This paper reports on the investigation of the loading rate of nickel onto an iminodiacetic acid ion exchange resin (TP207XL) under the finite solution volume condition in the presence of ferrous in a batch loading system. A hybrid correlation model (McKevitt, 2012) was applied for nickel-ferrous displacement loading data. The experimental fit parameters of the hybrid correlation were used to successfully predict the results of the batch loading experiments by applying the finite difference model. The finite difference model was applied to predict the loading behavior of nickel in the presence of ferrous in the batch system using the modified Helfferich number and the linear isotherm equation. As confirmed, the ion exchange reaction examined in this study was predominantly controlled under some combination of intraparticle diffusion/ion exchange reaction. Regarding the hybrid correlation fit parameters (Dapp
                     =9.95×10−12
                     m2/s, α
                     =0.65), these parameters correlated well with the loading behavior of nickel onto resin.The use of ion exchange resin and the resin-in-pulp (RIP) process have been considered and proposed as methods of primary or secondary metal recovery from nickel laterite leach operations ( McKevitt developed the hybrid correlation in order to model the loading of base metal ions in an RIP circuit. The detailed information regarding this model is available in the literature ( The idea of this new correlation came from the fact that the system dependency on concentration is somewhere between [Ni] This empirical fit alpha ( The previous work by McKevitt and Dreisinger was examining the loading of individual divalent metal cations onto a resin in the hydrogen form. However, in a resin-in-pulp circuit, the final stages will be depleted in the value metal (for example nickel) and therefore the loading of a non-value metal (for example ferrous iron, if present in solution) may be favored. As the resin advances to the head of the resin-in-pulp circuit, the value metal (nickel) will therefore displace the non-value metal (ferrous) as part of the loading of nickel on the resin. The purpose of this work then was to consider whether the McKevitt hybrid model could be applied to the metal-metal loading process in order to facilitate resin-in-pulp circuit modeling. To achieve this, the application of the modified Helfferich number and the hybrid correlation for nickel displacement of ferrous under finite solution volume condition was examined. In this study, all the experiments were carried out using one of the recently manufactured large bead iminodiacetic ion exchange resins (Lanxess Lewatit MonoPlus TP207XL) to investigate the loading behavior of ferrous and nickel ions. This polymeric resin is used for ion exchange experiments in either the hydrogen or sodium form. For this work, the as-received resin was converted to the hydrogen form following the manufacturer's recommended procedure. The hydrogen form and chelate structure of this iminodiacetic ion exchange resin are illustrated in  A synthetic solution was prepared for each experiment from ferrous and nickel sulphate salts with various target concentration ranging from 100 to 10,000 The original methodology was developed previously by McKevitt to study the loading behavior of metal ions such as copper nickel and cobalt ( In order to perform the Ni Once the resin was loaded with ferrous ions, it was introduced to the test solution containing the desired nickel sulphate concentration with a background concentration of ferrous close to 10,000 Similar to the ferrous loading experiments of the previous study, in displacement tests, it was desired to maintain a constant pH of 4 in the test vessel. However, since these displacement tests were performed under finite solution volume conditions (i.e. the concentration of ferrous and nickel sulphate in solution were not kept constant) there was no need of nickel or ferrous sulphate stock addition to the test vessel. As illustrated in Since the nickel loading behavior could only be determined based on solution assay, 2 Equilibration tests were completed after about 20 The loaded resin sample was transferred into the elution column and first washed with five bed volumes (BV) deionized water and stripped afterwards with 5 BV of 100 To perform analysis of the nickel loading experiments onto a ferrous loaded resin, an equilibrium loading isotherm must be generated. This approach is similar to most engineering models developed based on following the fractional approach to equilibrium. As a result, the nickel displacement equilibrium isotherms initially were developed followed by determination of the hybrid correlation fit parameters for the nickel-ferrous experimental results through the application of the finite difference model. In order to develop an equilibrium isotherm, the final results from each of the finite difference kinetics tests were used. It was expected that nickel ions mostly loaded onto the resin by displacing the ferrous ions previously loaded onto the resin. It is also likely that nickel will displace residual acid protons from the preloaded resin. Three separate approaches were used in order to obtain the final nickel loading values and generate the isotherm for the nickel–ferrous displacement experiments. One approach was observing the change in nickel concentration in solution. The second approach was determining the amount of ferrous and hydrogen ions displaced by nickel ions through each experiment. The amount of ferrous displaced from the resin was obtained by assaying the ferrous solution concentration using AA method. Monitoring the sodium hydroxide consumption throughout the experiment to maintain constant pH was the key to calculate how much hydrogen ions were displaced by nickel. The third approach was based on stripping the resin at the end of each experiment using 100 For the nickel-ferrous displacement isotherm, data for the full quaternary system of Ni Two conventional isotherm models, Freundlich and Langmuir, were initially generated for the nickel-ferrous displacement experiments based on the final loading achieved via assaying the strip solution for the nickel concentration on the resin samples. However, these two models did not provide an adequate fit to the whole range of displacement experimental datasets results. However, for such a system, as demonstrated in The empirical isotherm presented a suitable fit to the final loading datasets based on stripped solution assay analysis; therefore, the same isotherms were developed using the final loading based on observed solution assay (load isotherm) and the hydrogen plus ferrous ions displacements (displacement isotherm). For the purpose of this study, in order to evaluate the nickel loading behavior under non-infinite solution volume conditions the hybrid correlation fit parameters were estimated by using a finite difference model. McKevitt previously used a finite difference model for several experiments on TP207XL resins where the solution concentration of nickel varied for the duration of each test ( In order to apply the finite difference model, the rate-limiting step was required to be determined for the displacement experiments. Similar to most ion exchange reactions, the rate is controlled by the film diffusion regime at the beginning of the process and then become mostly limited by some combination of intraparticle diffusion and/or the ion exchange process. Linking the two rate-limiting regimes into a single equation with a combined constant could result in the highly complex mathematical terms since the film diffusion equation is derived based on a linear approach while the intraparticle diffusion derivation is based on non-linear approach ( The Helfferich number was developed many years ago to determine whether an ion exchange process is predominantly limited by film diffusion or intraparticle diffusion. The number is defined as the ratio of the predicted time to reach 50% loading under film diffusion control to the predicted time to attain 50% loading under intraparticle diffusion control ( To determine the rate-limiting step, the criteria of modified Helfferich number is the same criteria applied for the original Helfferich number and described as follows: Film diffusion control if ≫ Mixed control if ~ Intraparticle diffusion control if ≪ Consequently, for modeling the overall loading rate of this ion exchange system, for modified Helfferich values > Nickel-ferrous displacement experiments were carried out under the finite solution volume conditions; therefore, there was no longer a simple analytical solution to the model's differential equations. As a result, to model the continually-changing nickel solution concentration over the course of each experiment a finite difference model was applied by using a numerical analysis method, the first order Runge-Kutta (Euler's method) method. The model predicted the loading rate based on the Euler's method and therefore, the numerical solution to the loading rate problem developed an initial value problem. The very first mathematical solution was generated based on the initial nickel solution concentration for each test, the initial nickel loading onto resin (0gNi/L To determine the loading increase at time Δ The predicted resin loading at time Results for the displacement test run at 250 To get a better understanding of the rate-limiting step for the duration of the test, the modified Helfferich number is plotted in The test started with a Helfferich number higher than one, suggesting film diffusion control. As the resin bead loads, the modified Helfferich number decreased to a value of 0.06. Thus, the rate of the nickel loading in the presence of ferrous is predominately limited by combination of intraparticle diffusion/ion exchange reaction control as the modified Helfferich number is ≪  The hybrid correlation fit parameters for nickel loading under finite solution volume condition (FSV) are summarized in According to the table, the apparent diffusivity obtained with the hybrid correlation for nickel loading in the presence of ferrous appears to be of the same order of magnitude as the one obtained for nickel‑hydrogen ion exchange system. In addition, the apparent diffusivity obtained for the nickel-ferrous loading experiments is higher than the other one. The second empirical fit parameter of the hybrid correlation model, α, can be related to the boundary presented between loaded and unloaded part of the resin bead. Resin would be loading under a shrinking core mechanism if The model performed on the nickel-ferrous displacement tests resulting in a high alpha value ( Abbasi et al. explains that the alpha value can be related to a decomplexing pH value ( Several nickel-ferrous batch loading experiments were conducted in the presence of 10,000 The finite model fitted fairly well to all nickel-ferrous displacement experimental results by using the hybrid correlation fit parameters D The overall results from displacement loading experiments suggest that in the presence of high levels of impurities, as one would expect in an actual RIP process slurry, the impurities such as ferrous primarily load onto the resin and are then displaced by nickel. This emphasizes the importance of the outcomes of the loading experiments under condition reflective of its actual anticipated operating condition. It is reasonable to expect a different loading behavior related to the nickel-ferrous displacement process compared to the rates of nickel when loaded directly onto a resin in the hydrogen form. The displacement test outcomes highlight the fact that resin loaded noticeably faster when ferrous was displaced by nickel rather than hydrogen being displaced. However, as expected, TP207XL was shown to load to a higher capacity when nickel displaced hydrogen under the infinite solution volume condition. That is, ferrous ion present in the system speeds the rate of exchange of nickel onto the resin, but limits the ultimate loading value.