The objective of this study was to examine the osteoinductive capacity of different concentrations of BMP-2 on bone marrow stromal cells in vitro. Further, we intended to determine whether titanium provided with an increased surface roughness is more efficient in osteoblast differentiation than machined titanium. Therefore, 20,000cells/ml were seeded and cultured on machined and grit-blasted titanium discs for 4, 8 and 16 days. Different concentrations of rhBMP-2 (0, 10, 100, 1000ng/ml) were supplemented to the medium for 8 days of culturing. To evaluate cellular proliferation and differentiation, specimens were examined for DNA, alkaline phosphatase activity, and calcium content. Morphological appearance of the specimens at 8 and 16 days of incubation was evaluated using scanning electron microscopy. Two separate experimental runs were performed.
                  Evaluation of the DNA and alkaline phosphatase data revealed that a significant difference existed for these data between both experimental runs. Further analysis of the DNA figures learned that roughening of the titanium surface and addition of BMP-2 had no effect on cell proliferation. The alkaline phosphatase analysis and calcium measurements revealed that BMP-2 stimulated the early differentiation of osteogenic cells on machined titanium substrates in a dose-dependent manner. After 16 days of culture, no significant differences in calcium content could be observed anymore between machined and roughened titanium surfaces. Further, the data revealed that the machined surfaces showed a significant increase in calcium deposition when 100 and 1000ng/ml BMP-2 were supplemented to the medium. However, the roughened surfaces showed this significant enhancement in calcium content only with 1000ng/ml BMP-2. In addition, SEM evaluation revealed a dose-dependent response to BMP-2. Increasing BMP-2 concentrations resulted in more calcified globular accretions on bone surfaces than when no BMP-2 was added.
                  On the basis of our results, we conclude that (1) due to the heterogeneous nature of bone marrow, experimental results with primary rat bone marrow cells are difficult to reproduce from one experiment to the other, and (2) addition of rhBMP-2 in the medium stimulates the early differentiation and matrix mineralization of osteogenic cells on machined titanium surfaces in a dose-responsive manner. Further, we concluded that our roughened titanium surfaces had no effect on proliferation and differentiation of primary derived rate bone marrow cells.Bone formation is a complex process that involves migration of cells to the bone surface, proliferation of osteoprogenitor cells, and their differentiation into osteoblasts, resulting in the secretion of abundant bone matrix proteins, which coordinate the mineralization process Several types of implant materials are available to the medical profession today. The majority of the orthopedic and dental implants are metal based. In orthopedics and dentistry, titanium and its alloys are the implant material of choice. Various in vitro studies have investigated the response of cells to titanium implants In view of the above mentioned, in the current study we examined the differentiative capacity of different concentrations of BMP-2 on bone marrow stromal cells in vitro. Further, we investigated whether titanium provided with an increased surface roughness is more efficient in osteoblast proliferation and differentiation than machined titanium. Commercially pure titanium discs with a diameter of 12 The BMP used in this study was rhBMP-2 provided by Genetics Institute, Cambridge, USA. Four different concentrations of BMP-2 were used and added to the medium; 0, 10, 100 and 1000 Rat bone marrow cells were isolated and cultured using the method described by Maniatopoulos After 4, 8 and 16 days, samples were taken for DNA analysis. Therefore, medium was removed and cell layers were washed twice with PBS. The substrates were scraped with 0.5 Cellular protein concentrations were measured with a micro bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Pierce, Rockford, Illinois, USA) according to manufacturers instructions. Briefly, 150 Alkaline phosphatase was measured after 4, 8 and 16 days. Medium was removed and cell layers were washed twice with PBS. The cell layers were scraped of the discs with 1 Calcium content was examined after 4, 8 and 16 days of incubation. Calcium content in the samples was measured by the OCPC (ortho-cresolphthalein complexone) method (Sigma, Chemical Co., St.Louis, MO, USA). Substrates were washed twice in PBS and incubated overnight with 500 After 8 and 16 days of incubation, substrates were washed twice with PBS. The samples were fixed in 2% gluteraldehyde for 30 This study was performed by using two separate runs of experiments. In each run, all materials were present in triplicate. Data from both runs are presented separately. Statistical analysis was performed for each run by using first a one-way ANOVA followed by a Student–Newman–Keuls Test. The results as obtained in both experimental runs are graphically depicted in After 4 days of culture, analysis of the first run ( In the second run of experiments, alkaline phosphatase activity reached its maximum after 8 days of culture ( The analysis of the calcium measurements of both runs ( Further, after 16 days of culture, significant differences could be observed between machined and rough titanium surfaces ( SEM analysis of the 8 days specimens revealed cell proliferation and formation of cellular multilayers on all substrates. After 16 days, cells had formed a layer of calcified globular accretions associated with collagen bundles on machined as well as roughened titanium surfaces. Subjectively, a dose-dependent response to BMP-2 was noticed. Increasing BMP-2 concentrations resulted on both surfaces in more calcified globular accretions than when no BMP-2 was added ( A major observation in our study was again the variance in results between different experimental runs, when primary rat bone marrow cells are used. In view of this, we proved recently that the bone marrow population is heterogeneous in nature, which implies that different cultures can show different sensitivity. This will result in a differential response that even cannot be prevented by cell pooling or multiple experiments Our findings also show that high rhBMP-2 concentrations (100 and 1000 Our alkaline phosphatase activity, calcium and scanning electron microscopical analyses revealed that rhBMP-2 exerts its effect in a dose-dependent manner. This agrees with our earlier findings As part of the current study, we also investigated whether substrate surface roughness is more efficient in osteoblast differentiation than machined titanium. Unfortunately, on the basis of the achieved results, we have to conclude that the applied surface roughness had no effect on cell proliferation and differentiation of primary rat bone marrow cells. This corroborates with earlier findings of our group where we observed no effect of surface roughness on the PGE On the basis of our observations, we conclude that due to the heterogeneous nature of bone marrow, experimental results with primary rat bone marrow cells are difficult to reproduce from one experiment to the other. On the other hand, this effect of cell population is only present during initial assays and disappears at longer culture times. Further, we conclude that addition of rhBMP-2 in the medium stimulates the early differentiation and matrix mineralization of osteogenic cells on machined titanium surfaces in a dose-responsive manner. Evidently also, the roughness as applied on our titanium surfaces had no effect on the proliferation and differentiation of primary derived rat bone marrow cells. The Dutch Technology Foundation STW, applied science division of NWO and the technology program of the Ministry of Economic Affairs supported this research. The authors are grateful to Genetics Institute (Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA) for the generous gift of rhBMP-2.