α-melanocyte stimulating hormone (α-MSH) is a member of the melanocortin family, that has displayed important biological functions in diverse cells and tissues. The purpose of this study is to test the effect of α-MSH on the differentiation and mineralization of osteoblast cells. The expression of the α-MSH membrane receptor MC1R but not MC2R, MC3R, or MC4R increased distinctively during the osteogenic differentiation from 3, 7 to 14 d. Treatment with α-MSH promoted the differentiation and mineralization of MC3T3-E1 cells by increasing the activity of ALP, enhancing Alizarin Red S staining, and stimulating the expression of osteogenic genes, including ALP1, osteocalcin (Bglap2), and osterix (Sp7). Importantly, we found that α-MSH increased the expression of Runx-2, a master transcriptional factor of osteogenic differentiation. Mechanically, we found that the activation of ERK1/2 was involved in this process. Using the small interfering (si) RNA knockdown experiment, we proved that the effects of α-MSH on differentiation and mineralization of osteoblast cells are mediated by MC1R. The present study proposes α-MSH as a potential therapeutic agent to stimulate bone formation for osteoporosis and bone defect. Meanwhile, MC1R could also be a target candidate for the treatment of bone metabolism diseases.Osteoporosis is a very common disease among the elderly with reduced bone mineral density, and vulnerable to fracture and bone pain ( α-melanocyte stimulating hormone (α-MSH) is a family member of endogenous neuropeptide-melanocortin, derived from proopiomelanocortin (POMC) and secreted from the brain and pituitary gland. α-MSH exerts its function via its cell surface receptors, named melanocortin receptors ( Osteoblast maturation includes the biological processes of proliferation, differentiation, and mineralization. These processes are controlled by several different factors, such as hormone, cytokines, and neuropeptides. Osteoblast responds to the factors via membrane receptor and signaling proteins. Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), also known as ERK, signaling is previously reported to stimulate the expression of several genes involving in osteoblast proliferation, osteogenic differentiation, and mineralization process, including the transcription factor runt-related transcription factor-2 ( In the current study, we aimed to test the hypothesis that α-MSH may promote the osteogenic differentiation, and mineralization of osteoblast cells. MC3T3-E1 cell line, commonly be used as an osteoblast cell model, was used in the current study. The existence of MC receptors on MC3T3-E1 cells, the α-MSH stimulation/ERK signaling, osteogenic differentiation related markers including runt-related transcription factor 2 ( MC3T3-E1 cells were obtained from ATCC, USA. They were cultured in α-MEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S). To induce osteogenic differentiation, the following medium was used: α-MEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% P/S, 10 mM β-glycerophosphate, and 100 μg/ml ascorbic acid. α-MSH was purchased from Sigma Chemicals (St. Louis, MO). MC3T3-E1 cells were cultured in osteogenic medium (OM) with or without the use of α-MSH (10 nM) for 0, 3, 7, and 14 d to detect the effects of α-MSH on osteogenic differentiation. Also, MC3T3-E1 cells were cultured in osteogenic medium (OM) in with or without the use of α-MSH at a concentration of 0, 5, 10 nM for 14 d to detect the effects of α-MSH on osteogenic differentiation due to the dose. A specific ERK1/2 inhibitor, U0126 (10 μM) ( RNA was extracted from MC3T3-E1 cells after treatment by a TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, USA). cDNA was synthesized by RT-PCR with 1 μg of total RNA (with RNase-free water as a negative control) and iScript cDNA synthesis kit in a 20 µl reaction system, consisting of 5 × iScript reaction mix (4 µl), iScript reverse transcriptase (1 µl), nuclease-free water (13 µl), and RNA (2 µl). The RT-PCR conditions were according to the following: priming at 25 °C for 5 min; reverse transcription at 46 °C for 20 min; RT inactivation at 95 °C for 1 min 1 µl out of 20 µl cDNA was used for real-time PCR with SYBR green master mixes (Thermo fisher scientific, USA) in a 50 µl reaction volume containing cDNA template (10 µl) and GoTaq® qPCR Reaction mix (40 µl). Real time PCR condition was: 1 cycle for GoTaq® Hot Start Polymerase activation (95 °C, 2 min); 40 cycles for denaturation (95 °C, 15 s) and annealing/extension (60 °C, 1 min); 1 cycle for dissociation 60–95 °C. The expression level of the genes of interest was normalized to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) using Ct values. The following primers were used for this study ( mouse mouse mouse 5’- AATGGGTCCACCGCGCCAAG - 3’(anti-sense); mouse RUNX2, 5’- GAGGGCACAAGTTCTATCTG -3’ (sense), and 5’- CGCTCCGGCCCACAAATCTC -3’ (anti-sense); mouse GAPDH, 5’-AGAAGGCTGGG-GCTCATTTG-3’ (sense) and 5’-AGGGGCCATCCACAGTCTTC-3’(anti-sense). After indicated treatment, MC3T3-E1 cells were washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), then scraped off the plate and incubated with lysates on ice for 30 min. The cell lysate was centrifuged at 12,000 × MC3T3-E1 cells were washed with PBS and collected in a 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6) buffer containing 0.1% Triton-X on ice. After gentle sonication, the total proteins were determined using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay reagent (#23227, Pierce). The ALP activity was determined using a fluorometric detection kit (Wako, Japan). The ALP activity was normalized to the protein concentration of each sample. MC3T3-E1 cells were cultured in a 6-well plate at a density of 2.5 × 10 Predesigned MC-1R siRNA duplex against mouse MC-1R mRNA was purchased from Ambion (Austin, TX, USA). The sequences are: mc1r_1 sense 5’-GGGUGACAGUGAUAUCCAGtt-3’ anti-sense 5’-CUGGAUAUCACUGUCACCCtc-3’ mc1r_2 sense 5’-GGUACUCAUCCCUUCCUGAtt-3’ anti-sense 5’-UCAGGAAGGGAUGAGUACCtg-3’ mc1r_3 sense 5’-GGAUGAGCUUUAAAAUAGAtt-3’ anti-sense 5’-UCUAUUUUAAAGCUCAUCCtg-3’ Mouse GAPDH siRNA (Ambion) was used to detect the transfection effect and optimize transfection conditions in MC3T3-E1 cells. Non-specific siRNA (NS-siRNA) without sequence similarity to any known gene sequences from a mouse, rat, or human was used for negative control. MC3T3-E1 cells were seeded into a 6-well plate and cultured overnight. Then cells were transfected with mc1r siRNA or NS-siRNA. After 24 h, the cells were washed with PBS and lysed for western blot analysis. Experimental data is expressed as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 4–6). A comparison across multiple groups was performed by one-way ANOVA. P < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant. MC3T3-E1 cells are osteoblast-like cells and can be induced to differentiate into osteocytes in appropriate conditions. The present study seeks to evaluate the effect of α-MSH on differentiation and mineralization of MC3T3-E1 cells. Hence, the first step is to test the presence of α-MSH receptor, MC-1R, 2R, 3R, 4R on MC3T3-E1 cells. Human umbilical venous endothelial cells (HUVECs) were used as a positive control. RT-PCR ( The effect of α-MSH on osteogenic differentiation and mineralization was evaluated by detecting ALP activity, gene expressions of In order to understand the molecular events underlying the effect of α-MSH on MC3T3-E1 cells, the related signaling pathway and transcription factors were examined. After α-MSH treatment, the gene expression of Runx2 in MC3T3-E1 cells was increased and exhibited a dose dependent trend ( Since the expression of MC-1R elevated during the osteogenic differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells, we speculate that the effect of α-MSH on the differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells is mediated by MC1R. To test if the effect of α-MSH was exerted through the receptor MC-1R, the siRNA of mc1r was designed and cells were transfected. The transfection efficiency was tested by western blot analysis. Results in α-MSH is a neuropeptide consisting of 13 amino acids that belong to the melanocortin family. Previous studies have shown that multiple melanocortin peptides are present in osteoblastic like cells ( Interestingly, in the present results, among multiple receptors, MC-1R was the key receptor that responded to the extracellular differentiation-induction molecules and α-MSH hormone molecule in MC3T3-E1 cells. The expression of MC-1R increased in MC3T3-E1 cells in response to OM incubation and achieved the peak value in day 7 after OM stimulation. In fact, MC-1R is mainly found in periphery especially in skin, while MC-4R is present in both the brain and periphery ( Runx2 is an essential transcription factor that regulates the osteoblast specific gene expression and controls the commitment of mesenchymal cells to bone lineage differentiation. Runx2 is activated by the ERK/MAPK signaling pathway ( Osteoporosis is a very common disease in aging population, especially among menopausal women. As the aging population increased worldwide, in recent years the treatment of osteoporosis has attracted a lot of attention from researchers and clinicians. Searching for safer options in the treatment of osteoporosis is preferable. Due to the natural derivation of α-MSH and its effect on osteoblast differentiation based on the present study, α-MSH may be a potential candidate for a new generation of anti-osteoporosis drugs. Meanwhile, MC1R may provide a good target for designing therapeutic agents. In another scenario, bone defects due to various stresses require a better clinically available bone graft substitute. With the emerging field of tissue engineering, bone graft can be generated through bone tissue engineering from stem cells or osteoblast cells and biomaterial scaffold. As an important promoter of the differentiation process of osteoblast indicated in the present study, α-MSH would be worth further investigation to explore its therapeutic application in the treatment of bone defects. Above all, the results in the present study suggest that α-MSH activates MC1R downstream ERK1/2 signaling to promote osteogenic differentiation and mineralization of osteoblast cells. Further investigation in whether α-MSH would promote the differentiation and mineralization of human mesenchymal stem cells and osteoblast cells will provide more research to confirm the effect of α-MSH, which will shed light on the new application of α-MSH as a treatment agent for osteoporosis and bone defect. Last, but not least, the findings in the current study will bring very important proof in employing the receptors of α-MSH, such as MC-1R, as a therapeutic target. This study is funded by “ We certify that all authors have seen and approved the final version of the manuscript entitled “α-melanocyte stimulating hormone (α-MSH) promotes osteoblast differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells” being submitted. We warrant that the article is the authors' original work, hasn't received prior publication and isn't under consideration for publication elsewhere. There is no any ethical/legal conflict involved in the article. We hope that our paper could be accepted by your journal.