Spark discharge experiments with different nominal energy (100–1000 mJ) and inductance loads (0.024 or 1.454 mH) were carried out using different trigger methods. A Tektronix oscilloscope with a high-voltage probe and a current probe was used to record the dynamic voltage and current. The influence of inductance and trigger method on the discharge efficiency and discharge time were investigated. It was found that, when the discharge was triggered by electrode movement, the discharge efficiency ranged from 78.2% to 90.1% in case of without inductor, and ranged from 41.1% to 59.3% in case of with inductor.Minimum ignition energy (MIE) is one of important characteristics for risk assessment of processes handling combustible materials MIE is the lowest energy which is just sufficient to ignite the most ignition sensitive combustible mixtures. Because the energy of electrostatic discharge is easy to control by change of capacitance and charging voltage, MIE is determined using electrical spark discharge. The following standards are used widely for determination of MIE of dust cloud: EN 13821 The definitions of MIE in different standards are slightly different. The stored energy in the capacitor is considered as the discharge energy in EN 13821 and ASTM E2019, while the actual spark discharge energy is recommended to be measured in IEC 1241-2-3 for relative large spark energy. According to EN 13821, spark discharge energy is calculated by equation The final voltage after discharge is considered by ASTM E2019, and the spark discharge energy has the following form: IEC 1241-2-3 uses equation It is necessary to investigate the correlation between the energy stored in the capacitor and the actual discharge energy. However, few experimental investigations have been reported on the measurement of spark discharge energy using integration method at the nominal energy range of Eckhoff, et al. Peng, et al. The ignition behavior of combustible mixture is not only related to the discharge energy, but also related to the energy release rate. So the discharge power-time profiles during ignition at different energy levels are important for understand ignition mechanism, and they can provide boundary conditions for mathematical modeling of ignition process. Minimum ignition energy can be determined with or without additional inductor for different purpose in risk assessment. Inductance of 1–2 mH can be used as discharge load in case of with additional inductor. In case of without inductor, the distributed inductance of the discharge circuit shall not exceed 25 μH. Inductance could significantly affect the test results of MIE. Investigation of Siwek and Cesana The aim of this paper is to investigate the correlation between the nominal energy and the actual spark discharge while nominal energy ranged from 100 mJ to 1000 mJ. The influence of the discharge load (with or without inductor) and trigger method on the discharge performance were also studied. The experimental setup is a minimum ignition energy test apparatus for dust cloud developed in Northeastern University based on the apparatus defined in IEC 1241-2-3. Two kinds of trigger methods were used: triggered by electrode movement, and triggered by high-voltage (HV) relay. The schematic of the discharge circuit triggered by electrode movement is shown as The high voltage electrode is fixed on the wall of an open top Hartmann tube through a PTFE stopper. The grounded electrode is attached to a pushrod through another PTFE stopper which is bored in order to permit the electrode to be moved. The pushrod is connected to a controllable and double-acting pneumatic piston (diameter: 35 mm; operating pressure: 0.6 MPa). The piston has a working travel of more than 10 mm. The main capacitance is obtained by array of polyethylene film capacitors. The stray capacitance of the circuit in the investigated energy range is negligible. The capacitor is charged by a high voltage power supply with the electrode gap so wide that breakdown can't take place. After the charging relay is switched off, the grounded electrode is moved rapidly to 6 mm from the high voltage electrode by the pneumatic piston, and breakdown occurs at an unknown gap distance during electrode movement. The schematic of the spark discharge circuit triggering by HV relay is shown as The characteristic parameters of the discharge circuit is listed in The stored discharge capacitor energy prior to breakdown (nominal energy) investigated in the present paper were 100, 300, 500, 800 and 1000 mJ, respectively, which were achieved by adjusting charging voltage and the capacitance. The charging voltages and the capacitances of different nominal energies are shown in Discharge experiments were carried out in 4 test conditions, which are listed in The voltage between two electrodes was measured by a high-voltage probe (Tektronix P6015) whose attenuation ratio is 1000:1 and maximum bandwidth is 75 MHz. The current through the discharge gap is measured by a current probe (Tektronix TCP303) whose measurement range is 5 mA to 500 A and maximum bandwidth is 15 MHz. The oscilloscope used for data acquisition is a Tektronix oscilloscope type DPO 2024, with a hardware bandwidth of 20 MHz, a maximum sampling rate of 1 GS/s, and 8-bit resolution. Two channels are used for the signals of voltage and current respectively. The capacitance was measured with a capacitance meter (Tonghui Electronic TH2618B, Changzhou, China). According to Eckhoff The trigger condition for data acquisition was set at first trailing edge to 2 kV of the voltage signal, while time For each energy level listed in Typical voltage and current curves at nominal energy 100 mJ, 500 mJ and 1000 mJ are shown as From After break-down, peak of pressure decreases abruptly, and peak of current decay gradually. Both voltage and current curve are oscillating decaying curves. The discharge time of with inductor ( The U-t and I-t curves of triggered by electrode movement and by HV relay are quite similar except that the resonance periods and the peak values are slightly different. According to basic theory of simple LC circuit, the resonance period of the circuit is: The average resonance periods of experimental results and theoretical calculation are shown in It can be seen that the experimental periods of condition 1 and 2 (discharge was triggered by electrode movement) had good agreement with theoretical periods. This proved that the data acquisition signals were accurate enough to represent the actual physical properties. However, the error of the condition 3 and 4 (discharge was triggered by HV relay) is 9.5%–15.7%, which is obviously larger. The reason might be that discharge occurred inside HV relay, and unsteady sparks in the HV relay would introduce additional resistance. Because of additional resistance, the discharge circuit was not simple LC circuit. The curves of discharge powers versus time in case of From Because of different kinds of energy lost such as electro-magnetic radiation, residual electricity in the capacitor, the measured spark energy is always less than nominal energy. The discharge efficiency is defined as this: The relation between discharge efficiency and nominal energy of the 4 conditions is shown as In From The discharge efficiency of sparks in the 4 conditions are listed in For investigate the influence of inductance in the MIE test, ignition test for six dusts triggered by electrode movement of this system has been carried out and the test results are listed in By comparing the efficiency curves discharge with and without inductor, it can be deduced that the actual energy released in case of with inductor is less than that without inductor. However, according to former investigations Discharge experiments were carried out in a circuit for minimum ignition energy measurement, and spark energies were measured using integration method at energy range of 100 mJ–1000 mJ. Different trigger methods (triggered by electrode movement or by HV relay) and different inductance loads ( The voltage and current curves are oscillating decay curves, and inductance will increase discharge time. The discharge circuit can be considered as simple LC circuit in case of triggered by electrode movement. When the discharge was triggered by electrode movement, the discharge efficiency ranged from 78.2% to 90.1% in case of without inductor, and ranged from 41.1% to 59.3% in case of with inductor. When the discharge was triggered by a high-voltage relay, the discharge efficiencies were lower than those triggered by electrode movement. Lower energy with slow release rate may has more ignition capability to ignite dust cloud than higher energy with fast release rate. Energy release rate (power) is another important influence factor to ignition behavior besides total energy amount. This research was supported by the