In order to develop an improved understanding of the leaching behaviour of base metals and platinum group metals in a high pressure sulfuric acid leaching system, bench scale batch tests were performed to evaluate the effects of temperature, pressure, acid concentration, and solid-to-liquid ratio on the system. The precipitation and leaching kinetics of the other precious metals (OPMs: rhodium, ruthenium, and iridium) were influenced primarily by the leaching temperature, while the copper leaching kinetics were mostly dependent on the initial acid concentration.
                  Reactions describing the leaching behaviour were proposed based on the experimentally determined leaching kinetics data. Cationic exchange reactions between digenite and dissolved OPMs and between polydymite and dissolved OPMs resulted in OPM precipitation during the initial leaching stages. Copper leaching reactions preferentially consumed the available oxygen during the initial leaching stages. The experimental data were used to determine the rate constants of the reactions describing the leaching behaviour. This was done by means of the method of least squares, considering the differences between the predicted concentrations and the concentrations measured over time at different operating conditions. The dissolution rates of the OPM compounds increased in the order: oxides<alloys<sulfides.The hydrometallurgical process routes employed by platinum group metal (PGM) producers to separate base metals from PGMs present in the nickel-copper converter matte typically constitutes atmospheric leaching followed by pressure leaching. The objectives of the atmospheric leaching stages are to consume the acid present in the recycled spent electrolyte, to precipitate copper out of the recycled spent electrolyte by means of cementation reactions, and to dissolve nickel in order to produce a solid residue that contains primarily copper sulfides, nickel sulfides that did not dissolve in the atmospheric leaching stages, and PGMs. The objective of the pressure leaching stages is to dissolve the base metal sulfides while limiting PGM dissolution in order to produce a solid residue enriched in PGMs. In general, the control and operation of the pressure leaching stages are challenging due to an insufficient understanding of the leaching chemistry, resulting in insufficient base metal leaching and excessive leaching of the other precious metals (OPMs: rhodium, ruthenium, and iridium). The objectives of this study were to briefly review the previous studies on the pressure leaching stage, to investigate the effects of key process variables on the leaching behaviour, and to subsequently determine the leaching kinetics as a function of the key process variables. This publication elaborates the information previously published in the proceedings of the 26th International Mineral Processing Congress ( The leaching reactions by which the leaching of nickel sulfides (millerite and polydymite) and copper sulfides (digenite and covellite) in the first stage leach residue proceeded were selected based on proposed mechanisms in previous reports ( The oxidising conditions in the pressure leaching stage would prevent the formation of elemental sulfur. H Nickel leaching reactions involving copper cementation were not considered as no overall copper precipitation was observed during the experiments. Similar to the modelling approach followed by In instances where more than one reaction could potentially explain the leaching behaviour, the simplest reaction describing the overall reaction was selected. Minor phases, such as telluride and sellenide compounds, were not taken into consideration. The majority of the leachable iron was assumed to be dissolved in the first stage leach. Iron precipitation as a result of hydrolysis in the first stage leach results in the formation of Fe(OH)SO Only sulfide, oxide, and metallic OPM phases were considered in the determination of the system chemistry. All the OPMs were assumed to be present as OPM Precipitation of OPMs by hydrolysis was not considered feasible given the relatively high acid concentration in the leach solution. The OPM oxide and OPM sulfide compounds that were considered to be representative of all the OPM oxide and OPM sulfide compounds include Rh Given the above considerations, leaching of millerite and polydymite is likely to occur according to reactions 1 and 2 and reaction 3, respectively: Leaching of digenite and covellite most likely proceeds according to reaction 4 and reaction 5, respectively: The leaching of Fe(OH)SO Precipitation of PGMs from aqueous solutions by means of cementation reactions is possible (  The model developed by  The speciation of dissolved PGMs in sulfate media is complex and poorly defined ( The experimental setup and procedure used in this study were the same as described by The spent electrolyte and first stage leach residue that were used to conduct the tests were provided by the Western Platinum Ltd. Base Metal Refinery. The spent electrolyte contained 22.8 The initial acid concentration of the leach solution was adjusted by the addition of sulfuric acid to the spent electrolyte. 10  For both the high temperature ( At a specific pressure and initial acid concentration, a longer precipitation period during the initial leaching stages was typically observed for the test performed at the high solids content compared with the test performed at the low solids content. At a specific pressure and initial acid concentration, the kinetics of both the rhodium precipitation reactions and the rhodium leaching reactions increased as the temperature was increased. Even though the duration of the precipitation reactions was not affected by the change in temperature, the faster precipitation kinetics resulted in lower OPM concentrations during the initial leaching stages at the higher leaching temperatures. The average percentage rhodium dissolution achieved after 7 For the tests performed at 116 The effect of pressure on the rhodium leaching was more profound for the tests performed at 130 The rhodium leaching behaviour was not affected noticeably by the change in the initial acid concentration. Inconsistent copper analyses were achieved for the high solids content tests as a result of copper sulfate precipitation that occurred during sample transportation; this discussion hence focuses primarily on the results achieved for the low solids content tests. As was discussed in The fact that the solid-to-liquid ratio did not affect the copper leaching rate noticeably also implied that the oxygen mass transfer to the liquid was the rate determining step for the copper leaching reactions. The limited oxygen availability could have limited the rate of copper leaching for two reasons: firstly, the dissolution of the copper sulfide phases according to reaction 4 and reaction 5 is dependent on the availability of dissolved oxygen; secondly, leaching could proceed via reactions with Fe The leaching temperature did not have a significant effect on the rate of copper leaching. This was a further indication that the copper leaching reactions were not chemical reaction rate limited. The effect of pressure on the copper leaching rate was more significant for the tests performed at 116 The fast copper dissolution observed in this study compared with the results presented by For the range of initial acid concentrations investigated in this study, the tests with the lower initial acid concentration did, however, yield a higher maximum copper dissolution (88.7% on average) than the tests with the high initial acid conditions (75.3% on average). The existence of an optimum initial acid concentration where maximum copper leaching is achieved is in agreement with the results presented by Analysis of variance was performed in order to quantify the effects that the leaching temperature, pressure, initial acid concentration, and solids content had on the leaching behaviour of the system, and to identify interactions between these process variables in order to validate the qualitative observations. The response variable for the analysis performed on the copper behaviour was the maximum percentage copper dissolution achieved over the 7 Temperature was the only process variable that had a statistically significant main effect on the leaching of all the OPMs. This further confirmed that the temperature was the process variable with the largest effect on the OPM dissolution behaviour. The effects of interactions between pressure and slurry solids content and between the initial acid concentration and slurry solids content on Rh dissolution were the only significant second-order interaction effects. The main effects plot and the interaction plots for Rh dissolution illustrate these observations in The percentage Rh, Ru, and Ir dissolution achieved after 7 In addition to comparing the extent of metal leaching achieved after 7 The form of the rate expression describing the reaction kinetics depends on the rate controlling mechanism, and has been described in various sources ( The stoichiometric coefficient of species Estimating the solid surface area available for reactions furthermore introduced uncertainty. As was discussed in The solid surface area available for reactions to take place was hence estimated using the approach described by This implies that the solid surface area available for reaction was proportional to the amount of the particular solid species present in the system, rather than being dependent on the size distribution of particles which consisted of a range of phases. The shape factor will have a value of one, two, and three for particles with the geometry of a slab, cylinder, and sphere, respectively, while irregular shaped particles will have shape factors much larger than three. If the constants in Eqs. As a first estimation, the reaction rates were assumed to have a first order dependence on the concentration of the reactants present as dissolved species in the solution, as was done in previous studies evaluating the leaching kinetics of base metal sulfides ( For solutions containing   The reaction rate constants were determined by performing mass balances to calculate the change in the concentrations of the respective dissolved species over time. The resulting set of differential equations was solved numerically by the 4th order Runge-Kutta method in Microsoft Excel®. The method of least squares was used to determine the rate expression constants that would minimise the sum of the squared differences between the predicted concentrations and the measured Ni, Cu, Fe, Rh, Ru, and Ir concentrations at the different time instances. This was done separately for the eight tests performed at 130 The activation energies for the two copper sulfide leaching reactions (reaction 4 and reaction 5) are both negative with relatively small absolute values (< The activation energies calculated for the remainder of the reactions were all in excess of 34 The expressions derived to calculate the reaction kinetics were used to evaluate the effects that the leaching temperature, leaching pressure, and acid concentration have on the kinetics of the respective reactions. The composition of the solid phase was assumed to be the same as that of the first stage residue, and a typical liquid composition of 700 The effect of temperature and pressure on the rate of digenite leaching according to reaction 4 is illustrated in The rate of reaction 4 depends on both the acid concentration and the oxygen availability in the system. The direct effect of increasing the acid concentration on the particular reaction rate is more significant than the decreased oxygen solubility resulting from the increased acid concentration, resulting in slightly faster leaching kinetics. In the case of reaction 5, acid does not participate in the leaching of covellite, and the reaction rate is only dependent on the oxygen availability. For this reason, the decreased oxygen solubility caused by the increased acid concentration leads to slower kinetics for reaction 5. The effects that changing the temperature, pressure, and/or acid concentration have on the rate at which reaction 13 proceeds are shown in Since acid does not participate in reaction 13, an increase in the acid concentration resulted in a decreased reaction rate due to the reduced oxygen solubility. Similar trends were observed for the rates of reactions 7–12, reaction 14, reactions 16–17, and reactions 19–20. Although reactions 14, 17, and 20 include acid as a reagent, the rate expressions for these reactions were determined to be zero order expressions with respect to the acid concentration, as discussed in The rates of reactions 15, 18, and 21 increased as the temperature was increased, but these rates were not affected by changes in the pressure or changes in the acid concentration. The effects of temperature and pressure on the kinetics of reactions 1–3 and of acid concentration on the kinetics of reactions 2 and 3 are similar to those discussed for reaction 13. The effect of changes in the acid concentration on the kinetics of reaction 1 was more significant because acid was identified as a reagent in this particular leaching reaction. The relative reaction rates of the different rhodium leaching reactions at various temperature and pressure conditions are shown in A comparison between the experimentally determined metal concentrations and the model predicted concentrations for the tests performed at 130 Under the evaluated conditions, the mass transfer of oxygen from the gaseous phase to the liquid phase limited the rate of the copper dissolution reactions while the rates of the remainder of the reactions were chemical reaction controlled. Of the process variables investigated, the initial acid concentration had the largest effect on the copper leaching rate, while temperature was identified as the process variable with the largest effect on the OPM dissolution rate. It was confirmed that an optimum acid concentration existed, which was dependent on the values of the remainder of the process variables. Increasing the acid concentration lead to reduced oxygen solubility which was detrimental to oxygen dependent reactions. Copper sulfide phases and OPM phases competed for oxygen during the initial leaching stages, with oxygen being used for copper leaching preferentially. The precipitation of OPMs during the initial leaching stages could be ascribed to cation exchange reactions similar to the cementation and metathesis reactions leading to copper precipitation in the first stage leach. The reaction rate constants and activation energies supported the qualitative observations regarding relative leaching rates and rate controlling mechanisms. The leaching rates of the OPM phases were the fastest for the sulfide phases, then the metallic phases, and finally the oxide phases. The decreasing rate of OPM dissolution as leaching progressed was due to the fact that the leaching of different OPM phases dominated OPM dissolution at different stages of leaching. Material and financial support provided by Lonmin Plc is gratefully acknowledged.