This chapter explains that mining is designed to first liberate the coal from the host clastic rock and beneficiation to liberate higher grade coal and discard stone and poorer quality coal through a process of comminution, density separation, and flotation that is controlled by particle size and surface chemistry. For mines producing thermal coals, keeping rank and grade to specification is the prime task, along with tracking deleterious trace elements in product and reject. For mines producing metallurgical coal products, coal type or vitrinite content is an added factor as are element distributions such as phosphorus and sulphur. The chapter also highlights the different ways of estimating coal strength and hardness—compressive strength, fracture toughness, or grindability—but all will show a trend relative to rank, type, and grade of the coal. The measurement of coal strength is affected by the size of the test specimen, the orientation of stress relative to banding, and the confining pressure of the test. For mines producing thermal coals, keeping rank and grade to specification is the prime task, along with tracking deleterious trace elements in product and reject. For mines producing metallurgical coal products, coal type or vitrinite content is an added factor as are element distributions such as phosphorus and sulphur. The same There are different ways of estimating coal strength and hardness—compressive strength, fracture toughness, or grindability—but all will show a trend relative to rank, type, and grade of the coal. The measurement of coal strength is affected by the size of the test specimen, the orientation of stress relative to banding, and the confining pressure of the test (Hobbs, 1964; Zipf and Bieniawski, 1990; Mark and Barton, 1996; and Medhurst and Brown, 1998). By its nature coal is a banded material which makes it weak by comparison to most other rocks. Intact rock strength is commonly defined as the strength of the rock material that occurs between discontinuities, which in coal are closely spaced and related to lithotype banding and cleat. Cleat spacing will increase as a function of rank (Law, 1993, and Laubach et al., 1998) and also proportion of vitrain banding (Smyth and Buckley, 1993, and Pattison et al., 1996). For a given rank, individual lithotypes can have large compressive strength differences owing to wide ranges in maceral composition, banding texture, and cleat density (Medhurst and Brown, 1998), as shown in The larger the test sample, the greater the presence of inherent flaws due to cleats and banding, which significantly reduces the strength of the coal (Bienawski, 1968). Mark and Barton (1996) found size effects more pronounced in “blocky” (dull) coals than in friable (more well-banded, vitrain-rich) coals which fail more readily. For a given rank, vitrain-rich coals will also fail more readily when stress Coal strength will also increase with increased confining pressure (Hobbs, 1964), as shown in Gas drainage behavior is a function of the measured gas content, desorption rate, and coal permeability. Permeability decreases with increasing effective stress, which generally occurs with increasing depth of cover. The same textural discontinuities that reduce coal strength (primarily cleat and vitrain banding) increase coal permeability for premining and commercial gas drainage (Smyth and Buckley, 1993; For a given pressure or depth, cleat permeability can be reduced by mineral infilling or if horizontal stress is perpendicular to the face cleat direction (Gamson et al., 1993, and Li et al., 2004). In underground mines, stress magnitude and orientation is constantly shifting relative to the inherent macrostructure, which makes the prediction of areas that are low in permeability or outburst prone a multidimensional problem (Dumpleton, 1990, and Xu et al., 2006). The issue is when gas builds up and cannot escape, which is common around tectonically deformed or brecciated coal occurring in fault zones. In a study of Permian age coal seams in the Sydney and Bowen Basins, Australia, Gurba et al. (2003) noted the presence of specific petrographic “micro-markers” related to areas of difficult drainage. Areas of low permeability were related to the development of the Gas drainage drilling, either for mine site drainage or commercial production, in weak coal can result in fines generation that reduces reservoir permeability and/or results in borehole collapse (Palmer et al., 2005). In weak coal the borehole wall cannot withstand the pressure differential that occurs between the formation and the annulus of the borehole during drainage, resulting in borehole wall collapse. Strong coal provides good borehole stability and easy cutting but tends to have lower permeability. For thick seams with variable vertical composition, a simple brightness or lithotype profile can assist in designing both the well path and the pressure conditions of the well for improved drainage and borehole stability. Self-heating of coal leading to spontaneous combustion is a significant hazard during mining, transport, and storage of coal (e.g., Brooks and Glasser, 1986, and Falcon, 1986). Spontaneous combustion in coal occurs when the quantity of heat generated by oxidation of the organic matter is greater than the quantity of heat dissipated (Misra and Singh, 1994). Although lower rank coals are generally more prone to self-heating than higher rank coals, the relationship is not linear and is also affected by coal type (Chandra and Prasad, 1990; Clemens et al., 1991; Panigrahi and Sahu, 2004; Beamish, 2005; Cao et al., 2005; Singh et al., 2007; among others) as well as particle size and climate (Misra and Singh, 1994). Coal richer in reactive macerals, in particular liptinites and vitrinites, are more prone to self-heating than inertinite-rich macerals. It then also follows that for some coals, particularly Eocene age coals in New Zealand (Shaw, 1997) and Indonesia, that detrovitrinite-rich coals are more reactive than are telovitrinite-rich coals because they can contain abundant liptinite macerals. For Australian coals, Beamish (2005) also demonstrated Breakage of coal in the mining operation is the initial step in the liberation of mineral matter from the organic matrix in coal beneficiation. Coal breakage is related not only to the inherent friability of a coal seam but also to the delivery of energy or power (usually measured in watts). Energy is delivered through cutting or shearing, blasting, ripping and dozing, and dropping the coal onto hard surfaces or coal piles during transport. The result is usually measured by the size distribution of the daughter particles after an energy event. As coal preparation plants are designed with circuits to handle and treat different size fractions and the expense increases with increasing amounts of fine coal, it is important to know how size distributions will vary based on coal seam properties and mining methods. Drop-shatter testing of exploration bore cores is a common method for estimating the breakage that will result from the mining process (ASTM D440-86, 1986, and Swanson et al., 1993). Within a single (iso-rank) seam, different plies or benches that have different lithotype compositions will yield different size distributions for a given amount of energy resulting from the number of drops from a known height (Esterle et al., 2002). For open-cut mining methods where the total seam is extracted, the size distribution is a composite of all plies. If this same seam is mined by selective auger or underground mining methods, different size distributions would be generated from different plies. For example, finer coal size distributions would be generated from weaker plies with abundant vitrain banding (e.g., Ply 4 in Although each mining method delivers energy in a slightly different way, increased force or energy will increase the amount of damage, resulting in fragmentation of a material. The energy required for size reduction is proportional to the new surface area created; hence, more energy is required for a smaller parent to achieve an In open-cut mines, some coals are blasted rather than free dug. During blasting, excessive damage occurs in the high-energy crushing zone around the charge in the drill hole, resulting in fine coal generation (Djordjevic et al., 1998). Fines can be reduced during blasting by using lower velocity explosives and/or placing the charge in duller plies of the seam (Esterle et al., 2000a). Fragmentation through the rest of the block occurs through the propagation of gases and pressure through the inherent flaws (joints, lithotype bedding, and cleat) within the coal mass structure. Hence, the majority of the fragmentation, after dislodging the coal during blasting, will take place during the excavation and loading, and these are lower energy events. The selection of mechanical mining equipment such as rippers, dozers, and shovels in open-cut mines and continuous miners and In addition to coal rank and type, the sharpness, geometry, and attack angle of cutting bits will also affect the size and shape of the crush zone volume and resulting particle size (Zipf and Bienawski, 1988), which has implications for both coal fines and dust generation in underground mines (Zipf and Bienawski, 1989, and Page and Organiscak, 2002). The propensity of a coal to generate dust during mining is related to the comminution energy of the mining process as well as the inherent friability of the coal due to rank and type (Baafi and Ramani, 1979, and Gagarin, 2005).  The objective of coal preparation is to upgrade the quality of the coal product(s). Coal is often broken or crushed to help liberate the coal from stone prior to sizing, screening, and density separation. The density of different coal lithotypes is linked to their ash yield and maceral composition (  Direct methods for measuring breakage include dropping and shattering coal or coal core from a known height (Broadbent et al., 1957; Berenbaum, 1962; Barnard and Bull, 1985; ASTM D440-86, 1986; Teo et al., 1990; and Sahoo and Roach, 2005) or dropping a weight of known mass onto a piece of coal (Narayanan and Whiten, 1988). Other methods include fracture toughness and grindability (Bhagat, 1985; Zipf and Bienawski, 1990; and Hardgrove, 1931). All methods demonstrate that breakage, resulting in finer daughter particle size distributions, increases for increasing energy (see For a given energy, coals become easier to break as they increase in rank from sub- to midvolatile bituminous, thus generating finer particles for the same input energy. Scatter among vitrain-rich coal is greater than that for dull coal lithotypes. At higher ranks, low volatile to anthracite, the trend reverses and coals become harder to break (see There is an energy at which coals begin to condition and the rate of breakage declines. This has been referred to as the As in breakage, the grindability of a coal is a function of coal hardness, strength, tenacity, and inherent fracture (Yancey and Geer, 1945), which are linked (again) to coal rank, type, and grade (summarized in Hower and Wild, 1994, and Hower, 1998). Coal is commonly pulverized prior to utilization to increase its surface area and reactivity The Hardgrove Grindability test is commonly used to characterize the milling behavior of coals. The test, first conceived by Hardgrove (1931) and later modified to the current constant-weight test in 1951 (ASTM D409-71, 1971; ISO 5074, 1994c), attempts to mimic the operation of a continuous coal pulverizer using a batch process. As noted by Hardgrove (1931) and others (Roth et al., 1992; Hower, 1998) the test is empirical and has limitations, but it is widely used and even included as a specification in contracts for the supply of coal. In the Hardgrove Grindability test, 50 g of a limited particle size range (16 × 30 mesh, or 1.18 mm × 600 μm) of coal is ground in a ball mill for 60 revolutions. The resulting coal is sized and the weight of the (<200 mesh) product is recorded and, by calibration to a reference coal, used in the calculation of the Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI). The test results in a value for HGI generally between 30 and 100. The lower the HGI number, the harder it is to grind the coal. The test is highly nonlinear such that a change in HGI from 90 to 80 results in a small decrease in mill capacity, whereas a change from 50 to 40 leads to a considerably greater decrease in mill capacity (Sligar, 1998). The preparation of the 50 g quantity of 1.18 mm × 600 μm (16 × 30 mesh) coal from the larger original size, introduces a bias into the test. A number of studies (Gray and Patalsky, 1990; Hower and Wild, 1994; Bailey et al., 1996, and Hower, 1998) have demonstrated that the elimination of the <600 μm (-30 mesh) fraction from the test material creates a sample differing in petrographic composition from the original sample due to the partitioning of brittle vitrinite-rich and (unmineralized) inertinite-rich microlithotypes into the fine fraction, the fraction not tested. This is less likely to be a problem in the analysis of single-lithotype samples, particularly lithotypes dominated by either bright (vitrain, very bright clarain) or dull (durain) lithologies. Coals delivered to utilities are not single lithotypes, however, so the bias in the test is a problem.  Hower and Wild (1988) demonstrated a strong correlation between an increase in liptinite content and decreased HGI (harder to grind) for coals of narrow vitrinite reflectance ranges for a suite of Carboniferous age coals. Indeed, they noted a 39 HGI difference between a vitrinite-rich lithotype and a durain within the same, iso-rank seam section, indicative of the maceral/microlithotype versus HGI relationship. Working with Eocene age coals from Indonesia, Moore et al. (1990) demonstrated a direct relationship between HGI and megascopic coal lithotypes and in particular the texture and proportion of vitrain bands in hand specimens and phyterals in polished blocks. The link between megascopic coal type and HGI or any other breakage behavior allows the trend to be tracked through coal seam mapping in combination with bore cores. Just as there are regional differences in coal composition and rank between coals of difference ages and basins, there will be differences in the grindability linked to a coal's rank, texture, and composition. Minerals and moisture content will also have an impact on coal grindability (Urala and Akyildiz, 2004). Hsieh (1976) placed minerals into four groups based on their grinding behavior: clays and sulfates; quartz, oxides, and silicates; pyrite and other sulfides; and carbonates. Quartz and other nonclay silicates and oxides tend to be the hardest minerals and clays and sulfates are the softest minerals. Shales can have a wide range of grindability but generally are softer than the associated coal (Agus and Waters, 1971). Intercalated shale with coal will tend to lower the HGI (Kanjilal et al., 1979) and intergrown carbonates, as found in some Permian Gondwana coals, tend to decrease HGI (Falcon and Falcon, 1987). Coal beneficiation's ultimate objective is to produce a (relatively) uniform product that will meet the specifications of the end user. In the steam coal industry (see  The initial separations are dependent on the hardness, size, and density of the individual particles. As noted previously, the maceral and microlithotype composition of the lithotypes, the fundamental petrographic unit in coarse coal cleaning, is important in determining the breakage properties. Macerals will be segregated into different size fractions, with the proportion of macerals and mineral dependent on the mineral/maceral association and the degree of liberation. A number of studies (Mackowsky and Abramski, 1943; Bayer, 1960; Harrison, 1963; Maitra et al., 1979; Beck, 1981; Hower et al., 1986b; Hower and Wild, 1991; and W. Wang et al., 2006) have demonstrated the partitioning of macerals through the unit operations in a coal preparation plant. Fundamentally, Mackowsky and Abramski's (1943) observation that durain will concentrate in the coarse sizes and vitrain and unmineralized fusain will concentrate in the fine and ultrafine sizes underlies the later studies on high volatile bituminous Illinois coal (Harrison, 1963), high volatile bituminous western Kentucky coals (Hower et al., 1986b), high volatile A bituminous Pennsylvania coal (Bayer, 1960), high volatile A bituminous eastern Kentucky coals (Hower and Wild, 1991), and high volatile A and medium volatile bituminous Pennsylvania and West Virginia coals (Beck, 1981). By understanding the distribution of particle composition and density by size, one can high grade some coals to produce optimum coking coal products through breakage and screening in As noted, one of the fundamental reasons for coal beneficiation is the reduction of ash yield and deleterious minerals and elements with an inorganic affinity. The partitioning of major, minor, and trace elements depends on the degree of liberation of the minerals, their inorganic versus organic association, and the specific gravity of the separation. Mineral matter occurring as discrete bands and lenses within the coal can often be removed easily, but that disseminated within the coal matrix or within the organic compounds of the macerals will be more difficult to remove by simple density separation and may require extensive (and expensive) grinding to beneficiate. In low rank coals, dissolved salts or inorganic elements incorporated within the organic compounds of the macerals are common. An overview of analytical methods used to determine inorganics in coal is given by Huggins (2002), and mineral matter in coal is presented in Mitchell and McCabe (1937), Helfinstine et al. (1971, 1974), Cavallaro et al. (1976), and, more recently, Mastalerz and Padgett (1999) studied the ash and sulfur partitioning of (generally) high-S Pennsylvanian Illinois Basin coals. Because of the fine nature of much of the pyrite and an organic association of about half of the total S, the S in the clean product was generally above 2%. Finkelman (1994b) discussed the associations of the hazardous trace elements. His work was based both on his own research (Finkelman, 1981) and on comprehensive works by others (e.g., Gluskoter et al., 1977; Raask, 1985b; Eskenazy, 1989; and Swaine, 1990). Akers and Dospoy (1994) demonstrated the magnitude of element reduction Not all element concentrations will be reduced by beneficiation. Organic sulfur is an obvious example of an element that will not easily be eliminated in beneficiation. Hower et al. (1998) noted an increase in total S from run-of-mine to clean Eastern Kentucky coals, since organic sulfur will go with the product rather than high density reject coal. Similarly, chlorine (associations reviewed by Spears, 2005; Yudovich and Ketris, 2006b) is generally associated with the organic fraction; therefore, removal of the diluent mineral matter increases relative Cl concentration. Froth flotation is a long established technique in mineral processing. Extensive discussion of flotation can be found in the book by Leja (1982); see also recent work by Fecko et al. (2005) and Melo and Laskowski (2006). Basically, particles are either hydrophilic or hydrophobic (Gutierrez-Rodriguez et al., 1984). Surface properties of particles are modified with a surfactant (collector). Bubbles, produced by mechanical (froth flotation) or passive (column flotation) aeration and stabilized by a frother (a surfactant), are used to bring hydrophobic particles to the surface. Macerals, with some variation as will be discussed, and pyrite are hydrophobic and will adhere to the bubbles while clays and other silicates are hydrophilic and will sink. Whether pyrite is truly hydrophobic or entrained by the bubbles or interlocked with floatable particles is a matter of research, but one necessary to develop mechanisms that suppress pyrite from being recovered with clean coal product (Kawatra and Eisele, 1997). Since froth flotation (and oil agglomeration) relies on the surface properties of coal in separating particles, coal petrology plays an important role in the process. Arnold and Aplan (1989) reported a number of studies which examined maceral partitioning or lithotype partitioning, generally without consideration of the maceral association. In order of decreasing floatability, they noted that liptinite > vitrinite > fusinite and vitrain > clarain > durain > fusain. For an eastern Kentucky coal, Hirt and Aplan (1991) noted the relationship, in order of decreasing floatability: pseudovitrinite (high R Flotation, generally conducted on <0.5 mm particles, is processing particles from the lithotype to microlithotype scale. The maceral and microlithotype composition of the particle can be used as a proxy for the surface interface with the surfactants. Ofori et al. (2006) and O'Brien et al. (2003, 2006) have developed a semiautomated image analysis system to diagnose coal grains by their grain size, composition, and density and relate this directly to flotation performance. Imaging is used to classify grains as liberated (single component) or composite and to derive the density of each grain from maceral and mineral type and abundance (O'Brien et al., 2006). This method provides a tool for tracking behavior in the flotation circuit and for optimizing processes in advance. Weathering has an influence on hydrophobicity. In a study of Spanish bituminous coals, Garcia et al. (1991) demonstrated that the formation of humic acid complexes and the oxidation of Fe led to poor flotation recovery at the same pH as unweathered coal. Adjustment of the pH towards the basic range did yield some improvement in recovery. Oil agglomeration, similar to froth flotation, could be used to recover the finest coal particles (<150 μm) passing through a preparation plant. Only the finest particles are processed because excessive coal crushing and pulverization, beyond the point necessary to optimize the efficiency of the typical array of gravity-based coal-cleaning procedures, would not normally be cost effective. In addition, the reagents used in oil agglomeration are an added expense. The costs of fine-coal Oil agglomeration has a long history of development dating to the Trent Process, developed in the United States (Perrot and Kinney, 1921, and Ralston, 1922), followed in the 1950s by the German Convertol Process (Brisse and McMorris, 1958). Both were abandoned due to poor economics. Spherical agglomeration, using a light oil, which assists in the control of the product size, was developed by the National Research Council of Canada (Capes et al., 1971, 1972). OTISCA'sT-Process utilizes pentane in a coal-water slurry to process sub-0.5-mm coal. Pilot operation of the T-Process produced clean coal with 0.8% ash at 90% yield at processing costs in the range of $1.40/GJ ($0.60/10 Hower et al. (1997a) investigated the role of a variety of oils for three petrographically complex Eastern Kentucky (Pennsylvanian) coals spanning the high volatile A bituminous rank. Coal rank was noted to be a significant parameter in the agglomeration behavior of the coals, particularly for the hexane agglomeration, with the higher rank coal having greater clean-coal yield at lower oil concentrations than the other two coals. The maceral and microlithotype content proved to be a complicating factor, with the maceral composition of duroclarite, the most abundant microlithotype, partitioned between vitrinite-rich varieties in the concentrate and vitrinite-poor varieties in the tails at higher oil concentrations for all three coals. On the other hand, García et al. (1996) demonstrated the feasibility of agglomerating Spanish anthracites with low concentrations of High gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) (Trindale et al., 1974, and Liu, 1982) is based on coal being diamagnetic (repulsed by a magnet), whereas pyrite is paramagnetic (attracted to a magnet). The magnetic susceptibility of pyrite is 0.3 × 10 With the primary purpose of HGMS being the removal of pyrite from fine coal, experiments on high-S Illinois Basin coals by Murray (1977), Hise et al. (1979), Harris and Hise (1981), and Hower et al. (1984) were a logical test of the concept. Harris and Hise (1981) noted an increase in inertinite in the magnetic fraction, perhaps a function of coarse pyrite with fusain, while Hower et al. (1984) did not see Triboelectrostatic processing is a dry beneficiation technique involving imparting a charge onto fine particles and separating the particles toward electrodes (Ban et al., 1997). Commercial separation of fly ash has been accomplished, the systems described by Bittner and Gasiorowski (2005) and Cangialosi et al. (2005) being examples. Commercial separation of fine coal is not done, in part due to the inertia of wet processing of coal and also because of the low profit margin of coal processing in U.S. coals. Adding new equipment for fine coal processing has not been economical. Hower et al. (1997b) studied the behavior of three high volatile A bituminous Eastern Kentucky coals, a high volatile C bituminous Western Kentucky coal, and a high volatile B bituminous Illinois coal in a bench-scale triboelectrostatic processing unit. In tests of the 200– 325 mesh (75-45 μm) fractions, they found a partitioning of vitrinite to the clean product with the inertinites, liptinite, and mineral matter reporting to the tailings. Considering just the duroclarite, representing about a third of the eastern Kentucky coals, the partitioning of vitrinite to the clean product is observable with the microlithotype, indicating that it is not just partitioning of vitrite that accounts for the overall behavior of coals in the system. The lowest rank coal in the experiment, the Springfield coal (Western Kentucky; R In summary, the decisions on how to mine and beneficiate the coal are ultimately based on economics and safety, but the rank and composition of the coal will control coal behavior across the value chain, from site selection through extraction and beneficiation to utilization as a power or metallurgical coal. The composition of the coal can be characterized macroscopically by lithotype composition or microscopically by microlithotype and maceral composition. The manner of characterization isn't as important as the deed itself, since understanding the variability in the response of different coal lithotypes across a range of ranks will assist in understanding how the coal will behave under stress, through either loading onto pillars or impact crushing and grinding. This assists one in optimizing the design of pillars, gas drainage programs, blasting, cutting and extraction, handling, crushing and milling—all from the simple concept of coal rank and type.