Gadolinia doped ceria (GDC) powders with different gadolinium contents were successfully prepared by the thermal decomposition of ceria complexes. All the calcined powder samples were found to be ceria-based solid-solutions having a fluorite-type structure. The powders were cold-isostatically pressed and sintered in air at 1500°C for 5h to attain a sintered density of about 90% of its theoretical value. The electrical conductivity of the GDC pellets in air was studied as a function of temperature in the 225–700°C range, by using two-probe electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements. The highest total conductivity (σ
                     600°C
                     =0.025S/cm) was found for the Ce0.85Gd0.15O1.925 composition.Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) using oxygen-ion conducting electrolytes offer a low-pollution technology to directly convert chemical energy into electricity with high efficiency For this purpose, electrolytes with high oxygen-ion conductivity at low temperatures are under investigation. Moreover, reducing the electrolyte thickness decreases the electrolyte ohmic resistance. Gadolinia-doped ceria (GDC) is an attractive electrolyte alternative to YSZ, owing to its superior oxygen ion conductivity at low temperatures Currently, the common synthesis routes to prepare doped ceria powders include solid-state reaction In a previous work, Laobuthee et al. used a simple and straightforward method to directly prepare Mg–Al–TEA complex from Al(OH) The starting materials were cerium(III) nitrate hexahydrate [Ce(NO The complexes were prepared by mixing in 80 The complexes were calcined in an alumina crucible at various temperatures: 400, 600, 800, 1000, and 1200 The specific surface area of the powders, Scanning electron micrographs were obtained using a JEOL JSM-6301F scanning electron microscope (SEM) operating at an acceleration voltage of 12 The obtained powders were uniaxially pressed into green pellets (∼30 Electrodes were painted using a gold paste onto both sides of the pellets, and fired at 800 The various complexes between Ce(NO To obtain the ceramic powders, the complexes were calcined to remove the organic contents. The appropriate temperature for calcination was studied using TG/DTA measurements. Based on the TG/DTA analysis, the complexes were calcined at 400, 600, 800, 1000 and 1200   The pellet samples, prepared using the powders calcined at 600   It has been shown that oxygen-ion conductivity in rare earth (Re One can observe that the bulk conductivity (   Ce The authors would like to thank The Center of Advanced Studies in Industrial Technology, Faculty of Engineering, Kasetsart University, Thailand, for their support. The authors also thank Mettler Toledo (Thailand) Limited for providing equipment on TGA/DTA analyzer, the Thailand Institute of Scientific and Technological Research (TISTR) for providing equipment on CIP, and the Thailand Institute of Nuclear Technology (TINT) for providing equipment on XRD and BET analysis. The authors would like to thank Asst. Prof. Dr. Duangrudee Chaysuwan, Assoc. Prof. Dr. Sutin Kuharuangrong, and Asst. Prof. Dr. Hathaikarn Manuspiya for their fruitful suggestions. The authors also thank Dr. Sumittra Charojrochkul, Dr. Pimpa Limthongkul and researchers from the National Metal and Materials Technology Center (MTEC), Thailand, for providing equipment for EIS measurements.