This paper develops a safe control scheme under the abnormity based on Bayesian network (BN) for the thickening process of gold hydrometallurgy. By analyzing the causes and corresponding solutions of the abnormity, the operator experience of removing the abnormity is transformed to BN which is used to make safe decisions automatically. The proposed BN-based approach can provide real-time decision support when the abnormity happens. The BN combines the expert knowledge with quantitative data analysis for the abnormity which can make decisions to remove the abnormity. The BN is established off-line and used to infer on-line. After receiving abnormal phenomena as evidences, the posterior probabilities of the decision variables with different grades can be obtained by BN reasoning, which provide real-time safety analysis. The posterior probabilities can be updated using the abnormal latest information. If the abnormity is not removed, once again the BN analysis is invoked based on the newly established situation and the appropriate set of decisions are obtained accordingly. The application results show that the proposed approach can make the safe operation control decisions to remove the abnormity in the thickening process effectively.Hydrometallurgy is an important method to refine gold in industrial processes In order to meet requirements of process production, when the abnormity of the thickening process appears, operators need to analyze alarms and recognize unusual trends indicated by multiple equipments according to their own experience, memory and knowledge in real time. They have to find which causes contribute the abnormity and make effective decisions to make the process variable keep in the required ranges. However, sometimes the information is limited and difficult to obtain in a short time. In the thickening process, some abnormities sometimes appear, and some abnormities even occur frequently, and their damages are often huge. For example, the abnormity that the underflow concentration of the thickener is too high sometimes happens. If no measure to carry out, it will result in pressure rake which is a serious accident. The accident only can be handled by manual way to remove the slurry, which will result that the production has to be stopped. Due to the high economic value of gold, the pressure rake accident will result in serious loss. Therefore, it is necessary to find the causes of abnormity and make effective decisions before the pressure rake accident happens. The operators need to decrease the underflow concentration of thickener. However, the measurement of the underflow concentration is expensive and sometimes it is not accurate because of the external disturbance. In fact, the operators only use other phenomena to judge the abnormity indirectly, which results in the complexity of process analysis. Even if for the abnormity under the circumstance that the information is enough, it is difficult for the operators to find the causes of abnormity and make proper decisions without delay. Many unusual trends from different instruments are frequently triggered at the same time, which also make it difficult for the operators to find the causes of abnormity and make a decision in a very short time. Under the mental pressure from limited time circumstances, it is very difficult for operators to respond quickly and make decisions to return operational units to normal. Even if the decisions are made, the error rate of the decisions may increase due to the high mental workload. As the difference of knowledge among the operators, an efficient decision may not be made by different operators in crisis conditions. What's more, the thickening process is a complex process with a large number of uncertainties, such as instability of mine sources, data incompleteness, and large time-delay of measurements. At the same time, operators have limited abilities to use the multiple information of the process. These factors make it more difficult for human operators to find the causes of abnormity and determine effective decisions. Therefore, to improve the control performance, it is necessary to combine empirical knowledge and statistical data to design a safe control method in order to assist operators to make proper decisions under the abnormity for the thickening process. Conventional control method is to build mathematical models for complex industrial processes whether the situation is normal or abnormal. However, it is difficult to obtain accurate mathematical models because of the complexity of processes. To tackle this problem, artificial intelligence techniques are steadily advancing, which are good candidates for analyzing the abnormity of the complex industrial processes, such as Decision Support System (DSS). DSS can be described as “computer-based systems that help decision makers confront ill-structured problems through direct inter action with data and analysis models” BN is widely used to implement uncertain knowledge representation and reasoning based on Bayes' theorem to quantify complex dependencies, which is being applied in various fields, such as operational risk assessment Although it is very important, no researches have focused on the safe operation control in the thickening process. In actual production process, the abnormity are disposed by the operators with their knowledge, which does not realize automation. In the thickening process, the accurate information about what's happening inside the thickener under the abnormity is difficult to obtain. Therefore, it is necessary to develop an intelligent method for the safe operation control by applying the expert knowledge and abnormal production data analysis, which can combine the advantages of experts and computers. This paper presents a kind of a safe operation control strategy based on BN to make decisions for the thickening process of gold hydrometallurgical industry by transforming the experience of experts and operators, and accumulated empirical knowledge of the process. The method proposes feasible solutions for the abnormity in the thickening process, which can make the process return to the desired normal rapidly. In this paper, according to the abnormal production data of thickening process in a factory, the experience of experts and operators, and accumulated empirical knowledge of the process, the main factors and their relevance are analyzed deeply. After analyzing the causes and corresponding solutions of the abnormity, we need find a proper method to make safe decisions in automatic way. In comparison with previous researches, BN-based approach is a proper method which can overcome the deficiencies of traditional fault analysis methods, such as Fault tree (FT) analysis and influence diagrams. The rules are obtained by summarizing the causes and corresponding decisions of the abnormity, which serve as the base for obtaining the BN structure. The proposed BN-based decision approach is able to perform back-forward control by BN reasoning. BN provides a powerful tool for knowledge representation and reasoning in the thickening process. The application results imply that the proposed approach can be used as a decision tool to provide automatic decision support for abnormity in the thickening process. The remaining sections of this paper are organized as follows. Bayesian network (BN) (also known as belief nets, causal networks, probabilistic dependence graphs, etc.) provides a robust probabilistic method of representing and reasoning under uncertain knowledge in artificial intelligence, which has been applied in a variety of real-world tasks  In this paper the procedure of developing the BN for the thickening process is shown in Step 1: we need to analysis the thickening process and understand its mechanism. Step 2: the common abnormities in the thickening process should be summarized by expert knowledge and the established FT from references. Step 3: we need to determine related variables of every abnormity and understand the relationship between them. Step 4: the cause variables, the result variables and the corresponding safe control measures should be obtained for every abnormity. Step 5: we need to determine the nodes and the number of their conditions. Step 6: BN structure is learned. Step 7: BN parameter is learned. After finishing above steps, the BN can be established finally. The specific process of establishing the BN for the abnormity of the thickening process is described in the In this section, the safe operation control framework based on BN for the thickening process is proposed. The schematic diagram of the safe operation control framework is shown in In Step 1: when the abnormal phenomenon appears, we can regard it as the evidence and transfer it to the established BN. Step 2: after BN reasoning, by the BN reasoning results, we can make suitable decisions to remove the abnormity. Step 3: after the decisions are carried out, we need judge whether the abnormity is removed or not. If the abnormity is removed, the reasoning is over. If the abnormity is not removed, the reasoning needs to be implemented again under the new situation, i.e. return to Step 2. Under the abnormity, the decisions from the safe operation control framework are to give new set points of the process variables. This process is equivalent to the external control. And the process variables change as the given new set points. This process is equivalent to the inter control. The period of the safe operation control includes one or more periods of external control. The period of external control is longer than the period of inter control. The set period should make sure that other new abnormities don't appear when decisions are carried out to remove one abnormity. Therefore, the period of the safe operation control should be set properly, neither too large nor too small. In this section, based on the framework provided in  There are common two abnormities in the thickening process. They are described as follows. (1)	The underflow concentration of the thickener is too high. (2)	Buffer slot 1 under the thickener is empty. For the abnormity (1), if no measure to carry out, it will result in pressure rake which is a serious accident. The accident only can be handled by manual way to remove the slurry, which will result that the production has to be stopped. It will result in serious loss because of the high economic value of gold. Therefore, it is necessary to find the causes of abnormity and make effective decisions before the pressure rake accident happens. However, the measurement of the underflow concentration for the thickener is expensive and sometimes it is not accurate because of the external disturbance. Therefore, we use the phenomena that the motor current in the thickener is too large and the bed pressure in the thickener is too high to indicate the abnormity (1) indirectly. That is to say, when the phenomena that the motor current in the thickener is too large and the bed pressure in the thickener is too high appear, we can judge that the abnormity (1) happens. The causes of the abnormity (1) result from three aspects, the underflow rate is too low, the feed concentration is too high and the feed rate is too high. Generally, the feed concentration cannot be regulated. So we only can change the opening degree of the valve 3 and regulate the power of slurry pump 1 to control the underflow rate, and change the opening degree of valve 1 to control the feed rate. These measures can remove the abnormity (1). When the bottom of the thickener is blocked, the underflow rate is reduced even to zero. Effective measure is to use the returned water from the pressure filter to rush the block until the block is removed by regulating the opening degree of the valve 4. When the abnormity (2) happens, the abnormal phenomenon that the electricity of slurry pump 1 is not stable will appear. By analyzing the cause of the abnormity (2), we can conclude that the underflow rate is too low. We can change the opening degree of the valve 3 and the power of slurry pump 1 to increase the underflow rate. The cause of the underflow rate is too low also may be that the bottom of the thickener is blocked. The corresponding effective measure is to use the returned water from the pressure filter to rush the block until the block is removed by regulating the opening degree of the valve 4. The above operator experience can be summarized as the following rules shown in However, for some phenomena, the operators only can make rough decisions which have some degree of subjectivity. That is to say, different operators will give different decisions under the same situations, and some of decisions may be not good enough to remove the abnormity. To overcome the weakness of decisions from the operators, we use BN to make explicit decisions by reasoning. The BN has obvious advantage that it can combine the operator experience with abnormal data to analyze abnormal phenomena with different degree. The establishment of the BN is showed in the following section in detail. The main objective of this paper is to develop a safe decision control scheme for the thickening process. The safe decision control scheme can make proper decisions to make the thickening process out of abnormity smoothly. Based on the empirical knowledge of engineers and operators and the abnormal production data, a BN is established to make proper decisions to remove the abnormity in real time automatically. The establishment of BN includes two tasks: structure learning and parameter learning. For the structure learning, there are two ways to establish the structure of BN. The first way is machine learning based on complete or incomplete data sets. Many structure learning algorithms have been proposed In After the development of BN structure, parameters for each node need to be determined. The CPTs can quantify the probabilistic dependence relationship for each node In After establishing the BN, we can use the BN to analyze the abnormity, which is called BN reasoning. This quantitative analysis of the BN includes two forms. One is forward (or predictive) analysis, where the occurrence probability of any node in the network is calculated based on the priori probabilities of the root nodes and the conditional dependence of each node. Another one is backward (diagnostic) analysis that computes the posterior probability of any nodes when given some observation (the evidence). In this paper, we focus on the latter one. When given the abnormal phenomena as evidences, we can obtain the posterior probabilities of the corresponding decisions by BN reasoning. The posterior probabilities reflect the characteristics of the abnormity more specifically than priori probabilities. This is because posterior probabilities have been updated using the abnormal latest information. BN can repetitively substitute the posterior probabilities for priori probabilities in the abnormal analysis when a new set of abnormal phenomena are observed. This way not only continuously reduces the data uncertainty, but also can provide up-to-date analysis for the abnormity. In this paper, we use the junction tree reasoning algorithm to realize BN reasoning In this paper, we divide the conditions of nodes into three or two grades, which are based on the practicability of the thickening process. From the view of practicability, the operators usually regulate the power of slurry pump and the opening degree of valve in the following way: unchanged, change slowly and change quickly. As the number of the condition increases, the complexity of computation will increase, the speed of reasoning will decrease, and it is more difficult to determine the CPTs of BN. Therefore, three or two grades are enough to make decisions under the abnormity for the thickening process by trading off between the practicability and complexity. To improve the effectiveness and accuracy of safety control in the thickening process, using the framework described in In this part, based on the analysis of the operator experience in By analyzing the practical situations of the thickening process, we extract nine possible abnormal scenarios shown in The above nine abnormal scenarios shown in For the problem of the choice of the decisions, it follows the principle that we should choose the decisions which have the largest posterior probabilities based on the criterion of BN reasoning. Therefore, for the abnormal scenario 1, we can obtain that the decisions: change the opening degree of the valve 3 and the power of slurry pump 1 to middle high grade; the valve 4 is closed; change the opening degree of the valve 1 to low grade. For other abnormal scenarios, the corresponding proper decisions can be obtained as the above process in For the decisions of different abnormal scenarios shown in To test the effect of the decisions made by the BN, we take the abnormal scenario 3 as the example. The corresponding decisions of the abnormal scenario 3 are applied on the simulation platform of the thickening process. The threshold value of the underflow concentration is set as 11,000 The establishing of the BN is based on the experience of the experts and the operators. The advantage of the decisions made by the BN is that they can show more accurate and more suitable measures compared with the manual decisions when the severity degree of the phenomenon cannot be judged by the operators explicitly. That is to say, sometimes the decisions from the BN and the operators are the same; sometimes they are different when the judgments of the operators for the situation are rough. Taking the abnormal scenario 3 as the example, the states of the nodes G, H and I are large, very high and nonoccurrence respectively. Compared with the abnormal scenario 1, the operator's judgment for the severity degree of the abnormal scenario 3 is low. Generally they make the decisions: change the opening degree of the valve 3 and the power of slurry pump 1 to middle high grade; the valve 4 is closed; change the opening degree of the valve 1 to middle low grade. However, the decision made by the BN is that change the opening degree of the valve 1 to low grade for the node C. Comparing the effects of the decisions from the BN with the manual method for the same abnormal scenario, we can obtain the advantage of the proposed method. The changes of the underflow concentration by proposed method and by manual method for the abnormal scenario 3 are shown in From Therefore, the practical running results not only show that the reasoning results of the BN agree with the expert experience and the proposed safe operation control strategy can make the thickening process out of abnormity effectively, but also the effect of the decisions made by the BN is better than the decisions made by manual method. Hydrometallurgy has become a main way for the gold refining processes. However, the outbreak of abnormity will result in financial losses or even injuries. The safe control problem has received more and more concerns in recent years. Therefore, in this paper a safe control scheme under the abnormity based on BN has been developed for the thickening process to remove the abnormity in automatic way. By analyzing the causes and corresponding solutions of the abnormity, the operator experience to remove the abnormity is transformed to BN which is used to make safe decisions automatically. The proposed BN-based approach can provide real-time decision support when the abnormity happens. The BN combines the expert knowledge and quantitative data analysis to make decisions and remove the abnormity. The BN has been established off-line and used to infer on-line. After receiving abnormal phenomena as evidences, the posterior probabilities of the decision variables with different grades can be obtained by BN reasoning, which provide real-time safety analysis. The application results demonstrate that the proposed approach is very efficient to make proper decisions to remove the abnormity in the thickening process, and the effect of the decisions made by the BN is better than the decisions made by manual method. This work was supported by the