A proportion of the fast-growing elderly population needs special foods which are soft to chew and easily swallowed. Gel microparticles, GMP, (e.g., less than 100 μm in size) are an alternative as texture-modifiers in liquid and pureed foods, and may be used as carriers of needed flavors and nutrients. GMP (sizes < 40 μm) were fabricated from whey protein isolate (WPI)/sodium alginate (NaAlg) mixtures by size reduction of bulk gels made by the cold-gelation method. A cell test based on back extrusion was designed to evaluate the mechanical properties of a GMP paste and image analysis techniques implemented to resolve the size of GMP. A good correlation (R2 = 0.89) was obtained between the stress (at 60% strain) of bulk gels and that of GMP. Compression stress at 30% strain depended on the concentrations of WPI and NaAlg and a maximum was observed at intermediate values. Through Principal Component Analysis gels with low and high sodium alginate contents were clearly explaining 93% of the variability. The ample range of mechanical properties of GMP suggest that they may be used to design or modify the texture of soft foods.Ageing of our society is a phenomenon occurring worldwide at a rapid pace: old people are today the fastest growing demographic segment of the population. It is likely that by 2050 around 400 million people will be aged 80 years and over ( Gels are soft solids which immobilize large amounts of water (e.g., >90%) within a biopolymer network, whose microstructure may be adjusted within a wide range of physical properties and textures ( Food-grade gel microparticles are small-sized gels usually formed by proteins or polysaccharides and their combinations. They are finding increasing application in foods due to their unique physicochemical characteristics and functional attributes ( Mechanical breakdown is a common technique to produce small-particle soft gels. Among many apparatus to effect size reduction the Ultra-Turrax benchtop homogenizer has been widely utilized because it yields gel particles in an ample range of sizes, i.e., 20–200 μm ( The objective of this work was to fabricate and physically characterize soft gel microparticles from WPI and NaAlg mixed solutions gelled at a low temperature (cold gelation), exhibiting a wide range of mechanical properties. These soft particles could be used as texture-modified foods for the elderly (e.g., caviar-type products), added to provide consistency to fluid foods (juices, milks) or mixed into traditional foods (e.g., soups, purees, sauces, etc.). Whey protein isolate (WPI) with a moisture content of 4.7% ± 0.3 and protein content of 97.7% ± 0.7 (d.b.) was purchased from BIPRO (Davisco Foods Intl., MN, USA). The pH of a WPI dispersion in distilled water was 7.0 ± 0.3. Sodium alginate (NaAlg) was obtained from Gelymar Natural Extracts (Chile) with a composition of 38% mannuronic acid, 16% guluronic acid and 46% alternate units. Artificial membranes VISCOFAN of corrugated cellulose with a caliber of 20 mm diameter and 30–60 μm of thickness were acquired from Filter Print Ltda. (Santiago, Chile). Calcium chloride was from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO, USA). The composition and pH of WPI/NaAlg solutions are reported in GMP were observed using an optical microscope model SMZ-2T 2B (Nikon Corp., Tokyo Japan) and images were acquired with a ToupCam model UCMOS 08000 digital camera (ToupTek Photonics, Zhejiang, China) attached to the microscope. Images were first enhanced using contrast-limited adaptive histogram equalization to a pre-defined pixel distribution ( Mechanical properties of gels are usually assessed by uniaxial compression of cylindrical samples ( A central composite design was used to plan the experiments ( Principal component analysis (PCA) is a multivariate statistical technique that identifies those characteristics that vary most between individuals and uses a scoring system (the principal components) which can be treated like new types of measurements to compare populations with similar features. The PCA method was used to analyze the dataset of 24 averaged measurements obtained from the 10 treatments corresponding to bulk gels and GMP. The 24 averaged measurements are composed of 22 strain values (from 10% to 60% at 5% intervals) for bulk gels and GMP extracted from  The pH of solutions ranged from 6.89 to 7.03 ( Due to the minute size of the gelled microparticles (approximately 10–40 μm) a special back extrusion testing cell had to be constructed to assay the mechanical properties of a paste of GMP. Similar test cells were constructed to evaluate the mechanical properties of small grains ( Stress-deformation curves of cylindrical WPI/NaAlg bulk gels are presented in A second order surface response equation was estimated for the stress of GMP at 30% strain as a function of composition ( The calculated eigenvalues from the matrix made possible to describe 92.8% of the total variation in mechanical properties between bulk gels and GMP for all treatments when considering the first and second principal components (PC A good linear correlation (R WPI/alginate gel microparticles (GMP) were prepared by homogenization of bulk gels produced by diffusion of calcium ions into the mixed solutions and cold gelation. If larger particles were needed, GMP could be obtained by reducing the intensity of the size reduction method. The size of particles was determined using image analysis and a specially derived software which has the advantage that the objects can be seen in the photographs. A novel back-extrusion test cell was constructed to assess mechanical properties of GMP. Stress of bulk gels and GMP exhibited a good correlation, meaning that the back-extrusion method is an appropriate alternative to directly assess the mechanical properties of a paste of microparticles. Principal component analysis (PCA) allowed to distinguish softer GMP with low content of NaAlg from firmer GMP having a high concentration of the polysaccharide, thus, corroborating the positive role of alginate in structure formation of the mixed gel. We expect that these gelled microparticles may find applications as texture-modified foods for elderly people with mastication and swallowing dysfunctions. Further work should be carried out to resolve the gelation mechanism and its effect on microstructure and mechanical properties of GMP. Work reported is part of the doctoral thesis of Alicia Leon Tacca under support of