Melissotarsus ants have an extremely specialized set of behaviours. Both workers and gynes tunnel galleries in their host tree bark. Workers walk with their mesothoracic legs pointing upwards and tend Diaspididae hemiptera for their flesh. The ants use their forelegs to plug the galleries with silk that they secrete themselves. We hypothesised that the ants’ energetic needs for nearly constant gallery digging could be satisfied through the absorption of host tree tissues; so, using basic techniques, we examined the digestive capacities of workers from two species. We show that workers are able to degrade oligosaccharides and heterosides as well as, to a lesser degree, polysaccharides. This is one of the rare reports on ants able to digest plant polysaccharides other than starch.Termites and ants, both species-rich eusocial insects, are characterized by their abundance in terms of biomass and number of individuals. Together, they represent up to 33% of the terrestrial animal biomass The ant diet is very diverse and many species are either predatory or omnivorous, but their abundance is directly related to herbivory. Leaf-cutting ants cultivate cellulolytic basidiomycetous fungus and bacteria The present study focuses on myrmicine ants of the genus The This mode of digging soft tissues is similar to that of certain borer and miner insects that, while doing so, ingest the cells’ cytosol plus very small particles (i.e., individual cells or even parts of secondary membranes We hypothesised in this study that while digging galleries, a quasi-constant task for certain individuals to the point that their mandibles become worn, We collected samples of ants on the campus of the University of Yaoundé I (03° 53’ N; 11° 30’ W) and in the old secondary forest at Kala (03° 59’ N; 11° 28’ W) from two safoo trees ( The detection of enzymatic activity was carried out on crude extracts of biological material following a protocol very similar to that described by D’Ettorre et al. Seventeen specific and synthetic plant material substrates (from Sigma Chemicals; St Louis, MO, USA) were used in the enzyme assays (see Enzymatic activity was assayed according to the methods described by Rouland et al. The reducing sugars produced by the hydrolysis of the polysaccharides were assayed using the Somogyi–Nelson microdosage technique Enzymatic activity was noted in all cases, but to different degrees. In We need to remember that secondary growth in dicotyledonous tree stems is firstly due to the vascular cambium producing the secondary xylem toward the interior and the secondary phloem toward the exterior. As the diameter of the stems increases, the epidermis is stretched and a layer of cortical cells becomes merismatic through dedifferentiation, forming a layer of “cork cambium” that produces the phelloderm toward the interior and the periderm, made of cork cells, toward the exterior. The “bark” includes everything to the exterior of the vascular cambium (from the phloem to the periderm) In this general context, it is likely that nesting and feeding behaviours are related in Although the level of enzymatic activity was low, we show that It would be particularly interesting to determine in future studies if It is likely that The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article. We are grateful to Andrea Dejean for proofreading the manuscript. Financial support for this study was provided by the French