This paper reports an innovative development: concentrating gibbsite via reverse froth flotation in order to obtain a metallurgical-grade bauxite concentrate. Tailings from an industrial plant have undergone attrition scrubbing and desliming; the quartz silica contained in the tailings has undergone flotation. Starch was used as a depressant, and ether-amine as the cationic collector. Optimum pH is around 10.0. In pilot plant scale, a metallurgical-grade concentrate was obtained by assaying 42.3% available alumina with an alumina/insoluble silica mass ratio of 11.1. It contained the gibbsite and the iron and titanium bearing minerals. The concentrate was further upgraded by magnetic separation, leading to 54.0% available alumina, with an alumina/insoluble silica mass ratio of 12.6 at an overall available alumina recovery of 69.3% in the final concentrate (non-magnetic product).About 8% of the world bauxite resources are found in Brazil. There are two different bauxite types according to their origin: plateau bauxite and mountain bauxite. The first type – plateau bauxite – consists of extensive plateau areas with thick continuous ore layers, found in the northern deposits, such as Oriximiná – PA (exploited by Mineração Rio do Norte) and Paragominas – PA (exploited by Vale). The second type – mountain bauxite – occurs at the top and slope of high mountains (the so-called half-orange mountains); therefore, there are no extended continuous orebodies, as opposed to the plateau deposits. In the case of mountain bauxite, each orebody has particular properties, according to the nature of the mother rock. Also, there is huge variation of the ore properties inside the same orebody, as the intensity of the laterization process varies along the slope. This type of deposit is found in the Cataguases and Miraí deposits, in the Zona da Mata area, Southeastern Brazil. In both types of bauxite, the mineralogical assembly includes gibbsite (the only aluminum oxide occurring in Brazil), quartz, kaolinite, iron oxides and titanium bearing minerals. Other minerals may occur as accessories, depending on the mother rock. Worldwide, the industrial practice for bauxite consists in feeding the ROM ore directly to the alumina production plant. In contrast to the general treatment of bauxite, Brazil has a tradition of applying mineral dressing techniques to bauxite. Mineração Rio do Norte treats bauxite via scrubbing and desliming, while Mineração Santa Lucrécia uses a dense-medium separation (dinawhirlpool – DWP) circuit. Companhia Brasileira de Alumínio (CBA), in Itamarati de Minas, uses scrubbing and desliming, followed by heavy minerals separation in spiral concentrators, and complemented by high intensity magnetic separation. CBA also does optical sorting at its Poços de Caldas site, and Mineração Rio Pomba uses jigs to separate coarse silica at their site in Mercês, MG. However, even though flotation is the most important operation in ores beneficiation, it is still a new unit operation in the bauxite industry.   The sample used in the tests was provided by Companhia Brasileira de Alumínio – CBA, from its under-development mine in Miraí. A ROM ore dressing test was done at CBA’s preparation plant at Itamarati de Minas. Its circuit includes scrubbing and screening operations, as well as a desliming and gravitic separation circuit to recover bauxite from fines. Increments were taken from the light product of the spirals circuit, in order to compose the sample for the flotation tests. This sample was then characterized by laboratorial size analysis, chemical analysis, X-ray diffraction (XRD), and scanning electronic microscopy (SEM). As the sample was mineralogically and chemically characterized, the flotation tests could be performed. Previous exploratory tests performed by the authors had shown the cationic reverse flotation route to be the most effective in separating quartz silica from gibbsite. A commercial ether-amine (Flotigam EDA, provided by Clariant) was used as a collector, and caustic corn starch (provided by Corn Products) as a gibbsite depressant. Sodium hydroxide was added to pulp, in order to keep its pH value at 10.0. This is the usual practice for the concentration of itabiritic ores in Brazilian iron ore industry ( Also, those exploratory tests pointed out that: Particles as coarse as 0.297 The conditioning step generated iron hydroxide slimes, creating problems with froth control, and making necessary to remove the slimes. These observations demanded the granulometric adequation of the feed material for all the flotation tests. It was screened in 0.297 Only 78% of the initial sample mass was suitable to be floated. It is important to stress that no comminution operation has been used: the tailings from the spiral concentrator could already be considered fines. To perform the flotation testes, it was used a 1.5 XRD has shown that the mineralogical assembly consists of gibbsite as the ore mineral, and quartz, ilmenite, goethite and kaolinite as the accessory minerals. The chemical analysis presented in As there are two kinds of silica, the floated silica will be referred to along the paper as the quartz silica. The SEM examination ( Bench-scale tests were carried out in a 1.5  Pilot plant tests were carried out using the same samples used for the bench tests. A rougher-scavenger-cleaner circuit was adopted, where the scavenger feed is the rougher flotation tailing, and the cleaner feed is the rougher floated. This flowsheet is presented in In the first continuous tests, froth control became a real problem, due to the amount of slimes developed during conditioning. The pulp agitation provoked by the conditioner developed iron hydroxide minerals slimes even though the flotation feed had been previously deslimed. So, the additional scrubbing step in the Denver Attrition Scrubber had to be introduced into the circuit, prior to desliming and conditioning. Moreover, conditioning could not be done in the usual conditioners. A special conditioner was built for this operation, as shown in During the pilot plant test, samples were taken from all pulp flows. The method used was total flow interception, in order to establish the mass and metallurgical balances. The next increment was taken only after the operation was stabilized again. Additionally, the chemicals flows were controlled. During the operation, it was noticed that the tailings still contained quartz silica. In order to correct this, we increased the collector dosage and split it: 2/3 of the dose were added at the rougher cell and 1/3 at the scavenger cell. The pilot plant tests yielded a concentrate with 42.3% available alumina, 85.4% metallurgical recovery and 45.3% mass recovery. The best dosages of reagents were 250 A magnetic separation of the concentrate increased the available alumina grade to 54.0%. This operation is convenient because the iron minerals are depressed by corn starch as well as gibbsite; this increases the iron content in the concentrate, decreasing the available alumina grade. Non-liberated particles are also responsible for increasing the iron content in the concentrate. The reverse cationic flotation of quartz from gibbsite proved to be feasible in both bench and pilot scales. The best reagents are a commercial ether-amine as the quartz collector, and caustic corn starch as the gibbsite depressant, at pH 10. As the sample tested was a tailing from the industrial plant, it contained a great amount of natural fine particles. Slimes – both the natural slimes and those developed during processing – made flotation unfeasible. Adding further steps of scrubbing and desliming prior to flotation solved this problem. Besides, a specially designed conditioner was used in order to prevent the generation of slimes in conditioning. Particles as coarse as 0.297 The iron and titanium bearing minerals are depressed by corn starch, as well as gibbsite. Hence, after flotation, a magnetic separation operation was introduced to improve once again the available alumina grade in the concentrate. The pilot plant concentrate reached 42.3% of available alumina, increased to 54.0% after removal of the magnetic minerals. The available alumina content required by the alumina refinery, in this case, was 42%. The Al The process developed in this research is innovative, since there are no other papers referring to the production of metallurgical-grade gibbsite concentrate. It can be applied in the processing of natural fine bauxite ores, as in the CBA′s Miraí beneficiation plant, or to recover available alumina from tailings, as shown in this paper. The authors are grateful to CBA for the financial support.