Surface properties can markedly affect the mechanical behavior of structural thin films used in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) applications. This study highlights the striking difference in the sidewall surface morphology of n+-type polysilicon films from two popular MEMS processes and its effect on fracture and fatigue properties. The sidewall surface roughness was measured using atomic force microscopy, whereas silicon oxide thickness and grain size were measured using (energy-filtered) transmission electron microscopy. These measurements show that the oxide layers are not always thin native oxides, as often assumed; moreover, the roughness of the silicon/silicon oxide interface is significantly influenced by the oxidation mechanism. Thick silicon oxides (20±5nm) found in PolyMUMPs™ films are caused by galvanic corrosion from the presence of gold on the chip, whereas in SUMMiT V™ films a much thinner (3.5±1.0nm) native oxide was observed. The thicker oxide layers, in combination with differences in sidewall roughness (14±5nm for PolyMUMPs™ and 10±2nm for SUMMiT V™), can have a significant effect on the reliability of polysilicon structures subjecting to bending loads; this is shown by measurements of the fracture strength (3.8±0.3GPa for PolyMUMPs™ and 4.8±0.2GPa for SUMMiT V™) and differences in the stress-lifetime cyclic fatigue behavior.Because of their large surface to volume ratio, the surfaces properties of structural thin films used in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) invariably have a significant effect on their material properties. Consequently, it is imperative to fully characterize the surfaces of the materials and components used in MEMS designs in order to correctly predict device behavior and reliability after fabrication. Such surface characterization is relevant to both the electrical and mechanical behavior of the MEMS device. Since silicon is currently one of the main materials used in MEMS and many devices contain in-plane flexures In light of these studies, the present work is focused on an in-depth characterization of the sidewall surfaces of two frequently used multi-user MEMS processes: the MEMSCAP PolyMUMPs™ process and the Sandia National Laboratories SUMMiT V™ process. Scanning and transmission electron microscopy (respectively, SEM and TEM) is combined with atomic force microscopy (AFM) to characterize the polysilicon sidewall surface and silicon/silicon oxide interface, and to obtain sidewall surface roughness, silicon oxide thickness and in-plane grain size measurements. The effects of these parameters are illustrated by direct comparison of the fracture strength and fatigue resistance of polysilicon devices fabricated by these two different processes. Post-release sidewall surfaces from both the MEMSCAP PolyMUMPs™ and Sandia National Laboratories SUMMiT V™ n As noted above, SEM, TEM and AFM were used to characterize the morphology of the sidewall surfaces and oxides. Specifically, TEM and AFM samples were prepared using focused-ion beam (FIB) lift-out sample preparation techniques (FEI Strata DB235 Dual Beam FIB equipped with an OmniProbe™ micro-manipulator), as illustrated in Fracture strength and fatigue experiments were performed using electrostatically actuated resonator devices without mono-layer coatings, as described in refs. The sidewall morphology of polysilicon films from both the PolyMUMPs™ and SUMMiT V™ process are shown, respectively, in The morphologies of the oxide layer and the silicon/silicon oxide interface in the sidewalls of the PolyMUMPs™ and SUMMiT V™ polysilicon films are shown respectively in The silicon oxide layers in the SUMMiT V™ films ( To illustrate how the sidewall morphology of polysilicon can influence its mechanical properties, results of fracture strength and fatigue lifetime tests for both PolyMUMPs™ and SUMMiT V™ devices are given in The surfaces properties of structural thin polysilicon films are known to have a significant effect on their material properties. Since many micrometer-scale polysilicon devices contain in-plane flexures, the sidewall morphology, the silicon oxide thickness and their influence on the mechanical properties of polysilicon are clearly of importance; accordingly, their effect on strength and fatigue resistance was specifically investigated in this work. The measured difference in sidewall surface oxide thickness and Si/SiO We ascribe differences in the fracture and fatigue behavior of the two types of devices to the effect of the sidewall morphology; however, for this to be meaningful, it is important to verify that the failure origin of the specimens is actually on the sidewalls. The RMS roughness of the top surface for the SUMMiT V™ films is in the order of 3.5 In general, the measured difference in fracture strength between the PolyMUMPs™ and the SUMMiT V™ devices ( In addition to the observed roughness and oxide thickness effect on fracture strength, the effect of different oxide layer thicknesses is seen more clearly in high-cycle fatigue behavior of these two types of polysilicon specimens ( These fracture and fatigue results illustrate clearly the importance of the side-wall morphology on mechanical behavior of polysilicon structural films. Consequently, it is essential that sidewall parameters (including the oxide thickness) should be carefully considered when designing polysilicon MEMS devices, estimating their reliability, and interpreting failure modes for polysilicon MEMS. The intent of this study has been to show how the sidewall surface morphology, specifically the surface roughness and silicon oxide layer thickness, of n Thick (20 Together with the in-plane grain size, thicker oxide layers in the PolyMUMPs™ films were associated with increased surface roughness of the sidewalls and with increased roughness at the Si/SiO Due to their fivefold thicker oxides, 40% rougher sidewalls and roughness of the top of the film, measured fracture strengths for the PolyMUMPs™ films were over 20% lower than for the SUMMiT V™ films, Similarly, the thicker oxides and lower fracture strengths of the PolyMUMPs™ films resulted in an increased susceptibility of these films to cyclic fatigue failure, which are believed to fail by environmentally assisted subcritical cracking in a cyclic-stress assisted thickened silicon oxide. Specifically, the 10 This work was funded by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231 at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL). The authors acknowledge Drs. S. Timpe, K. Komvopoulos and M.T. Dugger for supplying devices for additional characterization, the use of the Molecular Foundry, specifically the assistance of Drs. P.D. Ashby and D.F. Ogletree with the AFM training, and the staff and facilities at the National Center for Electron Microscopy, both operated at LBNL with the support of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231. Support for BLB is also gratefully acknowledged from Sandia National Laboratories, which is a multi-program laboratory operated by Sandia Corporation, a Lockheed-Martin Company, for the U.S. Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security Administration under Contract no. DE-AC04-94AL85000.