This study illustrates how polar functional groups adjacent to bolaform charged groups modified the interaction behaviour of the compound with an oppositely charged surface. Adsorbed fumaric (trans-1,2-ethylene dicarboxylic) acid bridges particles in dispersions. However the presence of hydroxyl group adjacent to the two bolaform carboxylic groups depresses this particle bridging behaviour. Instead dihydroxyfumaric acid adsorbed to form a steric barrier. Molecular modelling shows that each of the two hydroxyl groups in dihydroxyfumate formed a hydrogen bond with the same carboxylic acid group leaving the other fully charged and free to adsorb onto a particle. In contrast, the presence of a methyl group adjacent to a bolaform carboxylic acid group did not affect the particle bridging attribute of the compound and this behaviour was displayed by adsorbed mesaconic or 2-methylfumaric acid.Surface and intermolecular forces drive most physical and chemical processes at the colloidal and molecular levels. These forces are being exploited in mineral processing such as in flotation and flocculation, drive the self-assembly of surfactant molecules and determine the shape and architecture of the structure formed, drive molecular recognition and interactions in biological systems and processes, impart specific function to functionalized surfaces and nanoparticles – just to name a few. Except for the simplest of processes, we are still unable to fully control and fine-tune these forces to achieve process optimization or to produce new smart devices and products in quantities that commensurate with the amount of money spent in this field of research. As an example, the molecular engineering of functionalized nanoparticles for medical and sensor applications requires a good control of these forces for attachment with the correct conformation structure. This requires a fundamental understanding of the forces interacting between the functional groups (in molecule and surface), the type of molecular structure that may facilitate such interactions and, the type and location of functional groups that may assist such interactions. The predominant intermolecular force operating in the dispersion gives rise to the type of surface forces observed such as bridging and steric. Interactions between like and unlike functional groups have been characterized in terms of an adhesion force in an AFM or a Surface Force Apparatus (SFA) The ability to design functional compounds that are perfect steric stabilisers and bridging agents, and that attach onto nanoparticles with the correct conformation structure to act as sensors, requires knowledge of all intra- and inter-molecular interactions and their strength, and how these interactions affect the conformation structure of the adsorbed additives. This research investigates the relationship between molecular structure and functional group of adsorbed additives, and intermolecular and surface forces in particulate fluids. The type of structure, molecular conformation and, number, nature and location of functional groups that accentuate or depress the different surface forces need to be determined and understood. Except for the number and nature of functional groups, the other parameters have been investigated to a certain degree The bridging property of adsorbed fumaric or Much larger increase in the maximum gel strength was achieved with longer chain length bolaform compounds where the conditions of backbone rigidity and ideal spatial positioning of the charged groups were maintained. The increase is as much as 7-folds for The α-Al In the dispersion preparation for yield stress measurements, a solution with accurately known additive concentration was first prepared by the dissolution of additive in distilled water. A few drops of 5 A Brookfield DVII+ viscometer adapted to perform vane yield stress measurement was employed. The pH and conductivity of the dispersions were measured with an Orion 710A+ and a TPS WP-81 portable conductivity meter. The zeta potential was measured with a Colloidal Dynamics ZetaProbe that uses the ESA (Electrokinetic Sonic Amplitude) technique. For this measurement, the dispersions with 5 The effect of dihydroxyfumaric acid on the yield stress–pH behaviour of α-Al The effects of fumaric and dihydroxyfumaric acids on the zeta potential behaviour of α-Al The zeta potential–pH behaviour gives an indication of the adsorption behaviour of the additives. In the absence of adsorbed additive, the α-Al The vastly different effects of dihydroxyfumaric and fumaric acid on the maximum yield stress ratio of α-Al Somehow, the rigid backbone and the ideal spatial position of the two bolaform carboxylic groups did not impart particle bridging attributes to dihydroxyfumaric acid. The close proximity of the However the mystery was solved by molecular modelling. Molecular modelling with ChemUltra 10 software subjected to MM2 energy minimization condition of dihydroxyfumarate produced quite an unexpected intrafunctional group interaction model that clearly explains the non-bridging behaviour of the compound. It also explains the high degree of adsorption of the compound. The molecular model shows that only one of the two carboxylic groups participated in hydrogen bonding. The two hydroxyl groups formed a hydrogen bond each with the same carboxylate group. See The effect on yield stress by adsorbed mesaconic or 2-methylfumaric acid is similar to fumaric acid but opposite to dihydroxyfumaric acid. Its effect on the yield stress–pH behaviour of 55 The cartoon illustrating particle bridging by a mesaconate molecule is shown in the inset of Adsorbed fumaric acid readily bridges particles in dispersion because of its rigid molecular structure with its two bolaform carboxylic acid groups in an ideal bridging position. However the behaviour displayed by adsorbed dihydroxyfumaric acid is the complete opposite. It does not bridge particles despite possessing similar structural properties except it has two bolaform hydroxyl groups adjacent to the carboxylic acid groups. Molecular modelling shows that these two hydroxyl groups formed hydrogen bonding with one of the bolaform carboxylic group thereby neutralising it charge and thus diminishing its ability to attach onto a second particle. Mesaconic acid is almost identical to fumaric acid in behaviour in terms of its effect on the yield stress and zeta potential. The relatively bulky methyl group did not affect the performance of its adjacent carboxylic acid group to bridge with other particles or decrease the strength of the bridging bond. YKL wishes to acknowledge the support of an ARC LIEF and USF grant (from UWA) for the purchase of the ZetaProbe used in this study. He wishes to thank Dr Makha for the cartoon drawings and Prof Raston for discussion. YKL conducted all the experiments, analysed all the results and wrote the paper.