The electronic and electrochemical properties are reported here for the first time for a series of five tris(β-ketoiminato)ruthenium(III) complexes. Since the β-ketoiminato ligand is unsymmetrical, both fac and mer isomers are theoretically possible for these octahedral complexes. Density functional theory calculations show that for complexes containing an H on the imino position, both the fac and mer are energetically possible, while for complexes with a Ph on the imino position, the mer isomer is energetically favoured, due to the steric hindrance caused by the Ph group in the fac isomer. Electrochemistry, utilizing cyclic voltammetry, showed RuIII/IV oxidation, RuIII/II reduction, as well as ligand based reduction of the RuII complex. Different RuIII/IV and RuIII/II redox couples were observed for the different fac and mer isomers of the tris(β-ketoiminato)ruthenium(III) complexes.Ruthenium complexes containing N,N, N,O or O,O bidentate ligands have been extensively studied before, for example in their use as potential anti-cancer agents [ In this study we thus present an electrochemical and computational chemistry study of five novel tris(β-ketoiminato)ruthenium(III) complexes, containing amino substituted β-amino α,β-unsaturated ketones (bidentate N,O-ligands), see UV/vis spectra were recorded on a Varian Cary 50 Conc ultra-violet/visible spectrophotometer. MS was recorded on an ABSCIEX 4000QTRAP or Bruker Microflex LRF20 spectrophotometer. Proton NMR were recorded on a 300 MHz Bruker FOURIER NMR spectrometer operating at 25 °C, The five bidentate N,O-ligands were synthesized and characterized as reported for ligands 1, 2, 4 and 5 [ 1,3-diphenylpropane-1,3-dione (2.438 g, 10.9 mmol) was dispersed over Montmorillonite K-10 (2 g) and DCM (20 ml) was added. While stirring, a mixture of ammonia solution (0.35 ml, 20.5 mmol) and DCM (10 ml) was added. The reaction was stirred at room temperature for 24 h. The catalyst was removed by filtration and the solvent was firstly removed on a rotatory evaporator, then under vacuum, yielding a red powder (1.687 g). Yield 69%. A mixture of L1 (1.951 g, 11.1 mmol) in THF (25 ml) was added dropwise, while stirring, to a mixture of sodium hydride (0.38 g, 15.8 mmol) and THF (25 ml). The reaction mixture was stirred at room temperature for about 30 min. The unreacted sodium hydride was removed by filtration. The filtrate was added to a mixture of [Ru(COD)Cl RuCl A mixture of RuCl A mixture of RuCl A mixture of L3 (0.784 g, 3.5 mmol) in THF (25 ml) was added dropwise, while stirring, to a mixture of sodium hydride (0.134 g, 5.58 mmol) and THF (25 ml). The reaction mixture was stirred at room temperature for about 30 min. The unreacted sodium hydride was removed by filtration. The filtrate was added to a mixture of [Ru(COD)Cl Cyclic voltammetric (CV) measurements were conducted on a BAS100B Electrochemical Analyzer linked to a personal computer, utilizing the BAS100W Version 2.3 software. Measurements were done at 293 K and the temperature was kept constant within 0.5 K. Successive experiments under the same experimental conditions showed that all formal reduction and oxidation potentials were reproducible within 0.010 V. Cyclic voltammetric (CV) measurements were performed either on a concentration of 2 mmol dm Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed via the B3LYP functional (and UB3LYP for spin unrestricted calculations), and B3LYP-D3 (B3LYP with the Grimme empirical dispersion correction D3), as implemented in the Gaussian 09 package [ ESI-MS spectra (complexes 1, 3, 4, 5) (electrospray-ionisation mass spectrometry) were collected on an ABSCIEX 4000QTRAP ion-trap mass spectrometer. The dried sample was dissolved in 1 mL acetonitrile and further diluted 1000× before being infused into a Sciex 4000QTRAP hybrid triple quadrupole ion-trap mass spectrometer, at 10 μL/min. During infusion a Q1 scan was performed between 100 and 800 Da in, while ramping the declustering potential between 0 and 400 V. The scan was performed in both positive and negative ionisation mode. The ionisation voltage was set at 5500 V in positive mode and −4500 V in negative mode, with a 10 psi curtain gas setting and 20 psi ionisation gas (GS1) setting. MALDI-TOF-MS spectra (complex 2) (matrix assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-flight mass spectrometry) were collected by a Bruker Microflex LRF20 in the negative reflection mode, using the minimum laser power required to observe signals. The β-amino α,β-unsaturated ketoimine ligands L1 – L5 ( Both the Results obtained in the previous section showed that the B3LYP DFT method provided a reliable calculated structure for complexes 1–5, when compared to existing experimental crystallographic data from a similar compound (6 obtained from literature). In order to determine whether the electronic energy of these complexes also was accurate, the possible spin states, S = ½, 3/2 and 5/2, were calculated for the d The relative energies and populations according to the Boltzmann equation of the Selected frontier molecular orbitals of complex 2 were shown in During the reduction of the neutral Ru(III) complex, an electron is added to the complex. This added electron could either go into the β-LUMO resulting in q = −1 and S = 0, or into the α-LUMO (overall LUMO+1), resulting in two unpaired electrons for the reduced complex with q = −1 and spin = 1. DFT calculations for 2 showed that the complex with spin = 0 had a lower energy compared to the complex with spin = 1 (with ΔE = 1–1.5 eV for complexes 1–5), therefore the electron added upon reduction of complex 2 was added to the β-LUMO. Since the β-LUMO is Ru-d based, the first reduction of complex 2 was therefore proven to be metal based, i.e. Ru In contrast, during oxidation, an electron is removed from the molecule. This electron could either be removed from the β-HOMO, resulting in q = 1 and spin = 1, or from the α-HOMO (overall HOMO-1) resulting in q = 1 and spin = 0 (no unpaired electrons). DFT calculations for 1–5 showed that the complex with spin = 1 had the lowest energy compared to the complex with spin = 0, with ΔE = 0.2–0.3 eV, implying that the reduced complex was diamagnetic with S = 0. Since the β-HOMO is Ru-d based, the first oxidation of complex 2 was therefore proven to be metal based, i.e. Ru A second reduction would involve an added electron, either to the LUMO+1 of the neutral complex, or to the LUMO of the reduced complex. These MOs did not have Ru-d character and were ligand based, see Similarly to complex 2, the LUMO and the HOMO of complexes 1, 3–5 were also proven to be predominantly Ru-d based, however extending further by small amounts also to the two donor atoms N and O, as well as to the central carbon between (C–N) and (C  The redox behaviour of the five ruthenium(III) complexes 1–5 in this research were studied under the conditions discussed in section The Ru(III)/(IV) oxidation on the anodic side, between −0.04–0.70 V The Ru(III)/(II) reduction on the cathodic side between −1.52 V and −0.89 V For Series 2 complexes ( The The same trend that was observed for the Ru(III)/(IV) oxidation, was also observed for the Ru(III)/(II) reduction, namely that the reduction occurred at an increasingly higher potential, as the amount of aromatic Ph groups at the R The potential difference between the two successive redox processes (Ru(III)/Ru(II) and Ru(III)/Ru(IV)) of complexes 1–5, was 1.3 V–1.6 V. This result was in line with previous studies of Ru(III) complexes, which showed that the average potential difference between two successive redox processes (Ru(III)/Ru(II) and Ru(III)/Ru(IV)) was 1.2 V–1.7 V [ It was further observed that both the Ru(III)/Ru(II) reduction and the Ru(III)/Ru(IV) oxidation of complexes 1 and 2 (containing N,O-bidentate ligands of the type (CH The DFT calculations showed that tris(β-ketoiminato)ruthenium(III) complexes 2, 5 and 3 mainly favour the This work has received support from the South African The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Optimized coordinates of the DFT calculations, additional figures and tables. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at