When green spaces compete with other forms of land use, especially in dense urban settings, their creation and maintenance need to be extensively justified. Very often the utilitarian arguments, such as reference to recreational uses or air quality improvement, are seen as the most convincing to illustrate the importance of green spaces for cities. However, people derive many other benefits from urban green spaces, many of which elude such a simplified practical focus. In this paper, we present an analysis of the values and important attributes that urban residents assign to green spaces. The data were collected in three cities in Poland: Krakow, Lodz and Poznan, using a public participation GIS approach—an online geo-questionnair. Overall, 1640 people took part in the survey. The results exhibit a wide spectrum of values associated with urban green spaces, emphasizing the importance of the multiple cultural and anthropogenic aspects associated with urban green spaces. The study illustrates differences in the valuation of formal and informal green spaces. The latter include all the areas that are not formally demarcated or have an uncertain land tenure status. Places valued for their greenness, pleasant views, uniqueness, wild character and role as natural habitats are predominantly marked outside of formal green spaces. We highlight the challenges in the classification of urban green spaces and the need to identify and address informal green spaces in urban green space governance.Green spaces have been established in cities since the beginning of urban history, initially to ensure food security and for aesthetic reasons ( There are also other challenges to capturing the values which people attach to urban green spaces. These stem from the heterogeneity and spatial distribution of green spaces on the one hand, and from the complex governance systems and institutional contexts on the other. In this paper, we address the elusive character of many values which people attach to urban green spaces, as well as spatial heterogeneity of urban green spaces, by using public participation GIS, and we relate our analyses to the institutional context of urban green space governance by referring to formal and informal green spaces. The general aim of this study was to reveal the variety of values associated with formal and informal urban green spaces. In order to explore these issues, we address and investigate the following research questions: Where do urban residents spend their time within green spaces and what are the most valued characteristics of these places? Which green spaces are considered valuable, and why? In the following subsections we briefly describe the main challenges to urban green space valuation that we faced within our study, referring to monetary and non-monetary valuation (1.1) and the institutional context of green space categorization—notably the distinction between formal and informal green spaces (1.2). In each case, we indicate how we addressed these challenges. In Section 2, we present the methods used and the three case study cities; in Section 3, the answers we obtained to our research questions. We discuss these results in Section 4 in the context of multiplicity of values associated with urban green spaces and the challenges inherent in their identification, as well as the importance of informal green spaces for urban inhabitants and the need to acknowledge these spaces in governance processes. We conclude and recapitulate our results in Section Even though most urban inhabitants consider green spaces as important, they rarely think of them in economic or, more specifically, monetary terms ( Many approaches have emerged to capture such a diversity of values, including those originating from psychoanalytic and environmental psychology ( Another challenge in eliciting the diversity of values attributed to urban green spaces is the need to address the highly heterogeneous character of those spaces. Studies on green space perception and valuation usually focus on green spaces understood as clearly demarcated areas, for which reliable, official inventory data exist. Indeed, much is already known about the use, perception and preferences of urban inhabitants and other users towards urban parks and forests (e.g. As a result, residents’ use patterns and attitudes towards informal, unmanaged, often smaller, less obvious and more dispersed components of urban green space are less recognized and understood. The main reason behind this knowledge gap is the fact that many forms of urban green spaces elude formal classifications − mostly due to their small spatial scale, often temporal and transitory character, as well as uncertainty with respect to land tenure or changing governance settings. If taken into consideration at all, these areas are usually referred to as ‘interstitial wilderness landscapes’ or ‘ambivalent landscapes’ ( For our purposes, we understand formal green spaces as well-recognized, clearly demarcated, and managed and maintained forms of vegetation assemblages, namely: parks, allotment gardens, cemeteries, and forests. We classify green space as formal if it is included in the local authorities’ formal planning documents (note that what is included varies across our studied cities and beyond). Following To address the abovementioned challenges, we studied urban green spaces in three Polish cities with the use of a public participation GIS (PPGIS) approach, which allows for capturing the diversity of values attached to green spaces and also addresses their geographical heterogeneity. In this section we present the broader context of the use of PPGIS as well as the details of our study. To link information on people’s preferences, uses, perceptions and values with specific, spatially explicit locations, one can use methods such as participatory mapping and its digital counterparts: participatory GIS (PGIS) and PPGIS. These approaches have provided researchers with a framework to combine expert knowledge with the experiences and values expressed by the public in contexts such as environmental management ( In the context of urban green spaces, such GIS-based techniques were used to attribute use patterns, perceptions, and values to geographical features in databases available to planners ( In a recent review, The questionnaire allowed participants to mark locations in response to two questions: “ The data were collected for three cities – Krakow, Lodz and Poznan – which are, respectively, the second, third and fifth largest cities in Poland (with roughly 762,000, 706,000 and 546,000 inhabitants at the end of 2014). The share of formal green spaces in the area of these cities is rather low – ca. 4.8%, 5.5% and 4% respectively (Local Databank of the Central Statistical Office of Poland: Set against this background, the Sendzimir Foundation, which promotes sustainable development in Poland, carried out a project meant to enhance participatory green space governance. In particular, the project collected information on the residents’ perception of green spaces’ use, quality, and value, to support decisions made by local authorities and to enhance interest and collaboration between the main stakeholders (local authorities, urban planners, urban activists etc.). The project was conducted by the Sendzimir Foundation in collaboration with a team of researchers and practitioners (including the authors of this study), and in close cooperation with municipalities and other NGOs. The dataset generated within the Sendzimir Foundation project which we used for our analyses is available at the Foundation’s website ( The target population of the survey consisted of all residents of Krakow, Lodz, and Poznan aged 15 and over. The recruitment strategy relied on voluntary sampling methods, and employed a social media campaign, local media advertisements, meetings with groups of students, and promotion through local authorities. To improve the representation of social groups with potentially limited access to the Internet and lower web-browsing skills, we organized additional meetings with senior citizens, and promoted the survey through stands and workshops in large open public events. The data were collected between 4 March 2014 and 11 September 2014. Overall, 1640 people took part in the survey ( In order to attribute elicited values to formal and informal green space categories, we used municipal GIS datasets on green space boundaries and attributes within urban borders. First, we gathered green space lists and GIS datasets from each city by sending inquiries to municipal offices responsible for green space management and planning, as well as by searching municipal websites. In Lodz, the official GIS dataset provided by the municipality includes cemeteries, forests, parks and green squares, and allotment gardens, and was used in the study in an unaltered form. In Poznan, we used a land use map from a municipal GIS database, which consisted of urban forests, allotment gardens, public gardens, cemeteries, and green areas (parks and green squares), but did not include information on municipal management. Then we checked the land use map with a list of parks and green squares under municipal management that was available at the city hall’s website, and removed inconsistencies between the datasets keeping only those green spaces that are managed by the municipality. In Krakow, we used a working version of the new GIS dataset used by the municipal office responsible for green space management and planning. The dataset included cemeteries, parks, green squares, allotment gardens, urban forests, boulevards, and public gardens. Consequently, inasmuch as the datasets differed among the studied cities, we brought them to a common categorization framework, which only included green spaces managed by municipal, regional or national public institutions. Our final dataset included four categories: parks and public gardens, forests, allotment gardens, and cemeteries. The ‘parks and public gardens' category includes all public parks of various sizes and functions, including green squares and boulevards, as well as public gardens, such as botanical and zoological gardens. ‘Forests' include all urban forests that are publicly owned and managed at either the municipal or national level. ‘Allotment gardens’ are plots of public land available for individual use, collectively governed and typically with restricted public access. ‘Cemeteries’ represent burial grounds, which often have many trees and shrubs. In the next step, we matched the geographic locations of survey answers to the formal green space categories obtained from municipalities, by intersecting data layers in ArcGIS 10.2. Answers that fell within the boundaries of formal green spaces were marked as pertaining to the green space categories (i.e. parks and gardens, forests, allotment gardens, cemeteries). Survey answers that were outside of the boundaries of formal green spaces but inside city boundaries, were marked as ‘informal green spaces’ ( The character of informal green spaces varies between the cities studied. In Krakow and Poznan, large informal green spaces consist predominantly of waterfronts, wetlands, vacant lots, and historic sites, such as fortifications, with various levels of maintenance and public accessibility. In Krakow, the area of such spaces is considerably larger than in Poznan. Small and dispersed vegetation patches (e.g. street greenery, backyards, front yards, and between buildings) are present in all of the three cities studied, but in Lodz they represent a larger portion of all informal green spaces than in the other two cities. There are fewer waterfronts, wetlands, and large vacant lots in Lodz, but railway and brownfield (post-industrial) vegetation is more widespread than in the other two cities. We first analyzed the distribution of answers for the two questions asked in the geo-questionnaire among the different green space categories (see Section We developed lists of, respectively, 32 and 21 distinct codes, describing the characteristics of a place and reasons for valuing a place (i.e. the valued green space attributes), and coded all the statements made by the respondents. In order to develop the lists of codes and analyze the answers to the two open-ended questions, we took an inductive approach. This allowed us to make preliminary identification of conceptual components emerging from the collected responses. Subsequently, we defined the codes which were then applied in the process of coding the respondents’ answers (see e.g. We explored two aspects of green space perception, namely the characteristics of green spaces attributed by their regular users, and attributes assigned by inhabitants to other green spaces (not necessarily regularly visited or directly used). In different cities, between 17% and 41% of places where respondents spend time corresponded to areas outside of formal green spaces ( For about half of the marked places where respondents spend time, they provided explanations revealing the variety of reasons for using and valuing urban green spaces (see Within most categories of answers, the majority of marked places fell within parks, but many also in informal green spaces. However, there were some place characteristics in the case of which informal green spaces were the most frequent localization. These included: view or landscape ( In the case of green spaces valuable for reasons other than spending time there, the respondents provided from 66% to 81% of answers for the additional open-ended question. Thus, they were more eager to provide additional information than in the case of places where they spend time (see Our results illustrate differences in the valued attributes of the different categories of green spaces. Many valuable places were marked within parks and public gardens. The attributes which were most often assigned to this category were: educational ( Few markings and associated explanations were placed within allotment gardens, both in the case of spending time there and valuing the place. Access to them is typically restricted to authorized users, hence their use is limited. When they were marked as valuable, it was mostly because of their importance for maintaining air quality and as a habitat for animals. Attributes associated with cemeteries that stand out include heritage, sentiment, and their quiet character. Forests are valued for their natural and wild character, contribution to air quality, their topography and geology, the resulting views, and their educational character. Many of the attributes presented in Numerous markings attributing value to informal green spaces pertain to dispersed vegetation. These include individual trees, avenues of trees, street greenery, small squares, gardens, backyards, as well as green spaces between buildings. Lack of maintenance is frequently mentioned in these places, typically as a disadvantage, but in some cases their informal character is mentioned as an asset (e.g. “ Large informal green spaces, such as waterfronts, wetlands and uncultivated agricultural lands are valued for their wild and natural character, ecological importance, and as animal habitats. They often play a role and have characteristics similar to large parks, allowing people to experience nature and take part in activities such as walking, running, and meeting other people. Markings indicating sentimental values, connected with respondents’ memories from childhood and adolescence, stand out in these places. Many of the large informal green spaces are also connected with a historical value, as in the case of fortifications and places of memorials to martyrs, and historical events. Small informal green spaces dominated among the markings collected in Lodz, where dispersed vegetation is often the only green space to be found in a very dense urban fabric. Only a few markings in Lodz pertained to agricultural lands, wetlands and river valleys, which are typically located in the city’s outskirts. In Poznan and Krakow, the majority of the markings attributed to informal green spaces were located in river valleys, wetlands, uncultivated lands, fortifications (Poznan), and brownfields related to mineral extraction (Krakow). In the central parts of these cities, participants also frequently marked dispersed street greenery, trees, and green backyards. Another informal green space category frequently marked in all case cities were open spaces located between buildings in modern neighborhoods. In short, the results indicate that the value of informal green spaces is often related to their unofficial and unmanaged character (wildness, ecological importance, natural habitat, microclimate), including lack of formal restrictions (dog-friendliness and social life) and to very specific circumstances (views, uniqueness). Meanwhile, formal green spaces are often valued for their official and managed character (translating into good design, cleanliness, sense of security, events and arts), location (especially in central parts of cities), and connotations with education and − perhaps in relation to that − with biodiversity. The present study provides insight into the ongoing discussions on the diversity of values assigned to green spaces by urban residents. Some studies, embedded in ecosystem service approaches, suggest that urban inhabitants perceive mostly cultural and regulating ecosystem services ( However, many of the place characteristics or values given by our respondents were of an elusive and intangible nature, some of them illustrating emotional and personal attachments, which indicates a much broader span of cultural benefits related to nature than so far indicated in most ecosystem services classifications. Again, for these reasons ecosystem services may seem to be a complexity blinder rather than a comprehensive approach to urban planning ( Furthermore, our study suggests that both the characteristics of urban green spaces that are important to their users, as well as the values attributed to green spaces in the city, are very closely linked to anthropogenic components, such as cultural or historical heritage, amenities, or infrastructural facilities ( Our study supplements the current knowledge on values that people assign to green spaces in cities by adding the aspect that the informal green spaces are being used and valued for most of reasons identified here. Following Addressing informal green spaces in planning and governance is a major challenge, mostly because of difficulties related to: The identification of existing and potential informal green spaces; and Taking into account local, experiential knowledge and the inhabitants needs in spatial planning. Identification of some of the informal green spaces – at least in the three cities studied herein – would be of particular importance because municipal green space datasets are incomplete. Indeed, some green spaces are not formally classified as such, not because of their hidden character but due to the lack of comprehensive green space databases or inventories. A closer look indicates that green spaces occupy more land in cities than it might be thought based on traditional, official green space inventories. Even though formally invisible, much of this land is used and valued by urban inhabitants, and it provides important ecosystem services. However, without formal acknowledgement of their importance, informal green spaces are downplayed in urban planning and management, and they are often seen as land reserves which can be used for investment purposes when an opportunity emerges. Hence, such green spaces are constantly under pressure from urban development, and there is an urgent need to collect more information on their social and ecological value, rather than their value in monetary terms (as the results of such studies might not withstand the competition of economic arguments for the development of these areas (c.f. Conversely, because the valued attributes of informal green spaces often differ from those of the formal ones, urban residents would benefit from maintaining their unique and unmanaged character. Had such attributes been lost due to potential formalization of these areas (and the associated new management regimes), their value for certain groups of inhabitants would also diminish (although the value for others might increase). In the case of formalization of such green spaces, care should be taken to preserve their valuable attributes. Our study illustrates that PPGIS may be an useful source of data on valuable attributes of green spaces that could be used by urban designers and landscape architects in the case of formalization of large informal green spaces. In terms of urban planning, another interesting option is to formalize the management of some of the informal green spaces as urban green commons which would be allowed to be collectively managed by the inhabitants, who also act as environmental stewards ( Using the PPGIS approach proved to be an effective way of eliciting non-monetary values from urban residents. Contrary to some of the previous experiences (e.g. The elicitation of people’s opinions and values related to nature using tools that both reveal intangible qualities and assign them to geographical locations seems to be crucial in urban spatial planning. These issues can be studied for entire urban populations or for specific constituencies, such as volunteers ( Our study reveals the variety of values attributed to urban green spaces and highlights the importance of informal green spaces to urban inhabitants. It also contributes to the evidence that non-monetary approaches are particularly well-suited to capture the benefits that people derive from nature, especially in terms of cultural benefits and non-material values ( The study was part of the Sendzimir Foundation’s “Count on Green” project supported by a grant from