A Population Balance (PB) model was developed for the sulfuric acid leaching of a roasted zinc concentrate (RZC). Considering that no previous work has validated with experimental data a PB model for this system, leaching experiments were done in order to validate and refine the proposed model. Initially, the chemical and mineralogical composition of the RZC, determined by XRF, XRD, and AAS, indicated the predominance of zinc (65% w/w), mainly as zincite. Next, leaching experiments were carried out using typical conditions of industrial processes. The parameters investigated were the stirring speed, the acid concentration, the reaction time, and the molar ratio, which is the molar ratio between the acid and the zincite present in the RZC loaded to the reactor. It was observed that the acid concentration affected had the major influence on the initial leaching rate, while the molar ratio determined the maximum zinc extraction achieved. It was also found that the model correctly described this behavior, which suggests that the model accounted for the major phenomena occurring during the leaching. Then, using statistical analysis, it was found an excellent agreement between the experimental and calculated data, which verified the validity and accuracy of the proposed model. A potential application of this model would be predicting the effect of changes in operational parameters (e.g., particle size, distribution polydispersity, and acid concentration) on the reactor performance. Thus, the model provides a robust technique for plant design and control, which may lead to better decision-making and costs reduction.Nowadays, more than 85% of the world’s zinc production is through the hydrometallurgical process ( In this perspective, the Population Balance (PB) is the correct approach to model polydisperse systems. In this approach, firstly proposed by two groups of scientists ( Several works applied the Population Balance approach to model leaching systems. While some of them focused on theoretical aspects ( Other studies available for the RZC focus on leaching optimization ( In this context, the purpose of this paper is to apply the Population Balance to model the leaching of a roasted zinc concentrate in sulfuric acid solutions and, then, validate the model with experimental data. It was intended to develop a model capable of simulate industrial conditions; therefore, the model should account for the solid particles polydispersity, the acid consumption, and the effects of loading the reactor high and low solid/liquid ratios. In addition, instead of using analytical grade zinc oxide, it was chosen to work with a roasted zinc concentrate used in an electrolytic zinc plant. This material is composed of several minerals, such as zincite, zinc ferrite, and sphalerite, which increases the system complexity but, at the same time, makes the study more interesting and relevant for its possible industrial applications. In this regard, the validation of the proposed PB model for the leaching of a roasted zinc concentrate in sulfuric acid solutions will contribute for further understanding of the zinc calcine leaching process and it will provide better techniques for its plant design, control, and performance predictions. The model proposed for the RZC leaching is comprised of one population balance (PB) for the solid particles and one mass balance for the leaching agent (sulfuric acid). The rigorous definitions and equations derivations are available in the work of For a batch leaching system, this equation can be simplified considering the following: the reactor has a constant volume ( It has been shown by The initial particle size distribution, The particle size distribution is usually determined in a mass basis, while the PB equations are derived in a number basis. However, it possible to transform a size distribution in a mass basis to a number basis, and vice versa ( Concerning the leaching intrinsic kinetics, in a previous work ( In this equation, Nevertheless, in the present study, it was investigated operating conditions with smaller surplus of acid and even lack of this reactant. As presented further ( Moreover, in order to account for the leaching of all the RZC minerals in the model, it would be required a precise quantification of each one of them, as well as to know the leaching mechanisms and the models to describe their kinetics. Considering the complexity that this would add to the model and that zincite is the main mineral present in the RZC, only this mineral was included in the present model, according to the Eq. Thus, the mass balance for the leaching agent (sulfuric acid) can be given as a function of the solid conversion ( In Eq. Given that only zincite was accounted for the calculations, but part of zinc ferrite is also solubilized during the leaching ( For the model solution, Eqs. The roasted zinc concentrate (RZC) was provided by a metallurgical plant located in the state of Minas Gerais, Brazil. In this plant, a zinc sphalerite concentrate is roasted and then leached for metallic zinc production by electrowinning. Although an extensive characterization of this material was done previously ( The particle size analysis of the RZC was done using ASTM standard sieves in the range between 38 and 297 The leaching solution was an aqueous solution of sulfuric acid (98 % w/w – Vetec) and anhydrous lithium sulfate (99 % w/w – Sigma-Aldrich). Li The parameters studied in the RZC leaching tests ( Initially, different stirring speeds (500, 750, 1000 and 1500 The temperature chosen for all tests was 40 The experiments were done in a 500 Initially, with the leaching solution added to the reactor, a determined mass of RZC, calculated by Eq. The XRF analysis of the roasted zinc concentrate sample indicated, as it was already expected, the predominance of the elements Zn and O, with low percentages of Fe and S. Several other elements, such as Pb, Cu, Mn, Ca, Si and Al, were also detected in the sample, but in smaller amounts. Corroborating with these results, chemical analysis by AAS of the RZC are shown in The mineralogical composition obtained by XRD ( The zincite (ZnO) percentage in the RZC (76.1% w/w) was determined using the digestion with ammonia ( To estimate the amount of zinc ferrite (ZnFe The size analysis of the RZC ( The results of the leaching experiments at different stirring speeds are summarized in It is worth to emphasize that the final conversions obtained at the end of the experiments (15 In light of the foregoing, and noting that pulp spillage was observed at 1500 The results of the batch leaching experiments, using the initial acid concentrations and molar ratios described in It can also be said that the RZC leaching kinetics is very fast, since after a few minutes, the zinc extraction (conversion) practically achieves plateau values. No significant change was observed in the zinc conversions between 5 and 15 When a molar ratio lower than one was used, there was a surplus of zincite in relation to the acid, as in the experiments with When a molar ratio equals to one is used, the acid is loaded into the reactor in stoichiometric proportions, in respect to the zincite. In these conditions, considering only the acid consumption, the total conversion should have been reached quite fast, since the reaction between zincite and the sulfuric acid is almost instantaneous ( In the experiment with the molar ratio of 1.5, similarly to the experiments with When a higher surplus of acid ( In regards to the final zinc conversion ( As discussed previously, the zinc present the RZC is mainly in the form of zincite (ZnO), but the minerals sphalerite (ZnS), willemite (Zn Therefore, an adjustable parameter ( In this equation, all parameters are known, except Therefore, it was obtained a value 5496 In order to verify if the PB model is adequate to describe leaching of the roasted zinc concentrate (RZC) in sulfuric acid solutions, the data obtained from the leaching experiments were compared with the data generated by the model. In this context, using the operating conditions of the leaching experiments ( For the statistical verification, the residual sums of squares between the calculated and experimental values of the zinc conversion and liquor acid concentration were determined. The values obtained, presented in Furthermore, the proposed PB model was also capable to reproduce the effect of the molar ratio on the RZC leaching. This becomes clearer analyzing the model predictions for the influence of the molar ratio on the system behavior ( Considering the results obtained, it is clear that the proposed PB model is valid to describe the roasted zinc concentrate leaching. This model was able to predict the general behavior of the RZC leaching, which was consistent with those obtained in other leaching studies. This verifies the realism of model and indicates that the model accounted for the major phenomena occurring in the RZC leaching. One potential application of the model is to evaluate the effect of a change in some operational parameters (particle size, distribution polydispersity, rate constant, acid concentration, molar ratio, and others) on the reactor performance. The traditional kinetic models, such as the shrinking core model, are developed for monodispersed particles (all particles with equivalent rate of shrinkage), and low solid//liquid ratios. On the other hand, the PB model does not have such limitations and delivers a robust method to improve leaching plants design and to predict problems faced in the operation of these plants. Leaching can contribute up to 30% of the total capital expenditure for a hydrometallurgy plant ( Nevertheless, this study was a necessary step towards enhancing the understanding of the dynamic of the particles in continuous reactors. Once verified that the PB model is adequate to describes the batch RZC leaching, a further work is been developed for the continuous leaching process. In such work, the mixing and the flow patterns in the reactors will be accounted in the PB model through the approaches of the perfect mixing or the segregated flow. Then, this model will be verified using leaching data obtained in a pilot plant. Using a similar procedure, Although several mathematical models have been developed for leaching reactors, the Population Balance (PB) model adequately accounts for the complex particulate phenomena that occur during leaching. However, considering that no previous work has validated with experimental data a PB model for the roasted zinc concentrate (RZC) leaching in sulfuric acid solutions, a thorough work on this regard was demanded. Therefore, in this paper, the RZC leaching was modeled using the PB approach. An excellent agreement between the experimental data from the RZC leaching and the PB model results was obtained. The results indicate that the proposed PB model is adequate to describe the RZC leaching, and accounts for the main phenomena occurring during the leaching, including the acid consumption. In a future work, these results will be used to design the continuous RZC leaching in a pilot plant, enlightening leaching plants performance predictions. In conclusion, the present findings have important implications in the modelling of polydisperse solids leaching processes. Overcoming the limitation of traditional kinetic models, the PB model can predict the effect of a change in several operational parameters on the reactor performance, such as particle size distribution, acid concentration, and solid/liquid ratio. With this powerful tool, plant design and control can be improved, leading to better decision-making and costs reduction.  stoichiometric coefficient for the sulfuric acid atomic absorption spectroscopy stoichiometric coefficient for the solid average rate of particles birth initial fluid reactant (sulfuric acid) molar concentration molar concentration of the fluid reactant (sulfuric acid) on liquor molar concentration of iron in the liquor molar concentration of zinc in the liquor particle diameter average rate of particles death aperture of a sieve in with 63.2% of the material would not be retained initial particle size distribution X-ray fluorescence spectrometry adjustable parameter (reaction rate constant) reaction rate constant RRB model parameter total mass of solid present at an specific time mass of RZC added to the reactor zincite molar mass initial number of particles initial number of moles of acid added to the reactor number of moles of zincite added to the reactor number of moles of zincite that was solubilized in the liquor number of moles of zinc from the zinc ferrite solubilized in the liquor number of moles of zinc in the liquor Population Balance liquor initial pH value liquor final pH value inlet volumetric flow rate outlet volumetric flow rate roasted zinc concentrate time percentage of zincite (ZnO) in the RZC reactor volume conversion or fraction of solid dissolved conversion of zinc or iron X-ray diffraction spectrometry  molar ratio between the acid and the zincite in the RZC added to the reactor solid molar density covariance time rate of change in particle diameter population density function The authors are very grateful to PROEX/CAPES (