Background
                  The aim of this study was to describe the fracture patterns of capitellum coronal fractures and to evaluate the complications and functional and radiographic outcomes of open reduction and internal fixation in patients older than 65 years.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective study of 23 patients with a mean follow-up of 48 months (36-105) was performed. Fractures were classified according to the Dubberley classification. All patients were evaluated by the Mayo Elbow Performance Index (MEPI) and the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) scores.
               
                  Results
                  Three patients were lost to follow-up. There were 16 type 1 and 4 type 2 fractures. The mean age was 71 years (66-79), and 65% were women. The mean MEPI score was 92 (60-100), and the mean DASH score was 9 (0-75). Either a concomitant fracture or an elbow dislocation was present in 50% of the patients. Mean sagittal plane range of motion at last follow-up was 122° ± 8°, with lower extension in type 2 and worse scores on MEPI (91 vs. 97) and DASH (3 vs. 0) scales. Placement of the screws in the posteroanterior direction was associated with better range of motion in flexion (130° vs. 122°) and better outcomes in functional scores (MEPI, 97 vs. 89; QuickDASH, 0 vs. 4). Complications were post-traumatic osteoarthritis in 3 patients, avascular necrosis in 1 patient, and heterotopic ossification in 5 patients. One patient required reoperation.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Patients older than 65 years have no substantial risk of complex fracture patterns, but they have a large number of concomitant injuries. Open reduction and internal fixation with cannulated screws allow stable fixation and provide satisfactory functional results with a lower complication rate.Partial articular fractures in the coronal plane of the distal humerus involving the capitellum and trochlea account for 1% of all elbow fractures and 6% of distal humeral fractures. The low incidence of these fractures means that surgeons have limited experience, and the studies evaluating the outcomes after ORIF are limited. The aim of this study was to evaluate radiographic and functional outcomes and complications after ORIF of capitellum coronal fracture in patients older than 65 years to further define the impact of surgical technique, fracture pattern, and concomitant injuries. This was a retrospective cases series of distal humeral coronal plane fractures. Between 2003 and 2012, 673 patients were diagnosed and managed operatively for fracture of the distal part of the humerus at our institution. Retrospective evaluation of collected medical and radiographic data from the fracture database at our institution identified a cohort of 23 patients older than 65 years (3.4%) who had sustained distal humeral coronal plane fractures treated with ORIF. Among these, 3 were excluded from the study. One of them died from causes unrelated to the surgery; the other 2 were lost to follow-up. Our population of patients consequently consisted of 20 patients. All of them were available for clinical and radiographic evaluation at a minimum of 1 year postoperatively and had a minimum of postoperative radiographs at 15 days, 1 month, 2 months, 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year. They were also invited to return for a long-term functional and radiographic evaluation made by an independent observer unrelated to surgical treatment, so the mean duration of follow-up was 48 months (36-105). The fractures of the capitellum and trochlea were classified on the basis of radiographs made immediately after the injury (anteroposterior and lateral views), the CT scan, and the intraoperative findings according to the Dubberley classification system. Functional evaluation was done by Mayo Elbow Performance Index (MEPI), Radiographic assessment included anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the involved elbow evaluated by 2 independent orthopedic surgeon reviewers who were not involved in management of the patients. They assessed evidence of fracture union, loss of fracture reduction, presence of osteonecrosis, heterotopic ossification classified by the Brooker system applied to the elbow, The descriptive methods to evaluate the data were the median and the interquartile range. Differences in continuous variables were evaluated with the Student The group included 13 women (65%) and 7 men. The mean age was 71 years (66-79). The trauma mechanism was a fall from a standing height in 19 cases and high-energy trauma in 1 case. None of them had previous injury in the affected elbow. The nondominant side was injured in 78.5% of the cases; in 16 cases, the affected elbow was the left side, although 19 cases were right-handed patients. There were 16 Dubberley type 1 fractures (13 type 1A and 3 type 1B) and 4 type 2 (2 type 2A and 2 type 2B). Ten patients (50%) had concomitant injuries. Eight patients had isolated concomitant injuries (2 lateral epicondyle fractures, 2 medial epicondyle fractures, 3 radial head fractures, and 1 lateral collateral ligament lesion), and 2 had fracture-dislocation (posterolateral dislocations associated with a radial head fracture and a lateral epicondyle fracture). Epidemiologic data of the 20 patients are summarized in All cases were operated on under general anesthesia in the supine position with the arm placed on a hand table. A tourniquet was used in all cases. A lateral skin incision was employed in 16 cases (80%) ( All elbows were immobilized postoperatively at 90° flexion for a mean of 10 days (range, 3-21). At the first outpatient clinic visit, the sutures were removed and assisted exercises were initiated. Strengthening exercises were not initiated until 6 weeks after surgery. The average MEPI score was 92 points (range, 60-100), with 14 excellent results, 4 good results, and 1 fair result. The average QuickDASH score was 9 points (range, 0-75), with 17 patients obtaining <10 points and 3 patients obtaining >10 points. The MEPI and QuickDASH scores of type 2 fractures were lower than those of type 1: 91 vs. 97 in the MEPI scale and 3 vs. 0 in the QuickDASH scale. However, there were no significant differences ( For ROM, the average flexion of the elbow was 122° (100°-135°), extension was −8° (0° to −30°), pronation was 84° (45°-90°), and supination was 83° (45°-90°). Only in the extension movement was there a trend in favor of type 1 ( All fractures united by 1-year follow-up with an average of 4.8 months (standard deviation, 1.068). We found 1 case (5%) of avascular necrosis, 3 cases (15%) of Broberg and Morrey grade 1 degenerative arthritis, 5 cases (25%) of Brooker grade 1 heterotopic ossification, 1 case (5%) of associated medial epicondyle fracture nonunion, and 1 case (5%) of hardware failure with secondary fracture displacement ( The patient who developed avascular necrosis was 72 years old and had a type 2B fracture with a good clinical result, so any further intervention was refused. The patient with hardware failure was 77 years old, with a type 2B fracture. The ORIF of this patient was performed using 4 anteroposterior screws. The authors believe that this fixation was probably excessive for such a small fragment. This technical mistake was the cause of fragment breakage and displacement. We did not find any significant differences in ROM between patients who developed heterotopic ossification and patients without this complication (mean flexion, 120°/122°; mean extension, 5°/10°). However, there was a significance trend in the functional scales (MEPI, The average MEPI and QuickDASH scores of patients who developed degenerative arthritis were significantly lower than those of patients who did not develop it (70/96 and 59/0, respectively). Mean ROM in flexion and extension was also lower (106°/124° and −20°/−5°, respectively). There was 1 case of ulnar neuropathy that resolved spontaneously. No instability was detected in any of the patients at the final follow-up. Coronal plane fractures of the capitellum and trochlea are uncommon; a few series include >20 patients, These fractures can markedly impair the elbow if they are treated inadequately. Their complex nature has become better appreciated. As a result, treatment options have evolved from closed reduction/immobilization and fragment excision Although we found a simple fracture pattern (Dubberley type 1) without posterior comminution (type A) in 80% of patients, complex fracture patterns (capitellum and trochlea fractures characterized by comminution, medial trochlear extension, or both) have been described by authors with younger series of cases. Although anatomic reduction with fracture fixation is the treatment of choice for this fracture, the presence of comminution and osteopenia makes this a demanding and difficult procedure in the older patient. For this reason, total elbow arthroplasty has been advocated as an alternative surgical option in elderly patients with low demands and more complex patterns, with good to excellent midterm results. Turning the discussion to instrumentation, the best direction in which to fix the fracture and the number of screws to use remain unclear. Some biomechanical studies postulate that anteroposterior fixation of capitellar fractures with cannulated headless screws (Acutrak, Acumed) is superior to posteroanterior cancellous lag screw and Herbert screw (Zimmer) fixation. In our study, although the differences in terms of ROM were not significant, the posteroanterior direction obtained high ROM. This was probably related to a minor damage to the articular cartilage surface and less soft tissue dissection. In accordance with other series, For the fracture classification, we employed the one proposed by Dubberley et al, The median arc of elbow flexion in the current series (122° at the time of the midterm follow-up) is comparable with the arcs found in other series. Although many patients had associated injuries (50%), they did not seem to evolve worse in ROM and elbow-specific outcomes (with the exception of epicondyle fractures). Other reports Several complications after surgical fixation of the capitellum and trochlea fractures have been reported. However, the definition of complications remains unclear; some authors include radiologic findings, whereas others consider only reoperations. In regard to complications, there was 1 case of ulnar neuropathy. Patients with epitrochlear nonunion and avascular necrosis had good clinical results, so they did not require additional surgery. Despite the advanced age in this series, the incidence of avascular necrosis was uncommon, as reported in other papers. Limitations of this paper include its retrospective design and its consequent heavy reliance on medical records and the small sample size. Another limitation is the lack of bone mineral density measurements to determine the role that osteoporosis plays in the appearance of this type of fracture in patients older than 65 years. Patients older than 65 years do not have more complex capitellum fracture patterns than younger populations. However, there is a high incidence of associated injuries. Complications other than stiffness are rare. Clinically significant osteonecrosis and heterotopic ossification are unusual, but mild to moderate post-traumatic osteoarthritis is common at midterm follow-up. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.