Crushing and grinding, the prerequisite processes in many industries, are employed in areas such as minerals processing and powder technology. During these processes, minerals will cleave or fracture along specific crystal directions, where there are weak inter-planar bonds, generating exposed surfaces. On an exposed mineral surface, different ions can possess different numbers of broken bonds. The total number of broken bonds of all ions on the exposed surface can be considered as the number of broken bonds of the exposed surface. The broken bonds on the exposed surface make the latter more active and determine its reactivity. The broken bond density on the exposed surfaces of fluorite was calculated, enabling the anisotropic surface reactivity of fluorite such as surface energy, surface relaxation, dissolution, wettability, surface charge and adsorbability to be revisited. The results show that the surface broken bond density, which is related to the specific surface energy, could be used to predict the cleavage nature, surface relaxation degree, dissolution rate and surface stability of fluorite crystal. The distribution feature and the number of broken bonds of exposed active ions (such as Ca2+ for fluorite) can be used to predict and explain the anisotropic surface wettability and surface charge, as well as the adsorption mode and strength of organic molecule binding to different exposed surfaces. The calculation of surface broken bonds can serve as useful method to assess mineral surface chemical behavior. This approach is helpful for mineral/material chemistry research in general.Grinding, a prerequisite for a successful flotation separation in mineral liberation ( The particular crystal orientations for a minerals lead to differences in the number of broken bonds on each exposed surface, i.e., anisotropic surface broken bonds ( The reactivities of different crystal surfaces play important roles in a wide range of engineering applications, such as biopharmacy ( Fluorite (CaF Surface energies of fluorite which were theoretically calculated by different researchers using such methods as density function theory, first principle simulation and atomistic simulation ( In this paper, fluorite was selected as a model mineral for the study of the relationship between surface broken bonds and the surface reactivities of the fluorite crystal. Recent advances in the anisotropic surface properties of fluorite were reviewed. Using surface broken bond density data, valuable insights into the screening and/or design of modifiers for the morphology control of mineral crystal growth, as well as the regulation of mineral surface properties in other applications such as froth flotation are obtained. The fluorite crystal structure ( From the literature (   The surface broken bond density (D The calculated D Mineral crystals tend to split or cleave along definite crystallographic planes under external forces and generate new smooth surfaces. The newly generated surfaces are known as the cleavage planes. In the process of crushing and grinding, the cleavage plane is generally parallel to charge-neutral surfaces, generated in the direction of the weakest chemical bonds between adjacent layers with a larger interlayer spacing ( The fluorite (1 1 1) plane has strong ionic bonds within every F The fluorite (1 1 0) plane is a charge-neutral surface with the second smallest D The total exposure of these four surfaces can be considered as 100% for the fluorite particles ( Saravanan et al. also investigated the cleavage behaviour of fluorite crystals by analyzing the charge density of Ca This combined structural and cleavage evidence indicates that the degree of cleavage and exposure of different fluorite surfaces follows the order (1 1 1) > (1 1 0) > (3 1 0) > (1 0 0). Interestingly, this order is inversely proportional to the D Surface energy refers to the energy required by a mineral crystal to be cleaved into two separate surfaces along a certain crystal direction by breaking inter-planar chemical bonds under the influence of external forces. Surface energy can be total or specific (per unit area). It is the latter which is important in this paper and has units of J/m Different research groups have calculated the specific surface energy of four commonly exposed fluorite surfaces using computational methods ( Regardless of the methods used, the surface energy follows the order of (1 0 0) > (1 1 0) > (1 1 1). Therefore, from the perspective of specific surface energy, (1 1 1) has the lowest surface energy, which is more prone to cleave, and is the most commonly exposed surface for fluorite mineral particles, followed by (1 1 0) and, to a lesser extent, (1 0 0). It is encouraging to observe that both D We reported ( During cleavage or fracture of a mineral or material, on the newly generated surface, ions in the uppermost ionic layer(s) will undergo rearrangement to minimize the surface energy, termed as surface relaxation ( L L The Ca Froth flotation is a widely used surface-wettability based method to separate valuable minerals from gangue. Contact angle is a general measure of the wettability of a solid surface. The wettability of fluorite surfaces exhibits anisotropy.  The anisotropic wettability also can be explained by the different coverage of water molecules on different surfaces. The surface area covered by one water molecule is 0.11 nm The dissolution behavior of four fluorite surfaces was studied by Godinho and coworkers using 3D confocal profilometry and atomic force microscopy (AFM) ( In the range pH 2–11, the (1 1 1) surface is more negatively charged than the (1 0 0) surface ( Oleic acid (C It is generally accepted that the carboxylic acid functional group directly reacts with the Ca The interaction between the carboxylic acid function group and active Ca Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was employed by Gao et al. to experimentally probe the adhesion energy of model oleic acid molecules on fluorite surfaces with different orientations, both in air and in aqueous solutions under different pH conditions ( AFM study also concluded that in both air and aqueous solutions, oleic acids have a stronger adhesion with the (1 0 0) surface than with the (1 1 1) surface. The anisotropic adhesion energy was analysed in relation to Ca Besides fatty acid, other type of organic molecules were also considered to be candidate collectors for fluorite flotation. In this work, the physicochemical properties of fluorite were revisited and explained by the calculation of surface broken bonds. A direct relationship between surface broken bond density (D We can concluded that the calculation of surface broken bonds can serve as a useful method to assess surface chemical behavior of fluorite reported previously. However, the distance of active ion from the exposure surface was not incorporated in the D The authors acknowledge financial support from the