Kinetic synergic extraction in solvent extraction chemistry was investigated by quantum chemical computations. Density functional theory (DFT) and conceptual DFT studies were carried out for us to analyze the extraction characteristics of kinetic synergist OT (Manoxol OT) in liquid membrane containing HPMBP (1-phenyl-3-methyl-4-benzoyl-pyrazolone-5) as the carrier to separate Cu(II) from Cu–Zn sulfate binary mixture solution. Reactivity indices verify that all the copper(II) complexes are more reactive than the zinc(II) complexes and the Cu(II) site of the copper(II) species is more electrophilic than the Zn(II) site of all the corresponding zinc(II) species in the presence of OT. The quantum chemistry computation demonstrates that the extraction of Cu(II) ions is composed of the two chemical reactions and M(H2O)2A2 (M=Cu and Zn) is an intermediate product. The LUMO of Cu(H2O)2A2 contains high anti-bonding characters and the molecule has a smaller HOMO–LUMO gap. The formation of the intermediate product, Cu(H2O)2A2, evidently improves the selectivity and the extraction rate for Cu(II) ions. The different polarity for CuR2 and ZnR2 provides the evidence on the selectivity of the extraction system for Cu(II) species. Through theoretical computations and the analysis for the intermediate product M(H2O)2A2,we can also forecast the probability of the separation for the different metal ions based on M(H2O)2A2 before solvent extraction and liquid membrane separation experiments, as shown in this work.Kinetic synergic extraction is an effective and powerful method in solvent extraction and liquid membranes to improve the separation efficiency in fission fuel treatment, rare earth element enrichment, hydrometallurgy, and environmental protection. In this method, a kinetic synergist plays a key role. Generally speaking, the kinetic synergist has three basic characteristics. It can accelerate extraction rate and enhance the selectivity for the target. Meanwhile, it possesses the low usage concentration in the organic phase. Consequently, the kinetic synergist is worthy deeply of investigation for enhancing the extraction separation efficiency The kinetic synergist often used in the extraction of copper(II). According to the literature, the kinetic synergist is firstly added into the organic phase containing extractants. The most familiar product is the extractant LIX64N for copper(II). The mixture consisted of Manoxol OT (C It is no doubt that quantum molecular orbital (MO) and density functional theory (DFT) are powerful complements to experimental data. The orbital and electron density representations that these computations provide can help us to interpret structures and properties, and to predict reactivity. Numerous studies throughout the past decade have demonstrated the ability of quantum computations. Conceptual DFT has been used to examine and understand the chemical reactivity and the site selectivity of the molecular systems. In this work, global reactivity descriptors such as chemical potential Because we have already finished the transport and separation experiments of Cu(II) from Cu–Zn(II) binary mixture solution by the liquid membrane containing HPMBP and OT Why are we interested in HPMBP and OT? In solvent extraction, HPMBP has been widely used in the extraction of double charged transition ions, as well as the lanthanide and actinide ions. Its important extraction characteristic is that it can form a synergistic extraction system with high selectivity and resist radiation damage. We think that a deep understanding of the extraction behavior of OT is helpful to us to devise better kinetic synergistic extraction systems with higher efficiency in separation. Since relatively few studies by quantum chemical calculations are reported in the literature pertaining to the extraction characteristics of the kinetic synergist OT, more studies are required in this field to resolve more practical separation problems. The DFT reactivity index is a key concept because it is associated with reaction mechanism, which facilitates the comprehensive understanding of chemical reactions from improving synthesis procedures, to developing new molecules, and to modifying old molecules thus generating novel materials. In the context of conceptual DFT Parr et al. To describe the regioselectivity, local descriptors have to be employed. A well-known local descriptor of this category is called Fukui function Since the number of electrons For systems with electron donation, the condensed Fukui index is a measure of the electrophilic attack: is considered to be better suited to analyze reactivity and selectivity for reactions involving electrophile–nucleophile interactions To assess the reactivity of a chemical reaction, following the literature All quantum chemical calculations were performed using Gaussian03 package The natural bond orbital (NBO) analysis was performed at the B3LYP level of theory using NBO program 5.0 In our previous work we have reported experimental results of the transport of Cu(II) ions through the liquid membrane using oxime N530 (2-hydroxy-4-(1-methylheptyloxy) ben-zophenone oxime) as extractant in the presence of OT The reactivity difference between these Cu(II) and Zn(II) complexes can be observed through the comparison of their DFT reactivity indices and FMO (Frontier Molecule Orbital) energies shown in On the other hand, we notice that values of the According to MHP, MPP and MEP, a more reactive species (reactant or product) possesses a smaller The concept of frontier orbital control proposes that the most important interaction is between a particular pair of orbitals. These orbitals are the highest filled orbital of one reactant (HOMO) and the lowest untilled (LUMO) orbital of the other reactant. We focus our attention to these two orbitals because they are the closest in energy. A basic postulate of perturbation molecular orbital theory (PMO) is that interactions are strongest between orbitals that are close in energy. Frontier orbital theory proposes that these strong initial interactions guide the course of the reaction as it proceeds to completion. Let us illustrate this idea for the systems we study in this work. From In  We must remember that the HOMO–LUMO gap in This analysis was carried out by examining all possible interactions between “filled” (donor) Lewis-type NBOs and “empty” (acceptor) non-Lewis NBOs, and estimating their energetic importance by 2nd-order perturbation theory. Since these interactions lead to the donation of the occupancy from the localized NBOs of the idealized Lewis structure into the empty non-Lewis orbitals (and thus, to departures from the idealized Lewis structure description), they are referred to as “delocalization” corrections to the zeroth-order natural Lewis structure. For each donor NBO and acceptor NBO, the stabilization energy  The above structural characteristics of M(H According to Eqs. Based on what we have obtained from the computational studies in this work, following conclusions are in order: (1) Our experiments and computations demonstrated that the selectivity of the liquid membrane for the Cu(II) ions in Cu–Zn sulfate binary mixture solution and the extraction rate of Cu(II) ions were notably enhanced in the liquid membrane using HPMBP as the carrier, as the kinetic synergist OT in xylene. In the presence of OT, the extraction of Cu(II) ions is composed of the two chemical reactions. M(H We are grateful to Shubin Liu of University of North Carolina for the in-depth discussion and comments on this work. We are also thankful to him for careful proofreading of the manuscript.