Background
                  The best fixation method for bicondylar tibial plateau fracture is debated. The aim of this study was to compare the effect of a lateral locking plate with that of dual plates in the treatment of tibial plateau fracture with a relatively intact medial condyle fragment.
               
                  Methods
                  Eighty-six patients diagnosed with a bicondylar tibial plateau fracture with a relatively intact medial condyle were assigned to groups treated with either dual buttress plates (DP group) or a lateral locking plate (LP group). Preoperative characteristics, surgical details, and postoperative complications were recorded and compared between groups. Hospital for Special Surgery Knee Scoring System score was used to evaluate clinical outcome.
               
                  Results
                  Both groups displayed satisfactory clinical and radiographic results. There were no significant differences in associated preoperative conditions between the DP and LP groups. Durations of hospital stay and operation were significantly shorter, and blood loss significantly less, in the LP group than in the DP group (P
                     =0.045;0.038;0.031). The rate of delayed-union was significantly lower in the LP group than in the DP group (P
                     =0.023).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Both dual-plate and lateral locking-plate fixation can provide satisfactory treatment of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures if properly used. When the medial tibial condyle is relatively intact, a lateral locking plate can provide stability similar to that of dual plate while decreasing operative duration and soft-tissue complications, which can assist fracture healing and shorten hospital stay.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  I — Randomized controlled trial.Fracture of the tibial plateau accounts for 1.3% of all fractures, and in China, the number of complicated fractures of the tibial plateau has increased with the widespread use of modern vehicles. Serious intra-articular damage and soft-tissue injury or incorrect treatment can lead to postoperative complications such as skin necrosis, infection, nonunion, deformity, and traumatic arthritis. The treatment of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures remains challenging, even to experienced orthopedic surgeons The goals of operative treatment include anatomic reduction with restoration of articular congruity and rigid fixation to allow early motion. Strategies such as dual buttress plates, locking plates, external fixators, and a combination of internal and external fixation have been advocated for the management of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures, but there is no consensus guideline for treatment of this kind of fracture In the normal knee, approximately 60–75% of weightbearing forces are transmitted through the medial plateau We wondered whether a single lateral locking plate could provide stabilization as effective as that provided by dual plates in cases where there is a relatively intact medial condyle fracture fragment without comminution or coronal fracture. In this prospective study, we used either a single lateral locking plate or dual buttress plates (Königsee Implantate GmbH, Allendorf, Germany) for fixation of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures if the medial fracture fragment was relatively intact. The purpose of this study was to compare the effect of a single locking plate and dual buttress plates in the fixation of tibial plateau fracture with a relatively intact medial condyle. Patients who underwent surgical treatment for a diagnosis of bicondylar tibial plateau fracture at our two affiliated university hospitals between May 2007 and May 2011 were included in the study. Inclusion criteria were the presence of a bicondylar tibial plateau fracture (Orthopaedic Trauma Association [OTA] type C) with a relatively intact medial tibial condyle without comminution or a coronal fracture line); exclusion criteria were pathologic, pediatric, extra-articular proximal tibial fractures, serious open fractures (Gustilo grade III) and polytrauma with serious head or chest injury. All patients were treated by two teams of surgeons according to standard procedure. A pre-study power analysis indicated that to have an 80% chance of detecting a 25% difference in Hospital for Special Surgery Knee Scoring System scores (HSS scores) between groups ( Eighty-six patients met the inclusion criteria and were enrolled in the study. Preoperative radiographic examinations consisted mainly of X-ray plain films and computed tomography (CT) scans and reconstructions before definitive surgical fixation ( All patients were treated with transcalcaneal skeletal traction for 7–14 Using a lateral approach, a lazy-S incision centered on Gerdy's tubercle was created. The knee capsule was incised and the meniscus drawn upward with a holding suture to expose the articular surface. The incision was extended distally, staying at least 1 In the DP group, a medial approach was used to create two incisions parallel to the posteromedial border of the proximal part of the tibia, with the distance between the incisions greater than 7 If a joint line depression was more than 2 Mobilization of the knee joint using a continuous passive-motion machine was started on postoperative day two, and analgesics were provided. Toe-touch weightbearing was started in the sixth postoperative week. Full weightbearing was begun when radiographic healing of the fracture was observed. Anteroposterior (AP) and lateral plain films of the operated knee were taken immediately postoperatively and three, six, and 12 Radiographs were used to assess the degree of joint depression and coronal and frontal angulation. Malreduction was defined as an intra-articular stepoff of 2 The chi-square test was used to compare categorical variables between the two groups. Fisher's exact test was used when one or more of the expected values were less than five. Student's One patient was lost to follow-up because of death due to a motor vehicle accident; therefore, 85 patients were followed for a mean follow-up period of 22 The LP group had significantly shorter hospital stay ( No patient in either group developed deep infection ( There is still no consensus on the treatment of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures. Techniques for open reduction and internal fixation, including unilateral or bilateral approach and use of buttress-plate, locking-plate, or external-ring fixation, have been extensively reported. While each treatment can achieve definite effect, each can also be associated with early and late complications in the literature Unilateral locking-plate technique can achieve the objective of stable fixation while avoiding medial dissection, thereby decreasing associated complications, but it is unclear whether it can provide stability equal to that of a double buttress. In a biomechanical study by Mueller et al. In a clinical study of the treatment of bicondylar tibial plateau fracture, Jiang et al. reported a higher incidence of postoperative malalignment of the proximal tibia and a higher incidence of symptomatic hardware irritation in the LISS group than in the dual-plate group, suggesting that the unilateral locking plate may not replace conventional two-incision double-plate technique Soft-tissue complications such as wound dehiscence and infection were major concerns in the treatment of complicated tibial plateau fractures in the past, when fixation of bicondylar fractures was performed through a single anterior incision. That technique is now rarely used because of the associated high rates of infection and avascular necrosis compared with infection rates of only 8–10% reported for the two-incision double-plate technique Nonunion of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures, which often occurs in Schatzker type VI metaphyseal fractures, has a reported incidence of about 4% The limitations of this study include the relatively small number of patients and short duration of follow-up. Long-term follow-up may lead to additional findings. Moreover, the patients in our study were simple bicondylar fractures, further controlled studies are needed to identify relative merits of dual plates and locking-plate in the treatment of complex bicondylar fractures. Both dual-plate and lateral locking-plate fixation are reasonable methods for the treatment of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures if properly used. When the medial tibial condyle is relatively intact, a lateral locking plate can provide the same stability as dual plates with shorter operation time and fewer soft-tissue complications, which can facilitate fracture healing and shorten the patient's hospital stay. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.