Rotating bending fatigue experiments, both in air and in a 3% NaCl solution, have been carried out in order to study the fatigue behavior of a 7075-T6 aluminum alloy coated with a WC–10Co–4Cr cermet by high velocity oxygen fuel (HVOF) thermal spray, without any grit blasting prior to the coating deposition. The results indicate that the presence of the coating gives rise to a significant increase in the fatigue strength of the substrate and therefore, that from the fatigue behavior point of view this coating could be a feasible replacement of electrolytic hard chromium plating in aircraft applications. Such an increase in fatigue and corrosion-fatigue strength is believed to be associated with the intrinsic microstructural characteristics, corrosion resistance and mechanical properties of the coating, its compressive residual stresses and the possible compressive residual stress field induced in the substrate during coating deposition. The fractographic analysis of the specimens indicates that the final fatigue fracture could be due either to the joint action of a large number of cracks, which propagate from the substrate–coating interface, or to a single dominant fatigue crack, depending on the maximum alternating stress applied to the coated system. It is shown that the lack of grit blasting prior to HVOF deposition does not seem to compromise the functionality of the coated system, while it avoids the introduction of further sharp stress concentrators for the nucleation of fatigue cracks.The significant development experienced in the past few years by the aircraft and aerospace industries has been intimately associated with the improvements in airframe design and the forming processes employed in the manufacture of many different parts and components that constitute these complex structures Among these aeronautical materials, aluminum alloys of the 7000 series, supplied in different forms, have been extensively used for the manufacture of different critical aircraft components subjected to complex stress states, which include upper wing surfaces, internal ribs, spars, frames, landing gear and dynamic helicopter components, among others. The improvement in the mechanical properties of these materials has been possible due to the development and optimization of different thermo-mechanical processes However, in spite of their excellent bulk mechanical properties, in general, aluminum alloys of the 7000 series have poor surface properties, particularly in relation to applications that require wear and corrosion resistance. This disadvantage has led to the extensive use of hexavalent-chromium-based conversion coatings (HCCC), such as electrolytic hard chromium (EHC) plating and chromic acid anodizing (CAA), in order to improve their surface properties EHC plating not only gives rise to a significant decrease in the fatigue properties of both ferrous and non-ferrous substrates, which represents a critical aspect for the aeronautic and aircraft industries. Also, it has an unreliable performance, delaminates in service and promotes hydrogen embrittlement in ferrous alloys On the other hand, Camargo et al. One of the possible alternatives for the replacement of EHC plating, as well as acid and hard anodizing is plasma spray. However, previous studies on the fatigue behavior of 7075-T6 aluminum alloy coated by this process with a WC–12Co cermet, tested under rotating bending conditions, showed that grit blasting and coating of the substrate gave rise to a significant decrease in fatigue properties, regardless of the testing medium (air or a NaCl solution) A similar decrease in fatigue properties has been reported by Sartwell et al. In this sense, Camargo et al. It has been shown that grit blasting with alumina particles prior to HVOF deposition, in order to increase the mechanical bonding of the coating to the substrate, could have a deleterious effect on the fatigue strength of the latter, as a consequence of the increase in roughness and the stress concentrations that arise from the alumina particles embedded into the substrate Given the above results reported by Sartwell et al. Santana et al. Regarding its residual stress profile, these authors have also conducted a detailed analysis of it on a coating of approximately 500 Thus, given the above facts and the possibility of generating a compressive residual stress field into the substrate material as a consequence of plastic deformation during HVOF deposition, the present investigation has been conducted in order to evaluate the fatigue performance, both in air and in a NaCl solution, of a 7075-T6 aluminum alloy coated with a WC–10Co–4Cr cermet by HVOF thermal spray, without any grit blasting prior to the deposition process and to compare this performance with that of the uncoated substrate. The present investigation has been conducted by employing samples of a 7075-T6 aluminum alloy with the following composition (wt.%): 6.10 Zn, 2.90 Mg, 2.00 Cu, 0.50 Fe, 0.40 Si, 0.30 Mn, 0.28 Cr, and Al bal. The material was provided as bars of approximately 12.7 The introduction of residual stresses throughout the machining operation of the specimens was minimized by employing adequate lubrication and by reducing continuously the depth of cut of the material during the turning procedure, which required the use of a turret lath at a low speed. All the samples were polished mechanically until the apparent surface roughness (R The samples were subsequently coated, without any prior grit blasting, with a WC–10Co–4Cr cermet of approximately 200 The static mechanical properties of the coated system were evaluated by means of tensile testing, employing a MTS 810 servo-hydraulic equipment. Five tensile samples were employed for this purpose. Fatigue tests were carried under rotating bending conditions (R   In this expression, S The dotted lines included in By comparing the corrected fatigue curves with those of the uncoated substrate, for each testing medium, it can be clearly observed that the deposition of the WC–10Co–4Cr cermet onto this aluminum alloy gives rise to a significant increase in the fatigue properties of the substrate. When the coated system is tested in air, in the range of 10 A detailed fractographic analysis of some of the uncoated and coated specimens tested both in air and in the NaCl solution was carried out, in order to understand better the fracture mechanisms in this coated system, in comparison with the uncoated substrate. Particularly, in the case of the coated specimens, which due to the presence of the coating were actually tested at maximum alternating stresses ~ For this purpose, different samples tested at high and low maximum alternating stresses were analyzed both on their fracture surface and along cross sections normal to the latter. Also, cross sections of samples tested in air, which were able to achieve 5 Thus,  The analysis of the cross section of this specimen, shown in   A closer view of the area identified as A in Regarding the samples tested in the NaCl solution, The fatigue fracture occurred due to the nucleation and simultaneous propagation of a number of cracks initiated at the substrate–coating interface. Such cracks, during their growth, consume a large part of the cross section of the specimen, giving rise to the displacement of the ductile fracture zone (DFZ), associated with final overloading, to the center of the sample. As it was indicated previously in relation to the specimens tested in air, under this testing medium, extensive delamination and interfacial cracking (I. C.) also take place, as indicated in this figure. It is important to notice that the differences found in the fractographic analysis between the uncoated and coated specimens can be interpreted in terms of the actual difference in the maximum alternating stresses at which both samples were tested, of approximately 54  At lower alternating stresses, even under these corrosive conditions, the fracture surface of both the uncoated and coated specimens exhibited the dominance of a single crack, rather than the joint action of different cracks propagating from the periphery of the sample, as shown in Finally, The significant increase in fatigue properties of the coated system formed by the deposition of a WC–10Co–4Cr cermet onto the 7075-T6 aluminum alloy by HVOF thermal spray agrees quite well with the previous findings reported by Sartwell et al. It has been shown that the WC–10Co–4Cr cermet is a dense and quite homogeneous material with a high hardness, which is under a compressive residual stress field. However, given the significant plastic deformation at the substrate–coating interface shown in The fractographic analysis conducted on the fractured specimens indicated that fatigue cracks could either be nucleated and transferred from the coating to the substrate or nucleated at the sharp notches present at the interface, produced by plastic deformation by the impact of the coating particles during the first stages of deposition. In both cases, the presence of a residual stress field within the coating and in the substrate itself will benefit the fatigue strength of the coated system by reducing crack propagation rate. This view is further supported by the fact that at relatively low maximum alternating stresses, only a single dominant crack is responsible of the fatigue fracture of the coated system. This fact indicates that the stress intensity factor at the tip of other existing cracks, regardless of the location of their nucleation sites, is not high enough to induce their propagation, even under corrosive conditions. When the samples are tested in air at maximum alternating stresses below ~ At present, more experimental work is being carried out in order to analyze the fatigue behavior of the 7075-T6 aluminum alloy in the range of 10 The deposition of a WC–10Co–4Cr cermet by HVOF thermal spray onto a 7075-T6 aluminum alloy gives rise to a significant improvement of the fatigue strength of the coated system in comparison with the uncoated substrate. Such increase in fatigue performance is associated with microstructural characteristics, corrosion resistance and mechanical properties of the coating, as well as with the deposition process itself. The presence of a highly homogeneous, dense and hard coating under a compressive residual stress field, as well as the compressive residual stresses possibly induced in the substrate due to the plastic deformation that occurs during coating deposition, provides an explanation for the outstanding fatigue results that have been obtained. According to the present results, the lack of grit blasting prior to HVOF deposition does not seem to compromise the functionality of the coated system, while it avoids the introduction of further sharp stress concentrators for the nucleation of fatigue cracks. Therefore, it is concluded that from the fatigue behavior viewpoint, the WC–10Co–4Cr cermet constitutes a feasible replacement for electrolytic hard chromium plating. The present investigation has been conducted with the financial support of the