The objective of this study was to report on the safety, efficacy and clinical outcomes of the Polyax™ Locked Plating System (Biomet, Warsaw, IN, USA) in the management of acute (non-implant related and periprosthetic) distal femoral fractures. We retrospectively reviewed 71 patients with 73 distal femoral fractures. Thirty-three of the included fractures occurred around previously placed implants. The average patients’ age was 67 years (range 18–98). There were 7 early postoperative complications (9.5%) including one deep surgical site infection, 2 pulmonary embolisms and 4 urinary or respiratory infections. At final follow-up (mean 12, range 9–55 months) all fractures progressed to clinical and radiological union. However, major revision surgery for healing problems was required in 5 cases (6.8%) and minor in 3 cases (4.1%). The average time to healing was 6 (range 3–23) months. Angulation less than 5 degrees in any plane was observed in 66 cases (89.7%), within 5–10 degrees in 5 cases (7.3%) and within 10–15 degrees in 2 cases (2.9%). The mean pre-injury and final follow-up values of Glasgow Outcome Scale were 1.5 (1–3) and 1.7 (1–3) respectively. Overall 61 patients (83.53%) retained their pre-injury activity status. The Polyax™ Locked Plating System offers a safe and efficient fixation in distal femoral fractures.Distal femoral fractures often occur in injured or elderly patients and their surgical management is challenging due compromised bone stock from coexistent osteoporosis and/or the presence of a pre-existing femoral implant (total hip and/or knee replacement femoral components or femoral intramedullary nail/osteosynthesis implants) Variable axis screws were initially used in spine fixation We retrospectively reviewed all the patients admitted with a distal femoral fracture in our institution from January 2009 to December 2013. Patients eligible to participate were identified from a prospectively documented hospital database. All adult patients with distal femoral fractures surgically treated with the Polyax Plating System were included in this study. Patients with fractures treated with different fixation modalities, pathological fractures and inadequate follow-up (i.e. less than 9 months) were excluded. Institutional board review approval was obtained for the study (IB Number: 1657). Standard demographics (sex, age, comorbidities), mechanism of injury, concomitant injuries, time to surgery, length of hospital stay and complications (local and systemic) were recorded. Fracture related data i.e. type of injury, the presence of an implant proximally and/or distally, time to union, malunion were also documented. Non-implant related fractures were classified according to AO/OTA Surgery was performed under general anaesthesia on a standard radiolucent table. Tourniquet was not used in any of the cases. A Transarticular Retrograde Plate (lateral parapatellar approach) was utilized for complete intra-articular fractures (AO/OTA type C). A lateral/anterolateral approach to the distal femur was used for extra-articular or partial articular (AO/OTA type A and B). No bone grafting was used in the index operation. Open fractures were treated by emergency debridement, tetanus prophylaxis, intravenous antibiotics, and with or without temporary external fixation. Postoperatively, thromboprophylaxis was given for 6–8 weeks or until the patients were fully mobile. Mobilization exercising toe-touch weight bearing along with range of movement and quadriceps strengthening exercises was instructed to all patients from the first postoperative day. Gradual progression to full weight bearing based on clinical and radiological signs of healing was instituted from the sixth postoperative week for extra-articular fractures. Full weigh bearing was initiated from the twelfth postoperative week for intra-articular fractures. All patients attended the outpatient clinics for follow-up appointments at 6, 12, 24 and 36 postoperative weeks for clinical and radiological review. Patients demonstrating signs of delayed union of the fracture had a longer follow-up, up to fracture union. Union was considered as the presence of combination of fracture consolidation in at least 3 cortices and painless weight bearing. Malunion was defined as the radiographic angulation of more than 10 degrees in any plane. The clinical outcome was assessed using the pre-injury and final follow-up values of Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS) as described and used in relevant previous studies in this field Seventy-one patients with 73 fractures from the initially 88 identified patients were included in this cohort. From the 17 excluded patients, ten died before the completion of the required follow-up (11%), 6 could not complete their follow-up and one patient had an above-the-knee amputation due of severe vascular injury from the initial injury shortly after the osteosynthesis of the distal femur and vascular reconstruction. The average patients’ age was 67 years (range 18–98) and the average number of co-morbidities was 3 (range 0–9). The mechanism of injury was reported to be low energy in 58 cases and high energy in 13. Nine patients were classified as polytrauma having an ISS The transarticular approach and retrograde plate osteosynthesis (TARPO) was used in 60 cases and lateral/anterolateral approach and retrograde plate osteosynthesis in 13 cases. There were 7 early postoperative complications (9.5%) including one deep surgical site infection, 2 pulmonary embolisms and 4 urinary or respiratory infections. The acute deep surgical site infection was successfully treated with multiple surgical debridements, retainment of implant and intravenous antibiotics followed by oral intake. All early postoperative complications were resolved before the patients’ discharge from the hospital. The mean length of hospital stay was 25 days (2–88). Overall, at final follow-up all cases progressed to clinical and radiological union. The average time to healing was 6 (range 3–23) months. However, major revision surgery to achieve osseous healing was required in 5 cases (6.8%). The Polyax Plate was revised to a retrograde intra-medullary nail and to a blade plate in four and one cases respectively. In two (2.7%) of these cases early implant failure occurred at 1 and 5 months postoperatively. In the remaining three (4.1%) cases revision osteosynthesis was required due to observed nonunion at 13, 15 and 16 months after the index osteosynthesis. Minor intervention was required in another three (4.1%) cases of atrophic nonunion that were managed with single percutaneous injection of bone marrow aspiration (concentrated osteoprogenitor cells) and application of BMP-7 at 4, 7 and 30 months. In total, 8 cases (11%) of revisions were observed i.e., early implant failure requiring repeat osteosynthesis, nonunions requiring secondary grafting and nonunions requiring implant revision. In 6 of these cases, the osteosynthesis was considered to be inadequate (4 too flexible, one too stiff and one related to varus malreduction). Removal of symptomatic prominent screws was performed in 3 cases (4.1%). There were no cases of varus collapse or screw loosening in the distal femoral fragment. From the 68 fractures that reached uneventfully to healing, angulation less than 5 degrees in any plane was observed in 61 cases (89.7%), within 5–10 degrees in 5 cases (7.3%) and within 10–15 degrees in 2 cases (2.9%). In patients with united fractures, the mean pre-injury and final follow-up values of Glasgow Outcome Scale were 1.5 (1–3) and 1.7 (1–3) respectively, with 61 cases (83.53%) retaining their pre-injury activity status. Distal femoral fractures usually occur in polytrauma or elderly patients. These fractures may also occur in the setting of a pre-existing total knee/total hip replacement and/or previous osteosynthesis (i.e. intramedullary nail) Various treatment modalities including external fixators, plating systems and intramedullary nails have been used for the surgical management of distal femoral fractures. External fixators are mainly useful for temporary fracture stabilization in polytrauma patients and open fractures. Their limited use for definitive treatment of distal femoral fractures is based on the difficulty to maintain anatomic reduction, and the increased risk of infection and knee stiffness Conventional plates such as condylar buttress plates, condylar blade-plates, dynamic condylar screws Locking plating systems such as LISS and polyaxial locking plates The latest development in locking plating is the polyaxial locking technology. Polyaxial plates allow multiple angle stable screw fixation and enable the fixation of fracture patterns, which would be either very difficult or even impossible to treat with standard types of devices ( The use of intramedullary nails in some types of distal femoral fractures may have advantages over plate fixation devices. Biomechanically, fixation with nails provides greater axial stiffness and plastic deformation but lower torsional stiffness than plate osteosynthesis Our study reports on 73 distal femoral fractures treated with the Polyax Locked Plating System. At the final follow up clinical and radiographic union was achieved in all fractures. Major revision surgery was required in 2 (2.7%) cases due to early implant failure and in 3 (4.1%) cases for the management of a non-union. A single percutaneous injection of bone graft was necessary in another 3 (4.1%) cases to enhance healing. In 6 cases out of 8, which presented healing problems, including non-unions, implant failures and secondary need of healing enhancement, osteosynthesis considered as inadequate. The final clinical outcome was satisfactory with 83.25% of patients retaining their initial activity. That was evident despite the advanced age of most of the patients. Results of recent studies from English literature of polyaxial plates for the fixation of distal femoral fractures are shown in Non-union rates with the use of first generation locking systems has been reported to ranged from 0% Up-to-date there is paucity of large randomized controlled studies comparing first generation and polyaxial locking plates and the reported results are variable and insufficient to draw a safe conclusion. Nevertheless it is our impression that polyaxial plates fixation should be promoted at least in complex cases since they are surgeon-friendly in their use, offer distinct application and fixation advantages in periprosthetic fractures and the reported results/outcomes of their use have been reported to be similar to that of standard locking plating systems. Limitations of this study can be considered its retrospective nature, the relatively small number of cases, the heterogenic patient group including young and elderly, periprostetic/peri-implant and non-implant related fractures and the short-term follow-up in terms of posttraumatic osteoarthritis development. We are also aware that the score we used to measure the outcomes is rather rudimentary. In summary, reconstruction of distal femoral fractures with Polyax plating technology appears to be associated with a low complication rate and satisfactory clinical results in a variety of fracture patterns and compromised bone quality as seen in this series of patients. We advocate their use in cases with increased surgical complexity of reduction and fixation such as periprosthetic fractures. Larger studies with strict inclusion criteria and patient reported outcome measures are desirable to provide further evidence about the effectiveness of this new technology in distal femoral fracture fixation. There is no conflict of interest related to the content of this article.