To develop tissue engineering strategies useful for repairing damage in the central nervous system (CNS) it is essential to design scaffolds that emulate the NSC niche and its tight control of neural cell genesis, growth, and differentiation. In this study we tested two types of poly l/dl lactic acid (PLA95/5 and PLA70/30), a biodegradable material permissive for neural cell adhesion and growth, as materials for nerve regeneration. Both PLA were slightly hydrophobic and negatively charged but differed in crystallinity, stiffness and degradation rate. PLA95/5 films were highly crystalline, stiff (GPa), and did not degrade significantly in the one-month period analyzed in culture. In contrast, PLA70/30 films were more amorphous, softer (MPa) and degraded faster, releasing significant amounts of lactate into the culture medium. PLA70/30 performs better than PLA95/5 for primary cortical neural cell adhesion, proliferation and differentiation, maintaining the pools of neuronal and glial progenitor cells in vitro. l-lactate in the medium recapitulated PLA70/30's maintenance of neuronal restricted progenitors but did not sustain bipotential or glial restricted progenitors in the cultures, as occurred when neural cells were grown on PLA70/30. Our results suggest that PLA70/30 may mimic some of the physical and biochemical characteristics of the NSC niche. Its mechanical and surface properties may act synergistically in the modulation of bipotential and glial restricted progenitor phenotypes, while it is l-lactate, either added to the medium or released by the film that drives the maintenance of neuronal restricted progenitor cell phenotypes.Despite advances in the knowledge of the mechanisms of nerve injury and repair, regeneration strategies for the damaged central nervous system (CNS) are still in their infancy. The development of tissue engineering opened up a new chapter for biomaterials and their potential applications in this field. Biomaterials can be used as mediators to help nerve regeneration across scars, gaps, and cavities resulting from injuries. In fact, they offer a wide range of possibilities since they can be designed to fit specific needs, such as promoting growth or recreating biochemical and topographical cues normally present in the neural stem cell (NSC) niche A variety of materials, in particular polymers, have been investigated in order to establish their suitability for tissue engineering applications. Among them, polylactic acid (PLA) is a promising polymer for neural regeneration owing to its thermoplastic processability and mechanical and biological properties, such as its lack of immunogenicity and its biodegradability Cerebral energy metabolism is a highly compartmentalized and complex process in which trans-cellular trafficking of metabolites plays a pivotal role. The adult brain normally uses glucose as its primary energy source Over the past decade, a role for lactate in fueling the energetic requirements of neurons has emerged, not only during the perinatal period but also in adulthood. It is not fully understood how the switch from glucose to lactate neuronal metabolism is achieved but the astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle seems to be involved. This hypothesis postulates that lactate is produced by astrocytes and used by neurons in an activity-dependent and glutamate-mediated manner We investigated the different biological responses Poly- Characterization of PLA95/5 and 70/30 wettability was performed via contact-angle measurements using an OCA 20 system (Dataphysics, GmbH). Advancing contact angle measurements were taken using the captive bubble technique. This method consists in the measurement of the equilibrium angle formed between a 3 ml air bubble and the surface of the PLA, both immersed in water. The measurements were performed in triplicate with at least three different data points for each sample. Z-potential measurements were carried out using a SurPASS apparatus and VisioLab software (Anton Paar Ltd.). All the measurements were performed at a dynamic pH of the electrolyte (KCl 1 m Tests to failure to measure films tensile strength were performed using an Instron 5565 compression and tension tester (Instron Corp. Canton MA) with samples of 15 × 10 mm and thicknesses of 333 ± 22 μm. The tensile stress test was monitored using a speed of 10 mm/min. A thermal characterization of the two different materials was performed by Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC, 2029 TA). PLA films were prepared by solvent casting following the protocol described above. For each DSC test, about 5 mg of material were loaded in the furnace of the instrument and were heated from room temperature up to 175 °C (heating rate 10 °C/min). The degree of crystallinity was calculated using the following Equation  Micro and nanomorphology was assessed using a Nova™ NanoSEM Scanning Electron Microscope at 10 kV and ultra-thin carbon coatings. All animal housing and procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee in accordance with Spanish and EU regulations. Glial cells were derived from the cerebral cortex of newborn mice (P0) as described elsewhere To assess the influence of material properties on glial cell adhesion, morphology and differentiation, Ps1 cells were cultured at a density of 2 × 10 Neurons were obtained from embryonic brains as described elsewhere In order to analyze the effect of lactate released by the material, neurons and glial cells were plated in the same conditions as described above for the first 24 h in a glucose-free Neurobasal The samples were either fixed in 4% PFA for 15 min at room temperature for immunochemistry, or used for protein extraction and Western blot analysis. Media were collected to measure lactate and glucose concentration. For Western blot analysis, protein extracts were obtained from primary cultures and total protein extracts were separated by SDS- polyacrylamide gel and electro-transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Bio-Rad). Membranes were blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma–Aldrich) and incubated firstly with primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C, and then with their corresponding secondary HRP-conjugated antibodies (1:3000; Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Protein signal was detected using the ECL chemiluminescent system (Amersham, GE Healthcare). Densitometry analysis, standardized to actin/vinculin as a control for protein loading, was performed using ImageJ software. For quantification, triplicate samples were analyzed and at least two different experiments were used. For immunofluorescence, fixed samples (4% PFA for 15 min at RT) were incubated with primary antibodies and appropriate Alexa 488 or Alexa 555 secondary antibodies (1:500, Molecular Probes). Phalloidin was used to stain F-actin (1:2000, Sigma–Aldrich) and To-Pro-3 iodide (1:500, Molecular Probes) to stain nuclei. Finally, the preparations were coverslipped with Mowiol (Calbiochem) for imaging. The following primary antibodies were used; rabbit anti-GFAP (mature and reactive glial marker, 1:500–1:8000, Dako), rabbit anti-BLBP (radial glial marker, 1:1000–1:8000, Chemicon), mouse anti-Nestin (progenitor and radial glial marker, 1:250, Abnova Corporation), goat anti-Actin (cytoskeleton Marker, 1:2000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), mouse anti-Tuj-1 (neuronal marker 1:10,000, Covance), rabbit anti-PH3 (proliferation marker, 1:250, Millipore), goat anti-Pax6 (neurogenic radial glial marker, 1:250, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), rabbit anti-Tbr2 (neurogenic intermediate progenitor cells marker, 1:500, Abcam), rabbit anti-EAAT1/GLAST-1 (glial glutamate transporter marker, 1:1000, Abcam), rabbit anti-Ki67 (proliferation marker, 1:500, Abcam), mouse anti- Synaptophysin (pre-synaptic neuronal marker, 1:1000, Dako), rabbit anti-PSD95 (post-synaptic neuronal marker, 1:1000, Abcam) and goat anti-MCT2 (neuronal monocarboxylate transporter marker 1:500, Santa Cruz Biotechnology). The degradation of PLA films The concentration of All experiments were carried out at least three times, and triplicate samples were diluted 1:20 with reaction mix (buffer of 0.3 The concentration of glucose was determined by the glucose oxidase–peroxidase method using PGO enzymes (Peroxidase and Glucose Oxidase, Sigma). O-dianisidine dihydrochloride (ODD, Sigma) was utilized as a colorimetric substrate. Colorless ODD in reaction with H In some experiments, E16 primary neuronal cultures and P0 glial cultures were treated with All experiments were carried out at least three times and triplicate samples were analyzed by Western blot, cell morphology was analyzed by ICC, and Micrographs were captured with a light microscope Nikon Eclipse 800 (Nikon) or with a spectral confocal microscope Leica TCS-SL (Leica Microsystems). Images were assembled in Adobe Photoshop (v. 7.0), with similar adjustments for contrast, brightness, and color balance to obtain optimum visual reproduction of the data. Cell counts were expressed as mean cells/mm In addition to their distinct composition, glass, PLA95/5, 70/30 and culture plastic (polystyrene) are harder than brain and are considered stiff substrates. PLA95/5, 70/30 and glass were slightly hydrophobic and negatively charged (contact angle 75.6 ± 5.2, 78.1 ± 8.7, 73.9 ± 2.8 respectively; AFM visualization of surface topography showed differences in the surface roughness in PLA95/5 and 70/30 ( To confirm the difference in the amount of semi-crystalline domains, the crystallinity of PLA95/5 and 70/30 films was assessed by means of X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC). The XRD diffraction patterns showed the different crystallinity of the materials after the formation of the solvent-casting films. While both raw materials were semi-crystalline (due to the aging process), on formation of the films only PLA95/5 remained semi-crystalline ( Tensile strength measurements were carried out for the different materials. PLA95/5, the most crystalline material, presented higher Young's Modulus (9.5 ± 0.3 GPa) than PLA70/30 (63.7 ± 1.3 MPa). Correspondingly, the maximum stress to rupture was higher in PLA95/5 (428.5 ± 118.1 MPa) than in PLA70/30 (5.7 ± 0.1 MPa) ( To determine differences in the degradation rate between the two PLA polymers, the presence of Firstly, Western blot and densitometry analysis were used to quantify differences in the expression of glial cell maturation markers after 5 Afterward, the lactate released into the medium and glucose consumption in the same glial cultures were analyzed. As no lactate was initially present in the culture medium, the β-III Tubulin (Tuj-1) staining revealed that cortical cells attached and differentiated into neurons in the control substrate (Lysglass), and their number remained constant during the culture period (1 To investigate whether gliogenic or neurogenic progenitors were favored in PLA70/30 films with respect to the control substrate, we used Western blot and densitometry to analyze the expression of several lineage-specific markers after 5 We then quantified the release of Taken together, these results indicate that PLA70/30 maintains the neuronal culture in a relatively immature state, preserving a pool of neuronal progenitors and inducing the expression of the neuron-specific lactate transporter MCT2. To analyze the possibility that neural cells used the lactate released from the substrate, neurons and glial cells were cultured on control substrates and both PLA films in the absence of glucose (Neurobasal A medium, NB In the absence of glucose, the survival of glial cells was similar on PLA70/30 films (186 ± 40) and control (glass) (161 ± 52); in both substrates they presented a spread and round morphology typical of mature astrocytes. In contrast, the number of astrocytes on 95/5 films was notably reduced (59 ± 33) and they were smaller and less spread out. Ki67 + proliferative glial cells were almost absent in all three conditions, indicating a quiescent state ( On the other hand, neuronal cultures did not survive on PLA95/5 films in the absence of glucose and barely survived on control substrate (64 ± 36), while neurons attached to and grew well on PLA70/30 (158 ± 50) ( In order to explore the influence of lactate on glial cell phenotype, cells were treated with Quantitative analysis of glial differentiation markers was performed by Western blot and densitometry ( The concentrations of To explore the influence of lactate on neuronal cell phenotype, embryonic neurons were cultured in the same conditions as those used for the glial cultures described above. After 5 Western blot and densitometry analysis were performed to quantify differences in the expression of neuronal glial and progenitor markers ( Finally, The regenerative capacity of a tissue relies on the maintenance of a population of stem cells which self-renew by asymmetrical division and produce a committed daughter cell able to differentiate. Those properties are regulated by the niche, a dynamic microenvironment in which stem cells reside. The CNS has only limited capacity for self-repair after injury despite the presence of NSC, therefore a fuller understanding is needed of the physical nature of the NSC niches and the molecular mechanisms that govern them PLA is a truly biodegradable polymer derived from lactic acid, and the initial D/L isomer distribution determines the potential for PLA crystallization Glial cells grown on PLA70/30 tend to express more immaturity and proliferation markers such as nestin, Ki67 and PH3 than those grown in control conditions. This undifferentiated and proliferative glial phenotype resembles that observed when glial cells were grown on PMMA films On the other hand, embryonic neurons grown on PLA70/30 also maintained an immature phenotype, increasing the expression of bipotential and neuron restricted progenitor markers Pax6 and Tbr2 after 5 One important property of PLA substrates is their release of active metabolites. PLA essentially degrades to Traditionally, On the other hand, glial cells hardly survive in glucose-free lactate medium, while glial cells grown on PLA reduced its glucose consumption, indicating a change in their metabolism. The somewhat deleterious effect of Nevertheless, to conclusively establish that the effect of An unexpected but exciting observation was the robust maintenance of potential Pax6 and neuronal restricted Tbr2 progenitor pools in neuronal cultures grown on PLA70/30. Pax6 is expressed by neuronal/glial bipotential radial glia cell progenitors, while Tbr2 is expressed by neural restricted progenitors and by early postmitotic neurons Although PLA70/30 film is not an appropriate material formulation for This study demonstrated that PLA70/30 films are good substrates for primary cortical neural cell adhesion, proliferation and differentiation, while also maintaining the pools of neuronal and glial progenitor cells This study was supported in part by grants from  Supplementary data related to this article can be found, in the online version, at