 On 4 February 2013, the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia handed down its decision in Novozymes A/S v Danisco A/S [2013] FCAFC 6. In its decision, the Court upheld an appeal by Shelston IP's client, Novozymes, from an earlier 2011 decision of Justice Bennett. An aspect of the decision of particular note is the finding that the novelty of a patent may successfully be challenged where the invention is not expressly disclosed in full in the prior art, but where the inevitable result of following instructions contained in the prior art is the working of the patented invention. Danisco's patent claimed a process for preparing a foodstuff, including the addition of an enzyme to a food material to generate two functional ingredients. Danisco sued Novozymes for patent infringement in respect of its product called “Lipopan Xtra”. Novozymes cross-claimed, challenging the validity of the patent on a number of grounds, including lack of novelty. It was in the context of one of the prior art documents, the “Novo patent”, that the question of ‘inevitable result’ arose. Novozymes argued that even if all the integers of the Danisco patent were not expressly disclosed in the Novo patent, the inevitable result of carrying out instructions contained in the Novo patent would be a working of the process claimed in the Danisco patent. At first instance, Justice Bennett accepted that a prior publication which contains a direction to do something which inevitably or inexorably results in something within the claim in question may deprive such claim of novelty. Such a proposition is derived from the English Court of Appeal decision in Delivering the primary judgment on this issue in the Full Court, Justice Jessup applied the reasoning in Justice Jessup (with whom Justices Yates and Greenwood agreed) also considered whether an alleged invention must Justice Jessup rejected this suggestion. The Patents Act defines the prior art base with respect to publication before the priority date, and it is the content of the information that amounts to anticipation, not the doing of the act or even the ability to do it. The first instance decision had created a tension between anticipation and infringement, in that following the instructions contained in a prior publication might result in infringement of a later patent, but would not necessarily anticipate it. The Full Court's decision resolves this tension. If directions in the prior art can be shown to lead inevitably to the carrying out of the alleged invention, there will be grounds to invalidate the patent, even where there is no express disclosure on the face of the document. Authors: Rebekah Gay and Katrina Crooks. “I was with some students at a mine in Mount Isa and I looked at the equipment they were using and thought, ‘I could build something better than that’,” Professor Jameson recalls. The result is a Cell with no motor, air compressor or moving parts, that is energy efficient and cheap to operate and maintain. A higher percentage of mineral is recovered, and because less mineral is left in the tailings, this reduces the chance of heavy metal leaching into the soil and posing a hazard. The Cell is now in use in more than 300 locations in 20 countries and has been hailed the most financially successful Australian invention in three decades. “The Jameson Cell is one of the great achievement stories of modern industrial research,” the University's Deputy Vice-Chancellor, Professor Mike Calford, said. “Professor Jameson has made an immense contribution to the science of mineral processing and we are fortunate and proud to have him at the University of Newcastle to share his breadth of knowledge, expertise and experience with his colleagues and our students.” Professor Jameson has more than 200 publications to his credit and is named as the inventor on 54 patents. He has received a myriad of awards in recognition of his achievements, including in 2005 an Officer of the Order of Australia award and the prestigious Peter Nicol Russell Memorial Medal from the Institution of Engineers Australia for outstanding service to his profession. Since 1996 Professor Jameson has been inducted as a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Science. Professor Jameson has now turned his mind to the development of a Fluidised Bed Flotation Cell to extend the upper size of particles that can be recovered by flotation. This new process is ideal for the recovery of copper, gold, silver, nickel, lead and zinc. As part of the development process, he has recognised that it is essential that savings in greenhouse gas emissions must be a part of any new technology, and he has been able to achieve this by designing a cell that significantly reduces the energy required for the previously energy-intensive grinding process. News item courtesy of the University of Newcastle. Shelston IP partner John Forster has been acting for Professor Jameson for nearly 30 years. Author: John Forster. Amendments to Australian trade mark legislation come into force on 15 April 2013. The Regulations implementing these amendments have gone through various stages of review and IP Australia has released the latest draft of these Regulations. The objective is to reduce delays in the resolution of substantive oppositions to applications for registration and oppositions to non-use removal applications. For less frequent oppositions to amendments and extensions, the Registrar will have broader powers to make directions so they may be resolved as quickly as possible. The changes will apply to all oppositions commenced after 15 April 2013 with transitional provisions applying to oppositions already underway. The opposition documents:   There is provision to obtain an extension to file the NIO and SGP in limited circumstances, namely error or omission, or circumstances beyond the control of the opponent. If an applicant wants to defend its application and contest the opposition, it must file a Notice of Intention to Defend (NID) within 1 month of being given the opponent's SGP. Failure to do so will result in lapsing of its trade mark application or failure of the removal application. The timetable for filing evidence has also been modified. Provided the applicant files a NID, the opponent will have 3 months from being given the NID to file evidence in support. The applicant will then have 3 months to file evidence in answer and the opponent will then have 2 months for any evidence in reply. The evidence in reply period has been reduced from 3 months. There will no longer be any opportunity to file any further evidence. In an opposition to a non-use removal application, if an opponent does not file evidence in support or ask for a hearing, the opposition is deemed to have ended and the applicant for removal prevails. The extension provisions have been tightened and the explanatory statements to the new Regulations make it clear that extensions will be closely scrutinised. Outside of the evidence procedures, there is provision for a party to provide the Registrar with information which may be considered in deciding the opposition. It remains to be seen how this will be utilised to admit information which is not strictly evidence but which may have a bearing on the Registrar's decision. The explanatory statements indicate it is not intended for this provision to be used as a substitute for the repealed further evidence provisions. It will no longer be possible to seek ongoing extensions for the purpose of negotiations. Rather, the parties will be able to agree to a cooling off period of up to 12 months maximum at any time after the opposition documents have been filed. Once all evidence is completed, a party may request a hearing which may be an oral hearing or by written submissions. The Registrar has a discretion to exercise in deciding whether to grant an oral hearing; however, we are anticipating that oral hearings will be granted on substantive opposition matters when sought. While pre-hearing submissions have become more commonplace in recent times, the changes mean that there will now be a requirement for: The opponent to file a summary of submissions at least 10 business days before the hearing; and The applicant to file a summary of submissions at least 5 business days before the hearing. This procedure is designed to identify clearly the issues in dispute prior to the hearing and avoid any element of surprise. Failing to comply can have consequences in any costs order made. These changes to trade mark opposition procedures will have a significant impact. They are designed to expedite the opposition process and will require clients to provide quite detailed and timely instructions, particularly when settling the opposition grounds and particulars. Parties will need to act promptly when preparing their evidence due to the real risk of extensions being refused, resulting in a party potentially being shut out from relying on formal evidence. Deadlines will become more critical due to the limited opportunities for extensions and the maximum suspension/cooling off period of 12 months will need to be monitored when parties are negotiating. Authors: Sean McManis and Gerard Skelly. (This section was much abbreviated from the original – full detail can be found at