Gas dispersion properties play an important role on determining the metallurgical performance of flotation processes. Indeed, bubble surface area flux (Sb
                     ) has been found to correlate with the collection zone flotation rate constant and is therefore a potential variable to regulate in order to achieve a target performance. Sb
                      can be calculated as a combination of two other gas dispersion properties, namely, gas superficial velocity and the Sauter bubble mean diameter. This communication describes the design and implementation of a feedback control system for the Sauter bubble mean diameter in an attempt towards controlling Sb
                     . In order to track changes on bubble size, the Sauter bubble mean diameter was derived from an adaptive bubble size probability density function (PDF). A Gaussian mixture model was used to represent the bubble size PDF and its parameters were updated on-line and in real-time by a dedicated computer from sequentially incoming images. To improve bubble size controllability, a frit-and-sleeve sparging device was installed. This device allows modifying bubble size by manipulating the water flow rate circulating through a sleeve surrounding a porous ring (shear water). A Wiener model is used to represent the dynamic relationship between the shear water flow rate and the Sauter bubble mean diameter. A nonlinear control, based on the internal model control (IMC) structure, was designed and implemented. Tracking and regulation performance against gas velocity and unmeasured frother concentration variations were then successfully evaluated in a two-phase system.Flotation is a process commonly used for separating valuable minerals from useless minerals (gangue). Metallurgical performance can be determined through the valuable-mineral concentrate grade and recovery. Whereas the first of these two variables can be measured on-line using an X-ray on-stream analyzer (XRA), the latter is commonly calculated from the feed, concentrate and tails grade using a steady-state material balance, an assumption that strongly limits its use for control purposes. Moreover, the long sampling times of these XRA devices, usually multiplexed, favor the use of a hierarchical control structure where secondary variables are kept under control to indirectly optimize the process. Experimental studies have shown that the collection zone flotation rate constant can be expressed as the product of the bubble surface area flux and a factor that accounts for particle related properties called particle This article extends previous works on the control of gas dispersion properties, to the control of bubble size represented by the Sauter bubble mean diameter. The flotation column used in this work has three sections made of polycarbonate tubes for a total height of 5 Gas flow rate is measured through a mass flow sensor/controller (Aalborg model GFC17). The mass flow sensor also provides an estimate of the volumetric flow based on a reference or standard condition provided by the vendor (i.e., 21.1 Images of the bubbles were captured by a digital camera (SONY DFW-X710) and continuously retrieved by a dedicated computer through the MatLab's Image Acquisition toolbox®. Free license Image J software was used to sequentially process the incoming collected images to calculate bubble sizes. A communication link between MatLab applications running on the control station (gray boxed) and the image processing computer is implemented using MatLab's Instrumentation toolbox® under Ethernet UDP protocol as illustrated in To obtain the benefits of feedback control, Sauter bubble mean diameter and therefore its bubble size distribution must be measured on-line and in real-time. The problem of estimating a density function from data points is known as Minimizing the negative log-likelihood of the samples the following adaptation law is obtained ( The Sauter mean bubble diameter at instant time A Wiener model is used to represent the dynamic relationship between the shear water superficial velocity set point and the Sauter bubble mean diameter. Wiener models consist of a linear system in series with a static nonlinear element, as shown in The Wiener model was identified in two steps; first, the static nonlinear element was determined by using steady-state information, then, the linear dynamic element was identified by using step response information. The technique used in either case is described hereafter. To explore the static relationship between shear water superficial velocity (   The following first-order lag plus time delay nominal model was identified using step response information: Assuming that there is no uncertainty in the nonlinear block, the static nonlinearity can then be completely removed by performing the inverse of the nonlinearity and consequently, the controller synthesis can be performed on the linear dynamic part only ( For a step signal the linear augmented optimal IMC controller can be expressed as: To evaluate the control system performance, the laboratory flotation column was fed with a solution of 10 It has been shown that for controlling This work explores the control of Sauter bubble mean diameter as a first step towards the control of bubble surface area flux. A frit-and-sleeve sparging device was implemented to allow the modification of the bubble size by injecting water through a gap. The Sauter mean diameter was calculated on-line from the measured (image processing) bubble size distribution. A convex combination of fixed Gaussian functions was proposed and its parameters were recursively determined in real-time by minimizing the negative log-likelihood of the data points. A Wiener model-based IMC was proposed to control the Sauter bubble mean diameter by modifying the shear water superficial velocity through the frit-and-sleeve sparger. Good tracking performance (bubble size set-point) and rejection of unmeasured changes in superficial gas velocity and frother concentration were obtained in a laboratory flotation column working on a two-phase system. This work was conducted under an