Organisers of technical conferences try hard to give each session its own theme. At Euro PM2006 in Ghent, they must have been delighted to find sufficient innovation to label the third session new materials. In general terms, each of the oral presentations covered here could be said to fall into this category, says Ken Brookes…Oxides are regarded traditionally as contaminants in sintered hardmetals, especially since they act as stress-raisers and remove carbon from carbides to form carbon monoxide or dioxide, leading to deleterious “eta” (η) phases. But there are occasions when such reactions can be avoided and a beneficial microstructure obtained. This was the target of an investigation into The author introduced her paper by noting the significant trend to finer-grained WC/Co hardmetals in the hardmetal industry. Ultrafine tungsten carbide powders with SEM particle sizes between 150 to 300nm were industrially available. However, increased pressures to improve both hardness and toughness demanded new concepts for strengthening WC/Co alloys. Behind this particular research was the idea that WC/Co alloys could be dispersion-strengthened by nanocrystalline aluminium-based phases. Several approaches for the reinforcement of tungsten carbide by additions of alumina had been tried previously. For example, Al The report focused on the addition of aluminium to WC/Co hardmetals in concentrations of two to 10 wt%. In investigating the sintering of these alloys, it targeted pore-free materials and the avoidance of η-phases. It also discussed interactions between the additive and the WC/Co matrix, which might improve the wear performance of the respective hardmetals. The addition of aluminium to hardmetals was investigated at different stages of the carbide/hardmetal production process ( Aluminium was introduced into the hardmetal in the form of aluminium nitrate solution or as fine (300nm) oxide powder. High purity tungsten trioxide, tungsten metal (BET 9.84 m For route A, porous tungsten trioxide (WO For hardmetal preparation the doped and undoped WC powders were respectively ball-milled with 10 wt% cobalt, 0.5 wt% VC and, for route C, the appropriate amount of alumina powder (two or 10 wt%). After ball-milling, the slurries were dried in vacuo, then sieved to 200 μm, granulated in a Turbula mixer, pressed to bars at 180MPa and vacuum sintered for one hour at 1400°C. High resolution scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD), energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and magnetic measurements (coercivity and magnetic saturation) were used to characterise the powders and microstructures, as were stress-free polished specimens in terms of hardness (HV During the early stages of tungsten oxide reduction with hydrogen, aluminium reacted with the porous tungsten oxide matrix (WO As reduction progressed, WO Prior to carburisation, carbon adjustment was necessary because of the reaction of alumina with carbon black to form oxycarbides. At the carburisation temperature of 1450°C, the nanocrystalline alumina particles grew, though most of the particles remained in the 50 to 100nm range ( Sintering of undoped and aluminium-doped WC powders revealed no problems in obtaining pore-free materials without formation of η-carbides, provided that a proper carbon balance was maintained. This turned out to be easier with routes A and B, as in these cases the alumina-containing powders were already carburised before, taking up some carbon to form oxycarbides. However, even where 10 wt% alumina was added directly to the charge, three-phase alloys (WC/Co/Al Compared to the aluminium-free standard alloy A1 ( In general, three different interactions were observed from aluminium additions to hardmetals, schematically outlined in Hardmetals obtained from process route A showed nanocrystalline alumina inclusions within the tungsten carbide grains, introduced during the reduction process ( According to the author, alumina could be dispersed homogeneously within the WC/Co matrix, irrespective of the method of adding aluminium. However, the size of the Al Later additions of alumina resulted in coarser alumina grains in the hardmetal matrix, as they coalesced during sintering. Thus very large cohesive ceramic areas were formed in alloy A5 with 10 wt% alumina addition. Volume ratio of WC to Al EDX analysis of the aluminium-doped hardmetals showed aluminium to be present in the cobalt binder in the form of a Co (W, Al, C) alloy ( During sintering of aluminium-containing hardmetals a peripheral zone or “shell” is formed which is free of alumina ( The presenter saw potential in heat treatment of the aluminium-containing hardmetals to further increase their hardness and wear resistance. Initial experiments had shown a hardness increase of about 140HV by annealing, due to the formation of intermetallic phases, but at the expense of toughness. Another idea was selective oxidation. Because of the different oxygen affinities of tungsten, cobalt and aluminium, it was suggested that the dissolved aluminium could be selectively oxidised to increase wear resistance, protecting the ductile binder phase through a nanocrystalline alumina film on the surface of the hardmetal. It seemed a little difficult, however, to reconcile this effect with a peripheral shell containing no aluminium. (Nevertheless, the principle of the idea seems to be on the right lines. Fifty years ago, we found that as little as 0.5% Cr The early stages of sintering are critical in determining not only the extent of grain growth in sintered WC/Co hardmetals but also the ultimate grain size distribution. Perhaps the major parameter is the grain-size distribution in the starting powder, since the primary mechanism of liquid-phase grain growth is solution of the finest WC particles in cobalt-base binder, followed by precipitation of WC on the largest carbide particles during cooling. The wider the initial distribution, the harder it is to prevent grain growth. Powder evaluation and control are difficult enough with relatively large (for example “submicron”) carbide powders. There are, however, very real problems with so-called “nanosize” powders, when the finest particles are virtually invisible, even on conventional scanning electron microscopes. And unfortunately, experimental (and also many production) nano carbide powders are produced or mixed in various kinds of impact mills (like attritors or planetary mills), which tend to exaggerate the distribution width – also known as the well-known ‘bell-curve’ effect. With these extremely fine powders, however, surface reactivity is increased to such an extent that considerable shrinkage and crystal rearrangement takes place before the liquidus (liquid-phase melting) temperature is reached. Professor Zak Fang of the Department of Metallurgical Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, chose this particular phase of sintering for his investigation of As explained by the presenter, the production of bulk nanocrystalline (average grain size <100 nm) WC/Co constituted a technological challenge because of the rapid grain growth during sintering. Cemented tungsten carbide was typically sintered via liquid phase sintering in vacuum at approximately 1400°C. Previous studies of the sintering of nanosized WC/Co powders had shown significant grain growth before the liquid phase sintering temperature was reached, suggesting rapid grain growth process in the solid state. This was also evident in many other studies, which had shown that the finest sintered grain sizes were approximately 100 to 200 nm even when sintering at high pressures at solid state. Few reported studies provided details of the process and mechanisms of this part of grain growth. In classic sintering theories, grain growth occurred by either grain boundary migration or solution-reprecipitation, but many researches found that these could not fully explain the grain growth of nano particles. Coalescence of particles and grains had been suggested as a possible mechanism, but details of the process were lacking. Grain growth in nanosized WC/Co powders was studied by tracking the changes of grain sizes and morphology of grains during heat-up as well as isothermal hold. The author then discussed the effects of cobalt and grain growth inhibitor on early stage grain growth. The nanosized powders used in this investigation were produced using a high energy dual-drive planetary mill in heptane. The powders used included WC/10Co, WC and WC/10wt/Co/1/VC. In order to minimise oxidation or contamination before sintering, the powders were kept in heptane and allowed to dry in an argon atmosphere in the sintering furnace without being exposed to air. The powders were therefore sintered in a loosely packed condition without compaction. This experimental technique also served to isolate the grain growth process as much as possible from interactions with densification. The experimenters believed that early stage grain growth was mostly due to interactions between nanosized particles, while the effect of relative density on grain growth was more pronounced during later stages of sintering. Powders were heated to preset temperatures between 800 and 1400°C in a vacuum furnace with a heating rate of 10K/min, then immediately furnace cooled. To study changes in microstructure during the isothermal hold at selected temperatures, the powders were held for 60, 120, 180, 240 and 300 minutes respectively.  Grain sizes of as-milled powders and sintered samples were determined by x-ray diffraction line broadening and quantitative microscopy techniques. The former was used when grain sizes were smaller than approximately 100nm and the latter for larger grain sizes. For some samples, cobalt was leached out in boiling 20per cent hydrochloric acid for about 30 minutes, to reveal the WC grain structure.  The evolution of grain structure during heat-up was observed by high-resolution SEM, as shown in These results showed that the overall evolution of the original nanosized particles and grain structure seemed to occur via two processes, aggregation of the nanosized particles and transformation of aggregates to single crystal. As the presenter explained, the role of cobalt in densification during sintering was well known. What was still not clear, however, was the role of Co in grain growth during solid-state sintering. For evaluation purposes, therefore, nanosized WC powders were sintered under the same conditions as that for WC/10Co powders. The change of grain size versus temperature and the morphology changes of WC during heat-up are shown in The mechanism of VC as a grain-growth inhibitor was typically attributed to the solution-reprecipitation process during liquid-phase sintering. The current paper further investigated the effects of VC on early-stage grain growth. As shown in A more detailed, mainly mathematical, analysis of grain-growth kinetics was given in the original paper. It also included