Pleural space or chest wall infection is a contraindication to surgical stabilization of rib fractures (SSRF) because of the risk of hardware infection. However, the exact degree of risk is uncertain. SSRF is associated with a decreased need for mechanical ventilation and pneumonia. This case report describes a patient with polytrauma and Candida colonization of the mediastinum who successfully underwent SSRF. Dr Sarani discloses a financial relationship with Acute Innovations, LLC. Poststernotomy mediastinitis is a rare but potentially fatal complication A 37-year-old man presented after a high-speed motor vehicle collision. On arrival to the trauma bay, the patient was hypotensive and tachycardic, with right-sided chest wall crepitus and paradoxical breathing. Tube thoracostomy was performed. The thoracic ultrasound examination showed pericardial tamponade, and the patient required sternotomy for repair of a right atrial laceration, repair of superior vena cava injury, and right lower lobe pulmonary resection. Both the right and left pleurae were taken down, thereby connecting the pleural and mediastinal spaces. The sternal incision was left open because of cardiac edema and diffuse bleeding related to coagulopathy. He ultimately required extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for 4 days as a result of cardiogenic shock related to blunt cardiac injury. Once stabilized, the patient underwent computed tomography imaging, which showed right-sided fractures of ribs one to nine, with various degrees of comminution, displacement, and flail segments ( After SSRF, his narcotic need decreased immediately. Two days after SSRF, the patient was placed on pressure support and started on tracheostomy collar trials. He was successfully weaned from the ventilator. He did not have any complications of his sternal incision or the implanted plates and was discharged to a long-term care facility. He completed a 28-day course of antifungal therapy. This is the first report of a patient who underwent SSRF with fungal colonization of the mediastinum and the right pleural space. It is important to discern active infection from colonization, particularly where fungal organisms with biofilm formation can adhere to drains, thereby resulting in an erroneous diagnosis of ongoing mediastinitis. Whereas our patient was presumed initially to have fungal mediastinitis with resultant septic shock, he had no clinical or radiographic evidence of sternal dehiscence or empyema Definitive diagnosis of mediastinitis typically requires imaging or clinical evidence of sternal wound breakdown, in addition to positive culture results and systemic signs of infection SSRF has been shown to be most effective in decreasing pain and liberating patients from mechanical ventilation In conclusion, SSRF in patients with positive microbial cultures who have no clinical or imaging findings consistent with mediastinitis or empyema may be safe and effective. This case report describes that fungal colonization of the chest is not an absolute contraindication to SSRF. Larger reports are now needed to support our experience further.