The dynamic locking screw (DLS) in association with minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO) in a bridging construct for simple metadiaphyseal long bone fractures enables modulation of the rigidity of the system and facilitates the development of early and triplanar bone callus.
                  Twenty patients affected by distal tibial fracture were treated with MIPO bridging technique and DLS at the proximal side of the fracture. Time of consolidation, quality of the reduction, complications and American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) score were monitored and the results compared with those from a control group treated with only standard screws on both fracture sides. Student t-test for independent samples was used for the comparison of means between the two groups. Chi-square test was used for the comparison of proportions. A multiple logistic regression model was constructed to assess the possible confounding effects. Performance was considered significant for p
                     <0.05. The mean healing time was 17.6±2.8 weeks in the group treated with standard screws and 13.5±1.8 weeks in the group treated with DLS (t
                     =5.5, p
                     <0.0001). The DLS was associated with early healing and triplanar bone callus.The stiffness of a fixation construct is a principal determinant of fracture-site motion and, therefore, affects the mechanism and progression of fracture healing The introduction of locking plates improved the fixation strength of plate constructs, which expanded their indications to bridge plating for diaphyseal comminuted fractures Development of bridge plating constructs for comminuted fractures where anatomic reduction is not absolutely required promotes the development of minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO). The plate is tunnelled extraperiostally through a small skin incision and then fixed with screws; this approach reduces soft tissue damage and respects bone biology. The inherent stiffness of locked constructs is increasingly recognised as a potential cause of deficient healing that has been observed in simple fracture patterns stabilised with periarticular locking plates The interfragmentary strain hypothesis predicts that fracture healing will occur only if the interfragmentary motion divided by the fracture gap width is less than the fracture strain of bone (2%) Several approaches have been proposed to decrease the stiffness of locked plating constructs Working length (i.e., the distance between the screws less proximal and distal to the fracture), the kind of fixation of the screws in the bone, the implant itself and the distance of the plate to the bone influence the flexibility of an osteosynthesis. Another method to increase stiffness and reduce flexibility in a fracture zone is the moderate use of interfragmentary screws to block certain fragments towards each other or to limit interfragmentary movement The methods analysed are quite effective, but most of them primarily decrease the bending stiffness of the locked plate constructs. In these cases, interfragmentary motion results from the bending of the plate, which leads mainly to a rise of the motion at the far cortical side, while the interfragmentary movement at the near cortical side is hardly affected. In the context of these concerns, new implants were developed. Bottlang et al. Döbele et al. The present study analysed the influence of the DLS on simple distal metadiaphyseal long bone fractures when MIPO and bridging configuration technique were adopted. The objective of this study was to show that DLS may enable an expansion of the indications for MIPO bridge plate technique to more simple fracture patterns, which up to now were treated with intramedullary nailing or compression plate technique and associated with a delay in the healing process when treated with bridging plate technique. A prospective, multicentre, randomised study was conducted to evaluate the outcome of 40 patients affected by distal tibial fracture without joint affection who were treated with minimally invasive bridging plate technique. Patients with Volkmann's fracture were included and treated with one additional free screw. Twenty patients had only locking screws (LS) on both fracture sides and twenty patients had DLS on the proximal side of the fracture and standard LS on the distal side. Patients were enrolled between 2011 and mid-2013 in three different Orthopaedic Clinics and were treated by six expert surgeons. A distinct shared protocol was followed for treatment. Written consent to analyse the data of the patient charts for scientific purposes was obtained from every patient. Time of consolidation, quality of the reduction, complications and American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) score in the DLS group were monitored and compared with the results from a control group treated with only homogeneous locking compression plate (LCP) and standard screws. A total of 17 males and 23 females with a mean age of 43.5 Complex pilon fractures (AO43C3) were excluded because these require a different treatment approach and surgical technique. There were two patients with additional Volkmann's fracture in the group of extrarticular fractures: in these patients, the Volkmann fragment could be addressed easily with anterior-to-posterior screws that were independent of the plate. Patients with polytrauma, metabolic bone disease or nickel sensitivity (DLS consists of a chromium cobalt [CrCo] alloy) were excluded from the study. Trans-skeletal traction or temporary external fixator was adopted as first procedure to avoid soft tissue and neurovascular disease. Definite surgery was conducted after sufficient detumescence of the soft tissues. Six surgeons were finally involved in the treatment. If the fibula had to be reduced for length reconstruction, it was addressed first; then the tibial fracture was reduced under fluoroscopy. The use of 3.5–4.5 Medial Distal Tibial LCP with MIPO technique was chosen for all the fracture patterns. Surgery was performed in supine position on a radiolucent table. Perioperative antibiotic and anti-thromboembolic prophylaxis were adopted. Adjuvant pharmacologic or physical therapy was not adopted. The plate was inserted extraperiostally through a small incision over the medial malleolus, sparing the saphenous vein and nerve. The positioning was controlled under fluoroscopy. Fractures were then indirectly reduced by manual traction or with the help of AO distractor. Occasionally, reduction was achieved by using a reduction screw through the plate, to bring the distal fragment against the plate before insertion of two or three angle stable screws. In simple fractures (AO42-A1 and 43-A1), a pointed reduction forceps was inserted percutaneously to achieve direct reduction. Fixation of the plate was always conducted through a small incision with a 5.0 Depending on anatomic features, 3.7 or 5.0 DLS were used (only two 3.7 DLS were used in the study). The DLS was applied on only the proximal side of the fracture and always in a bicortical and parallel configuration. Standard LS were never used at the same side as DLS. Follow-up took place at 4, 8, 12, 24 and 48 weeks after surgery, with a clinical and radiological examination by the expert surgeon who treated the fracture, a control expert surgeon and an expert radiologist; 3D CT scan was planned 3 months after surgery. Visual analogue scale (VAS) and AOFAS scores were used for clinical evaluation. Classic definitions of pseudoarthrosis were strictly observed. Healing within 6 months was defined as normal, within 6–9 months as delayed and longer than 9 months as pseudoarthrosis. The fracture was considered healed when a visible callus bridging of one cortex was present on both lateral and posterior–anterior X-ray and the patient was fully weight-bearing without pain. Partial weight with crutches and brace (maximum 15–20 A form that reported sex, age, type of trauma, waiting period before surgery, complications and healing time was filled for each patient and entered into a database (FileMaker software PRO11; STATA software MP11). The Student A total of 40 patients were analysed in the study; no patients were lost at the follow-up. The main time until surgery was 5.45 days. The mean operative time was 115 Depending on the soft tissue conditions, mobilisation with partial weight-bearing started a mean of 4 days after surgery. Medial Distal Tibial LCPs were used in all 40 patients, of whom only 2 received a 3.5 plate and the remaining 38 patients had a 4.5 plate; the study group had a mean number of 3.3 DLSs, always located on the proximal side of the fracture, while the control group had a mean of 3.1 LS. Based on our clinical and radiological definition of fracture healing, a total of 10 patients were classified as healed at 12 months; the longest healing time was 22 months, which was observed in only 1 patient. The group treated with DLS had a mean healing time of 13.55 (±1.8) weeks compared with 17.65 (±2.8) weeks in the LS group ( Simple fracture patterns (42-A, 43-A) showed a quicker healing process in the DLS group (13.8 weeks) compared with the LS group (19.5 weeks) ( Mean AOFAS score was 89.65 in the DLS group and 85.50 in the LS group. There was one case of non-union in the LS group in a female patient with a simple pattern fracture (42-A1.1) and a history of heavy smoking and alcohol abuse. She refused additional treatment. There were three cases of varus/valgus angulation (<5°), one superficial infection and one algodystrophy in the DLS group ( All instrumental investigations were checked by the expert surgeon who treated the fracture, a control expert surgeon and an expert radiologist. A comparison of the X-rays of those patients treated with LS showed that there was a regular, but not always distinct, pattern. In over half of the cases, there was a strong callus formation on the cortex away from the plate, whereas there was very little or no callus formation on the cortex adjacent to the plate. All patients in the DLS group showed a regular callus pattern; and there were no differences in callus distribution between the two cortices ( The present study describes the efficacy of DLS confined to the proximal diaphyseal fracture side in conjunction with MIPO technique for simple distal metadiaphyseal tibial fractures. The results support the hypothesis that DLS can reduce the stiffness of a locking construct and induce parallel interfragmentary motion while retaining construct strength. Abandoning the doctrines of conventional plate techniques (exact anatomical reduction and rigid fixation) the objective of fracture management with locking plates is no longer primary bone healing. Performed in bridging technique, locking plate fixation relies on indirect bone healing; therefore, the presence of interfragmentary movement is essential. Nevertheless, due to the rigid plate-screw connection, locking plates cause less bone stress and may suppress interfragmentary movement to an inadequate range for optimal indirect bone healing. The elastic oscillation of the plate leads to asymmetrical interfragmentary motion, which occurs predominantly at the far cortex side. In an analysis of 32 patients with diaphyseal and distal tibial fracture treated with LCP in bridging configuration and MIPO technique, Hasenboehler et al. The stiffness of a fixation construct is the principal determinant of fracture site motion and primarily affects the mechanism and progression by which a fracture heals. On the basis of theoretical and clinically emerging concerns, several strategies to decrease the stiffness of locked plating constructs have been investigated. The stiffness of a locked plate construct can be modified by varying the length of the bridged part of the plate, the number and position of the screws and the plate–bone distance. In this manner, a reduction in stiffness involves primarily a reduction in the bending stiffness, and this causes a greater bending of the plate. A selective decrease of axial stiffness is not provided. The unequal distribution of micromovement at the fracture site therefore persists, primarily at the expense of the near cortex. Horn et al. Some authors have tried to reduce the stiffness of locked plate constructs by modifying the screw design while trying to preserve construct strength. Bottlang et al. Doornink et al. Döbele et al. The DLS may enable expansion of the indications for bridging plate technique to both periarticular and more simple fracture patterns, which were limited until now to treatment with intramedullary nailing or compression plate technique. The DLS merges the advantages of a nail osteosynthesis with the advantages of a plate osteosynthesis. The aim of the current study was to transfer the theoretical data of the previous papers into clinical practice. The results of this study show that the combined use of DLS with locking plates in MIPO technique and bridging configuration leads to significantly earlier bone healing and ability for full weight-bearing compared with LS in patients with metadiaphyseal tibial fractures (13.5 The current study also compared healing time of simple fracture patterns (42-A, 43-A) in the two groups: healing time in the DLS group was significantly less than in the LS group. This result concurs with data from other studies and confirms the need to modulate construct stiffness to provide indirect modulation of interfragmentary movement, particularly when comminution is not the main character of the lesion. Simple fracture patterns appear to require a precise and not yet well defined amount of interfragmentary movement. In the current study, DLS was applied only at the diaphyseal side of the fracture and not at the metaphyseal side. A parallel configuration of the screws is required for fracture healing with this implant procedure and this is possible only at the diaphyseal side. Positioning DLS at the metaphyseal side could be associated with articular impingement at the syndesmosis and with excessive micromovement that would not be tolerable for the periarticular fracture healing process. Previous biomechanical studies on FCL showed little difference in stiffness reduction for periarticular fractures when a hybrid construct (FCL screws for diaphyseal fixation and conventional LS for metaphyseal fixation) was applied instead of an LCP construct with FCL on both sides In the current study, triplanar symmetrical distribution of bone callus could be observed on the control CT scan at weight-bearing in the DLS group; this could be explained by an earlier callus remodelling process with functional properties similar to physiological bone tissue biomechanics. Although a medical device safety alert was released recently about evidence of breakage at the bottom of the pin of the DLS, there was no such complication during removal of two implants in the current study. The breakages are recognised during planned implant removal of the whole construct after successful healing. The difficulties of removing LCP with standard LS have been reported, and different technical tricks to avoid screw breakage have been described The findings in this small prospective study cannot necessarily be generalised: interindividual differences in fracture healing and weight load have a stronger effect on the results than in large collectives. Furthermore, the amount of callus was not quantified through a callus index, and callus pattern was observed only empirically on CT scan and X-ray. The study also did not investigate the effects when DLS was positioned distally to the fracture side. DLS with MIPO bridging technique enables This study compared the time until clinical and radiological healing of periarticular fractures of the distal tibia when treated with LCP with or without combination of DLS. In this study, the use of DLS on the proximal fracture site reduced the time of bony consolidation and promoted an earlier and triplanar bone callus with a homogenous pattern that could represent a faster remodelling of the fracture site. This is particularly interesting for simple fracture patterns that until now were associated with a delay in the healing process when fixed with LCP construct. The study was limited by the small patient numbers. Large, prospective, long-term clinical trials are required to confirm the findings. Authors certify that they have no affiliations with, or involvement in, any organisation or entity with any financial interest or non-financial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript. No funding source was involved.