A redox copolymer, a macroporous poly(S/DVB) resin bearing N,N-dichlorosulfonamide groups, was used to remove residual sulfides from aqueous solutions by its oxidation to non-toxic products. The resin contains 8.2 meq active chlorine/g and shows strong oxidizing properties. It was employed in static and flow processes for treatment of sulfide solutions containing 32, 100 or 320 mgS2−/dm3. The effects of various parameters on the reaction course have been studied (molar ratio of the reagents, alkalinity of the reaction media, flow rate in column processes). The data showed that the reactive copolymer easily oxidizes sulfides––it was possible to reduce the concentration below 10 μgS2−/dm3. During oxidation processes the formation of two end products was confirmed––these were sulfates (in majority) and sulfur which causes the turbidity of the effluents. The reaction conditions to eliminate sulfur formation were sought. To utilize the polymer-bonded active chlorine with good efficiency, it was necessary to maintain a suitable level of alkalinity of the influx. The exhausted copolymer contained unsubstituted sulfonamide groups. It could be regenerated with a slightly acidified sodium chlorate(I) and reused for further processes.Hydrogen sulfide––extremely poisonous and one of the most dangerous substances––occurs widely throughout nature and industry, mostly as an objectionable impurity. Hydrogen sulfide is frequently found dissolved in underground, rarely in surface waters. Surface waters may become contaminated with H Hydrogen sulfide is one of the most troublesome compounds to be dealt with in a potable water supply. It is difficult to produce a high-quality potable water if S The main method used for removal of S The chemistry of oxidation and removal of hydrogen sulfide from solutions is a complex process. The oxidation proceeds to form either sulfate, elemental sulfur, or both. There are two important reactions between chlorine and hydrogen sulfide Most of the traditional oxidation techniques, which are performed by low-molecular-weight reagents, do not achieve the removal of undesirable contaminants from solutions to levels regarded as safe for disposal. In order to attain a full effect, it is necessary to add an excess of these agents whereby the treated solutions may become harmful again. In the present study––concerning in particular the treatment of dilute sulfide solutions––macromolecular, water-insoluble oxidizing reagent are employed: A reaction similar to The DCSR was prepared by the method previously described Sodium sulfide Na (a) Solutions used in experiments carried out in static regime were 0.001 M Na (b) Solutions used in experiments carried out in dynamic regime were: 0.003125 M Na It is well known that sodium sulfide containing solutions are unstable. Owing to hydrolysis, they lose gradually H The sulfide ion concentration was determined by (a) a colorimetric method (Spekol 1200, Analytik Jena, 660 nm) using 4-amino- The sulfur and nitrogen contents in the resin were determined by elemental analysis (CHNS-1110, CEInstruments). The active chlorine content in the resin was determined by the iodometric method. In all studies carried out in static conditions, a measured amount of the resin (0.25 or 0.5 g) placed in a iodine flask was shaken on a mechanical shaker with a known volume of sulfide solution at room temperature. The reagents––active chlorine in resin and sulfide ions in solution––were used in different molar ratios. Excess of sulfides or excess of active chlorine relative to the stoichiometry of In the experiments carried out in the dynamic regime, a sample of DCRS (30.0 g in dry state, ∼50 cm In order to estimate the maximum sulfide oxidizing capacity, a 0.25 g sample of DCSR was treated with 50 cm In the case of the sample containing sodium sulfide alone, it could be clearly observed that the sulfide ion oxidation is accompanied by a strong acidification of the reaction medium (pH of the starting solution was 12.35 whereas after 4 h it dropped to 2.83). The course of this reaction (dashed line in In the next step of the batch mode experiments, a reverse molar ratio of the reagents was taken. In this procedure, a 0.50 g sample of DCSR was contacted with 25 cm It was found that the most alkaline sulfide solution (1 M NaOH) contains the highest amounts of the unreacted sulfide ions, whereas the post-reaction resin contains the lowest amounts of active chlorine. This result is consistent with those in previous contributions. Earlier experiments concerning the stability of DCSR in aqueous media showed its highest stability in neutral and acidic media, whereas in alkaline media, the resin gradually loses its activity by dechlorination In order to confirm this assumption, the further step of the experiments was conducted using much smaller amount of sulfides relative to the active chlorine. In this series, a 0.25 g sample of DCSR was shaken with 100 cm The results of sulfide ion oxidation in a column system are shown in The sulfide breakthrough started after elution with about 9.0 dm DCSR during the sulfide solution treatment undergoes dechlorination, in which the sulfonamide groups are formed. When the column process was finished, the spent resin was washed with distilled water, removed from the column, shaken some hours in a iodine flask with 50 cm To investigate the effect of the influx alkalinity on the course of the oxidation processes, another series of experiments using alkaline sulfide solutions was performed. The influx contained as much Na The last column experiment consisted in passing through the DCSR bed a solution containing the same amount of Na (1) The experiments carried out in the batch regime showed that DCSR oxidizes sulfide and effectively removes it from dilute aqueous solutions. The type of the reaction products depends on the reagent ratio. When a 100% excess of sulfides relative to the stoichiometry of (2) In experiments carried out in the flow system, it is possible to obtain effluents free of sulfide (<10 μg (3) In the column processes, in spite of a very high concentration of active chlorine in the resin bed, the presence of variable amounts of two end products (sulfate and sulfur) was observed. The effect of the influx alkalinity on the ratio of the end products was investigated. If treated alone, nearly 85% of the sulfide in solution was oxidized to sulfate and the rest only to sulfur (present in the effluent and in the resin). When a sulfide solution with a added NaOH, (no more than 75–90% of the amount of required for neutralization of acidic products of reaction (3)), the results were much better. The effluents contained no more than 1.0 mg (4) The reactive copolymer during the sulfide solution treatment undergoes dechlorination and the sulfonamide groups are formed. It can be regenerated and reused in the next processes. The Polish Committee for Scientific Researches, grant KBN no. 3 T09B 006 19, financed the research project.