The fatigue life for T and cruciform welded joints containing different extents of lack of root penetration was calculated for different combinations of geometrical parameters, including thicknesses up to 45 mm, by integration of the Paris law and use of stress intensity factor solutions calculated previously. The effect of attachment and main plate thickness, weld leg length and initial lack of penetration size on fatigue life was studied. For T welded joints, the effect of different support span has also been investigated. The results are reported as fatigue life curves for both types of joints. All the curves show higher fatigue life for T joints than for cruciform joints. These curves were then compared with the S–N curves for failure from either weld toe position or on the weld throat, proposed by Eurocode 3. The maximum tolerable sizes for lack of penetration at which weld toe failures would still rule are reported for each case. Results of experimental tests are in good agreement with the predictions.Traditionally, the fatigue design of welded joints for structural applications has used the For critical structural applications, such as offshore structures or nuclear power plant where safety is paramount, additional information may be obtained from fracture mechanics approaches to supplement traditional methods to predict the fatigue life of the components or to assess the influence of initial imperfections. The fatigue life, In this paper, predicted fatigue lives for cruciform and T welded joints with different geometrical parameters have been investigated. These parameters include the attachment and main plate thickness ( The Paris law equation is widely used for the study of crack propagation in welded joints. The general form of the equation is as follows: For welded joints in steel, the constants The general form of the stress intensity factor equation for welded joints can be written as By inserting The general form of the correction factor Normalising Rearranging and integrating The fatigue lives of the cruciform and T joints were calculated numerically by It should be noted that for the purpose of calculating stress intensity factors, values of For the cruciform and T welded joints there is always competition for fatigue crack initiation from the stress concentration points at the weld toe and the weld root sites. In some cases, fatigue cracks can propagate from both locations simultaneously. The preferred site for fatigue crack initiation depends on the loading conditions and geometrical factors. In this study, different combinations of geometrical parameters were considered, so the preferred site for fatigue crack initiation may change. Moreover, for T welded joints, variation of support span size can affect the fatigue crack initiation sites, with cracking possible from the weld toes on both the main plate and the attachment plate. For the main plate cases, in order to bound likely behaviours, bending stresses at the weld toe position were calculated assuming both simply supported and fixed end conditions. To predict these sites, the mean It has been shown that for nearly all types of welded joints the Partial penetration cruciform or T welded joints where weld toe or base plate cracking is predicted are represented in Eurocode 3 as class 71 type of joints For the case of the main plate weld toe, the bending stress range at the weld toe position has to be derived from the plate stress range The bending moment at the weld toe for these cases is given by the following: For the simply supported case, the value of Taking into account the boundary condition and using the standard theory of bending for the fixed end condition, Then, the bending stress at the weld toe, The In order to consider the effect of this bending stress range on the prediction of fatigue crack growth from the weld toe on the main plate using the class 71, the Partial penetration cruciform and T welded joints with the weld throat as the potential site for cracking are considered in EC3 as class 36 The coefficient of one half in The applied stress range on the attachment plate can be written as Dividing From The results of calculations for limiting mean Manual metal and submerged arc welding processes, were tested under tension only fatigue loading. The geometries of the fatigue specimens were within the range of those analysed as shown in Fatigue life calculations were carried out for cruciform and T welded joints and for all the combinations of geometrical cases in this study listed in  The results from The details of the results obtained from the experimental tests are listed in For practical purposes it may sometimes be considered preferable to interpret the results in terms of predicted fatigue lives against the normal input data used by a designer involving the weld size and plate thickness. This has been done in Fatigue life calculations for cruciform and T welded joints with different combinations of geometrical parameters, with thicknesses up to 45 mm, have been carried out by integration of the Paris law, using results for stress intensity factors obtained in a previous study. The comparative study for both types of joint shows that cruciform welded joints always have lower fatigue life than T welded joints for failure on the weld throat. In this study, results have been produced to predict the probability of weld toe or weld throat fatigue crack propagation. Diagrams were constructed by using the Eurocode 3 mean