Selective extraction of Ni(II) from base metals is a critical step in the direct nickel synergistic extraction process. Significant synergistic effect and preferential extraction of Ni(II) over Co(II) were observed by using the synergistic extractant containing dinonylnaphthalene sulfonic acid (HDNNS) and 2-ethylhexyl 4-pyridinecarboxylate ester (ligand L) in Escaid 110. The selectivity sequence followed the order: Ni(II) > Co(II) > Al(III) > Mg(II) > Fe(III). In order to elucidate the separation difference between Ni(II) and Co(II) which had similar chemical properties, statistical thermodynamics analysis and relativistic density functional theory (DFT) calculations were applied to provide the selective mechanism from both macroscopic and microscopic perspectives. The synergistic extraction diagrams showed that the optimum molar ratio of HDNNS and the ligand L was at 1:2 for Ni(II) and Co(II) extraction, and statistical thermodynamics analysis indicated that the overall extraction process was endothermic. According to DFT calculation results, the optimized geometries of the Ni(II) and Co(II) complexes were in accordance with the crystallographical data. The thermodynamical examination for the Ni and Co extraction was further conducted using a thermodynamical cycle. The difference in the change of Gibbs free energies for the formation of the Ni(II) complex was more negative than that of the Co(II) complex, which was in agreement with the experimental data. It could be concluded that the synergistic extractant had a higher affinity for Ni(II) than Co(II), which might account for the preferential extraction of Ni(II) over Co(II). The results established a computational model capable of predicting the selectivity order of metal ions, which would provide new insights into the separation mechanism of Ni(II) and Co(II) with synergistic extractants.As energy demand continues to grow, nickel and cobalt are amongst the most important non-ferrous metals. The separation of Ni(II) and Co(II) has aroused commonly concern since Ni(II) and Co(II) showed close chemical properties, such as similar oxidation state, ionic radii, and coordination numbers. The extraction and the separation of Ni(II) and Co(II) have been extensively studied using diverse extractants and some industrial processes have been in operation. The general route was to selectively extract Co(II) against Ni(II) by organophosphorus extractants. In recent years, lateritic nickel ores with low grade represent an alternative source because the traditional sulfide ores are fast exhausted. However, specific selective extractant for Ni(II) from laterite leachates remained scarce so that the separation and the concentration of Ni(II) and Co(II) present technical challenges. In the industrial practice of hydrometallurgical treatment, synergistic solvent extraction (SSX) was favored for the recovery of nickel from laterite leachates. Cheng et al. have systematically reviewed the synergistic systems for direct and selective extraction of Ni(II) from acidic polymetallic media [ Some authors have tried to elucidate the synergistic mechanism for Ni(II)/Co(II) separation with the extractants containing aryl sulfonates and pyridine-based ligands [ Theoretically, the equilibrium constant is related to the free energy difference between the reactants and the products of the reaction, ∆G In this work, a comprehensive study of the separation behavior and mechanism for Ni(II) and Co(II) with synergistic extractant containing HDNNS and the ligand L was presented. The pH isotherm of Ni(II) and Co(II) against impurity metal cations was obtained, and the extraction behaviors of Ni(II) and Co(II) under different extractant concentrations and temperature were compared. Along with experimental studies, the effects were also being put forward for the understanding of the structure, bonding and thermodynamics of Ni(II) and Co(II) with the synergistic extractants using quantum chemical calculations. The correlation between microscopic properties and the extractability of Ni(II) and Co(II) with the synergistic extractant was discussed after validating the reproducibility of the experimental selectivity for Ni(II)/Co(II) ions. This study may provide some useful information for understanding the complexation and separation mechanism of Ni(II) and Co(II) with the synergistic extractants, which helps us to promote the design and modification of novel synergistic extraction system with high selectivity based on related ligands. HDNNS, which was supplied by Shanghai JiaChen Chemical Co., Ltd., was further purified according to our previous study. NiSO The initial aqueous phases containing 0.02 mol·L The extraction efficiency, E, was defined as, The distribution coefficient of Ni(II) or Co(II), While [ All the calculations were performed by using unrestricted density functional theory (DFT) method with the hybrid functional B3LYP [ The solvation energy is considered as the change in Gibbs free energy when an ion or molecule is transferred from the gas phase into a solution [ The pH isotherms for the extraction of Ni(II), Co(II) and some relevant base metal cations (0.02 mol·L Then, The stoichiometry of the Ni(II) and Co(II) extraction was conducted by the synergistic extraction diagrams under requisite molar fraction of the ligand L (X The extraction behaviors of Ni(II) and Co(II) were carried out at the temperature ranged from 298 K to 318 K, respectively. Generally, the extraction efficiencies of Ni(II) and Co(II) increase with the rise of temperature, indicating that increasing temperature is beneficial for the extraction of Ni(II) and Co(II) from aqueous solutions with the synergistic extractant containing HDNNS and the ligand L. In order to calculate the extraction thermodynamics parameters, the fitting straight lines were also presented in The enthalpy change values for the Ni(II) and Co(II) extraction reactions (correspondingly abbreviated as ΔH The calculated difference in Gibbs free energy changes between the Ni(II) and Co(II) extraction reactions (−14.78 kJ·mol In our previous work, by single crystal structure studies of model complexes, the coordination chemistry of Ni(II) and Co(II) extraction has been illustrated and found that metal complexes with similar coordination configuration could be formed for both Ni(II) and Co(II) in the organic phase [ The structures of Ni(II) and Co(II) cations in aqueous solutions have been studied by experimental and theoretical methods [ The aqueous-phase change in Gibbs free energy for the hydration of M Then, the differences in the aqueous-phase changes of Gibbs free energies for the hydration of Ni(II) and Co(II), ΔΔG The obtained thermodynamical parameters for the hydration reactions of Ni(II) and Co(II) were shown in Statistical solvation thermodynamics for ions has been discussed in the studies of Ben-Naim [ The geometry configurations of all the related species were firstly optimized, and the corresponding energy parameters were listed in Table S6. Accordingly, the gas-phase changes in enthalpy (ΔH In the thermodynamical cycle shown in ΔG To further examined to assess the selectivity towards Ni(II) over Co(II) with the synergistic extractant, the difference in the aqueous-phase changes of Gibbs free energies for the synergistic extractions of Ni(II) and Co(II), ΔΔG The obtained thermodynamical parameters for the extraction reactions of Ni(II) and Co(II) were shown in As listed in This study explored the extractability of Ni(II) and Co(II) with synergistic extractant containing aryl sulfonates and monodentate aromatic nitrogen donor ligand via experimental measurements as well as theoretical calculations. It has demonstrated that both of Ni(II) and Co(II) had affinities with the synergistic extractant and the possibilities to be extracted directly and simultaneously from highly acidic sulfate solution. However, Ni(II) extraction appeared distinctly preferential extractability compared that of Co(II) in the whole experimental range. DFT calculations further revealed the intrinsic relation between microstructure and energy contributions for understanding the extraction difference. According to the optimized geometry configuration, similar coordination chemistry between Ni(II) and Co(II) complexes was found but the shorter Ni This work was supported by the