Background
                  The treatment of unstable displaced proximal humeral fractures remains challenging and controversial. Reports about the application of a mini–external fixator in the treatment of proximal humeral fractures are rare. The objective of this retrospective study was to evaluate the efficacy and complications of surgical treatment of proximal humeral fractures by closed reduction and external fixation with application of a mini–external fixator.
               
                  Methods
                  Thirty-two patients with displaced proximal humeral fractures were surgically treated by closed reduction and external fixation with mini–external fixators at our institute between March 2007 and June 2009. There were 22 men and 10 women who had a mean age of 56 years (range, 23-81 years). The Neer scoring system related to pain, function, and range of motion was used to assess the outcome.
               
                  Results
                  All the patients were followed up at an mean of 18 months (range, 13-27 months). The duration of surgery was 29 ± 12 minutes. The accumulative fluoroscopy time was 12 ± 3.5 exposures. The mean time of fracture union was 13 ± 3.6 weeks. The mean Neer score was 83.2 ± 12.5 points at final follow-up. The incidence of excellent and good results was 81%. Two patients had loosening of the pins. One patient had a collapsed humeral head. There was no infection and impingement.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The surgical treatment of displaced proximal humeral fractures with a mini–external fixator is characterized by minimal invasion, a shorter duration of surgery, and easy manipulation, making application of the mini–external fixator a good option for some selected patients.Proximal humeral fractures are one of the most common upper extremity fractures. Although the majority of proximal humeral fractures are nondisplaced or minimally displaced, approximately 20% of proximal humeral fractures are displaced and need operative treatment. Various operative techniques have been advocated for displaced proximal humeral fractures, including use of tension band sutures, locking and nonlocking plates, intramedullary nails, and prosthetic replacement. To minimize the intraoperative jeopardy to the blood supply of the humeral head and avoid the complications of open reduction, minimally invasive techniques have been advocated with the objective to preserve vascularity to the articular segment. The objective of this retrospective study was to evaluate the outcome of surgical treatment of proximal humeral fractures by closed reduction and external fixation with use of a mini–external fixator. In this retrospective study, 32 sequential displaced proximal humeral fractures underwent surgical treatment at our institute between March 2007 and June 2009. There were 22 men and 10 women. The mean age of the patients was 56 years (range, 23-81 years). Of the 32 patients, 15 (47%) were aged more than 60 years. The mechanism of injury was a fall in 25 patients and motorcycle accident in 7. All proximal humeral fractures were closed and unilateral. Five patients had diabetes. The proximal humeral fractures were classified according to the Neer system. All operative procedures were performed after a mean duration of 5 days (range, 2-9 days) from injury. After induction of general anesthesia, surgery was performed with the patient in the beach-chair position on a radiolucent table. The C-arm image intensifier (Philips DA, Best, The Netherlands) was used during the entirety of the surgical procedure. The maneuver of initial reduction was performed with the injured shoulder in 40° to 60° of abduction and the elbow in the position of 70° to 90° of flexion. The longitudinal traction was exerted on the arm by holding the flexed elbow. A sterile folded sheet was used to wrap around the injured shoulder to counteract the traction from the arm. With the monitor of the C-arm image intensifier, the gross valgus or varus angulation of the fracture on the anteroposterior view could be corrected by adducting or abducting the shoulder. Subsequently, 4 threaded pins (diameter, 3 mm; Synthes, Solothurn, Switzerland) were inserted percutaneously into the humeral head with the tip of the needle located at 3 mm under the articular surface. The directions of the pins were placed inter crossing and widely spaced in the humeral head to strengthen the stability. Another 3 threaded pins were inserted into the proximal humeral shaft ( The advanced correction of any residual displacement or angulation deformity of the fracture was performed with a repeated maneuver by use of the pins in the humeral head and humeral shaft as a handle for the maneuver. Once functional reduction was confirmed on the C-arm image on both anteroposterior and lateral views, the connecting rods were assembled to the pins with clamps. The minimum requirement for functional reduction in this study included the following: more than 75% of contact surface between the major fragments, residual angulation of less than 20°, and no presence of a defect at the inferomedial corner of the humeral head. All shoulders were immobilized in a sling for 4 weeks postoperatively. Physical therapy and passive range-of-motion exercises were started from the second day after the operation. Controlled active mobilization with abduction and flexion was started 1 to 3 weeks postoperatively, depending on the fracture type, stability of the osteosynthesis, and bone quality. Most of the 4-part fractures were delayed in their mobilization. Patients were followed up clinically and radiographically at 4 weeks and 8 weeks postoperatively and at 3-month intervals thereafter. The pins of the mini–external fixators (Synthes) were cleaned 3 times a day with alcohol and removed at 6 or 8 weeks postoperatively when signs of fracture union could be seen on the radiographs. The pin removal was performed in an outpatient setting. The outcomes were assessed according to the Neer scoring system: the maximum score is 100 points, comprising 35 points for pain, 30 points for function, 25 points for range of motion, and 10 points for anatomy. The result was subdivided into 4 groups according to the Neer score: excellent (>90 points), good (80-89 points), fair (70-79 points), and poor (<70 points). SAS for Windows, version 6.12 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA), was used for statistical evaluation of the results. The paired All patients achieved a functional reduction of the fracture: more than 75% of contact surface between the major fragments, residual angulation of less than 20°, and no presence of a defect at the inferomedial corner of the humeral head. The patients were followed up at a mean of 18 months (range, 13-27 months). The duration of surgery was 29 ± 12 minutes. The frequency of exposure to radiography was 12 ± 3.5 times. The mean time of fracture union was 13 ± 3.6 weeks ( There were a few complications: 3 (9.4%) of the 32 patients had an unplanned second operation within 12 months after the initial operation. Two patients had loosening of the pins. One patient had a collapsed humeral head. One patient was in the 3-part fracture group, and two were in the 4-part fracture group. All 3 patients underwent hemiarthroplasty eventually. There was no infection and impingement. Proximal humeral fractures are more common in elderly patients than in younger patients. The majority of patients with proximal humeral fractures are aged more than 60 years, in whom the fractures are related to osteoporosis. In our study, 15 of 32 patients (47%) were aged more than 60 years, comparable to the incidence reported in the literature. The aim of treatment is to obtain a stable reduction for healing of the fracture and for achieving early functional recovery of the shoulder. Although most of the proximal humeral fractures are either nondisplaced or minimally displaced and can be treated nonoperatively, approximately 20% of all proximal humeral fractures are displaced and require operative treatment. Many surgical techniques have been described to stabilize proximal humeral fractures, including intramedullary nails, plate-and-screw osteosynthesis, tension band wiring, percutaneous pin fixation, and hemiarthroplasty. With the advocation of minimally invasive surgery to preserve the vascularity to the humeral head, closed reduction and percutaneous fixation have been reported to show good results. In the report of Jaberg et al Besides the quality of fracture reduction, the duration of surgery and blood loss are also very important factors that may influence the outcomes and complications, particularly for older patients or for patients with multiple injuries. Most of the patients with proximal humeral fractures are elderly persons. To decrease the complications of the surgical treatment for proximal humeral fractures, the surgical time and amount of blood loss should also be minimized. In our study, with closed reduction and a percutaneous technique, the duration of the surgical procedure was short (29 ± 12 minutes) compared with 68 minutes or 97 minutes in a report on open reduction–internal fixation. In most cases, the result of humeral head is influenced by the severity of the fracture. The displaced 4-part fractures have a higher probability of necrosis than the 2-part fractures. In our study, there were 12 two-part fractures, 15 three-part fractures, and 5 four-part fractures. For the 4-part fractures fixed with the mini–external fixator, the stability is not as strong as the stability for the 2-part fractures. The incidence of excellent and good results in the subgroups of 2-part, 3-part, and 4-part fractures was 91.7% (11 of 12), 80% (12 of 15), and 60% (3 of 5), respectively ( In this study, the threaded pins were inserted percutaneously, which prevented the occurrence of impingement of the acromion. As for the 3 patients with complications, there were 2 patients who had recurrent displacement of the fracture because of the poor bone quality. There was 1 patient who had recurrent displacement because of malpositioning of the pins. However, there was no infection. There are some limitations in our study. First, this study was retrospective without a control group. The number of patients involved in the study was not large, and the follow-up was not very long. A study with more patients involved, with a control group, and with longer-term follow-up is needed to confirm the eventual outcome of this technique. The advantages of closed reduction and fixation with a mini–external fixator include short duration of surgery, minimal blood loss, and few complications. This kind of technique could be a good option for some selected patients. In polytrauma cases and patients whose condition is weak and thus cannot undergo lengthy surgery, this technique may be especially useful for the fixation of the fractures. However, we do not recommend this kind of external fixation in patients with severely osteoporotic bone because of poor pin stability or for those with fracture-dislocations with a reversed humeral head because of difficult reduction. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.