Wear by slurry abrasion occurs in extruders, slurry pumps, and pipes carrying slurry of minerals and ores in mineral processing industries. The wear life of components used under slurry abrasion conditions is governed by the process parameters, properties of abrasive particles in slurry and material properties. In the present work slurry abrasion response of heat treated En-31 steel was studied. The quenched and tempered specimens of En-31 steel, tempered at different temperatures, were used in the present investigation. The slurry abrasion tests were performed using slurry abrasion test apparatus with silica sand as the abrasive medium. The effect of sliding distance, normal load and slurry concentration on volume loss was evaluated. The experiments were also carried with simultaneous variation of normal load and sliding distance. The results of the present work were explained by a model, V
                     =(K
                     ×
                     S
                     ×
                     L)/(H)2/3, where V is the volume loss in slurry abrasion, S is the sliding distance, L is the normal load, H is the bulk hardness of the surface and K is wear coefficient. The morphology of the worn surfaces after slurry abrasion was studied under scanning electron microscope. The morphological studies of the worn surfaces revealed characteristic differences in the wear pattern under different test conditions. The operating mechanisms of material removal involved ploughing and cutting.The primary modes of wear responsible for degradation of the engineering components in industries are sliding wear, abrasive, erosive wear and chemically assisted wear Although one or more strategies can be used to enhance wear performance of engineering components, the cost involved in surface modification/alteration in surface properties is the key factor. Wear by slurry abrasion potentially occurs in slurry pumps, pipes carrying mineral and ore slurries in mineral processing industries. The evaluation of slurry abrasion under actual service conditions is often a difficult task, due to interactive effects of different parameters such as slurry concentration, velocity and properties of abrasive medium on wear rate. Accelerated wear testing of materials can be performed by increasing load, velocity and other operational parameters in a laboratory test where real contact conditions can be simulated. Akira et al. The wear performance of ceramic coatings was evaluated by many researchers. Sari and Yilmaz Thus it can be concluded that abrasion resistance does not show consistent co-relation with hardness of the surface and the inconsistency in prediction may be attributed to data generated under limited set of experimental conditions. Most of the earlier investigations on abrasion of steels were carried out using dry sand rubber wheel abrasion tester. The slurry abrasion data on steels is limited and earlier investigations were carried out under narrow range of experimental conditions. None of the previous studies indicate interactive effects of material and operational parameters on wear rate under slurry abrasion conditions. The objective of the present work was to study slurry abrasion response of En-31 steel under a wide range of slurry abrasion conditions using slurry abrasion tester. SEM studies were carried out on worn surfaces to gain an insight into the mechanism of material removal under different experimental conditions. In the present investigation En-31 steel in the as rolled and annealed form was used to study the slurry abrasion behavior. The chemical composition of as received En-31 steel plate was determined by wet chemical analysis method. The chemical composition is given in The heat treatment was carried out on En-31 Steel specimens prepared for slurry abrasive wear testing. The specimens were rectangular blocks measuring 57.2 The specimens for metallography were 20 The microstructures of heat treated specimens of En-31 steels are shown in The bulk hardness of as received and heat treated specimens was measured using Rockwell hardness tester at a load of 150 The slurry abrasion wear tests were performed using slurry abrasion test apparatus (Ducom make, India). The apparatus consisted of a slurry abrasive chamber enclosing the rubber lined steel wheel, test specimen and slurry. The wheel is made of steel disc with an outer layer of neoprene rubber (durometer hardness of 60 The specimens for slurry abrasion testing were rectangular blocks measuring 57.2 The slurry abrasion tests of various specimens AR, A, B, C and D were performed according to the test conditions mentioned in To assess the effect of operating parameters on wear scar pattern, the length of the wear scar was also measured when the load and revolutions were changed. From this, total distance slid by the specimen under particular set of test conditions was calculated. The sliding distance values were used in characterizing wear behaviour of different specimens. The morphology of the abraded surfaces was studied by scanning electron microscope. The effect of sliding distance, normal load and slurry concentration on slurry abrasion volume loss of AR specimen of En-31 steel is shown in      In the present investigation slurry abrasion response of heat treated En-31 steel was evaluated using slurry abrasion test apparatus. Two different approaches were explored to assess slurry abrasion response of En-31 steel. The first approach was based on mass and volume loss measurements in slurry abrasion test and the second approach which, was qualitative in nature, based on morphological studies of worn out surfaces. The volume wear loss of as received specimens of En-31 steel exhibited linear relationship with operating parameters, i.e. sliding distance, normal load and slurry concentration as shown in The volume wear loss in a abrasion test can be represented by Archard’s equation To rationalize the effect of other operational parameters, the volume wear loss data obtained in the present work was plotted vs. a parameter ( The detailed morphology of the worn surface of specimen D (centre portion) under severe slurry abrasion conditions ( 95  The morphology of worn out surfaces did not indicate susceptibility of martensitic microstructure to either crack or fracture under given slurry abrasion conditions. The volume wear loss data indicate that finer morphology of the martensite and carbides resulted in relatively greater abrasion resistance as compared to that of coarser martensite and carbides. These observations are in contrast to the observation of Badisch and Mitterer Although ceramic materials are known to exhibit excellent abrasion resistance, their use is restricted to high technology fields and most of manufacturers and designers prefer to use metallic materials with superior properties or materials with surface coatings to enhance wear life of industrial components  The slurry abrasion volume loss of En-31 steel exhibited linear relationship with operating parameters, sliding distance, normal load and slurry concentration. However, the magnitude of volume loss was a function of the operating parameters. The effect of normal load on slurry abrasion volume loss was more pronounced as compared to that of slurry concentration. The increased hardness of En-31 steel by heat treatment resulted in two fold increase in slurry abrasion resistance. The volume wear rate parameter increased with severity of slurry abrasion test conditions. The volume wear rate parameter increased more than two times when slurry abrasion conditions were changed from very mild to very severe. The finer morphology of the martensite and carbides proved beneficial to wear resistance under given slurry abrasion conditions. The results of the present investigation were explained by a simple model, The characteristic differences were observed in the morphology of the worn out surfaces under different slurry abrasion test conditions. The important mechanisms of material removal during slurry abrasion of heat treated En-31 steel were observed to be ploughing and cutting. Further refinement in the experimental plan with systematic variation of individual variables with quantification of microstructure on wear rate under different test conditions will be useful in providing more comprehensive understanding of the phenomenon. The authors are grateful to Director, VNIT for providing necessary facilities in carrying out this investigation. The authors are grateful to Dr. Ramanna Rao, JNARDDC Nagpur for his help during SEM work.