As the number of total knee arthroplasty procedures performed worldwide continues to increase, so is there an associated increase in the requirement for revision surgery. Revision total knee arthroplasty is a major and complex undertaking, requiring first a full understanding and appreciation of the exact underlying causes for the failure of the primary procedure. Revision arthroplasty is fraught with potential technical pitfalls, with the risk of intra-operative difficulties and challenges plus the significant potential for post-operative complications. This articles aims to detail the potential complications that can be associated with revision knee arthroplasty surgery, with the emphasis that if the surgeon is fully aware of and looks out for such potential eventualities then appropriate preparation should aid in both their avoidance and their appropriate management.Complications are inevitable in a revision knee surgeon's practice. The best defence against these complications is avoidance, and this is only attained through knowledge, planning and experience. In his seminal work ‘The Art of War’ (722–481 BC), the Chinese general Sun Tzu quotes “In the practical art of war, the best thing of all is to take the enemy's country whole and intact; to shatter and destroy it is not so good.” Taking the failing knee replacement as the enemy, and the revision as the battle Sun Tzu advises: “If ignorant both of your enemy and yourself, you are certain to be in peril but if you know your enemy and know yourself you can fight a hundred battles without disaster.” “Predicting success is all about understanding failure” (Jones 2009) holds true for revision knee arthroplasty. Understanding failure mechanisms allows the surgeon to avoid the pitfalls and achieve a successful revision without complications or early failure. There is considerable overlap between complications and modes of failure in revision arthroplasty. This review will focus on the complications of revision arthroplasty and how to avoid them. A detailed discussion into the modes of failure is beyond the scope of this article. A complication can be defined as ‘an unwanted event or condition that occurs as a consequence of another procedure’, in this case revision knee arthroplasty. A mode of failure is ‘the mechanism of functional failure of an arthroplasty at a component level’. There are eight modes of failure described; infection, extensor mechanism failure, stiffness, tibio-femoral instability, patella mal-tracking, loosening, peri-prosthetic fracture, and component breakage. Complications of revision can be divided up into local and systemic ( Clinical failure is described as pain and dysfunction following arthroplasty. An arthroplasty can fail due to number of different factors, all of which need to be considered alongside modes of failure when planning a revision operation. These factors can be divided into:- (i) patient factors, e.g. obesity, diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis, (ii) surgeon factors e.g. component mal-alignment/mal-positioning, learning curve, (iii) soft tissue factors e.g. multiple re-revisions, (iv) component design factors and (v) component orientation. The primary outcome of any revision knee surgery is to provide the patient with a joint that is pain free, has a healed soft tissue envelope, is aseptic, is functioning, is stable and has a physiologic range of motion. The volume of revisions carried out by a centre is reported to have an impact on the incidence of complications and patient morbidity. Specialized hospitals also have a lower incidence of complications. A majority of the published data arises from North America. The odds ratios for adverse outcome for arthroplasty performed in speciality hospitals compared to a general hospital have been shown to be 0.64 [CI Exposure is the critical step in revision arthroplasty. Exposure is often difficult due to fibrosis and reduced soft tissue envelope elasticity. The quadriceps tendon is often thickened and the patella tendon short. There are three main aspects of exposure that need to be considered in the planning stage of the operation ( Adequate exposure is required to avoid complications associated with:- difficult explantation and cement removal, the assessment, bypass and reconstruction of bone defects and maintenance of bone stock, the excision of posterior scar tissue with care of the vascular structures, re-implantation and reconstruction of the joint line, ligament tension and balance, and preservation of the extensor mechanism. “A revision operation is an exercise in soft tissue handling, with an arthroplasty at the centre” (Morgan-Jones 2011). The careful handling of the soft tissue envelope is crucial to minimize wound healing problems, wound breakdown and subsequent infection. Adequately sized skin incisions to prevent excess tension on the soft tissues are preferred. The correct choice of incision in the multiply re-revised patient is vital, and the excision of previous scar tissue are required for a successful outcome. The midline incision is usually well tolerated, provided full thickness fascio-cutaneous flaps are raised, with no undermining of the skin edges. Full-thickness flaps maintain the vascular integrity of the plexus that lies superficial to the deep fascia. Lateral flaps should be avoided as the primary vascular supply to the dermis arises from the medial side. Anticipation of inadequacy of soft tissue closure, especially in the presence of infection, should prompt the surgeon to think about the soft tissue reconstructive ladder and involve the plastic surgeons if required. Adequate exposure avoids unnecessary traction on wound edges and minimizes soft tissue ischaemic time. The extensor mechanism is part of the soft tissue envelope. Failure of the extensor mechanism can occur intra-operatively or as a late complication of revision. Complications can be avoided with meticulous attention paid to exposure technique. Inadequate exposure increases the risk of intra-operative extensor mechanism failure. Excess tension transferred to the patellar tendon risks avulsion at its insertion. This can be particularly problematic in the stiff knee, where limited range of movement and scarring causes high tension on the patellar tendon during subluxation or eversion when flexing the knee. Techniques for improving exposure can be divided into either proximal or distal procedures ( Proximal procedures are soft tissue procedures that involve division or partial division of the quadriceps tendon. Studies have shown no increase in morbidity in patients treated with a rectus snip. Distal procedures such as the patella tendon peel, where the patella tendon is reflected from the tibial tubercle but left intact laterally and distally, and the patella inversion technique Tibial crest osteotomy (TCO) was first described by Dolin in 1983 and popularized by Whiteside and Ohl. Multiple techniques have been described for fixation of the TCO, including screws, Forty-one primary revisions and 39 multiple re-revisions were studied. We experienced no major complications of extensor mechanism failure, non-union, avascular necrosis, anterior knee pain or proximal migration. Two patients were noted to have an extensor lag of greater than 5 degrees, but this had been present pre-operatively. The TCO has been shown to be strong enough to cope with routine rehabilitation of the knee following arthroplasty. The incidence of late extensor mechanism failure in primary knee arthroplasty is reported to be 0.1% for quadriceps rupture and 0.22% for patellar tendon rupture. Quadriceps tendon failure is less common than patellar tendon failure and is associated with systemic disease. Surgical factors thought to be associated are lateral retinacular release, multiple previous operations and rectus snip. Patellar tendon rupture is more common after primary arthroplasty (0.22%), and is associated with knee stiffness, extensive lateral release, post-surgical manipulation under anaesthesia, and revision knee surgery. The senior author prefers to use allograft Achilles tendon with calcaneal bone block for extensor mechanism reconstruction. In cases of multiple re-revisions, a posteriorly placed hinge prosthesis improves the extensor moment lever arm and is therefore preferred (   Fixation Cemented stems – Endolink, Biomet RHK Cement & stems – Zimmer RHK, Braun Sleeves & stem – Noiles Hinge position Posterior – Noiles, Biomet RHK Central – Zimmer RHK, Endolink, Braun Bearings The commonest nerve to be injured during revision arthroplasty is the common peroneal nerve, with an incidence of 0.58–1.8% in primary arthroplasty. The risk factors for peroneal nerve injury are similar to those for primary arthroplasty. Increased incidence has been seen with pre-operative fixed valgus and fixed flexion deformity of greater than 20 degrees, either singularly or combined. One series of patients with nerve palsies after primary arthroplasty reported an average varus correction arc of 12 degrees (range 7–20 degrees). Other factors that also play a role in the development of nerve palsies are previous laminectomy and the use of epidural anaesthesia. As with any complication, prevention is better than cure. Identification of a pre-existing nerve palsy and those at risk should occur in the pre-assessment clinic. Care should be directed towards safe patient positioning intra-operatively and during time spent on a recovery trolley with safety bars. Operating time should not be excessive and is reduced with experienced, high volume revision surgeons. Once a post-operative nerve palsy has been identified, initial management should consist of flexion of the knee to 30–40 degrees and release of circumferential dressings. If spontaneous recovery does not occur by 3 months, surgical exploration and decompression should be considered. In a series of 31 unresolved nerve palsies, exploration of the nerve to release perineural fibrous bands constricting the nerve at the level of the fibula head and the proximal origin of the peroneus longus muscle resulted in good motor recovery. Vascular injury in the setting of total knee arthroplasty ranges in incidence from 0.1 to 0.17%. The common belief of posterior movement of the popliteal artery in flexion has been confirmed by previous cadaveric studies. Vascular injuries can be direct or indirect ( Haemorrhagic complications (direct injury) are clinically evident either intra-operatively or in the immediate post-op period. Arterial transections can usually be treated with end-to-end anastomosis or with a PTFE interposition graft. Patients in whom ischaemia is present but no bleeding evident (indirect injury) may have pre-existing arterial disease. Doppler studies of the popliteal artery following TKR do not show a reduction in blood flow or worsening of stenosis. Popliteal pseudoaneurysm should be suspected if severe post-operative lower extremity swelling is present or if there is posterior knee pain. Once confirmed by ultrasonography, percutaneous stenting techniques can be used effectively. If pulses are not palpable before joint replacement, ABPI studies should be performed. If a value less than 0.5 is seen, non-invasive vascular studies should be arranged and a vascular opinion sought. Avoidance is better than cure. Careful dissection of the posterior femoral notch and care with PCL excision is mandatory. For procedures where a large box cut or a distal femoral excision is required i.e. for semi-constrained/fully constrained or distal femoral replacement, careful dissection of the posterior capsule using osteotomes to sub-periosteally strip the capsule is recommended. For distal femoral replacement, the senior author prefers to strip the periosteum in a medio-lateral fashion using Trethowans retractors in order to lift the soft tissue from the bone in one flap, therefore minimizing risk to vascular structures. Posterior dissection of the femoral condyle by removing both heads of gastrocnemius is then performed, with protection of the posterior soft tissues, before progressing to the distal femoral saw cut. Posterior capsular scar tissue excision utilizes the bone resection to strip the capsule sequentially. The popliteus remains a good indicator for proximity of the posterior vessels. Blunt posterior tibial retractors should be used for sagittal dislocation of the joint, and avoidance of sharper instruments is recommended. Before explantation can begin, adequate exposure is achieved by circumferentially excising fibrous tissue from the tibia in order to visualize the bone-cement and cement–component interfaces. Adequate exposure will also provide AP translation of the tibia relative to the femur, to give clearance for the axial removal of the tibial component. Explantation is a critical phase in the revision operation. Careful explantation can preserve bone stock and avoid intra-operative fracture and damage to collateral ligaments. If the tibial components to be explanted are modular, then the poly insert should be removed first. This is best done with an osteotome. The component–cement interface of the tibia can then be worked loose using a fine osteotome or oscillating saw. Stacked osteotomes beneath the tibial implant can facilitate removal. Separating the component–cement interface over the posterior tibial condyles is a crucial step to preserve posterior bone stock. This separation is only possible by achieving adequate exposure. The use of a TCO aids explantation of stemmed tibial components, as proximal tibial cement can be removed under direct vision. The component can be removed using an osteotome with an axially directed force at a mechanically advantageous angle. The author recommends tibial component removal first, if possible, due to the protection given to the bone stock of the distal femur from posterior tibial levers during tibial explantation. The use of uncemented prostheses has declined in the National Joint Register in 2011, but still accounts for 5% of TKRs in the UK. Femoral explantation similarly begins with separation of the component–cement interface. Exposure is critical for access to the posterior femoral condyles. Simultaneous medial and lateral axially directed force is then used to remove the femoral component. If one side of the femoral component remains well fixed during this manoeuvre, then a bone defect can be created or a condylar fracture can occur. Removing a well fixed femoral stem can be challenging. If the prosthesis is a system where the distal femoral component can be removed from the sleeve or stem then access can be gained to the metaphyseal segment and osteotomes can be passed along the component-bone interface to loosen the prosthesis. In doing this, often a defect in the anterior femoral cortex is created. This can facilitate the removal of the stem as the osteotome can be inserted into one of the ridges and the stem can be tapped out. If no purchase is achieved in this fashion, or the distal component cannot be disengaged from the stem, a proximal diaphyseal bone window can be created to assist. The stem can then be dis-impacted in a proximal to distal fashion. The true incidence of intra-operative peri-prosthetic fracture is not known. One study in North America reported an incidence of 0.78% in 645 revision arthroplasty procedures. Femoral condylar fractures in the revision setting are considered metaphyseal fractures, and often occur in the presence of bone defects. Tibial fractures also occur in the revision setting. Stability of the component is crucial. Condyle fractures occur during explantation, trialling and impaction of the definitive prosthesis. Tibial condyle fractures pose a problem as screw fixation in poor quality bone with a metaphyseal fit prosthesis in situ is not very satisfying. We use a simple classification system ( When a femoral condyle fracture does occur, or a large posterior or central bone defect is caused during implant removal, a stemmed implant with a metaphyseal fixation will be required e.g. metaphyseal sleeve. Part of the planning process in our institution is consideration of the zone of fixation once the implant has been explanted. We use this simple method of ‘Zones of Fixation’ to consider implant stability ( The metaphyseal cancellous bone transmits 80% of the axial load from the tibial plateau to the distal diaphyseal cortex. A metaphyseal sleeve provides a stable fixation in Zone 2 (metaphysis). The metaphyseal sleeve is therefore a valuable tool when dealing with fractures or bone defects. Bone loss and condylar fractures of the tibia can also be treated using a stemmed implant with a metaphyseal-bearing sleeve. Bone loss is classified by the AORI classification. The main aim when treating bone loss is to provide early structural stability and preserve bone stock that maybe required for subsequent revision. Stability of the joint requires intact balanced collateral ligaments and a limb alignment that distributes the load equally over the medial and lateral condyles and collateral ligaments. The incidence of revision for instability is estimated to be 4.9–30%. There are three types of instability: extension, flexion and recurvatum. Extension instability refers to inadequate ligament balance in extension, and is due to inadequate filling of the extension gap. Extension instability may occur with inadequate release of the contracted side of a varus or valgus knee. Late ligamentous failure occurs when there is failure to restore a neutral mechanical alignment, i.e. failure to correct the pre-operative deformity, which confers continuing strain on the ligaments and eventual instability and failure. Flexion instability is a relatively new concept that describes symmetrical instability in flexion between 30 and 60 degrees, and is often termed mid-flexion instability. Symptoms can be subtle, where the patient experiences instability particularly when climbing stairs or getting up from a chair, or recurrent effusions and pain. Mid-flexion instability has mainly been described in the primary arthroplasty setting when there is a large distal femoral resection to correct for a pre-operative fixed flexion deformity. This allows the knee to reach full extension with stability from the contracted posterior capsular structures. With the knee past 30 degrees of flexion, the posterior capsular structures are no longer taut and the collateral ligaments will be loose due to an elevated joint line. Pre-operative planning is crucial in order to have the necessary resources available before contemplating revision surgery for instability. Thorough clinical examination is performed to rule out neuromuscular pathology and extra-articular deformity. The physical examination requires assessment of generalized ligamentous laxity and muscle strength. Careful gait analysis usually reveals varus or valgus thrust and may suggest coronal plane instability. The knee should be examined in full extension, 30 degrees of flexion and 90 degrees of flexion to eliminate the stabilizing effect of the posterior capsular structures. The use of full-length weight-bearing and stress radiography also helps to confirm collateral ligament disruption. If findings are equivocal, we recommend examination under anaesthesia as this can provide valuable information about the direction of instability and it can also help in planning the types of implant and level of constraint required during revision surgery ( Restoration of the native joint line is considered to be one of the most important factors for normal ligament tension and knee kinematics. The point at which the femoral component meets the tibial polyethylene is the new joint line in flexion and extension. It is useful to remember that the initial primary distal femoral bone cut is 11 or 12 mm, explantation and loosening results in 2 or 3 mm more loss, freshening of the distal femoral cut removes another 1 or 2 mm. Already, the distal femoral resection is approaching 17 mm, and therefore the revision component will need to be distalized. As a guide, restoration of the joint line in extension can be referenced from the medial epicondyle, and is 25 mm distal to this point, with 99% accuracy to 5 mm and 93% accuracy to 3 mm. Elevation of the joint line causes problems with ligament tension and consequent coronal plane instability in extension, and also mid-flexion instability. It also causes patella baja, increased PFJ contact forces, reduced range of flexion, extensor lag (decreased quadriceps lever arm) and impingement, many of which can result in anterior knee pain. The joint line in flexion depends on the combined height of the posterior femoral condyles of the femoral component and the tibial insert. The inferior pole of patella with the knee flexed to 90 degrees is not a reliable indicator. Ideally, the joint line should be distal to the inferior pole of the patella. The previously described three-step technique for achieving a stable knee in the revision setting involves re-establishing the tibial platform first, then stabilizing the knee in flexion, then stabilizing the knee in extension. Following explantation, there may be no stable bone for reference. The tibia articulates with the femur continuously during flexion and extension, whereas the distal and the posterior femur articulate in extension and flexion respectively. The tibia is therefore the foundation to build upon. Tibial defects can be reconstructed at this stage. Femoral component size should be chosen so that it stabilizes the knee in flexion. One should not measure the existing bone and simply fit the corresponding component, as this will lead to selection of a smaller component, leading to instability in flexion. The role of posterior femoral augments comes into play at this stage, enabling the surgeon to select a large enough femoral component to stabilize the knee in flexion while maintaining implant bone contact and rotational stability. Depending on bone stock, this is not always possible. However, advances in metaphyseal sleeve technology now allow the surgeon to achieve Zone 2 fixation thereby preserving as much distal bone as possible. Zone 2 fixation is also useful as it allows variability in joint line position. The surgeon is then able to place the joint line in the position to best recreate the native joint line, and restore the correct ligament tension and knee kinematics. In the situation where fixation needs to be enhanced using metaphyseal bearing sleeves and stems, the femoral component is seated in external rotation using three important landmarks; the epicondylar axis, the residual posterior condyles and the anterior femoral cortex. The rotation of the component relative to the sleeve can be set so that the normal external rotation of the femoral component can be achieved. It was previously recommended to use posterior augments on the lateral side to optimize external rotation of the femoral component. If all else fails, setting the femoral implant parallel to the tibial implant will achieve functional rotational alignment. If the surgeon finds excess recurvatum, it is recommended to distalize the femoral component either by the use of distal femoral augments, or the authors' preferred method is to increase the size of the metaphyseal sleeve and place the sleeve–component interface in a more distal position. If the knee demonstrates instability despite adequate joint line restoration, the use of constrained devices such as a rotating hinged implant is advocated (   Medial collateral ligament instability is associated with a high rate of revision to a semi-constrained condylar or fully constrained rotating hinge knee. Reconstruction or conservative treatment of the MCL is not recommended in the revision setting due to the high risk of recurrent instability. Prevention of venous thromboembolism (VTE) is of prime importance in revision knee surgery. The prevalence of asymptomatic DVT in primary TKR ranges from 15% to 84% (median 34%). The prevalence of VTE in revision knee replacement is less well reported. A large multi-centre study of 2986 revisions from North America reported a symptomatic DVT rate of 1.4% and a pulmonary embolism rate of 1.6%. The most appropriate pharmacological agent for prophylaxis is debated. Low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) is considered to be more effective than warfarin for the prevention of symptomatic thromboembolic disease, The recent introduction of oral Factor 10a inhibitors has made anticoagulation easier for the patient, and has been shown to be as effective as LMWH for the prevention of VTE. The combined use of pharmacological and non-pharmacological methods of VTE prophylaxis, such as early mobilization or intermittent compression devices (ICD), decreases the VTE rate further. The revised NICE guidelines recommend a VTE risk assessment with combined pharmacological and non-pharmacological VTE prophylaxis for all knee arthroplasty patients. The recommended duration of anticoagulation is for two weeks post-operatively, regardless of the agent used. The enemy of VTE treatment is the haematoma and the leaky wound, and if the battle is lost, joint infection. It has been shown that persistent wound problems increase the risk of infection. Avoidance of haematoma and persistent wound ooze is important in revision cases, to minimize infection. The already poor quality soft tissue envelope, particularly in multiple re-revision cases, is fragile and sensitive to tension. The senior author uses a front slab for the first 5 days in patients in whom there is significant soft tissue compromise. The front slab is easy to apply, splints the leg in extension, rests the soft tissues and avoids the pressure areas of conventional plasters. Mobilization is commenced at 5 days. There is no dressing change in the first 5 post-operative days, to avoid wound contamination. Drains are used in cases where there is persistent venous ooze at the end of the procedure, but not routinely. Sterile single-use tourniquets are used for all revisions for three reasons: (i) they minimize contamination of the surgical site from the often colonized re-useable tourniquets, Haemostasis needs to be achieved at the end of a revision procedure. During revisions for infection and metallosis, there will have been extensive dissection and debridement of the soft tissues. This leaves a large surface area for venous bleeding. Usually, haemostasis can be achieved with diathermy once the tourniquet is released. Any tight elasticated extremity drapes that are acting as a second venous tourniquet should be released. If haemostasis is not achieved by conventional methods then hydrogen peroxide and fibrin sealants such as Evicel No article on the complications of revision knee arthroplasty would be complete without mention of deep prosthetic infection. Infection is, however, covered in detail in a separate article in this mini-symposium. Between 2000 and 2007, 60 patients in our unit had a two-stage revision for deep prosthetic infection. This involved explantation of each set of infected components, thorough debridement, soft tissue stabilization using cemented interval prostheses and poly-anti-microbial therapy continued until the CRP falls to <10. The interval prosthesis consisted of a stemmed stabilized femoral component and a mobile bearing poly insert cemented directly onto the tibia ( Thirty-eight patients (63%) went on to have the planned 2nd stage procedure. Twenty-two patients (37%) declined the 2nd stage as they were infection free, pain free and functionally satisfied. Five patients (8%) had a recurrence of the deep prosthetic infection; three who had had the second stage procedure (3/38, 7.8%), and two who had kept just the interval prosthesis (2/22, 9%). This prompted conversion to us adopting a single-stage protocol for revision of infected primary and infected revision components. However, for cases of multiple re-revisions for infection, where the infection burden is too great for adequate debridement and there is significant bone loss, a two-stage protocol is still followed. We now achieve soft tissue stabilization through use of a reinforced cement spacer, which is formed by cementing two external fixator rods encased in cement loosely into the intramedullary (IM) canals. A front slab is then used to keep the leg in extension. Organism-specific poly-anti-microbial therapy is then utilized for 8 weeks, until the second stage. It is then vital to perform a thorough debridement at the time of the second stage procedure, as if the surgeon is attempting a single-stage protocol. A thorough debridement is a series of steps repeated multiple times until the IM canal and all surfaces are clean. Once all the cement is removed, any membrane should be debrided, canals should be reamed and washed with brush pulsed lavage, cleaning the femur first and then tibia, to prevent any sump drainage. Carbojet Exposure is also the key to dealing adequately with infection, and the authors recommend a tibial crest osteotomy (TCO) as the means to achieve an adequate debridement. There is relatively little in the literature regarding stiffness in revision TKA. Stiffness in primary TKA has been mistakenly equated with arthrofibrosis, which implies that soft tissue healing rather than surgical technique is responsible for the lack of range of motion (ROM). Predicting the range of motion after revision TKA is difficult. It has been shown that the pre-operative range of motion is the main determinant of post-operative range. The incidence of peri-prosthetic fractures around the knee is reported to be 0.3%–2.5% for primary TKR and 1.6%–38% for revision arthroplaty. Anterior femoral notching is a risk factor for fracture in primary knee arthroplasty. One study showed that 42% of anterior femoral notches were associated with supracondylar fractures. Peri-prosthetic fractures can occur early, due to technical error, or late ( The review from Scotland found that the only significant risk factors associated with peri-prosthetic fracture in total knee arthroplasty were female gender [Hazard ratio 2.3; CI It is known that distal femoral and proximal tibial bone loss occurs after TKA, which has raised the question of bisphosphonate use following arthroplasty. It has been shown that the decrease in Bone Mineral Density (BMD) is greatest in the first 6 months after TKA, and that the magnitude of decrease is variable, ranging from 13.8% to 57%. On average, BMD decreases 5% each year for three years after TKA. Classification systems mainly focus on peri-prosthetic fractures around primary implants. Treatment depends on fracture pattern, quality of bone stock, reducibility of the fracture, position of the implant and implant fixation and function. The comorbid status of the patient needs to be assessed. Non-operative treatment is an option in certain circumstances, especially when there is poor biology associated with a fracture ( The treatment of peri-prosthetic revision fractures is more challenging, as often the surgeon will need to bypass the fracture with a longer stem, increase the constraint level in the prosthesis to gain stability, or replace the distal femur or proximal tibia. The conventional treatments for peri-prosthetic fractures around a primary implant are often not suitable, such as retrograde IM nailing, the use of peri-articular locking plates or external fixation. These devices maybe used in some circumstances, but in the revision setting where there is already a stemmed component in situ, they have their limitations. There is little in the literature regarding revision peri-prosthetic fractures. In the revision setting, fractures are likely to be either Type 2 or Type 3 fractures. Often fractures are supracondylar femoral fractures involving the stem tip in patients with a stemmed revision prosthesis in-situ. Poor distal femoral bone quality with inadequate distal bone for fixation and incompetent collateral ligaments can mean that increased constraint is required. The aim of treatment is to restore leg length, regain anatomical alignment, provide stability and allow early mobilization. The use of fully constrained implants, hinged components or a distal femoral replacement is gaining in popularity as this technology improves. A majority of the reports of outcomes following the use of a constrained implant are from peri-prosthetic fracture in primary TKA. In a study from Philadelphia, 20 of 62 peri-prosthetic fractures around primary implants required a fully constrained implant or distal femoral replacement. All patients had pain relief and regained a functional range of motion. Peri-prosthetic tibial fractures are less common, with a reported incidence of 1%, Management is similar for peri-prosthetic fractures around revision implants. In the revision setting, stability and fixation need to be achieved. The surgeon needs to be aware of the need to reconstruct and bypass any fracture. Achieving fixation in the tibia can be challenging in the face of severe comminution, and proximal tibial replacement may need to be considered.  Type Occur in the tibial plateau Adjacent to the stem Distal to the prosthesis Involve the tibial tubercle Sub-types Well-fixed implant Loose implant Intra-operative The primary aim of any revision knee surgery is to provide the patient with a joint that is pain free, has a healed soft tissue envelope, is aseptic, is functioning, is stable and that has a physiologic range of motion. The authors have attempted in this article to provide the reader with a review of the literature and tips on how to avoid some of the complications seen in a revision knee surgeons practice.