The separation of Zr and Hf is of importance in the production of nuclear reactor grade metals. Solvent extraction experiments were performed to separate the two metals by using LIX 63, PC 88A and mixture of PC 88A and LIX 63 in the nitric acid concentration from 0.5 to 4M. Zr was selectively extracted over Hf by the above extractants. Of the two extractants, PC 88A led to higher extraction efficiency of the two metals while LIX 63 resulted in an outstanding separation factor of 186 between Zr and Hf. The mixture of LIX 63 and PC 88A had some positive effect on the extraction of the two metals but the separation efficiency of the mixture was not as high as single LIX 63. The solvent extraction reaction of Zr and Hf by LIX 63 at 2M nitric acid solution was identified by applying a slope analysis method. Selective extraction of Zr over Hf by LIX 63 was verified by varying the initial concentration ratio of Zr to Hf from 1 to 50. An optimum concentration ratio of LIX 63 to Zr was proposed to get higher separation factor. Effective stripping of Zr and Hf from loaded LIX 63 was possible by using sulfuric acid solution.Zirconium is always accompanied by hafnium in nature and therefore termed congeneric. Zircon (ZrSiO Various extractants have been employed for the separation of Zr and Hf by solvent extraction. Especially, the extraction of Zr and Hf by TBP from nitric acid solution has been commercialized, where a separation factor of 10 between Zr and Hf is obtained ( Hydroxyoximes, such as LIX 63 (5, 8-diethyl-7-hydroxy-6-dodecanone oxime) and LIX 84 (2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenoneoxime), are highly efficient for the extraction of copper. Extraction of other metals, like Mo, Ni and Zr by employing these reagents were studied recently ( Since both Zr and Hf are extracted well from chloride solution by organophosphorous extractants and their mixtures with other extractant, the separation factor between them is generally low ( LIX 63 (5, 8-diethyl-7-hydroxydodecan-6-one oxime) was purchased from BASF Co., while PC 88A (2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester) was supplied by Cytec Canada Inc. Kerosene (Daejung Chemicals and Metals CO., Ltd., Korea) was used as a diluent without any further purification. The aqueous solution of Zr and Hf was prepared by dissolving the necessary amount of ZrOCl The general extraction and stripping experiments were carried out by shaking equal volumes (20 The distribution coefficient (D) was taken as the ratio of the concentration of metal present in the organic phase to that in the aqueous phase at equilibrium. From the D values, the extraction percentage was obtained by using %Ex The influence of nitric acid concentration on the extraction of Zr and Hf by LIX 63 and PC88A was investigated in the range of 0.5 to 4 According to the literature, solvent extraction of Zr and Hf with acidic organophosphorous extractants follows cation exchange reaction when acid concentration is low ( According to The dependence of Zr and Hf extraction on the PC88A concentration was investigated at 2 The values of the separation factor between Zr and Hf are listed in In order to identify the solvent extraction reaction of Zr and Hf by LIX 63 from nitric acid solution, the concentration of nitrate ion was varied by adjusting the concentration of NaNO The following equation can be derived by substituting the definition of distribution coefficient (D) into the equilibrium constant (K The plot of log D against log [NO Literature survey indicates that a mixture of acidic organophosphorous and chelating or non-chelating oxime extractants has synergism towards the extraction of metals ( Among the extractants tested in this work (single LIX 63/PC88A and the mixture of PC88A and LIX 63), solvent extraction of Zr and Hf by single LIX 63 from 2 Since the concentration of Zr is much higher than that of Hf in zirconium minerals, it is necessary to investigate the effect of concentration ratio of Zr to Hf on the extraction and separation behavior of the two metals by LIX 63 from nitric acid solution ( The experimental results are represented in The concentration ratio of Zr to Hf in nitric acid solution depends on the nature of the zirconium sources. Therefore, for the given concentration of Zr and Hf in the nitric acid solution, it is important to determine an optimum concentration of LIX 63 which leads to higher separation factor. For this purpose, the data in The stripping of zirconium and hafnium from loaded LIX 63 containing 0.137 The stripping percentage of Zr and Hf increased up to 92% and 75%, respectively, as the concentration of H Solvent extraction of Zr and Hf by using LIX 63, PC 88A and their mixture was investigated from nitric acid solutions. Zr was selectively extracted over Hf from nitric acid solution by the extractants tested in this study. PC 88A led to high extraction percentage of both Zr and Hf in the whole nitric acid concentration range but the separation performance was poor. In the extraction with LIX 63, the extraction of Zr increased with the concentration of nitric acid to 2 This work was financially supported by a grant from the fundamental