A study has been conducted in order to evaluate the descriptive capability of a modified form of the models advanced by Jönsson and Hogmark, Burnett and Rickerby, Chicot and Lesage and Korsunsky et al., regarding the composite hardness measurements carried out on different substrate–film systems. The modification that has been introduced involves the incorporation of the indentation size effect on both the substrate and film hardness through the power relationship, for the description of the change in hardness with the indentation diagonal, earlier proposed by Meyer. The modified models were first evaluated employing the data already published by Chicot et al., for Ti and TiC films formed on the surface of a chromium steel of a high carbon content. Subsequently, they were tested employing the data obtained experimentally with three under stoichiometric TiN
                        x
                      coatings, deposited by PVD magnetron sputtering on 316L stainless steel. It has been determined that the composite hardness measured on such systems can be satisfactorily described by means of any of the four models analyzed. However, it has also been found that the model proposed by Korsunsky and co-workers not only gives rise to the minimum quadratic difference between most of the measured and predicted values of the composite hardness, but also provides useful information regarding the film toughness. An optimization procedure is outlined which can be used in order to compute unambiguously and simultaneously all the constants involved in any of the four modified models, taking into consideration all the experimental measurements. The models advanced by Burnett and Rickerby, Chicot and Lesage and Korsunsky et al. have been found to predict a smooth increase in hardness as the indentation diagonal decreases, outside the range of experimental measurements. On the contrary, it has been shown that the model advanced by Jönsson and Hogmark breaks down when tested outside the range of experimental values of hardness, particularly at low indentation diagonal values.One of the most important aspects concerning the selection and optimization of coatings for particular substrates and applications is the mechanical response of the substrate-deposit system to contact stresses, whose scale and severity would be expected to have a strong influence on such a reaction. It is widely accepted that at contact scales of dimensions less than the coating thickness, the response of the system would be dominated by the deposit, whereas at scales of dimensions very large in comparison with the deposit thickness, the reaction would be determined mainly by the substrate. At intermediate scales, it would be expected that both deposit and substrate contributed in determining the response of such an arrangement. Therefore, the computation of the absolute hardness of the coating requires the separation of the contributions of the film and substrate. In the past few years, a number of models have been developed in order to determine the absolute hardness of both mono and multilayer thin films from standard indentation tests Thus, the present investigation has been carried out in order to develop a different and more complex modification of some of the models available, by incorporating the ISE of both the substrate and film through the power relationship advanced by Meyer, for the description of the change in hardness with the indentation diagonal. Also, a numerical least square non-linear regression algorithm is outlined in order to compute the constants involved in any of the modified models. The latter have been tested in two different ways: firstly, by re-assessing the hardness data previously published by Chicot et al. As first suggested by Bückle According to this model, the film hardness can be determined at each value of Once the film hardness have been computed at each indentation diagonal, it is possible to evaluate the ISE through any of the formulations available for this purpose. On the other hand, the model advanced by Burnett and Rickerby (B–R) The disadvantage of this model is that in order to determine the film hardness, the Young's modulus of the film should be known in advance. However, if this information is available, the film hardness can also be computed at each indentation diagonal by solving the non-linear equation: Once the film hardness at each value of The model proposed by Chicot and Lesage (C–L) As with the B–R model, if the Young's modulus of the film is known, it is possible to compute the film hardness at each indentation diagonal from the present model, by solving the non-linear equation that results from the above expression: Thus, the ISE of the film material can also be readily determined. More recently, Korsunsky and co-workers In the case of fracture-dominated coating response, the total energy contribution due to cracking is given by: However, in order to include in the consideration the case of fracture dominated response of the coating, the above equation has been modified further From As it has already been shown, only the models advanced by B–R Thus, the modified form of the J–H model Similarly, the modified forms of the expressions for the composite hardness according to the B–R A second objective of the present work was to outline the principles of a numerical algorithm that could be employed for determining the different constants involved in the three modified models. Such an algorithm can be illustrated by taking, for example, the expression for the composite hardness according to the modified version proposed here, of the model advanced by J–H The search interval for constant Similarly, the parameters The modified models outlined in On the other hand, in the present work, a number of samples of 316L stainless steel with a cylindrical shape, were polished mechanically to a specular finish and coated industrially by unbalanced magnetron sputtering at Teer Coatings, Hartlebury, UK, with TiN  Regarding the Ti and TiC deposits, whose data were originally reported by Chicot et al. The fact that the optimized values of the constant The results corresponding to the three TiN For two of the stoichiometries analyzed, the model predicts the occurrence of fracture of the film rather than plastic deformation, which agrees with the electron microscopy observations made on the deposit after the indentations with 0.049, 0.098 and 0.245 N, as shown in An important aspect that should be discussed in relation to this model, when applied to the different films under consideration, is that it is clearly observed to break down at very low values of the indentation diagonal, outside the range of experimental measurements, a behavior that is also seen when the ISE is introduced into this model through the linear law advanced by Thomas Therefore, it can be concluded that although it provides a satisfactory description of the change in the hardness value of the substrate-deposit composite, due to the definition of the fraction of film involved in the hardness test, such a description should be limited strictly to the range of indentation diagonal values employed for the calculation of the constants involved in such a model, regardless of the way in which the ISE is introduced into the model. These results are in agreement with the analysis conducted by Tuck et al. The modified version of the model advanced by B–R Thus, according to the B–R and C–L models, the Ti film would not display any ISE. For the TiC film, both models also predict similar values for the constants involved: 45.7 and 2.13 GPa, according to the modified B–R model, and 55.1 and 2.15 GPa for the modified C–L model. These results indicate a moderate ISE for this film which gives rise to an increase in the film hardness as the load applied increases. Also, the present results differ appreciably from those obtained with the modified form of the J–H model, which predicts values of 22.6 and 2.03 GPa, respectively, for the film constants. However, as it will be shown and discussed in the forthcoming, despite the apparent differences in the constants determined, in most cases, the predicted film hardness at low indentation diagonal values is very similar for the models analyzed.  Regarding the TiN As mentioned before, the modified version of the B–R and C–L models involve only two parameters for the description of the film hardness and the results obtained depend on the value of the Young's modulus of the coating. However, in the case of the TiN In relation to the modified version proposed here, of the model originally advanced by Korsunsky and co-workers Thus, On the other hand, As mentioned before, the model requires the computation of three parameters and it also predicts a smooth increase in hardness as the indentation diagonal decreases. This trend is particularly noticeable for the TiN Finally, In the case of the TiC coating, the hardness at low indentation diagonal values is also observed to vary from 18.2 to 20.1 GPa, although in this case a significant change in the film hardness of the film with indentation diagonal for some of the models would be expected. For the TiN The above observations can be explained in terms of The composite hardness measured on systems formed of Ti and TiC films, deposited on a high carbon chromium steel and of TiN All the constants involved in the four models can be readily and unambiguously determined by means of the optimization procedure here outlined, taking into consideration all the experimental measurements. All the models, with the exception of that advanced by Jönsson and Hogmark, predict a smooth increase in the composite hardness as the indentation diagonal decreases, outside the range of experimental measurements. On the contrary, the model advanced by Jönsson and Hogmark is observed to break down when tested outside the range of experimental values. This behavior is independent of the way in which the ISE is introduced into the model and it is attributed to the particular definition provided by these authors of the fraction of the film involved in the indentation test. In most cases, the different models predict a similar film hardness at low indentation diagonal values. However, the differences found in the magnitude of the constants that describe the ISE for each film can be explained in terms of the distinct definitions given to the fraction of the film involved in the hardness test of the composite material, according to the four models analyzed. This investigation has been conducted with the financial support of the Venezuelan National Council for Scientific and Technological Research (CONICIT) through the project LAB-97000644 and S1-2000000642, and the Scientific and Humanistic Development council of the universidad Central de Venezuela through the project PG-08-17-4595-2000. J.A. Berrı́os is deeply grateful to the Organization of the American States for the financial support received through the Multinational Material Project. He is also grateful to the School of Mechanical Engineering of the University of El Salvador.