Background
                  Surgical treatment with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of displaced middle-third clavicular fractures resulted in shorter complete return to work periods with earlier consolidation documented on computed tomography (CT) scans in this prospective, randomized controlled trial.
               
                  Methods
                  The study randomized 76 consecutive patients with displaced fractures (2B1-2B2 according to Robinson) to conservative (C, n = 42) and surgical (S, n = 34) treatment with plates and screws. Bone union was documented with CT scans at 6 and 12 weeks.
               
                  Results
                  Risk factors known to increase the risk of nonunion were similar between groups. Time until discharge for complete return to work was 3.7 ± 1.1 months for C and 2.9 ± 0.8 months for S (P = .003). On the CT scan at 6 weeks, 24.1% of the patients presented advanced bone union in S vs 5.3% in C (P = .05). At 12 weeks, 81% of the patients presented advanced bone union in S vs 16.7% in C (P = .005). At final follow-up, 4 nonunions were present in the C group that required surgery; in the S group, 4 patients underwent revision surgery for plate removal. At 6 and 12 months of follow-up, Constant scores were higher for the S group.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Surgical treatment with ORIF of displaced middle-third clavicular fractures achieved good and excellent functional results, shorter time to complete return to work, earlier bone union, and fewer cases of nonunions in a working population under injury compensation.Middle-third clavicular fractures are frequent injuries amongst the general population, with a greater incidence in individuals exposed to work-related risks or who participate in contact sports. Most of the published studies regarding clavicular fracture outcomes were performed in the general population, including pediatric cases in some studies. When the patient is an active young individual, a more demanding function is required from a working and sports perspective; therefore, an earlier return to normal function might result in important improvements concerning these activities. Displaced middle-third clavicular fractures represent an important subgroup to analyze, because of the higher rates of nonunion and longer periods out of work. For this reason, we consider that middle-third clavicular fractures, classified according to Robinson The objective of the present study was to compare union rates, functional outcomes at follow-up, and time until complete return to work in displaced middle-third clavicular fractures, classified according Robinson This was a prospective, randomized study of a consecutive case series that included 76 displaced midshaft clavicular fractures diagnosed in 76 patients, classified according to Robinson Randomization was performed following the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) guidelines by the method of tables of 4. This resulted in a list, with randomized consecutive numbers appointed to each patient, and those with 0 were assigned to conservative treatment and with 1 were assigned to surgical treatment. These results were placed in envelopes that were given to each patient at the initial consultation. A sample size of 34 patients per group was calculated with a power of 80% and an α error of 0.05. Of the 76 patients included in the study, 42 were treated conservatively (C) and 34 were managed surgically (S) with ORIF with plates and screws. Inclusion criteria were: displaced middle-third clavicular fractures (without cortical contact); age older than 18 years; signed approval to participate in the study; isolated clavicular fracture; patients with labor accidents that were treated under the national workers insurance laws and compensations; and fracture classified 2B1 or 2B2 according to Robinson et al. Exclusion criteria were: Fractures in the lateral or medial segment of the clavicle; neurovascular associated injuries; open fractures; and more than 21 days of evolution from the accident. Clinical and radiologic evaluations were performed at follow-up. Constant Anterior-posterior and axial X-rays of the clavicle were obtained during the initial evaluation, at 4 weeks, 8 weeks, and at 4 months of follow-up, mainly with the purpose to determine displacement and nonunion. A computed tomography (CT) scan was obtained at 6 and 12 weeks of follow-up, primarily to document bone union. We arbitrarily classified bone union according to subjective observations of each image as “with” or “without” healing signs, when current images were compared with prior evaluation, observing the presence of trabecular bone or cortical continuity, or both, in areas where a fracture line was evident on the first assessment. For the C group, a shoulder sling was used for 6 weeks (permanent for 3 weeks and intermediate use for 3 more weeks). Physical therapy was started at 4 weeks, with passive range of motion (ROM) and analgesic physiotherapy for 3 weeks, following active ROM and strengthening exercises. For the S group, ORIF was performed using the 3.5-mm Locking Compression Plate (LCP) system (Anatomic; Synthes, Solothurn, Switzerland) in 12 patients and LCP reconstruction plates (Synthes) in 22. Different implants were used according to availability at the day of the surgery. A sling was used after surgery for pain management and soft tissue care for 4 weeks (continuous for 2 weeks and intermittent afterwards). Physical therapy was started at 3 weeks, with passive ROM and analgesic physiotherapy for 3 weeks, following active ROM and strengthening exercises. Complete return to work was determined the moment when the patient was sent back to work without functional restrictions. We documented this time in months. The statistical analysis was performed with SSPS 11.0 software (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL, USA). Fisher and analysis of variance instruments were used to obtain At an average follow-up of 12 ± 2 months (range, 10-14 months), we did not find statistical differences regarding patient age between the C (37.2 ± 11.2 years) and S (38.1 ± 13 years) groups ( The study included 76 fractures in 76 patients; of these, 73.3% were Robinson Analysis of variance using as dependent variables “time to complete return to work” and as constant variables “Robinson classification” Concerning fracture displacement (measuring amongst largest medial and lateral fragments of the fracture), the values did not differ significantly, with average results of 19.3 ± 7.8 mm for the C group and 21.4 ± 6.1 mm for the S group ( Clavicular shortening after the fracture (measuring among the largest medial and lateral fragments of the fracture) was similar between the groups, with average shortening of 7.5 ± 7 mm for C and 9 ± 9.8 mm for S ( Constant scores were similar at 3 months of follow-up. At 6 months, an average of 4 points of difference in the Constant scores was observed in favor of the S group. At 12 months of follow-up, the S group had an average Constant score 6 points higher than the C group ( Signs of radiologic bone healing in the CT scan at 6 weeks were present in 5.3% of patients in the C group and 24.1% of the S group ( There were 4 patients (9.6%) with nonunion (defined as more than 4 months without radiologic signs of bone healing) in the C group. All 4 were treated with ORIF with plates and screws with additional bone allograft. Four patients (11.7%) in the S group required implant removal due to symptomatic plate or screws. We did not see any nonunions in the S group. Currently, appropriate treatment of displaced middle-third clavicular fractures remains controversial, particularly if these fractures are comminuted in a young and active population. Also, radiologic signs of fracture healing on CT scan were present in a higher rate in the S group. At final follow-up, 9.6% of nonunion cases were found in the C group and no cases in the S group. Symptomatic nonunion was found only in the C group, and all were treated with plate fixation. The reoperation rate of 11.7% in the S group was solely due to plate prominence. We did not observe refractures after plate removal. Outcomes documented in this study and those described by Robinson et al McKee et al In a prospective, randomized study of 132 patients, Altamimi et al Functional outcomes obtained in our study were comparable with those described in the literature for both groups, with better Constant scores for the S group, especially after 6 months, following a linear progressive correlation with bone healing on CT scans. Fracture shortening or displacement did not affect the overall results in our analysis because no differences between the groups or correlation with nonunion were documented. Fracture comminution appears to be a more relevant point to consider when deciding appropriate treatment of midshaft clavicular fractures. This does not mean that we should overlook fracture shortening or displacement. A comprehensive analysis of the fracture, including all known clinical and radiologic variables, must be accomplished before deciding appropriate treatment. We did not evaluate whether clavicular shortening affected clinical outcomes in the C group when fracture healing was achieved. These parameters should be considered because there is evidence that clavicular shortening of more than 2 cm may affect shoulder strength and endurance. There is not enough evidence regarding return to work after a midshaft clavicular fracture. Alshameeri et al, The most relevant weakness of our study is the short follow-up (1 year average). We have considered re-evaluation of our patients at 2 years to assess longer-term results. Furthermore, 2 different implants were used in our study, and we do not know whether this could modify our surgical treatment results. We could not find a validated scale applicable to our research to describe bone healing in clavicular fractures; therefore, radiologic signs of bone healing were evaluated with our own subjective scale. Regarding the randomization process, 34 patients for each group offered 80% power and an α error of 0.05; nevertheless, 42 patients were included in the surgical group after the randomization list was complete, going back to the first ones of the list again. This was performed in an attempt to have extra patients to avoid underpowered analysis in case of patient drop-out. This might have caused skewed groups. Our patient population was covered by worker compensation insurance; for this reason, our clinical results at follow-up might be different in a diverse patient population. Recent studies have evaluated the optimal treatment of displaced midshaft clavicular fractures Surgical treatment with ORIF of displaced middle-third clavicular fractures results in good and excellent functional results, shorter time to complete return to work, earlier bone healing, and fewer cases of nonunions, in a working population under injury compensation. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.