The purpose of this study was to investigate the separation of Co, Nd and Dy from a ternary Co-Nd-Dy solution using amorphous zirconium phosphate (am-ZrP). Am-ZrP was synthesized by a precipitation method at room temperature and subsequently characterized by Fourier transform-infrared spectrometry, thermogravimetry, scanning electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, solid-state 31P magic angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometry and sodium hydroxide titration (with and without background salt). The ion exchange kinetics of am-ZrP that were determined in ternary 1mM equimolar solutions at equilibrium pH2.5. The effect of pH on the adsorption was studied in ternary 1mM equimolar solutions and the uptakes of the metals increased with increasing pH until approximately pH3.5. The adsorption isotherms of Co, Nd and Dy were tested in a series of ternary equimolar solution, the total uptake amounted to 4.13meq/g at pH ~3.0. The preference of am-ZrP for these metals occurred in decreasing order Dy>Nd≫Co. The separation of Co, Nd and Dy from their 1mM equimolar ternary mixture was investigated on an am-ZrP column. Effects of loading (7.8%, 62% and 100%) on the separation were compared by measuring the corresponding HNO3 elution fractions. It was found that with a lower metal loading of 7.8%, three clear elution bands were obtained. Am-ZrP exhibited selective separation properties towards the ternary Co-Nd-Dy system, which contribute to the future scale-up studies for the recycling of NdFeB magnets.Neodymium-iron-boron (NdFeB) permanent magnets have been widely used in computer hard-disk drives, hybrid and electric vehicles, wind turbines, household electrical appliances and small electronic devices ( Recently, many researches using physical or chemical way to recycle REEs from EOL NdFeB magnets took place. The processes for REEs separation from computer hard disk drives have been well developed to produce demagnetized hydride alloy powder in atmospheric pressure hydrogen ( For commercial REEs production, they are firstly extracted from ores using mineral acids leaching. The obtained pregnant leaching solution is then treated by solvent extraction (SX) for the separation of REEs. During the SX operation, REEs are transferred to an organic phase using REE-selective extractants. Apart from the demerit of using volatile organic solvent as a diluent, the separation efficiency of individual REE is not satisfying. Due to the similarity of the REEs, often hundreds of separation stages (utilising mixer-settler units) and complicated flowsheets with reflux are needed in the actual industrial scale separation to obtain individual REE. In fact, the REEs are still present in the strip liquor/raffinate after many stages even though the extraction rate is higher than 99% ( Ion exchange technology is commonly used to purify solutions by removing the dissolved ions by electrostatic adsorption onto the internal and external surfaces of ion exchange materials of various physical forms. Before the 1960s, the separation process of ion exchange was the dominated method to obtain the individual REE. Nowadays, ion exchange method is still used industrially to prepare high purity REEs even though solvent extraction plays the key role on the large scale REEs production ( Inorganic ion exchangers are generally much more selective than organic resins for metal ions. Typically such high selectivities arise from their porous and ordered, rigid structures that exhibit ion sieve functionality ( Herein, am-ZrP was investigated in our present study for its potential in the separation and recovery of Co, Nd and Dy from a Co-Nd-Dy ternary solution system. The synthesis and characterizations of the am-ZrP material in addition to the identification of its acidity, selectivity, and isothermal adsorption for Co, Nd and Dy ions. The kinetic mechanism of am-ZrP material and preliminary batch elution using mineral acids were also investigated. Our aim was to avoid the use of organic complexing agents by using simple mineral acids to separate Nd and Dy from each other and Co by relying on the separation capability of the ZrP material itself. Finally, column loading and eluting using only HNO Zirconium tetrachloride (ZrCl X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns of am-ZrP were recorded by a Philips PW3710 X-ray powder diffractometer with the setting of: 40 Am-ZrP was prepared via room-temperature precipitation synthesis method at room temperature according to the method described by The ternary Co, Nd, and Dy solution was prepared by mixing their corresponding nitrate salts and the solution pH was adjusted by 1 The direct titration (from H to Na form) of the prepared am-ZrP was conducted in a series of batch experiments where 100 A 100 Investigation of sorption kinetics were carried out for different reaction times (from 0.25 A 100 A 100 Column tests were performed in a Bio-Rad glass column with an inner diameter of 10 Considering a binary ion exchange between ions B The distribution coefficient (K It can be calculated from solution phase measurements of A by The separation factor (SF) can be described as the comparison of distribution coefficients to one another: Here K When considering the exchange of metal ions M In cases when metal loading in exchanger is low in the system ( Thus, log K Equivalent fractions or mole fractions are often used as substitute for molarities or molarities. For example, the equivalent fraction of M The elution percentage (Elution %) is calculated from The symbols are the same as those in Eq. The P/Zr ratio of the synthesized am-ZrP was determined to be 2.03 by total digestion, which was very close to the ideal stoichiometry of 2. The XRD powder diffraction pattern of am-ZrP ( The The titration of am-ZrP displayed a steadily increasing titration curve in deionized water ( Titration in NaNO In the crystalline ZrP materials, the equivalence points become more apparent as the degree of crystallinity in the material increases ( The adsorption kinetics of am-ZrP were studied by determining the characteristic constants of adsorption using a pseudo-first order equation and pseudo-second order equation ( In the pseudo-first order equation Intra-particle diffusion equation We observed ( The uptake of Nd and Dy reached a maximum plateau at pH of about 3.0 ( The absorbed quantities of Co, Nd and Dy in the adsorption isotherm leveled at about 1 The binary selectivity coefficients ( Sulfuric acid was the most efficient mineral acid for elution, as it was found to elute 85% of Nd and 83% of Dy at 1.0 The feed of 435 BV of solution resulted in full loading (totally 2.43 The elution experiments indicated that the elution peak of Nd appeared before that of Dy ( The metals in the eluting curves Separation factor (SF(Dy/Nd)) of Dy/Nd in the column eluting experiments ( An am-ZrP ion exchanger was synthesized using a precipitation synthesis method at room temperature. The am-ZrP contained three different phosphate groups: H The research leading to these results received funding from the European Community's