In this work, synergistic flotation of U(VI)–alizarin complex at the presence of some diamine compounds was firstly investigated by the spectrophotometric method. The flotation process was carried out on aliquots of 100ml of U(VI) solutions containing alizarin and the diamine at pH of 5.00 using n-heptane. The floated layer was then dissolved in acetonitrile and its absorbance was measured. Since the synergistic effect of 4,4′-diaminophenylmethane (dapm) was much more than the others, it was used for the determination of U(VI) by this method. Beer's law was obeyed (λ
                     max
                     =591nm) in the range of 5×10−7 to 1×10−5
                     moll−1 with the apparent molar absorptivity of 1.12×106
                     lmol−1
                     cm−1, and a correlation coefficient of 0.9991. The detection limit (n
                     =7) was 1×10−7
                     moll−1, and the R.S.D. (n
                     =7) obtained for 4×10−6
                     moll−1 of U(VI) was 2.23%. Except that only a few analogous cations, which could be masked by EDTA, no interference was observed at the presence of various conventional ions, even at high concentrations. The reliability and applicability of the method were confirmed using some geological standard reference materials and spiked synthetic water samples, respectively.Uranium is an important element in view of industry, especially in view of nuclear energy production. Mining, nuclear fuel preparation and waste management require a number of chemical methods for purification, enrichment and its determination. Widely used methods for uranium determination in environmental samples are inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry Generally, spectrophotometric determinations are widely used to determine of uranium One of the interest methods for separation and preconcentration of trace amount of metal ions is flotation spectrophotometry in which the organic solvent, on the contrary of solvent extraction methods, is not polluted during the performance so as can be used over again All the reagents were of analytical grade, obtained from Merck, Germany and used without further purification. All of the solutions were prepared with fresh double distilled water. Alizarin solution (2.0 A Shimadzu model 160 A double beam spectrophotometer and a Corning model 130 pH-meter were used for absorption and pH measurements, respectively. To a separating funnel containing 100 In order to determine of U(VI) in the solutions, the flotation process was carried out similarly on aliquots of the solutions (100 Initially, a number of parameters were investigated that influence on performance of flotation the binary U(VI)–alizarin complex formed in acidic media. Before that, the effect of pH was examined on efficiency of the flotation process over a range of 3.00–6.00 by adjusting the pH of the solution just before the organic phase addition. As shown in The effect of alizarin concentration was studied over a range of 4.0 The effects of volume and type of the organic phase were also investigated using cyclohexane, toluene, benzene, By considering to the previous work in which the synergistic flotation of RE(III)–alizarin complexes had been studied at the presence of phen In order to find the most adequate agent for the synergistic flotation process, a number of other nitrogen-involving neutral bidentate ligands including ethylenediamine (en), 1,4-diaminobutane (dabt), 1,2-diaminobenzene (dabz), 4-methyl-1,3-diaminobenzene (mdabz), 2,2′-bipyridine (bpy) and 4,4′-diaminophenylmethane (dapm) were separately employed. The preliminary studies showed that none of these reagents is capable to form binary stable complexes with U(VI) so can be floated at the interface of aqueous/organic phases. However, as depicted in Among the several diamines that were investigated, the exhibition of dapm was much more considerable in comparison with the others. Thus, the determination of U(VI) was carried out using dapm as the synergistic agent. To confirm that the applied concentration of dapm is sufficient for the synergistic flotation of all the U(VI) contents, it was preferred to investigate its necessary concentration similar to phen. Curve B in The stoichiometric ratios of the complexing components were investigated by performance of the synergistic flotation process at the presence of phen using the excess amounts of all the components. The floated complex was then separated, purified and decomposed by addition of 10 Under the optimum conditions, a linear calibration curve was found between the U(VI) contents of the initial solution (100 The possible interference attributable to the various ions, which may be present as the major constituents of mineral samples or found in water samples, was examined by introducing them into the solutions containing 4.0 The proposed method was applied to determine of U(VI) in geological standard reference materials including JG-1a and JR-1 (Geological Survey of Japan (GSJ) reference samples) and CANMET-DH-1a (Canada Center for Mineral and Energy Technology). As shown in This method benefits from a good sensitivity in determination of trace amounts of U(VI) in various water samples and minerals even with the complicated matrix. Since the organic solvent used as the organic phase is much less toxic than those used usually in extraction methods and also can be applied repeatedly without any purification, this method has no problem in view of the environmental pollution. Furthermore, in comparison with the well-known methods, such as extraction methods, the method benefits from a high selectivity in the determination even at the presence of actinide and lanthanide ions with high considerable concentrations. The detection limit, recovery yields and R.S.D. of the method are considerable in spite of using no complicated device and procedure.