This work was aimed at comparing the physical and chemical properties of the Kambara Reactor Slag (KRS) and a Granulated Blast Furnace Slag (GBFS) for achieving partial substitution of GBFS for the KRS. The KRS and GBFS were characterized by chemical, mineralogical, thermal, granulometric, visual, and microscopic analyses, which included the determination of the unit weight, pH, and ability to be ground. The KRS had lower concentrations of SiO2, Al2O3, and MgO and higher percentages of total Fe and Fe° than the GBFS. Moreover, compared to the GBFS, it was crystalline (the GBFS was amorphous); had a larger specific area with a final fraction of 150μm, higher unit weight, and predominantly spherical particles; and was more alkaline. Thus, the KRS is a by-product that may be useful for Portland cement manufacturing; however, the thermal, mechanical, or chemical activations will be needed to attain the cement requirements.Steel is one of the most widely used materials worldwide owing to its characteristics and properties. The steel industry generates large amounts of waste at each stage of steel production, including reduction and refining. During reduction, when a blast furnace is used, the by-product is pig iron. Refining includes the desulfurization of steel and consists of the reduction of the sulfur present in the metal by the formation of stable sulfides. These sulfides are removed from the liquid pig iron by skimming or scraping the slag formed on the surface, preventing the reaction product from being reversed and new solubilization of the sulfur to occur in the bath. In both stages, large quantities of by-products are formed, resulting in an environmental problem for the steel industry. One alternative use of blast furnace slags has been in the manufacture of Portland cement. Compared to fly ash, silica fume, and pozzolanas, cementitious materials must have relatively constant chemical compositions, low heat of hydration, high sulfate and acid resistance, better workability, and higher ultimate strength The use of Portland–GGBFS cement allows reducing the temperature rise of the concrete and improves the resistance to early cracking This work aimed at the comparison of the physical and chemical properties of the Kambara Reactor Slag (KRS) and a GBFS to achieve partial substitution of the blast furnace slag for the KRS. The KRS, as shown in Portland cement type III (CP III) was used as a base to which the KRS was added; CP III was selected because this type of cement is already a constituent of clinker, gypsum, granulated slag, and carbonate materials. Chemical analyses of the slags were performed at the ArcelorMittal Tubarão Chemical Laboratory using the techniques and equipment listed in In addition to the tests cited in X-Ray diffraction (XRD) was performed to verify the crystalline state of the GBFS by-products and KRS in addition to identifying the phases present in each sample. The tests were conducted with a Bruker D8 phaser diffractometer, from the Materials Characterization Laboratory of the IFES campus Vitória. The settings used for all the tests were 40 Thermogravimetry (TG) measures the mass variation of a sample resulting from physical or chemical transformations when subjected to a controlled temperature gradient. In comparison, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measures the energy difference between a sample and thermally inert reference material required to keep both at the same temperature. The tests were performed at the Materials Characterization Laboratory of the IFES campus Vitória using a Netzch model STA 449 F3 Jupiter. The samples were subjected to a temperature ramp to 1000 To determine the particle size distribution of the KRS and GBFS slags, the samples were quarantined with a Jones divider. The granulometric distribution of each slag was determined according to the ABNT NBR NM 248:2003 standard Both the quarrying and granulometry tests were performed at the Concrete Laboratory of the Federal Institute of Espírito Santo Vitória Campus. In addition, the volumetric distribution of the GBFS and KRS particles at 150-μm-throughput was determined using the Mastersizer Hydro 2000 Hydro MU from Malvern, housed at the Laboratory of Ceramics on the IFES campus Vitória. The KRS unit weight was determined by Kaeme Engenharia, according to ABNT NBR NM 45:2006 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed for the GBFS and KRS to verify the morphologies and distributions of their particles. Zeiss model EVO MA10 at the Laboratory of Electronic Microscopy and Microanalysis of the IFES Campus Vitória was used. In addition, Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) was performed on the GBFS and KRS samples to spectrally evaluate their elemental composition and identify their constituent elements. These spectra can provide a semi-quantitative characterization of the samples. The pH of the slags was determined according to ABNT NBR 10.004 To grind the KRS, empirical tests were performed using a Marconi ball mill of the Laboratory of Ceramics of the IFES campus Vitória. The slags were placed in a steel jug internally coated with high alumina, with an internal diameter of 17 A second test step was performed in the laboratory mill of an Engines Segor model BB10 of a cement factory located in southeast Brazil, and the characteristics obtained are described in The results of the KRS and GBFS chemical analyses are presented in Based on the results, the GBFS is basically composed of CaO, SiO Although the GBFS and KRS constituents are practically the same, they differ in content because of the type of manufacturing process: the GBFS is a by-product of pig iron production (in a blast furnace), whereas the KRS is a by-product of pig iron desulfurization (in the Kambara reactor). The chemical analysis of the CP III 40 cement purchased for the execution of the research is presented in The GBFS X-ray diffractogram is shown in    Considering the stoichiometry of the dehydration reaction of Ca(OH) Similarly, based on the mass loss between 700 Other calcium compounds likely present in the sample were CaSO Analyses of the thermolysis curve in According to The granulometric distribution results of the GBFS and KRSs are shown in  The fineness modulus was calculated according to ABNT NBR NM 248:2003 The maximum characteristic size corresponds to an opening in millimeters of the mesh, in which the accumulated retained percentage of the material is ≤5%. For the KRS, the maximum characteristic size obtained is 4.75 For the KRS analysis, according to The analysis of the fractions in 150 Considering that the cement industry utilizes particle sizes smaller than 75 The unit weight of the GBFS and KRS was determined by Kaeme Engenharia following the requirements of the ABNT NBR NM 45 standard The SEM results for the GBFS and KRS are shown in The KRS by-product shown in In addition, EDS is performed for the GBFS and KRS samples to spectrally evaluate their elemental composition to identify their elements, thus providing a quantitative characterization of the samples. By EDS, O, Ca, Si, Al, and Mg are detected in the GBFS by-product, with O, Ca, and Si having the highest percentages. This corroborates the chemical analysis tests. A similar analysis was performed for the KRS. The sites selected for the EDS and spectra 8 and 9 for this by-product are shown in For the KRS, the chemical elements present in spectra 8 and 9 are O, Ca, Si, and Al, with O and Ca present in the highest percentages. These values corroborate the chemical analysis and X-ray diffraction tests for the by-product. The slag pH was determined according to ABNT NBR 10004 The results show that the KRS is more alkaline than the GBFS. The higher pH of the KRS implies more OH As mentioned above, CP III cement was used as a base for preparing the blends. Because the GBFS is already a constituent of CP III cement and is already widely used and standardized for such applications, the grinding test was performed only for the KRS. For the grinding of the KRS, empirical tests were performed using a Marconi ball mill from the Ceramics Laboratory of the IFES Campus Vitória. A steel jug internally coated with high alumina was used, with an internal diameter of 17 Calculations of the total ball mass, ball size distribution, and sample mass were performed according to the Herbst–Fuerstenau model All the beads were placed in a jar together with the sample to perform each of the grindings denoted as #1, #2, #3, and #4. At the end of the first grinding, the sample was still visually coarse, so that sieving was not performed to evaluate the fineness. After three millings while varying the time and frequency, a significant amount of material was retained in the 0.15-mm and 0.075-mm-sieves. The fourth test was performed by reintroducing a part of the test #3 sample for another 4 After various millings under different conditions, the equipment used at laboratory scales was not efficient for grinding the KRS. Thus, a partner company, a cement manufacturer, was contacted to help in the grinding of this by-product. The KRS was crushed prior to milling to ensure the input particles were smaller than 3.5 The results of the last milling test showed an evolution relative to the previous results presented in In this study, the KRS had a considerably lower concentration of SiO The GBFS was predominantly amorphous, whereas the main phases present in the KRS were Ca(OH) Based on the TG, it was estimated that the KRS had 12.91% Ca(OH) The KRS had a maximum characteristic particle size of 4.75 Based on the fineness modulus (2.34 and 2.54 for the KRS and GBFS, respectively), both the KRS and GBFS fineness values were classified in the optimal zone according to ABNT NBR 7211:2005 The KRS had a specific area of 0.307 It was necessary to perform mechanical activation by grinding the slag because the cement industry works with particle sizes smaller than 75 The KRS had a unit weight larger than that of the GBFS (1437.47 In the SEM analyses, the predominantly spherical KRS particles aggregated more than the GBFS particles, which had polygonal and spherical morphologies. The KRS was more alkaline than the GBFS, which may have contributed the OH The grinding of the KRS using the Marconi equipment with alumina balls was not efficient possibly owing to the lower density of the balls compared to that of the steel balls. The grinding of the KRS using the same clinker milling conditions (BB10 mill with steel balls) was more efficient, reaching 23% of material retention in a 75-μm-sieve. However, the fineness modulus required for the clinker was not reached for the KRS. Thus, it was concluded that KRS is a by-product that offers the possibility of use for the manufacture of Portland cement, although it will be necessary to perform thermal, mechanical, or chemical activations so that the cement requirements are reached. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors would like to thank the