This article discusses a method to recover silver from waste X-ray films with the spent fixing bath. At first, the silver in the waste fixing bath was reduced by KBH4 at pH 8~9. Then the silver-free fixing bath was oxidized by air and some main components were replenished. As a leaching solution, the silver-free spent fixing bath was used to recover silver on the waste X-ray films. The total silver recovery from the spent fixing bath and waste X-ray films was 98.0% and 95.8%, respectively. The purity of recovered silver was more than 99.5%. The spent fixing bath can be reused again in the present method. The discharging of wastewater can be reduced and the polymer substrate of waste X-ray films can also be recycled.Due to its high photosensitivity, silver salt has been widely used in light sensitive materials. From 2002 to 2005, the consumption of silver in China increased at a rate of 8% every year, and reached 208 tons a year in 2004 ( During the usage of light sensitive materials, about 80% of the silver enters the fixing bath and the remainder (about 20%) remains in the films. Many methods of silver recovery from the fixing bath have been reported, such as electrowinning ( The spent fixing bath used in the development of color sensitive materials contains [FeEDTA] KBH The spent fixing bath of Fuji (10 L, the content of silver is 6.37 g/L) was collected from a photo studio. The waste X-ray films were produced by the Second Film Factory of China. All reagents in the experiment were AR degree. KBH The pH of spent fixing bath was adjusted to 8~9 with 10 wt.% NaOH aqueous solution, then 10 wt.% KBH The waste X-ray films were cut into small pieces in 2 mm The raw silver powder reduced by KBH KBH The efficiency of KBH KBH The relationship between the KBH The silver-free fixing bath was oxidized by air until there was no increase in its absorbency. When air was passed into the solution, some of Na Due to the high-remaining concentration of [FeEDTA] 20 g of films and a 100 mL leaching solution were added into a 200 mL beaker. The pH was adjusted by 10 wt.% sodium carbonate or 10 wt.% acetic acid. The solution was stirred until the films became transparent. The remaining silver on the films was analyzed. The silver recoveries at different pH were calculated by Eq. There was effective silver leaching around pH 8. Since Fe 30 g of waste films and 100 mL of leaching solution were added into a 200 mL beaker. The solution was stirred and the silver concentration was detected at every 2 min. The results are illustrated in The volume of leaching solution was kept at 100 mL. Different quantities of waste films were added into the solution. The silver recovery was detected and the results are shown in With an increase of mass to volume ratio, the silver recovery decreased. When the ratio was less than 4:10, the silver recovery was over 99.0%. If the ratio was too large, it would be hard to stir. The suitable ratio is 3:10. A 100 mL leaching solution was used to leach 30 g of waste films. After 20 min leaching, the waste films were filtered and the solution was used to leach another 30 g of waste films. The above operation was repeated several times. The silver recovery changes with the number of treating times as illustrated in The obtained silver powder was purified by the method described in In the present work, the possibility of recovering silver on waste X-ray films by spent fixing bath has been described. The spent fixing bath could act as a leaching solution to dissolve the silver on waste X-ray films. The silver recovery in spent fixing bath and on waste X-ray films has been discussed in detail. The valuable polymer substrate is not destroyed and can be further recycled. At first, the spent fixing bath was reacted with KBH After the silver was recovered, the silver-free fixing bath was oxidized by air and then analyzed. The main components [FeEDTA] At pH 8 and 3:10 mass to volume ratio, the waste X-ray films were leached for 20 min and then filtered. After repeating the above operation six times, the silver recovery of the waste X-ray films was 99.4%. The total silver recovery from waste X-ray films was 95.8% and the purity of the silver was 99.5%.