Nonunion of the distal humerus is a relatively uncommon complex elbow problem. Recovery from a distal humerus fracture is prolonged and painful; therefore, nonunion may only be distinguished by loosening or breakage of the implants or instability of the elbow. Unstable nonunions are treated with open reduction and internal fixation with autogenous bone graft, release of contracted elbow capsule, and release of the ulnar nerve. Total elbow arthroplasty may be used in relatively infirm, older patients.Nonunions are traditionally diagnosed no earlier than 6 It is helpful to know the initial mechanism of injury, previous surgeries including obtaining previous operative reports when possible, current symptoms and disability, and functional expectations. Although a small subset of patients may develop a relatively painless and functional nonunion, most patients with nonunion experience pain, instability, and limited motion. Inability to support the hand away from the body due to instability of the humerus is disabling. Ask the patient about symptoms of ulnar neuropathy and evaluate the motor and sensory function of the nerve. Look for any outward signs of infection. Previous incisions are considered. The alignment of the extremity at the elbow should be assessed for varus/valgus and flexion/extension deformities. Active range of motion (ROM) at the elbow is recorded. One hundred degrees of flexion and extension between 30° and 130° and 50° each of supination and pronation are considered adequate for most activities of daily living ( Patients with implant failure/loosening and bone loss or a synovial pseudoarthrosis at the supracondylar level often have gross instability through the fracture. It can be Standard anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs are assessed for signs of non-union, including persistent fracture lines, progression of deformity, or loosening or breakage of implants. Bone stock and alignment are also evaluated on radiographs. The normal angle between the humeral shaft and the proximal ulna is between 10° and 18° ( Mitsunga classified distal humerus fracture nonunions by anatomic location and fracture orientation ( Most nonunions of the distal humerus are treated with surgery. When a patient has limited pain and the ability to support the hand and bring it to the mouth, or medical comorbidities that preclude operative intervention, a hinged elbow brace may provide additional comfort and stability. In the setting of adequate bone stock, revision open reduction internal plate and screw fixation, with or without bone grafting, is the preferred treatment. Most healthy, active patients are unable or unwilling to accept the restrictions of a TEA. Ninety percent of nonunions heal after surgery, although motion is often limited ( The patient is positioned in the lateral decubitus position. The arm is supported over a rolled pillow or in an arm holder. If previous incisions allow, then the authors prefer a midline posterior incision. Once skin flaps are elevated, the ulnar nerve is identified, mobilized, anteriorly transposed into the subcutaneous tissues, and protected. Previous operative notes can be reviewed to help find the nerve without injuring it. The nerve is identified proximally and is dissected free for at least 6 In patients with ulnar neuropathy, external neurolysis (opening the scarred epineurium) can be considered. McKee described nine patients with sensory and motor deficits in the ulnar nerve distribution undergoing revision ORIF for distal humeral nonunion. After subcutaneous transposition, all nine patients had improvement of their sensory and motor deficits ( For cases in which the surgeon is committed to revision ORIF, a posterior approach to the elbow with an olecranon osteotomy offers excellent exposure of the distal humerus and the articular surface ( When elevating the olecranon away from the trochlea, care should be taken because if articulation is adherent, the cartilage can easily be stripped with hasty elevating of the olecranon ( With the olecranon reflected proximally, the fracture site is opened, removing fibrous and synovial tissue and opening up the sclerotic bone ends. The triceps and posterior capsule are typically contracted and scarred at the nonunion and posterior humerus. The capsule is incised and the triceps elevated. The anterior capsule is released off of the anterior humerus through the nonunion. If the distal fragment is small, then the proximal fragment can be shaped into a point or a “V” (typically at the point of the thin olecranon/coronoid fossa bone), which is placed in a “trough” created in the intramedullary part of the distal fragment ( Precontoured plates may or may not fit adequately depending on the distortion of the anatomy, and 3.5-mm reconstruction plates can be used ( Every screw should pass through a plate. Every screw in the distal fragment should end in a fragment on the opposing side. As many screws as possible should be placed in the distal humerus and should interdigitate in the distal segment. Screws should be as long as possible. The articular segment should be fixed to the metaphysis and diaphysis with compression plating. Plates should be strong enough to resist breaking (3.5-mm plates at least; one-third tubular plates are insufficient). For very small meetings, it can be helpful to place a third plate posteriorly to improve stability ( Combined intra-articular and extra-articular nonunions represent a complex problem and are technically challenging. In general, these fractures have worse outcomes than their extra-articular counterparts. McKee reviewed 13 patients with combined nonunions, and bony union was achieved in all patients with an average flexion/extension arc of 97° and 7 of 13 patients having residual pain. Structural corticocancellous autogenous bone graft from the iliac crest can be used to replace important parts of missing central articular bone to restore structure and hold the articular parts of the humerus in place. Cancellous bone is packed into metaphyseal defects. In cases of severe bone loss with shortening (>3 Isolated intra-articular nonunions, or so-called osteochondral nonunions, are uncommon. Headless compression screws and autogenous cancellous bone graft are typically used. Ring described three patients with osteochondral nonunions who were treated with revision ORIF and autogenous iliac crest bone grafting ( Patients leave the operating room in a posterior elbow splint. On postoperative day 1 (or after a few days), the splint is discontinued and patients are allowed to start active, self-assisted elbow stretches. No passive manipulation is allowed. Resistive exercises are started once there is radiographic evidence of union, usually between 2 and 4 Complications of surgery for nonunion include persistent nonunion, malunion, ulnar neuropathy, avascular necrosis, stiffness, heterotopic ossification, symptomatic hardware, and arthritis. McKee described 13 patients who underwent revision ORIF for malunion or nonunion. All fractures united an average of 25 TEA is a salvage operation that should be considered for infirm, inactive patients (usually >65 In the setting of acute distal humerus fractures, McKee performed a multicenter, prospective, randomized controlled trial of TEA compared with ORIF. Results included significantly better MEPS and Disabilities of Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) scores in the group undergoing TEA at 6-week and 6-month follow-up ( Ninety-one patients who underwent TEA for distal humerus nonunion were reviewed by Cil an average of 6.5 LaPorte described 12 patients who underwent TEA for distal humerus nonunions after attempted internal fixation ( In another series of 14 patients who underwent TEA for distal humerus nonunion, Figgie reported excellent functional improvements at an average of 5 Preoperatively, the patient can be evaluated for infection by measuring the erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein level, and complete blood count with differential, and perhaps aspiration. Alternatively, the surgery can be staged. At the first stage of surgery, all implants and devitalized bone are removed and five sets of cultures are obtained. The elbow arthroplasty is placed at a second stage after all cultures are negative or positive cultures are adequately treated. Radiographs should be examined for deformity of the humerus that may affect the prosthetic stem. In addition, if a previous ulnar osteotomy was used, the osteotomy site should be carefully assessed for nonunion. The patient is placed in lateral decubitus position with the elbow supported on a pillow bolster or elbow support; alternatively, they are positioned supine with the arm across their chest. A sterile tourniquet is applied. An extensile midline posterior approach to the elbow is used incorporating previous incisions when possible. Subcutaneous flaps are elevated medially and laterally to allow exposure of the epicondyles. The ulnar nerve is identified proximally on the medial side, isolated, and anteriorly transposed. The ulnar nerve is mobilized 6 TEA for nonunion can be performed without detaching the triceps from the olecranon. The triceps is posteriorly elevated from the humerus and the distal fracture fragments are excised creating a substantial working space. For some prostheses, bone fragments should be saved to create a bony wafer to rest behind the anterior flange of the humeral component. Removal of the distal fragment through the lateral window is recommended to avoid entanglement with the ulnar nerve. The humeral shaft is delivered through the lateral window. The details of preparation and insertion of the prosthesis are specific to the implant used. The rotation of the humeral component is gauged relative to the medial intermuscular septum or the relatively flat contour of the posterior humerus. The humerus is returned into the wound and attention is turned to the ulna. The ulna is delivered through the medial window with flexion of the elbow. If delivery is hindered by tension on the soft tissues, then up to 25% of the triceps insertion can be detached from the olecranon. Preparation is started with resection of the tip of the olecranon. The intramedullary canal of the ulna is then opened with a high-speed Trial implants can be inserted and the elbow taken through a ROM. Once final implants are selected, bone plugs are introduced into the canals and antibiotic cement mixing can begin. Cement is injected into the canals and the components are seated. Once the cement has set, the elbow is reduced into place and the cross-link pin is inserted. Postoperatively, the elbow is splinted with a posterior slab. It is removed a few days after surgery and self-directed, active-assisted, ROM exercises are started. Elbow arthrodesis is a salvage procedure that is rarely indicated or performed. This procedure was traditionally performed for patients with Potts disease of the elbow ( The position of fusion will vary based on the patient’s functional demands. Mighell and Kovack have described an appropriate range anywhere from 45° to 110° ( In a series of 14 patients, Koller fused patients at an average angle of 97.6° (range 85°–125°). Using posterior compression plating, he achieved bony fusion for 11 of 11 patients at a final follow-up of 37 Nonunion of the distal humerus is a challenging clinical problem for the patient and surgeon. In most cases, operative intervention is chosen to provide stability and to prevent pain and disability. Revision ORIF can achieve union, but there is often residual ulnar nerve neuropathy, pain, and stiffness. TEA is appropriate for infirm, inactive patients.