The presence of calcium (Ca) and magnesium (Mg) in the hydrometallurgical processing of base metals results in a number of difficulties. These problems range from the contamination of the final product, to high energy consumption and large bleed streams during electrowinning. Calcium poses a greater problem in sulphate solutions due to the low solubility of its sulphate salts. In the first part of this study, fluoride precipitation of calcium and magnesium is considered for investigation, using a batch precipitation reactor. The batch precipitation reaction investigated the effects of the quantity of fluoride, molar ratio of Ca to Mg, identity of the soluble fluoride and temperature. The possibility of controlling Ca and Mg through the precipitation of their respective fluorides, without the co-precipitation of nickel and cobalt was shown. At Mg to Ca molar ratio above 3, the precipitation of Mg dominated over that of Ca due to the former’s high concentration in the reaction vessel and therefore, its high activity. For a 10% stoichiometric excess amount of fluoride, 96.5% Ca and 98.5% Mg were removed. When the identity of soluble fluoride was considered, results demonstrated that NH4F solution caused a higher Ca and Mg precipitation compared with HF. This was found to be due to the high stability of the HF complex in solution when using HF as the fluoride source, resulting in a lower free fluoride activity in the solution. For the range investigated (45–65°C) temperature was found to have a negligible effect on the precipitation of the alkaline earth metals. The supersaturation ratio for CaF2 was 73 and 27 for MgF2 and it was found that while primary nucleation did not dominate, it could not be ruled out completely. A conceptual process is proposed whereby only a portion of the leach stream is subjected to the fluoride precipitation process, after which it is returned to lower the overall Ca and Mg concentrations. This method is expected to reduce the effect of the observed dominance of Mg precipitation in processes not requiring the maximum removal of both Ca and Mg. This study proposes the integration into the production line of a hydrometallurgical industry the three main steps of fluoride precipitation process and recovery; precipitation, solid–liquid separation and adsorption–desorption cycle of the unreacted fluoride.The developments of solvent extraction and ion exchange are responsible for the enhanced separation of base metals during the hydrometallurgical processing of complex ores ( A good technique for controlling the levels of Ca and Mg should be robust and environmentally benign. This is in line with the environmental legislation the world over, which is presently very stringent. Traditionally, bleeding was used to control the concentration levels of Ca and Mg in the electrolyte, but this is considered to be environmentally unfriendly. Recently, Thus, the objectives of this study were to initially investigate the feasibility of controlling Ca and Mg in a hydrometallurgical process through fluoride precipitation. A batch precipitation reactor was used for these purposes. The batch reaction process investigated the influences of the amount of fluoride, soluble fluoride source, Mg to Ca molar ratio and temperature. A conceptual process is presented for controlling the levels of Ca and Mg in the base metal solution. The supersaturation ratios of MgF It must be noted that the kinetics of the fluoride precipitation was not investigated at this stage as it was considered beyond the scope of this work. The base metal solution was prepared according to the procedure presented previously ( Two fluoride sources were used; either hydrogen fluoride (HF) or ammonium fluoride (NH The reactor used consisted of cylindrical container made of polypropylene (PP) material due to the low pH value used and the resistance of the PP to fluoride solution. The dimensions of the reactors and other accessories are summarized in Batch precipitation experiments were performed to investigate the effects of the level of fluoride addition (10%, 25%, 50%, 75%, 100% and 110% of the stoichiometric addition required for calcium and magnesium combined), molar ratio of magnesium to calcium (0:1, 1:1, 2:1, 3:1, 4:1 and 10.3:1), identity of the soluble fluoride used (NH The concentrations of the metal ions in solution and precipitate were determined by atomic absorption spectrometer (AAS). The liquid chromatography was used to determine the concentration of either fluoride or sulphate. Separately, in the presence of high sulphate concentration, fluoride ion-selective electrode was used to measure fluoride ion concentration. For the latter, a calibration curve was initially prepared by recording the potential values for a range of known fluoride concentration. The fluoride concentrations were then calculated from the measured potential values. The thermodynamic calculations were performed with FactSage 5.5, using its In this section the results obtained from the batch precipitation experiments are shown and discussed. The effects of different process conditions are investigated and where possible compared to simulated results obtained using FactSage. An investigation into the feasibility of the precipitation process was done in a batch reactor. The feasibility study considered such factors as reagent consumption, selectivity between the base metals and the alkaline earth elements, selectivity between calcium and magnesium, and the influences of environmental parameters such as temperature. The experimental data were compared with the computer generated data generated with FactSage. The computer-simulated values did not compare that well with the experimental data under all conditions. This could be due to the fact that many possible species are missing from the database as discussed. However, the aim of the simulation was not to predict the experimental data In Ca and Mg control by fluoride precipitation, it is important to establish the relationship between precipitate formation and the amount of fluoride used as a means of optimizing the use of reagents as well as avoiding the problem of possible gypsum precipitation in the solvent extraction circuit of the hydrometallurgical process. For comparison, the simulated data points are also included in Although Mg was thermodynamically favoured at the low additions of fluoride, both Ca and Mg were supersaturated and the precipitation reactions proceeded in parallel. A plausible reason for the dominance of Mg over Ca precipitation is due to the former’s high concentration in the reaction vessel and therefore, its high thermodynamic activity. The activity and activity coefficients of ionic Mg and Ca in solution as predicted by FactSage are shown in The measured concentration of free fluoride is plotted in  Computer simulation was done to validate the preceding assumption. The simulation was also done using FactSage with an input solution of equal volume to that used in the experiments and a fluoride addition equal to 100% of the stoichiometric amount necessary. However, no metal sulphates were included in the simulation and instead of using the Pitzer model, the The equilibrium constants ( Another factor that may limit the application of HF is the pH of the resulting solution. The measured pH of the HF solution as measured in the experiments is given in If the lower solubility of calcium fluoride were to be considered independently, it would be expected that the formation of CaF The results are presented in In In order to attempt to verify this postulate a simulation was done using the When one considers the lack of data for certain species in the FactSage Pitzer model, it becomes clear that while the model does have its limitations, it can probably be used with relative confidence in situations where NH The influence of temperature was investigated relative to the fluoride addition in the form of a factorial experimental design. A low and high level of 45 As mentioned in Section Solubility product values for both CaF The supersaturation ratios were calculated using the solubility product from the literature and the mean ionic activities calculated using FactSage. These ratios can now be used, along with other parameters, to determine whether the nucleation in the system is of a primary or secondary nature. In order to do this the number of solute entities ( Having presented pertinent results which were obtained from batch precipitation studies, this section proposes the integration into the process flowsheet of a hydrometallurgical industry such as that of Nkomati mines, the three main steps of fluoride precipitation process and recovery; precipitation, solid–liquid separation and adsorption–desorption of the unreacted fluoride. Detailed precipitation results for a reactor operated continuously and fluoride adsorption–desorption cycles were presented elsewhere ( A continuous precipitation reactor is used to accomplish fluoride precipitation. The important process parameters shown below were investigated experimentally ( At the above operating conditions, precipitates with relatively constant characteristics are produced. In earlier work (    Since the present system is operated at a low solids concentration, the physical method best suits the application because increasing the crystal concentration of the system would not adversely affect the operation. Meanwhile, it is proposed that the precipitation step be operated using ammonium fluoride at a 10% excess amount of fluoride. The volume ratio of the fluoride feed stream to the treated stream should be set at 5%. The solubility of the ammonium fluoride would allow this ratio to be reduced down to 2% if required. Other soluble fluorides, which would be accommodated by the overall process, are the base metal fluorides such as cobalt and nickel fluorides. Owing to the low solids concentration, the product stream from the precipitation step has to be subjected to a thickening step before the precipitates can be filtered. Part of the thickened stream has to be recycled to the precipitation reactor as seed crystals. Additionally, it may be considered to include a classification step such as a cyclone to recycle only the fine particles. There are a number of possibilities surrounding the solid–liquid separation step. For the Nkomati metals plant the precipitate product stream could first be thickened and then filtered using belt filters already available for the leach residue. With this implementation it would be important that the precipitate does not come into contact with the acidic leach solution (pH The following properties were observed for the precipitate and can be used in the design of the filtration system ( The best demonstrated available technology (BDAT) for fluoride removal from water is that based on activated alumina adsorption. Consequently, a lot of studies have been presented on the adsorption performance characteristics of activated alumina ( In the experimental study it was found that activated alumina successfully removed the fluoride ions from the base metal solution. Moreover, the adsorption media was regenerable. This latter property is important from economic and environmental point of view. During the investigation the following features were identified that could aid in future investigations ( The pH of the solution decreased during the loading cycle, requiring a pH adjustment step afterwards. The acidification of the activated alumina has to be optimized to ensure that during loading, the acid is not eluted. The ratio of the solution treated to the volume of the base solution required for regeneration was 2 to 1. This value has to be improved for the recycling of the fluoride. The volume ratio should at least be 20 to 1 (5% of the volume of the treated solution). A higher hydroxide concentration could be investigated for this purpose. Sodium hydroxide was used for the desorption of the column. The sodium hydroxide may not be compatible with overall process and another base such as ammonium hydroxide has to be investigated. This section summarizes the implementation of the conceptual process ( The settler has a twofold function. It provides a high residence time for crystal growth and serves as the first step in the solid–liquid separation. According to the experimental evaluation, the residence time could be fixed at 30 Finally the excess fluoride is removed and recovered in an adsorption–desorption cycle using activated alumina (5) as an adsorption media. The recovered fluoride is returned to the mainstream. The activated alumina is regenerated using a basic media after which it is reused in another cycle. While sodium hydroxide was investigated as regenerate the use of ammonium hydroxide may be a better option as this would introduce the ammonium ion into the process. This study investigated the potential technological application of fluoride precipitation to control calcium and magnesium in the hydrometallurgical processing of base metal sulphate solution. In the first part of the investigation using batch precipitation reactor, the Mg precipitation dominance over Ca for sub-stoichiometric fluoride additions was shown. This was found to be due to the higher activity of Mg in solution, so that Mg precipitation proceeded with preferential consumption of fluoride. When the activity coefficients of Mg and Ca were investigated using FactSage it was found that although the activity coefficient of Mg was higher than that of Ca, it was of the same order and the higher activity of Mg could therefore be attributed to its high concentration relative to that of Ca. To remove an appreciable amount of Ca, the fluoride addition should be at stoichiometric or in excess amount. For example, a 10% excess fluoride addition resulted in the precipitation of 96.5% and 98.5% of the Ca and Mg, respectively. On the variation of Mg to Ca molar ratio, it was observed that Ca precipitation dominated for molar ratios up to 3:1 after which Mg precipitation dominated. With the activity coefficients of Mg predicted using FactSage being somewhat higher than that of Ca for all fluoride additions, one would expect that Mg dominance would kick in as soon as the Mg to Ca molar ration was greater than or equal to 1, which was the case in the FactSage simulations. The reason that this did not occur in the experiments is thought to be due to the existence of a significant amount of the MgSO When ammonium fluoride and hydrogen fluoride were compared as a fluoride source for the precipitation reaction, the ammonium fluoride was found to be superior (i.e. more MgF Under the conditions investigated an increase in temperature from 45 In the second part, a conceptual process was proposed based on the experimental observations summarized in this study and some previously presented. This process could be used to control the levels of Ca and Mg in base metal solution in situations where maximal removal is not required. To avoid the dominance of Mg precipitation over Ca, it is proposed to subject only a portion of the base metal stream to fluoride precipitation. A 10% excess of fluoride would be added to the split stream to effectively remove Ca and Mg. Thereafter, the precipitate is removed through a solid–liquid separation step, followed by the adsorption–desorption cycle of the unreacted fluoride using activated alumina. The split stream is then circulated back to the process line to lower the overall Ca and Mg concentration. To expedite the understanding of the conceptual process, a block flow diagram for the proposed implementation was presented.