The precipitation of fine aluminium hydroxide (Al(OH)3) powders (average particle size <2 μm) from Bayer plant liquor was investigated, which is important for the production of specialty alumina (Al2O3) products. The process involves first a nucleation stage to form primary seeds by adding an acidic aluminium sulphate solution to a Bayer plant liquor which contains 210 g/L caustic (assayed as Na2CO3) and an alumina/caustic ratio (A/C) of 0.65. Further addition of the plant pregnant liquor to this primary seed slurry produced secondary gibbsite seeds required for the precipitation of high quality fine aluminium hydroxide powder. The precipitation was controlled at 50–60 °C using 0.5–1.0% w/w secondary seed addition with respect to the alumina content in the pregnant liquor.For over a century, the conventional Bayer process has been employed to produce alumina (Al Fine alumina (particle size range 2–5 μm) and ultra-fine alumina (particle size < Several studies have been conducted to optimize the conditions for the nucleation, agglomeration and crystal growth that take place during the precipitation of fine aluminium hydroxide from Bayer plant liquors because most plant liquors contain organic contaminants which interfere with the formation of good gibbsite crystals ([   This study, therefore, was conducted to determine the optimal conditions for the precipitation of fine aluminium hydroxide (average particle size 1–3 μm) from a plant Bayer liquor, that could be adopted by conventional alumina plants. As indicated from the above studies, the main focus was on the size and characteristics of the seed material and the promotion of nucleation, rather than crystal growth or agglomeration. The gibbsite structure of the fine precipitate formed in this study was confirmed by XRD. All precipitation solutions (Bayer liquors) used in this study were prepared at the KC Corporation alumina plant in Mokpo, Korea. The plant liquor has a constant alumina/caustic ratio (A/C) of 0.65 and typically contained 210 g/L caustic (expressed as Na The precipitation tests were performed using 1-litre polypropylene plastic bottles rotated with a variable speed rotator, which was immersed in a thermostatic controlled water bath set at 50–60 °C to prevent auto-precipitation. Samples were collected at pre-determined intervals and all pregnant or spent liquors were analyzed for their alumina and caustic content by titration using the sodium gluconate method and an automatic titrator, Titrando, Metrohm (  To form aluminium hydroxide primary seeds, an aluminium sulphate solution containing 80 g/L Al (expressed as Al There are several reaction steps involved: The dissolution and hydrolysis of aluminium sulphate to form aluminium hydroxide and sulphuric acid: Precipitation of aluminium hydroxide from the aluminate solution by the acid The resulting reaction is expressed as: Neutralization of the free caustic in the pregnant liquor by additional acid also takes place. Using the above solutions, the molar stoichiometric relationship for precipitating aluminium hydroxide and neutralization of all the free caustic from the pregnant liquor is given by: Therefore, a volume ratio of 0.64 aluminium sulphate solution was required to completely precipitate all the available aluminium hydroxide to form seeds and to completely neutralize the free caustic (calculated as 1.3 M). However, it was found that although this volume consumed most of the free caustic causing the pH to drop to pH 11, aluminate ion (and hence associated OH The primary seed preparation step required vigorous agitation at 1000 rpm for a maximum of 15 min to prevent the agglomeration and coagulation of fine aluminium hydroxide seeds. Stirring for a longer period of time caused the fine precipitate to break up, making it more amorphous and hence more difficult to handle in the next step. It was also found that this step required the addition of a 4:1 molar ratio of water/alumina content to reduce the viscosity of the primary seed slurry. Under a scanning electron microscope (SEM), the size of the fine particles produced was generally much smaller than 2 μm, as shown in  More pregnant liquor was then added to the primary seed slurry at 30% seed loading and held at 60 °C for 4 hs to produce secondary seeds for the final precipitation stage. Under optimum conditions, well-crystallized seeds of gibbsite were formed as shown by XRD analysis ( The prepared secondary seed slurry was used in plant liquor for the precipitation of the final fine aluminium hydroxide product by mild stirring for 20 h. It was important to control the secondary seed slurry addition ratio (i.e. ratio of alumina content in seeds and pregnant liquor) and the precipitation temperature to obtain a desirable fine aluminium hydroxide product. Thus the operational parameters identified as critical for the production of fine aluminium hydroxide are stoichiometry of aluminium sulphate addition, water dilution ratio, primary and secondary seed slurry addition ratios and precipitation temperature. Addition of a stoichiometric amount of aluminium sulphate with respect to the alumina content in the plant liquor produced more amorphous primary and secondary seeds. It is also clear that with this type of seed, the mean size ( The addition of water during the formation of primary seeds also appears to be critical for the formation of the right seeds for precipitation. High water dilution lowers the slurry viscosity; but too much dilution causes a significant reduction in the concentration of caustic and alumina in the secondary stage spent liquor, rendering it undesirable for plant operation. A dilution of 6:1 water/aluminate ion also causes an increase in the final product mean size to 3.5 μm, as shown in   The effect of precipitation temperature is clearly shown in  Typical products obtained from plant operations have confirmed the above results. As shown in The conditions for seed preparation and precipitation are critical in determining the mean particle size of the final aluminium hydroxide product. In the primary seed preparation stage, an amorphous pseudo-boehmite was formed using various aluminium sulphate solution additions. A stoichiometric addition with respect to the aluminate ion content in the plant liquor offered the best seed for use in subsequent stages. This stage also required water dilution and fast stirring at 1000 rpm for no more than 15 min. A 30% primary seed addition was adopted for the preparation of the secondary seed slurry at 60 °C for 4 h in order to obtain a crystalline gibbsite phase. Addition of 0.5–1.0% secondary seed within the temperature range of 50–60 °C for 20 h produced fine aluminium hydroxide with a mean particle size of 1–2 μm. These conditions have been adopted in plant operations at KC Corp for over 2 years, providing a gibbsite product with acceptable specifications for size and other qualities. Assistance from KETEP (Korean Institute of Energy and Resources Technology Evaluation and Planning) for this research was greatly appreciated.