Rotor-stator emulsification devices are versatile tools for the production of fine emulsions in various industrial sectors. These devices are particularly useful when high viscous emulsions need to be processed and when emulsifiers with slow adsorption kinetics are used. In these cases, rotor-stator devices are capable of generating much smaller droplets than, e.g., high-pressure homogenizers.
               This chapter presents different rotor-stator devices for batch and continuous processes, such as high-shear mixers, disperser discs, colloid mills, and in-line gear-rim devices, and outlines possible modes of operation. Furthermore, basic concepts are explained that help to manipulate the emulsion droplet size generated in rotor-stator devices. Different process and formulation parameters and how they influence the emulsion droplet size are discussed in detail to optimize emulsion processes toward nanoemulsion production. Finally, examples of successful nanoemulsion preparation by rotor-stator devices are given.  Batch Devices Continuous Devices   The Power Density Concept as a Tool to Scale Batch Processes The Energy Density Concept as a Tool to Compare Continuous Processes  Influence of Process Parameters Influence of Formulation Parameters    Rotor-stator devices are widely used in the industry not only for emulsification purposes but also for general dispersion and comminution tasks. They are relatively easy to install into existing vessels and tanks and require comparably low costs of investment. For these reasons, rotor-stator processes are often the emulsification process of choice in many industrial sectors. In processes aimed at the production of nanoemulsions, rotor-stator devices are often used to prepare a coarse emulsion and before additional comminution steps by, e.g., high-pressure homogenization. The reason is that rotor-stator emulsification is probably the least favorable method for the one-step production of nanoemulsions. It is very difficult to achieve droplet sizes below 1 For this purpose, the chapter is structured as follows: at the beginning, different rotor-stator devices commonly found in laboratories and in industrial plants are presented. Furthermore, different process designs, in which rotor-stator devices can be used, are outlined shortly. Next, basic concepts are explained that help to manipulate the emulsion droplet size generated in rotor-stator devices. Finally, some examples from literature are listed that show which combination of process and formulation design can lead to stable nanoemulsions. The overall aim is to highlight the interacting parameters in rotor-stator processes and how to control them. Rotor-stator emulsification devices are commercially available in a wide variety of constructive designs by a large number of suppliers. All of these designs have in common that one part of the device is moving while the other one is stationary. Designs in which the two parts of the apparatus are moving at different speeds relative to each other are available as well. These devices are also known as rotor-rotor emulsification devices. There are different ways to classify rotor-stator or rotor-rotor devices. One common way is to differentiate between batch and in-line devices. The latter ones are suitable for the continuous production of emulsions. The most common constructive designs of rotor-stator devices are explained in the following subchapters. This overview is by no means complete as a lot of company-specific designs that are often patented can be found as well. Many companies all over the world market rotor-stator devices: Chemineer, Ekato, Gea, IKA Werke, Kinematica, Proxes, Ross, Rayneri, Silverson, Symex, and Ystral are examples, but this list is by no means complete. Rotor-stator device suppliers are also common guests at chemical engineering fairs where equipment can be inspected. High-shear mixers, or radial discharge mixers, are long dispersing elements inserted into a vessel holding the liquids to be emulsified. These elements typically consist of two parts: (1) a hollow stator with—sometimes exchangeable—screens or an axial slotted rim at the tip and (2) a coaxially arranged rotating shaft inserted into the stator. Different rotor designs are in use such as blades or gear-rim units (see High-shear mixers come in various sizes, and their constructive design can exhibit various complexities. The diameter of the dispersing element can be as small as 1 For large-scale industrial applications, suppliers also offer dispersing elements with diameters up to half a meter. Several tons of products can be processed at once with these devices. Here, the operating mode is comparable to lab-scale equipment, but the dispersing element is fixed installed into the reactor. Production-scale high-shear mixers are usually capable of rotational speeds between 1000 and 5000 Because of the fixed installation of the dispersing element, thorough circulation of the fluid within the vessel can be a challenge particularly at high fluid viscosity. Therefore, special attention needs to be put on a proper scaling of the high-shear mixer. Suppliers can usually help with finding the optimal ratio between rotor-stator diameter and vessel volume. Furthermore, to ensure proper circulation, high-shear mixers can be installed eccentrically, and they are often used in combination with anchor or spiral agitators. Droplet breakup in high-shear mixers usually takes place in inertial-turbulent flow conditions. Due to the typically large vessel volumes, high-shear mixing processes are characterized by an inhomogeneous energy input, which often leads to emulsions with wide droplet size distributions ( Disc systems, or disperser or dissolver discs, are a specific type of agitators for vessels. A flat disc with toothed rim is attached to a rotating shaft, which is top-mounted to a vessel (see Mostly, disperser discs are used to disperse solids in a liquid. They are very suitable for high viscous products, which is why they are very common in the dye and lacquer industry. They are also able to produce fine droplets in high viscous emulsions of up to 10 Gear-rim dispersing units are rotor-stator devices that consist of at least two coaxially meshed rings equipped with radial holes or slots of different size (see During emulsification, the liquid is sucked into the device in axial direction and is accelerated due to centrifugal forces caused by the moving rotor (see Colloid mills consist of a cone-shaped rotor and stator, which are coaxially aligned. Liquid flows in axial direction through the narrow gap between rotor and stator (see Rotor-stator devices are available for batch and for continuous processes (see schematics in In-line devices are mostly used in continuous processes; see However, in-line devices can also be used in batch processes. One possible process design is to use two storage tanks that are connected by a pipe in which the in-line device is installed. The product is now pumped from one storage tank to the other passing the in-line homogenizer ( The mechanical emulsification process comprises the steps of droplet breakup and immediate droplet stabilization ( When droplets are broken up, new interface is created, which needs to be stabilized by the adsorption of emulsifier molecules. Stabilization kinetics competes with kinetics of collision of unstabilized droplets ( Mechanical emulsification processes are complex processes characterized by the occurrence of spatial and temporal inhomogeneities of the generated stresses. In order to improve the understanding of rotor-stator processes and therefore to gain better control of the resulting emulsion morphology, different attempts have been made. Experimental approaches involved the investigation of optically accessible rotor-stator devices in order to visualize flow patterns within the device ( In batch processes, the magnitude of the stresses that can be used for droplet breakup is determined by the power density where Flow in agitated vessels is considered to be turbulent at Reynolds numbers with For each stirrer type, there exists a Newton number The relationship between Following that, the Sauter mean diameter The exponents In continuous emulsification processes, the magnitude of deforming stresses does depend not only on the power density but also on the residence time Similar to batch processes, in turbulent flow, the Sauter mean diameter In steady laminar shear flow, however, not the disperse phase viscosity but the viscosity ratio between disperse and surrounding phase is relevant for the mean droplet size: with The mean droplet size of emulsions produced under various conditions can be plotted over the energy density applied to prepare these emulsions. The slope of the resulting curve can be used to analyze emulsification processes concerning their efficacy and to compare different processes ( Once such curves have been created for a formulation and an emulsification device, they can also be used for the scale-up of emulsification processes: in order to produce an emulsion with the desired droplet size, the corresponding energy density is simply read from the diagram. The process parameters necessary to achieve this energy density, however, can freely be chosen ( When recoalescence is suppressed, higher energy density leads to smaller emulsion droplet sizes. Various process parameters are available, which allow for intensifying the energy density in rotor-stator devices. These are foremost the speed, size, and design of the rotor and the rotor-stator size ratio. All of these parameters and how they can be used to obtain nanoemulsions are described in the next chapters. Increasing the rotational speed is perhaps the most intuitive way to reduce the droplet size in rotor-stator emulsification processes. The described relationship between droplet size and rotational speed is universally true for all rotor-stator systems provided that all other process and formulation parameters are kept constant. The results for in-line gear-rim devices were confirmed by Hall et al. in a more recent publication ( Several studies report reduced droplet sizes at higher rotational speeds when emulsions were prepared by high-shear mixers ( Increasing the rotational speed of the impeller reduces the droplet size in agitated vessels as well. Rotors with larger radius In in-line rotor-stator devices, this leads to smaller droplets because of higher resulting energy densities. Karbstein investigated gear-rim dispersing units of different rotor diameters (see In colloid mills, adjusting the gap width between rotor and stator is a further option to increase energy densities. However, a possible second effect needs to be kept in mind: reducing the gap width also reduces the cross-sectional area causing the liquid to flow faster through the device when a constant volume throughput is set. Production lines typically run at constant volume throughput so that the product experiences shorter residence times within the disruption zone. Therefore, both higher shear forces and reduced residence times are a consequence of smaller gap widths. Both features influence the energy density; however, they counteract each other. Several parameters such as product viscosity determine which of the two effects will dominate droplet breakup in the end. Emulsions produced by batch devices show a comparable dependency of the droplet size on the rotor diameter as in-line gear-rim devices. Corresponding results have been reported for disperser discs of different size. Discs with diameters between 50 and 110 In order to achieve a higher energy density and therefore to produce finer emulsions, the design of the rotor or of the rotor-stator combination can be modified. In gear-rim devices, it is possible to vary the slot design of each gear-rim and to increase the number of concentrically arranged gear rims within each rotor-stator unit. Higher numbers of gear rims increase the shear intensity and reduce the volume stream of the emulsion, resulting in a higher energy input into the emulsion ( The influence of the slot size of the gear rims on the mean droplet size cannot be predicted that easily from theory. With decreasing slot size, droplets experience higher stresses, but the residence time in the high-shear zone decreases simultaneously, and both effects counteract each other (see the definition of energy density in Colloid mills often come with an interchangeable set of rotating cones that have grooves varying in shape and geometry. In an agitated vessel, it is recommended to use propeller stirrers or pitched blade impellers in order to obtain smaller droplets at equal power input ( Despite the common approach to average power and energy input into the emulsion, it could be shown, e.g., by numerical simulations ( In true batch devices, the power density distribution is even more inhomogeneous making longer processing times necessary to obtain fine emulsions. In lab-scale high-shear mixers, typical processing times are between 2 and 5 The droplet size in emulsions produced by rotor-stator devices is not only influenced by process parameters. Various formulation parameters can impact the emulsion morphology as well. As droplets are broken up by stresses transmitted onto one liquid phase by the surrounding second liquid phase, formulation parameters affecting the viscosity of the system and thus the magnitude of the transmitted stresses are of importance. This can be the oil type, the disperse phase concentration, or the use of stabilizers. These parameters mainly affect droplet breakup. Other formulation parameters such as the type of emulsifier and its concentration impact the stabilization of the newly formed droplets. By reducing immediate recoalescence, these parameters also influence the droplet size of emulsions. In rotor-stator devices, droplets are broken up by stresses transmitted onto them by the surrounding liquid phase. Therefore, the viscosity of the continuous phase is one of the key parameters to influence the droplet breakup and the emulsion droplet size. Most of the time, higher viscosity of the continuous phase leads to smaller droplets as shown in Similar results have been reported for in-line gear-rim systems, for high-shear mixers, for disperser discs ( However, the emulsion droplet size cannot be reduced infinitively by increasing the viscosity of the continuous phase. When the viscosity becomes too high, the Sauter mean diameter can also increase as the type of flow within the rotor-stator device may be affected as well. Higher emulsion viscosities restrict eddy formation and turbulence and instead promote laminar flow reducing droplet breakup efficacy. In contrast to the effect of the continuous phase viscosity, a high viscosity of the disperse phase usually leads to coarser emulsions and larger droplets. Altering the disperse phase viscosity as a formulation parameter is often not feasible in practical applications: Specific disperse phases are required, e.g., by formula; exchanging the disperse phase often drastically alters the product properties of the entire emulsion. However, when using synthetic oils (mineral or silicone oil), variations are possible as these oil types typically come in a large variety of viscosities. Viscosity also decreases with increasing temperature. However, heating up usually also involves an increased temperature of the continuous phase. Consequently, droplet breakup might be worse due to a reduced continuous phase viscosity. When rotor-stator devices and process conditions are chosen in which droplet breakup occurs mainly in steady laminar shear flow, not only the viscosities of the individual phases but also the ratio between them can have an influence on droplet breakup. Well-known studies ( The influence of the viscosity ratio on the emulsification result is only important for devices and process conditions in which droplet breakup occurs in dominantly laminar flow such as colloid mills or certain gear-rim devices. For devices and process conditions in which mainly turbulent flow occurs (many stirrers and gear-rim device setups), the impact of viscosity ratio was found to be negligible ( Droplets are broken up by stresses transmitted onto them by the surrounding liquid phase. It was previously explained that finer emulsions can be achieved when the continuous phase viscosity is higher. The “effective medium approach” extends this concept by laying out that it is not so much the continuous phase viscosity but rather the emulsion viscosity that impacts droplet breakup. The emulsion viscosity, however, does not only depend on the continuous phase viscosity but also on the disperse phase ratio. At higher disperse phase ratios, the emulsion viscosity is higher, and more energy can be introduced into the emulsion system ( In terms of process and formulation design, these results mean that emulsions should preferably be produced at high disperse phase ratios to achieve small droplets. The emulsions can then be diluted to obtain an emulsion of the desired disperse phase ratio. However, this strategy only works out when recoalescence in the system is suppressed by, e.g., a proper choice of emulsifier (see following chapter). If the final droplet size is influenced significantly by coalescence, increasing the disperse phase ratio can even lead to much bigger droplets. This is also visualized in Studies exist in which the chosen process and formulation parameters lead to an emulsion system in which droplet breakup and coalescence are more or less balanced. In these studies, the mean droplet size is reported to be independent of the disperse phase ratio. For example, When droplets are broken up, they need to be stabilized immediately against coalescence. For this purpose, emulsifiers that adsorb to the newly created interface are used. However, adsorption kinetics of emulsifiers differ significantly, depending on their molecular structure (  The long residence times in rotor-stator devices combined with reduced stresses are one of their big advantages as they allow for the production of fine emulsions even with slow-adsorbing emulsifiers. However, depending on the exact process conditions and formulation parameters, recoalescence can be a challenge in rotor-stator devices, too, as was also seen in Therefore, if the emulsifier can be chosen as a formulation parameter, emulsifiers with fast adsorption kinetics should be preferred. If the formulation cannot be changed, it can be necessary to give the emulsifier more time for adsorption, which can be achieved by two means: Increase the residence time in the disruption zone of the rotor-stator device by reducing the flow rate. Reduced flow rates can be created by, e.g., emulsifying at high viscosities. Emulsify at enhanced turbulence in the emulsification device. This reduces the droplet coalescence rate as the contact time between two droplets becomes too short for droplets to actually coalesce ( Rotor-stator processes are usually not the emulsification method of choice for the production of nanoemulsions. Still, several studies can be found, which document the successful preparation of emulsions with very small droplet sizes in various rotor-stator devices (see A comparable formulation was used to prepare cosmeceutical emulsions ( True nanoemulsions, i.e., emulsions containing nanoobjects according to ISO/TS 27687:2008, were prepared by For miniemulsion polymerization, emulsions with mean droplet sizes < Although the use of rotor-stator systems for nanoemulsion production is rarely documented, these systems do have advantages compared with, e.g., high-pressure homogenizers. The strength of rotor-stator devices lies where high-pressure homogenizers cannot achieve satisfying emulsification results anymore, that is, emulsion of high viscosity stabilized by slow-adsorbing emulsifiers. Finally, disperser discs are reportedly well suited for extremely high viscous emulsions. Urban et al. prepared oil-in-water emulsions in which up to 15% corn oil was dispersed into a starch solution ( From these examples, it can be seen that rotor-stator emulsification is particularly suitable for the emulsification of highly viscous liquids. If an emulsion does not meet this criterion, the formulation can be adapted by relatively easy means in order to improve the processing conditions in rotor-stator devices. Stabilizers can be added to the continuous phase in order to increase the continuous phase viscosity as seen in In order to produce nanoemulsions in rotor-stator processes, very high energy densities must be generated by the device, and all emulsion droplets within the product must be equally stressed. For this reason, rotor-rotor devices are particularly useful as they can generate higher stresses than rotor-stator devices. In both rotor-rotor and rotor-stator devices, high energy densities can be achieved (a) by high peripheral velocities (i.e., large rotor diameter and high rotational speed), (b) by high product viscosities, (c) by a longer emulsification time, and (d) by higher disperse phase ratios. It is, for example, possible to prepare an emulsion at a higher disperse phase ratio so that the overall emulsion viscosity is increased. After the emulsification step, the emulsion can be diluted with pure continuous phase to achieve the desired disperse phase ratio without altering the droplet size as described by