This chapter examines phosphorus release and the inhibitory effects of periphyton on cyanobacterial growth. The released loads of exchange phosphorus (exch-P) including labile-P and Fe/Al-P from sediments to the overlying water decreased significantly after the introduction of periphyton. The presence of periphyton significantly inhibited cyanobacterial (Microcystis aeruginosa) growth. The inhibition of cyanobacterial growth could be attributed to allelopathy between periphyton and cyanobacteria.The quality of drinking water has deteriorated with increasing inputs of external pollution loads ( Many technologies have been used in situ to reduce P loads in water via controlling P release from sediments. These include the application of lake marl ( Periphyton is a complex mixture of algae, cyanobacteria, heterotrophic microbes, and detritus that is attached to submerged surfaces in most aquatic ecosystems, serving as an important food source for invertebrates, tadpoles, and fish ( One of the objectives of this chapter is to examine whether the P release between sediments and overlying water is affected by the introduction of periphyton. As the P released from sediments is directly corrected with the growth of algae, the second objective of this chapter is to investigate whether the algal growth was inhibited by periphyton through affecting the P release and to what extent. The parameters of the water and sediments used in the experiment are presented in The experimental microcosm was made of glass and its dimensions were as follows: length Three microcosms were used for this experiment. One was used as the control and the other two for different treatments. The collected lake water was added into the microcosms after the sediments were laid on the bottoms of the microcosms. After the microcosms were static for 1 Two control experiments were conducted. One experiment was designed to determine whether the two periphyton substrates, AAMs and ISCs, had affected P movement and cyanobacterial growth. A 1000-mL measuring cylinder with 150 The other control experiment was designed to determine the extent of cyanobacterial growth inhibition by periphyton. A 1000-mL measuring cylinder with 150-mL sediments at the bottom and 850 Stock solutions for BG-11: Stock 1: Na Ferric ammonium citrate 0.6 Citric acid·1H CaCl Filter into a sterile bottle or autoclave Stock 2: MgSO Filter into a sterile bottle or autoclave Stock 3: K Filter into a sterile bottle or autoclave Stock 5 (microelements): H MnCl ZnSO CuSO COCl NaMoO For basic BG11 medium the following stock solutions were combined: Stock solution per L of medium Stock 1—10 Stock 2—10 Stock 3—10 Na Stock 5—1.0 NaNO The stocks were combined and pH adjusted to 7.5 (using 1.0 The sediments and overlying water used in the control experiments were as in  The water samples were collected from 0.5 The periphyton was peeled off by ultrasonication rather than a knife to avoid breaking microorganism cell walls. The periphyton biomass was weighed after the periphyton was filtered at 25–30°C for 2 The bacteria in periphyton were characterized by ERIC-PCR as follows. One gram of periphyton (filtration weight at 25–30°C for 2 PCR amplification of the flaA gene was performed by using the forward oligonucleotide primer (5′AGCTCTTAGCTCCATGAGTT3′) and the reverse primer (5′ACATTGTAGCTAAGGCGACT 3′) ( The Shannon–Weaver diversity index was calculated to assess the bacterial diversity in the periphyton. Statistical analysis (one-way ANOVA and regression analysis) using the software package SPSS 12.0 was performed. The level of statistical significance was accepted as To investigate the dominant species composition, the periphyton was observed under optional microscope and scanning electron microscope. The results showed that the heterotrophs in both AAM and ISC periphytons were dominated by bacteria. The algal communities in both AAM and ISC periphyton were dominated by diatoms ( The total P content in the periphyton (Periphyton-TP) was 0.59 The DTP TP in overlying water are directly associated with P release in sediments ( The largest proportion of the TP in the experiment sediments was Ca-P, followed by Residual-P. Their concentrations were maintained in the range The average TP concentration in the control sediments decreased after periphyton was introduced for 25 The average Fe/Al-P concentration in the control sediments markedly decreased, from 1.9 to 0.38 The Fe/Al-P was the largest portion of exch-P, accounting for 86.4% at the beginning of the experiment. The Fe/Al-P concentrations decreased with time not only in the control but also in the periphyton microcosms; in particular, the average exch-P concentration in the controls between day 25 and day 38 decreased by more than half of the original concentration (2.2 Cyanobacterial growth can be represented by chlorophyll-a concentration in overlying water, thus, the chlorophyll-a levels in the overlying water were determined to investigate whether cyanobacterial blooms occurred. During the first 23 There were two good relationships between the average concentration of TP and chlorophyll-a in the control during the whole experimental period ( Some middle- and large-sized protozoa are capable of capturing young cyanobacteria. Thus, a control experiment without the presence of protozoans was conducted to exclude the effects of protozoa on the growth of cyanobacteria. Microscope observation (×1000) did not find any microorganisms (i.e., protozoans) growing on the AAM and ISC surfaces at the end of the experiment, indicating no periphyton spontaneously formed during the experiment. The change trend lines of the average TDP and chlorophyll-a concentrations in the overlying water of both control and AAM and ISC treatments were very similar ( When the original chlorophyll-a concentration of Phosphorus is an essential element for the synthesis of nucleic acids, ATP, and proteins and is also the necessary element for cell division and growth of cyanobacteria ( The increase of transparency in the control microcosm from day 0 to day 16 of the experiment was due to coprecipitation ( The decreases in the TP and DTP concentrations in the overlying water in the periphyton microcosms were partly attributed to the uptake of P by periphyton, which resulted in phosphorus-limited cyanobacterial growth to a certain extent. According to the conservation law of materials, the amount of P released from sediment in the AAM and ISC periphyton microcosms was not equal to the total amount of the TP in the corresponding overlying water and Uptake-P in the periphyton. Periphyton often acts as a role of short-term sink for P ( The increases in the TP and DTP contents in the overlying water in the control microcosm were supplied by P released from sediments during the algal bloom from day 23 to day 38 of the experiment. It has been reported that some algal bacteria, like cyanobacteria, could induce the production of alkaline phosphatase ( The amount of P released in the control microcosm was dependent on exch-P release from sediments, accounting for 68.4%. This is inconsistent with the driving process for the rapid P release being the remineralization of organic P ( In the AAM and ISC periphyton treatments the periphyton acted as a P sink that could maintain the balance in overlying water of P concentration ( The negative linear relationship between the exch-P concentration in the sediments and the chlorophyll-a, TP, and DTP in the overlying water in the control microcosm showed that the released exch-P from the sediments was the main source of P for cyanobacterial growth in the absence of periphyton. In addition, the significant difference of exch-P in the sediments between each periphyton treatment and the control indicated that the introduction of the periphyton could positively retard the exch-P release from sediments into overlying water. Furthermore, the significant differences in the TP and the DTP in the overlying water between the periphyton treatments and the control showed that the application of periphyton decreased the P content in the overlying water through retarding P release as well as uptaking and adsorbing P from the water. However, the DTP contents of the overlying water of the periphyton microcosms from day 25 to day 38, ranging from 0.12–0.14 In addition, the control experiment excluded the effects of AAM and ISC substrates on P release and cyanobacterial growth. It implies that cyanobacterial growth in the periphyton treatment microcosms could not contribute to the adsorption of cyanobacterial cells by periphyton. One reason is that the increase of the average chlorophyll-a contents in the overlying water in the periphyton treatment microcosms was very trivial, only from 48.9 to 38.2 and 39.3 Another mechanism inhibiting cyanobacterial growth in the periphyton microcosms should be considered after excluding other possible mechanisms. Allelopathy, defined as the production and release of biochemical substances by one organism that influences others positively or negatively ( This study showed that the effects of periphyton should not be ignored during studies of P release between sediment and overlying water. The introduction of periphyton could delay (retard) the release of exchange phosphorus (Exch-P) from sediments, which also provides a promising biomeasure to reduce P release from sediments in eutrophic waters. Most importantly, the inhibitory effect of periphyton on cyanobacterial growth provides an environmentally benign biomeasure to control cyanobacterial blooms that frequently occur in centralized drinking waters worldwide. In addition, the potential inhibition of cyanobacteria growth through periphyton allelopathy provides a potential pathway for cyanobacteria growth control.