Concrete safety barriers used by the Quebec Ministry of Transportation (QMT) to delineate construction zones of traffic areas have an approximate service life of about 3–4 years. Utilization of fiber reinforced concrete (FRC) in barrier represents an economical alternative to delay crack initiation and propagation due to low velocity impacts occurring during their handling procedure. The objectives of this research project were to evaluate the impact of synthetic and steel fiber contents ranging from 0 to 1%-vol. on results of flexural and shear tests conducted under quasi-static and pseudo-dynamic conditions to select the appropriate FRC for the safety barrier. Adding steel fiber content from 0 to 1%-vol. to the reference concrete matrix increased the maximal quasi-static flexural (MOR) and shear (τmax
                     ) strengths up to 107% and 229%, respectively. Adding synthetic fiber content from 0 to 1%-vol. provided unsystematic trends, either a decrease of quasi-static MOR of 20% and an increase of τmax
                      of 27%. Besides, higher loading rate improved the MOR values by around 20–35% for all concretes considered (without fiber, with steel fibers and with synthetic fibers), τmax
                      was further increased up to 50–150%.Quebec Ministry of Transportation (QMT) uses as other transportation jurisdictions temporary concrete safety barriers to delineate construction zones of traffic areas. Over their service life, the concrete safety barriers are moved regularly from one construction site to another, or to storage sites. The concrete barriers are submitted to frequent and various low velocity impacts by handling equipment closed to lifting zones and at connection zones with other barriers Inclusion of macrofibers into concrete improves its quasi-static flexural and shear behaviors. In bending, the first cracking resistance is not significantly modified The quasi-static shear behavior depends on the friction effect between the two crack lips observed in concrete without fibers. The presence of fibers in FRC provide additional pull-out and dowel action in the shear crack and leads to better shear performance (higher shear stress and ductility) The concrete mechanical behavior also depends on the loading rate. The initial tensile or flexural stiffness do not seem to be significantly affected by the loading rate According to the literature review, the research project focused on FRC with high aspect ratio fibers and at high fiber dosage to obtain significant improvement of the mechanical behavior of the concrete safety barriers under low velocity impacts caused by the handling process and to extend their longevity. Existing studies on the mechanical behavior of FRC focus mainly on the flexural or shear quasi–static behavior and consider frequently one type of fiber. This study distinguishes from others by evaluating quasi–static and pseudo-dynamic behaviors under both bending and shear loadings, with two fiber types (steel and synthetic) and two fiber dosages (0.5 and 1% in volume). Air entrained concrete with a compressive strength of 35 MPa generally required for construction of temporary concrete safety barriers in Quebec (V-P QMT concrete mixtures) was selected as a reference material Details of concretes studied are presented in The same experimental program was also conducted on an air entrained concrete with a compressive strength of 50 MPa with different fiber dosages. Results of this experimental program are available in The binary cement used in the project is a Canadian GUb-SF type. This cement is composed of 91% of General Use (GU) type cement and 9% of silica fume. Its 28-days compressive strength is equal to 50 MPa. The sand came from a quarry with a grading range between 80 μm and 5 mm, its fineness modulus was 2.42 and its specific gravity was 2.694. Coarse aggregate was a crushed limestone aggregate. Its grading range was between 5 and 14 mm and its specific gravity was 2.688. Superplasticizers and air-entrained admixtures were used, the former was a polycarboxylate-based while the other was a liquid solution of sulfonated fatty acid. Properties of the fibers selected are presented in Compositions of air-entrained concretes are detailed in Fresh state properties and compressive strength were measured according to ASTM standards shown in Flexural tests were conducted on prisms of 150 mm-height, 150 mm width and 600 mm length with a span of 450 mm following ASTM C1018 Quasi-static flexural tests (Phase 1) were controlled in displacement by LVDT measuring the center net deflection of the specimen. Loading rate for concrete without fibers was 0.01 mm/min (equivalent to 1 MPa/s) until the end of the test, as specified in ASTM C78 Pseudo-dynamic tests (Phase 2) were performed to evaluate the mechanical behavior of materials for low velocities impact encountered by safety concrete barriers. These tests were controlled by the actuator displacement at a rate of 300 mm/min (5 mm/s) no matter the type of concrete tested. This loading rate was chosen to have a significant increase of the loading rate in comparison to the quasi–static loading rate while considering the limitations of the load frame and control system. It was not possible to control the tests with the LVDT as for quasi-static tests for security reasons in case of sudden failure or LVDT drop. A shear test setup was developed specifically for this project. It was done on prisms of 150 mm height, 150 mm width and 600 mm length according to modified standard JSCE SF6 Shear tests were controlled by the actuator displacement. For quasi-static tests (Phase 1), displacement was applied at an initial rate of 0.05 mm/min (equivalent to 0.1 MPa/s), specified in JSCE SF6 The fresh state and compressive properties (at the age of the flexural and shear tests) of the concretes studied in Phase 1 (quasi-static tests) and Phase 2 (pseudo-dynamic tests) are summarized in The fresh state specifications for a V-P MTQ concrete mixture was a slump of 150 ± 30 mm and air content of 5–8%. These specifications were encountered for most concretes tested. Furthermore, all concretes presented compressive strengths between 38 and 54 MPa and thus met the minimum requirement of 35 MPa.  The average quasi-static flexural load–displacement curves of the five concretes tested in Phase The inclusion of 0.5 and 1% in volume of hooked-end steel macrofibers led to first crack loads ( Then, both mixes with steel fibers (FRC35-StF) presented a hardening phase directly after the first cracking ( Despite the lower flexural strength performance of FRC35-SyF in comparison to FRC35-StF, both concretes presented higher failure energy when compared to NSC35-0% ( The average pseudo-dynamic flexural load–displacement curves of the three concretes tested in Phase 2 (NSC35-0%, FRC35-StF 0.5% and FRC35-SyF 0.5%) are illustrated in Pseudo-dynamic Low variabilities were obtained during shear tests between the three specimens of a same testing condition, as illustrated by examples of the quasi-static shear behavior of the NSC35-0% and FRC35-StF 1% in The average quasi-static shear stress-displacement curves of the five concretes tested in Phase The FRC35-StF showed much higher shear strengths ( The synthetic fibers also improved The average pseudo-dynamic shear stress-displacement curves of the three concretes tested in Phase 2 (NSC35-0%, FRC35-StF 0.5% and FRC35-SyF 0.5%) are illustrated in The initial shear rigidities under pseudo-dynamic solicitation were similar for the three concrete tested in Phase 2 ( Then, the pseudo-dynamic As The quasi-static flexural behaviors of FRC in comparison to NSC are in accordance with results from literature. Indeed, the flexural behavior of the NSC35-0% and FRC35-SyF The quasi-static shear behaviors of FRC are also in accordance with results from literature. Considering the shear behavior of FRC35-StF, the improvement of The The effect of increasing the steel fiber dosage (in FRC35-StF) on the quasi-static flexural and shear strengths was very important with a quasi-linear The synthetic fibers increased the flexural failure energy in service condition (for a displacement of 1 mm, The steel fibers brought a considerable improvement of the failure energy whether the service condition ( At equivalent fiber dosage, steel fibers provide much better flexural and shear behaviors than synthetic fibers. During quasi-static flexural tests (Phase 1), the higher flexural performance of the steel fibers is revealed by significantly higher Based on these results, the FRC35-StF 0.5% was considered the most promising material to improve low impact resistance of safety concrete barriers with a limited impact of the production cost in comparison to the FRC35-StF 1.0%. The FRC35-SyF As explained in the previous section, only FRC with 0.5% in volume of fibers were tested under pseudo-dynamic solicitations (Phase 2). An increase of the loading rate improved both maximal flexural ( Except for the In addition to improving the flexural and shear maximal strengths, increasing the loading rate also improved the flexural and shear failure energies in service condition ( Besides, applying a higher loading rate resulted in steeper stress decreases in the FRC specimens once the maximal flexural or shear strengths were reached. These steeper decreases in the post-peak stresses when increasing the loading rate were also observed in flexural tests by Koboyashi et al. on synthetic fiber reinforced concrete Temporary concrete safety barriers used by the Quebec Ministry of Transportation (QMT) to delineate construction zones of traffic areas have an approximate service life of about 3–4 years. Replacing the normal strength concrete by a fiber reinforced concrete in the barrier represents an economical alternative to delay crack initiation and propagation due to low velocity impacts occurring during their handling process. The objectives of the first step of this research project were to evaluate the improvement of bending and shear behaviors provided by synthetic and steel fibers under quasi-static and pseudo-dynamics loadings to select an optimal fiber reinforced concrete (FRC) for the safety barrier. Based on the experimental results, the following conclusions can be drawn: Adding steel fiber content from 0 to 1%-vol. to the reference concrete matrix NSC35-0% increased significantly and quasi linearly both maximal quasi static flexural ( Adding synthetic fiber content from 0 to 1%-vol. to the reference concrete matrix NSC35-0% provided unsystematic trends, either a slight decrease of quasi-static At equivalent dosage, steel fibers supplied higher Higher loading rate improved The effect of the loading rate on the flexural and shear strengths is quite similar regardless the concrete type, fiber content and fiber type. The FRC with a steel fiber content of 0.5% (FRC35-StF 0.5%) was considered the most appropriate material to improve the low impact resistance of safety concrete barriers with a limited impact on their production cost. The second step of the research project concerned the evaluation of the on-site performance of temporary concrete safety barriers produced with the FRC35-StF The research work complies with ethical standards of the journal. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This project was financially supported by the Quebec Ministry of Transportation, province of Quebec, Canada (Grant n°R751.1 “Utilization of fiber reinforced concrete for concrete safety barriers”). The technical advices of Mr. Desmarchais, Mrs. Baljic and Mrs. Durand of Quebec Ministry of Transportation are acknowledged. Authors would like to acknowledge CRH Canada, Euclid Canada and Bekaert for graciously providing materials and the technical staff of