The raffinate in the extraction process contains plenty of acid and metallic ions, the dispose of which causes the resource loss and environmental pollution. The present study proposed an innovative way to solve this problem by using raffinate as the leaching agent in the copper leaching process. The effects of significant leaching parameters were investigated and optimized using the central composite design (CCD) of response surface methodology (RSM). A maximum leaching efficiency of 96.74 % can be obtained under the 53.22 Kg/t of initial acidity, 2.54 h of leaching time and 5.95 of liquid/solid ratio. In addition, the comparative features of samples before and after leaching process were analyzed by using the X-ray diffraction (XRD), sieving test, scanning electron microscope (SEM) and adsorption-desorption isotherms. We found that the majority of copper components have been removed from copper ores, causing the reduction of size distributions. Specifically, the content of <38 μm after leaching was largely increased from 43.71% to 85.00%. It also led to the appearance of micro pores and cracks in the copper ores, so as to increase the specific surface area and the adsorption mean aperture, which were beneficial to the copper leaching process.Copper, one of the essential metals in the world, is extensively used in many areas for its excellent properties, such as electricity conductor, corrosion resistance and heat conductor To obtain the high-quality cathode copper from leachate, the large amount of extracting agents are applied in the extraction process to purify the leachate, thereby increasing the concentration of copper ions in solution Considering the raffinate still contains the relatively high amount of acid and metallic ions which were the by-products of extraction, the recovery and recycling of the raffinate have been attempted in recent years. Hydroxide precipitation is an effective method to recover metal ions from raffinate by adding lime or sodium hydroxide Extensive researches have been conducted on the recovering of metal ions from raffinate by physical and chemical methods while most of them need to be neutralized with the acid in the raffinate or recover by some materials The effects of leaching parameters and the optimum leaching conditions were investigated to reveal the possibility of using raffinate as the leaching agent in the copper leaching process. The features of copper ores before and after leaching process were analyzed by the X-ray diffraction (XRD), sieving test, scanning electron microscope (SEM) and adsorption-desorption isotherms. The low-grade copper oxide ore and raffinate were obtained from a hydrometallurgical plant located in Muliashy, Zambia. The size range of sample was 70 % below 74 μm. The chemical assay and components of the copper ores were analyzed by the X-ray fluorescence and X-ray diffraction, respectively, which revealed that the copper grade is low (1.53 %) and the main gangue mineral was the quartz. The main copper phase in the copper minerals was the copper oxide. Elements in raffinate were identified using atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS), which revealed that the raffinate was the high concentration acid (15.3 g/L) coexist with some metal ions with low concentrations. More details of elements analysis of copper ores and raffinate were shown in Leaching tests under the certain temperatures were carried out in a 1 L beaker with a controller of temperature and stirring speed. In each test, 100 g of low-grade copper oxide ore was leached with leaching time of 3 h, temperature of 65 ℃ and stirring speed of 500 rpm. To maintain the sufficient acid content, a required concentration of sulfuric acid (with respect to solid material) was added into the raffinate as the leaching agent. The heating was stopped, and the beaker was cool to the room temperature at the end of each test. Afterwards, the mixture was filtered, and the residue was washed with water and dried in oven. The content of copper in the residue was analyzed by AAS. Copper leaching efficiency ( The module of central composite designs (CCD) in the response surface methodology (RSM) were adopted by using software “Design-Expert” to optimize the leaching process and to analysis the interaction between the parameters. A 2 The independent variables used in this experiment were coded as follows: The residue under optimum leaching conditions were filtered, washed and dried in oven at 40℃. Both the residue and raw ore were platinum coated in a sputter coater for preparing samples, more details can be found in the reference The samples before and after extraction were prepared under the optimum leaching parameters. The 1.0000 g of copper ores were initially heated under the vacuum oven to remove the air and moisture. Then the nitrogen was given to the test tube under the required pressure and removed subsequently to evaluate the specific surface area and micro pore structure using the specific surface aperture analyzer (JW-BK112). The results of copper leaching efficiency using central composite design (CCD) were shown in To validate the optimization model, the analysis of variance of response surface methodology (RSM) was conducted and shown in The leaching parameters can also be estimated by the P-value which is the probability of “Prob>F” in The comparison of predicted and experimental copper leaching efficiency was shown in Three-dimensional surface plots were drawn between two experimental factors while holding another variable at its central level to demonstrate the influence of variables on the copper leaching efficiency. As shown in  With the increase of initial acidity in the solution, more H The effects of leaching time on the leaching efficiency was relatively weak  To maximize the leaching efficiency, the optimum leaching parameters were identified by the Design-Expert statistical software. As reported in The composition of copper ores before and after leaching were detected by the XRD and shown in The size ranges of copper oxides before and after being leaching were characterized by sieving test and shown in To investigate the surface morphology of leaching residue, the SEM analysis of samples before and after leaching was demonstrated in To further identity the cracks and pores of the copper ores after leaching, the nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherms at 77 K of the sample before and after leaching process were conducted and shown in In this study, the raffinate from the extraction process was successfully recycled and utilized as the leaching agent for the copper leaching, the operating conditions were optimized by the RSM. A copper leaching efficiency of 96.74 % was achieved under the optimum leaching parameters, which could largely reduce the consumption of acid. The analysis of copper ores before and after leaching found that the micro pores and cracks occurred in the particles after leaching, the specific surface area and adsorption mean aperture of samples after leaching increased as well, which could be attributed to the removal of copper. An illustration diagram of the selective leaching process of copper ores using raffinate as the leaching agent was shown in Currently, there are many ways to recover metal ions from aqueous solution, such as electrocoagulation The raffinate from the extraction process were firstly cyclic utilized for the copper leaching in this study. The operating parameters including initial acidity, leaching time, and the liquid/solid ratio were investigated by the module of central composite designs in the response surface methodology (RSM) to achieve the optimal leaching conditions. The initial acidity was found to have the significant effects on the copper leaching efficiency while the other variables presented minor effects. The optimum leaching parameters were confirmed as the initial acidity of 53.22 Kg/t, leaching time of 2.54 h and liquid/solid ratio of 5.95, which resulted into a maximum leaching efficiency of 96.74 %. Further explorations revealed that the micro-cracks and micro-pores were well-developed in the copper ores during the leaching process, which led to the decrease of particle size and the improvement of leaching performance. We declare that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that can inappropriately influence our work, there is no professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the position presented in, or the review of, the manuscript entitled“The optimization and characterization of the recycling utilization of raffinate in the copper leaching process”. The authors gratefully thank the