The adequate cost estimation of mill plants plays a crucial role in the success of feasibility studies of mining projects. Grinding is one of the most important operations in mineral processing plants and assumes a substantial share of the total milling costs. The objective of this work was to develop a set of cost functions for major grinding mill equipment. These cost models were developed using two relatively different techniques: uni-variate regression (UVR) as well as multivariate regression (MVR) based on principal component analysis (PCA). The first is appropriate for the quick estimation of costs in the early stages of project evaluation, while the second method can be helpful in the feasibility study stage. The explanatory variable in UVR was power (P), while in MVR the power and some other variables depending on the type of mill were used. The PCA technique was employed in order to omit the correlation between the independent variables in the multivariate regression. Furthermore, the scale-up factor for all mills has been calculated. The result of the evaluation of the models showed that the mean absolute error rates were less than 9.84% and 11.36% on average for the capital and operating costs of the uni-variate model, and 5.82% and 4.9% for the multivariate model, respectively.Before initiating a mining project a feasibility analysis is a key step in ensuring that the project is technically feasible, cost-effective and profitable. Consequently it is essential to identify the cost factors, which can be classified as capital and operating costs. The costs of each item are required in order to inspect the authorization of project progress ( Regression is among the most professional common techniques used to build appropriate cost models ( Hence, despite the importance of these models in preliminary capital and operating cost estimation, the role of other effective independent variables has simply been ignored. Some of these models have now become obsolete, and updating them may also cause considerable errors. Therefore it seems that multivariate regression based on up-to-date data is the best solution for providing adequate cost estimation models. In this research, an attempt has been made to provide two sets of univariate and multivariate regression functions for the estimation of the capital and operating costs of grinding mill equipment in mineral processing plants based on up-to-date cost data, since the comminution system contributes to about 60% of the total capital cost in concentrator equipment, 40–50% of the total operating costs, and more than 60% of the total energy consumption in processing factories ( In the next section, the specification of six main types of mills are introduced as the data structure, and also the procedure of regression modeling for uni-variate and multivariate regression is described. In Section A set of technical and economical data for six main types of mill, operating in mill plants in the United States, have been gathered ( Meanwhile, the cost of the operator’s time is not incorporated here. Our database and consequently the developed models cover mills with separate motors (except for the tower mill) and therefore the cost of purchasing and operating the motors (including the cost of energy) has not been considered. It also implies that costs of mills with integral motors (as in wraparound drives) cannot be estimated with the developed models. The capital and operating costs of motors are usually estimated separately from the other costs of the mills. Particularly, the operating cost of energy depends on the real throughput and efficiency of equipment and also the properties of the material being ground (such as hardness). Bond’s method or empirical models could be used to estimate the real consumption of energy and then the cost could be evaluated. Before modeling the costs, the relative shares of each operating cost item were investigated ( Technical parameters of the six considered mills with their statistics are presented in The scheme of the modeling process is presented in After choosing the regressor variables, the structure of the model should be selected. Cost models of mineral grinding mills have historically applied the power function platform ( Here, considering power ( By approving the power function it is possible to give a preliminary cost estimation in terms of the “scale-up factor”. The earliest mention of this concept was found in 1947 as the “rule of six-tenths ( where Screening and selecting the candidate variables to obtain a regression model with the best regressors is the first step in the building of any multiple regression model. In this situation, previous experience or underlying theoretical considerations can help the analyst ( Essentially, when dependencies between the regressor variables are found multicollinearity is occurring. Multicollinearity can have serious effects on the estimation of the regression coefficients and on the general applicability of the estimated model. Different indices could be monitored in order to detect multicolinearity, namely the correlation matrix, Variance Inflation Factor (VIF) or F-test for overall regression and individual regression coefficients. In this research, significant correlation between the variables constructing the models was found. Two proposed solutions for resolving multicollinearity were examined in this research; ridge regression modeling and the PCA method, in order to eliminate the dependencies. An attempt was made to use ridge regression to estimate coefficients. However, inconsistencies were found when using this technique, which resulted in statistically insignificant regressors. PCA is a dimension reduction technique which aims to find a few Principal Components (PCs) that explain a large proportion of the sample variance while having no correlation with each other. Principal components are often used as input to other analyses, such as regression. If PCs are used as the predictor variables, the regression model is called PCA regression ( The power regression function ( The As mentioned previously, high correlations between all the variables of the mills were observed. The MAER values for all mills for the uni-variate and multivariate regression models are shown in Although the precision of the cost models suggest them as credible tools in prefeasibility and feasibility study stages, our purpose is to provide a tool for estimations only and not to establish cost values of grinding machineries that could be used in bankable studies. The use of cost estimation predictive models in the first stages of a mining project is of fundamental importance. The majority of existing models are relatively out of date and hence need to be updated. Furthermore existing models are presented in the form of uni-variate cost functions, and the role of other effective variables has simply been ignored. The aim of this study was to provide a more adequate cost model for grinding mill equipment, as some of the most important machines in mineral processing plants. For this, the regression method has been used due to its well-defined mathematical background as well as its ability to interpret the relationship between the cost and the variables considered. The model includes two different sets of up-to-date cost functions, i.e. uni-variate and multivariate regression structures. The uni-variate model is appropriate for preliminary capital and operating cost estimations, when sufficient information is not available. The power function is considered adequate for the uni-variate model. Other variables have been incorporated in the multivariate model. The contributions of these parameters were investigated with the stepwise method. Omitting the correlation between them was performed with PCA method. The MAER measure and performance evaluations, such as residual analysis, were used to inspect the adequacy of the results. MAER of 5.82% and 4.9% on average, for capital and operating costs respectively, indicate that the model could be used as a powerful tool for the cost estimation of mills.