This paper describes a microwave heating technique as a new method for the treatment of oil-contaminated drill cuttings (OCDC). The effects of power, treatment time and moisture content on the thermal desorption of oil were studied, and it was found that under certain operating conditions the oil levels could be reduced to below the current environmental discharge limit of 1%. For a sample mass of 40g, it is shown that approximately 20s of microwave treatment is required in order to reduce the residual oil levels close to or below the 1% threshold. The major limitation in the minimum achievable residual oil levels appears to be the moisture content, however, it is shown that increasing the amount of water in the samples can potentially overcome such limitations.Oil-contaminated drill cuttings (OCDC) arise from drilling activities in the exploration and extraction of oil and natural gas, in the North Sea oil fields for example. The drilling of wells requires the use of ‘drilling muds’, which act to lubricate the drill bit, provide hydraulic power, maintain the stability of the well-bore and transport the drill cuttings back to the production platform The drill cuttings return to the production platform with the circulating drilling mud, where a primary separation is performed. The separated cuttings were, until recently, discharged straight into the sea without further treatment. Environmental legislation for the UK now stipulates that in order to discharge cuttings into the North Sea the residual oil levels must be <1 In conventional thermal processing, energy is transferred to a material through conduction, convection and radiation. In contrast, microwave energy is delivered directly to materials through molecular interactions with the electromagnetic field. The internal temperature distribution of a material subject to conventional heating is limited by its thermal conductivity, whereas microwave heating results in all individual elements of the material being heated individually. Consequently, heating times using microwaves can often be reduced to less than 1% of those required using conventional heating methods There are three generic classifications for the behaviour of materials upon interaction with a microwave field: transparent (low dielectric loss materials)—microwaves pass through the material with little absorption; opaque (conductors)—microwaves are reflected by the material and do not penetrate; absorbing (high dielectric loss materials)—microwave energy is absorbed based on the electric field strength and the dielectric loss factor Microwave processing has distinct advantages in the treatment of materials which contain a mixture of absorbers and transparent components. Microwave energy is absorbed by the substances with a high dielectric loss whilst passing through the low loss transparent material, resulting in selective heating. In this case, significant energy savings are possible since the dielectric material can be heated without heating the entire matrix. The power absorbed by a material is dependent on the dielectric properties of the material. The power absorbed per unit volume, or power density (Pd), is given by From Eq. Microwave heating has been widely studied in recent years for a range of industrial processes, with the most common applications in the food industry. Microwaves have been used in mineral processing This study assesses the effects of microwave treatment on the residual oil levels in OCDC with a multimode cavity by studying a range of factors including microwave power, treatment time, sample mass and sweep gas flow rate. The experimental apparatus developed and used during this investigation is shown in A 0–15 Water content of the OCDC was evaluated using the Dean and Stark method (BS 756, 1952). Oil content was determined by extraction with dichloromethane (DCM) and subsequent evaporation, a technique which yielded results repeatable to within ±0.05 The OCDC samples used in this study were obtained from North Sea drilling operations, and were very heterogeneous in nature. Representative sample characteristics are shown in It is clearly evident from Initial tests using a fixed-bed reactor yielded wet and dry regions within the same sample, indicating a non-uniform temperature distribution which was almost certainly the result of the electric field distribution within the multimode cavity. The homogeneity of the samples improved with increasing treatment times due to conductive heat transfer throughout the sample body. To improve the temperature distribution throughout the sample a semi-fluidised bed reactor was used, with conditions such that homogeneity was obtained even at short treatment times. The apparatus was the same as that indicated in Tests were performed to ascertain the effects of field strength, nitrogen flow rate, sample residence time and matrix composition on the thermal desorption of oil in OCDC. As well as the assessment of the residual oil levels, analysis was performed on the original and recovered oil products. Any recovered oil is likely to be recycled into the drilling mud, hence it is important to understand the effects of the microwave treatment process on both the residual oil levels and the physical properties of the product oil. Forty grams of OCDC samples were used with a microwave power of 10 As the gas flow rate increases above 1 To maintain the uniform temperature distributions whilst minimising condensation, gas flow rates of 1.4 With constant sample mass (40 At 40 It is apparent in  Forty grams of OCDC samples were studied with an irradiation time of 22 It is clear that residual oil levels can be obtained which are below the 1% environmental discharge limit. Increasing the cavity power results in a decrease in residual oil in OCDC samples, which is likely to be due to a higher electric field strength and hence more rapid heating of the dielectric materials within the sample prior to mass transfer of the microwave treated phase out of the sample. Low-power (0.2 The moisture content in the OCDC samples was of the order of 6%. Extra water was added to the samples, and test conditions maintained at 1.4 It is clear from Density, viscosity and flashpoint data for the original and recovered oils are shown in The density, flashpoint and viscosity of the drilling oil and recovered product appear to be very similar, although there is some indication that the product oil contains a higher concentration of lighter hydrocarbon components. The TICs of the original, product and residual oils are virtually identical. A higher concentration of lighter components is evident in the product oil from comparison of the peak values at low elution times. Similarly, the residual oil appears to be contain a higher concentration of heavier species as evidenced by the multiple peaks at longer elution times, which can be attributed to the inability of these components to vaporise during the microwave treatment process. In practical terms, the differences in composition between the original and recovered oils are likely to be insignificant as the recycled stream will be well diluted by the large quantities of drilling mud with which it will be mixed. The spectra in It is clear from this study that microwave treatment can remove oil from OCDC to a level which is considered potentially acceptable for off-shore discharge. It has been shown that one of the major controlling factors in removing the oil from the samples is the applied microwave power (and therefore, the localised electric field strength). It is shown by Eq. Single mode cavities comprise a metallic enclosure into which a microwave signal of the correct electromagnetic field polarisation will undergo multiple reflections. The superposition of the incident and reflected waves gives rise to a standing wave pattern that is very well defined in space. The precise knowledge of electromagnetic field configurations enables the dielectric material to be placed in the position of maximum electric field strength allowing maximum heating rates to be achieved at all times. Therefore, even though the heating rate in the centre of the cavity will be very high (order of magnitudes faster than for a multimode cavity with the same power input) there will be a significant temperature gradient formed across the cavity leading to uneven removal of oil. Before microwave treatment of OCDC can become an industrial reality, specific cavities must be designed which meet all the criteria for successful oil removal, i.e. appropriate sweep gas flow rate, residence time, electric field strength and electric field homogeneity. A further study by the authors has addressed some of these issues regarding the use of single mode cavities Microwave treatment in a multimode cavity has been shown to significantly decrease the residual oil concentration in OCDC samples, with residence times typically of the order of 20 The authors wish to thank Shell, BP and Amerada Hess for supporting this research.