The separation of particles from a fluid for a particular application is controlled by the filter medium. There are seemingly unlimited forms and types of media that are possible. Choosing a filter medium can be a daunting task. This chapter provides a general description of the different types of media, their properties, and applications. This overview provides the reader with a starting point for narrowing the selection of what media to use for a particular application. It also provides options to improve upon an existing separation process. Where appropriate, trends in media developments and commercialization are discussed.Introduction The filter media business Media structures Non-woven Media Paper media Bonded non-woven materials Wool resin media Needlefelts Melt spun materials Woven Fibre Media Woven fabrics Woven yarn fabrics Synthetic monofilament fabrics Woven wire mesh Types of weave Sintered wire mesh Membranes Membrane types Membrane module formats Membrane processes Absorbent, Adsorbent and Biological Filter Media Absorbent media Adsorbent media Biological filters Rigid Porous Media Bonded porous media Inorganic materials Perforated plate Expanded metal sheets Bar and wire structures Loose Porous Media Deep-bed media Precoat filtration Assembled Cartridge Media Edge filters Stacked disc filters Yarn-wound cartridges Media of Extremely Small Fibres  The retained components, the ones to which the medium is impermeable, may be solid particles, droplets of liquid, colloidal material, or molecular or ionic species in solution, while the permeate (or filtrate) normally is the suspending fluid or solvent, possibly together with some of the other components. This definition includes the diffusion processes of reverse osmosis and nanofiltration, which are not strictly filtration processes, because of their similarity to membrane ultrafiltration and microfiltration. It is true to say that any material that is porous or can be rendered porous and is made into a porous structure, whether the pores are the size of a person’s fist or smaller than a micrometre, can serve as a filter medium. However, as far as is reasonable, a filter medium should be strong (in tension at least), flexible, resistant to corrosion and abrasion, easily manipulated into the required shapes and capable of being made with a range of porosities. These requirements constrain the number of possible media, but still leave plenty of potential materials: inorganic (minerals, carbon, glass, metals and metal oxides/ceramics) and organic (natural and synthetic). Each of these basic materials lends itself to one or more formats, as given in This introduction describes filter media in general terms. More detailed information and descriptions are available in the The industrial context within which filter media are made and supplied to their end-users is of more than passing interest. The great variety of media available commercially reflects the wide range of applications and the corresponding variety of types of companies involved supplying the media. Some companies are devoted to media manufacture, while for others media manufacture may be only a small part of the total company activity. Six main commercial steps are conducted by the industry. These are: Making of the basic material from which the medium is formed: a metal wire, a natural or synthetic fibre, a ceramic powder, an extruded plastic filament, etc. Conversion of some of these basic materials into a form in which they can be used to make filter media: the spinning of fibres or the twisting of filaments into a yarn, the crimping of a wire, etc. Formation of the bulk medium: the weaving of a cloth or monofilament mesh, the moulding and sintering of a mass of plastic or metal fibre or powder, the production of paper, the preparation and processing of a sheet of membrane (all together with any necessary finishing processes). Conversion of the bulk medium material into pieces of the particular size and shape required for the medium to fit the filter (especially for makers of replacement media for existing filter units), which may include, for example, the pleating of flat material. Making of the assembled filter, including the fitting or adapting of the medium to its position in the filter. Distribution or wholesale of the filters: stands at the end of this process, serving the end-user, and may exist at several interstage points in this series. The creation of a stand-alone filter element, such as a cartridge, might be considered as part of Step 4, or as a further activity between Steps 4 and 5 – and subsequently bypassing Step 5, by direct sale to the end-user. Many companies in the industry conduct combinations of two or more of these manufacturing steps (vertical integration), but this may result in limitation of the markets for the products of the earlier step. Some media, of course, do not require all these steps: sand filters go from the supplier of the graded sand straight to the deep-bed filter maker. Most, however, have several steps, with some of the most common (woven fabrics, needle felts) requiring all of them. This complicated market structure obviously has its impact on a review of this nature – which basically looks only at the products of Steps 3 and 4. The filter media business is large. Estimates of the global market for media place its value at all kinds in 2007 was $21 billion with growth at about 5.5% per year. Some sectors of the market may do better than others. In 2013 the estimated global value of the non-woven media market was $3.7 billion with an annual growth rate of 7.3% (  The properties of the filter medium determine how the filter performs to remove the particles in the slurry and determine whether the particles form a cake, are captured in the depth of the filter, or pass through the filter. The filter medium’s performance depends upon the structure and properties of the medium material (fibres, granules, etc.). The design of the housing that contains a medium depends upon the properties of the medium and how the elements of the medium are held together. The most direct way to describe the different types of media is by the structures of the materials forming the media. The major categories include woven media, non-woven media, loose media, porous interconnected media and assembled media. Many media fit into these categories, though there are exceptions and some materials may fit into more than one category. The following sections briefly describe the media in these different categories. The reader interested in greater details should refer to literature specific to each category. Non-woven fibre media are currently perhaps the most widely used type of media. Non-woven media are relatively simple to fabricate and, depending on the material, are inexpensive. Non-woven media have been used for many years for both gas and liquid filtration applications. The name ‘non-woven’ implies the fibres are randomly oriented with no discernable pattern to the structural arrangement of the fibres. The fibres may come from natural sources such as wool or cotton, or the basic cellulose of wood, or they may be synthetic, produced by the extrusion of a molten polymer, which means that they may be produced initially as a continuous filament and then broken up to form the required length of fibre. This could imply that such materials are organic in origin, but modern manufacturing techniques enable almost any inorganic material to be produced as fine fibres: carbon, glass, metals and ceramics and so on as a yarn or pad of randomly oriented fibres. The properties of the finished fibrous material as a filter medium are very much related to the properties of the fibres or filaments themselves, the most important correlation being that of size: the finer the fibre from which the material is made, the finer the particle that will be trapped by the resultant filter medium. The selection of a fine fibre from which to make a particular filter medium must be made in the realization that the finer fibres will produce a less strong material. The fibre choice becomes an optimization exercise among degree of filtration (cut-point and efficiency), pressure drop (i.e. energy consumption in operation) and mechanical strength. A weak material, but one with the required filtration performance, can be strengthened by supporting it on a stronger substrate – but at an increase in cost per unit of filtration area. It is not unusual that a filter medium is over-specified and consequently costs more than it need do. As seen in Nevertheless, it is also true that the demands being made upon filters in terms of finer degrees of filtration are growing, and this will lead to a continual lowering of filtration cut-points and increasing filtration efficiencies, with as little increase in material and operating costs as possible. A special sub-category of non-woven fibre media is that of paper media. Paper is commonly made by the wet laying of a mass of cellulose fibres onto a woven wire band, which is effectively a filter through which the water drains and the fibres settle down to produce a continuous sheet. A slurry of cellulose fibres, or pulp, is formed by disintegrating and beating (or chemically treating) wood chips, and is then slowly and evenly fed onto the woven wire. The fibres settle in a random manner to form the sheet of paper, which has to be pressed and dried to achieve the required moisture content. The resultant porous sheet can be used as a filter medium, but if the untreated paper gets wet the fibres absorb water, with two significant consequences: (1) the fibres swell, Alternatively, the paper may be treated with a binder to give it intrinsic strength for liquid applications. The effect of an impregnated neoprene binder is shown in By the nature of their formation, papers have a random fibre structure, although this can be controlled to some extent in the manufacturing process. They also have a relatively low permeability because of the tortuous nature of the flow path through the paper. Hence, only relatively thin sheets of paper are practical as filters for most applications, and even then the specific resistance is high. However, treated papers have two great advantages as filter media: they can be made with nominal cut-offs of 10–20 The chief disadvantages of paper media are their high specific resistance and their limited mechanical strength. To offset the former, paper filter elements are most commonly used in pleated form, considerably increasing the superficial area for a given size of element. This substantially reduces the flow velocity through the paper and hence the effective or overall resistance to flow. Pleating also improves the rigidity of the element, although it is normally fully supported by a perforated inner tube or core. The depth of pleating is usually of the order of one-quarter of the diameter of the element. Variations on the simple pleated form include corrugating the paper before pleating, which has the effect of increasing both the surface area and to some extent the stiffness; or dimpling the surface; or the use of scrim and separator strips to maintain constant spacing and prevent the collapse of the pleats. Collapse of a pleated element will reduce the effective surface area and, if excessive, may lead to tearing. The mechanical strength limitations of paper elements normally set a maximum working pressure for such types at about 7 Another inherent limitation with paper elements is that the very nature of the material does not provide an absolute cut-off point. There will almost certainly always be larger pore sizes than the nominal rating and random larger particles may pass through the filter. This limits the suitability of paper elements for ultra-fine filtering. On the other hand, the performance of paper, and particularly resin impregnated paper elements, can be superior in performance to other types of fabric media. Although paper elements are invariably thin, they still have a finite thickness so that they filter in depth as well as acting as a simple mechanical screen. However contaminants will mostly collect on the outer surface and the accumulation of such contaminants will progressively increase the efficiency of the filtration by acting as a filter cake. Some solid contaminants will penetrate into the depths of the paper, become lodged there, and make cleaning of the paper difficult or impractical. In the case of dry fluids, such as air, particles tend to form a cake on the paper inlet surface. In this latter scenario adequate cleaning may be provided by a backflow of air to blow the cake off the surface. Paper elements may then be reusable in such cases. With wet fluids, such as oil or water, it is more usual to employ disposable filter elements, which are simply replaced when they become clogged. The progress of cellulose paper as a filter medium has been considerably affected by the manufacture of fibres of other materials that can be formed into paper-like sheets by adapting the conventional paper-making process; the outstanding example of this is the variety of glass fibre papers, which are of major importance in filtration. The other has evolved by exploiting the characteristics of the synthetic fibres formed by the extrusion of molten polymers; adaptation of this extrusion process enables these fibres to be formed directly into the paper-like sheets of the spun-bonded media discussed below, which have taken a share of the markets formerly supplied by wet-laid media. Filter sheets are made in the same way as paper, i.e. by wet laying, but they usually are thicker and rougher in texture than paper. Filter sheets traditionally are used in filter presses and employed to clarify beverages such as beer and whisky or to sterilize pharmaceutical solutions. An array of filter sheets is shown in From earliest times, woven fabrics formed the bulk of filter media. Beginning in the 1940s, with the production of a suitably bonded felt, non-woven materials started to be used for filtration, and now they dominate the business. One reason for this is the demand for finer filtration, of both liquids and gases, which can be met by very finely spun fibres, assembled into ever more complex forms of non-woven materials. Woollen felt is probably the oldest form of textile, and for many years was the only practical non-woven fabric, produced by the combined action of moisture and heat on carded wool fibres. The development initially of a strong adhesive bonded felt, and later of the multiplicity of forms of dry-laid synthetic fibres, transformed the spectrum of non-woven media, both in format and basic material. A non-woven fabric is made up from an agglomeration of fibres, and sometimes of continuous filaments, which are held together by some form of bonding, to create There are two broad classifications of non-woven materials, into which almost all types will fall. These two classes are, to a large extent, divided by the means used to hold the loose fibres together: felts, which use the basic characteristics of the fibre and fibre entanglement to provide mechanical integrity, or which use mechanical processing (especially needling) to create a fabric bonded fabrics, which use some adhesive material to hold the fibres together, or, more commonly, rely upon the thermoplastic nature of the polymer to provide adhesion when properly heated. The second group is then further divided, according to whether the formation of the basic fibre is an integral part of the manufacture of the medium (the dry-laid spun media) or not (resin and thermal bonding). The basic felt has no added binders: some fibres, wool especially, have the ability to cling together to form a coherent mass, because of protrusions from the fibre surface. Most others can be made to adhere by suitable processing. The first step in any felt making, or dry laying, process is the carding of the fibres, whereby they are drawn out into a thin web, which has its fibre content roughly aligned in one direction. Pieces of such web can then be placed one above the other to provide a felt of the required thickness. The successive layers can be aligned with the fibres all lying in the same direction, or in different directions to give equal directional strengths. When sufficient thickness has been achieved, the felt is compressed and heated, often after dampening, to produce its final structure. It is a fundamentally weak structure, in terms of tensile strength, and many felts are strengthened by the inclusion within their thickness of a layer of a woven material, called a scrim. The fibres in a felt are not securely locked into the mass of the fabric, and a simple felt used as a filter medium would be liable to significant loss of the fibres into the clean filtrate. Hence the need for bonding techniques to hold the fibres, such as various adhesive techniques, including the use of adhesive dispersions within the felt, the integral bonding of thermoplastic fibres and several mechanical bonding processes, based on needling or stitch knitting, with or without the use of binding threads. Modern felts are produced from synthetic fibres or mixtures of synthetic and natural fibres, bonded with adhesive or held together mechanically, with close control of manufacture to yield consistent density, pore size and mesh geometry, so that the cut-off performance is reasonably predictable. The structure of felts is considerably more open than papers so that whilst filtering in greater depth, specific resistance is High-temperature-resistant meta-aramid fibre has helped hot gas filtration technology to move a step closer to the industry’s goal of zero emissions by providing a combination of high separation efficiency and low differential pressure. It is a common feature of solid/gas filtration, and, to a lesser extent, solid/liquid filtration, that the particles in suspension may carry an electrostatic charge, and therefore that a filter medium carrying the opposite charge will be more effective in their removal. Many different media can be given a charge for this purpose, but wool fibre media in particular have a long history of enhanced separation efficiency in this way. The filtration efficiency of wool felts against sub-micrometre aerosols can be greatly increased by the addition of a special resin, which produces a very long-lived electrostatic effect. The electrostatic charge is generated during processing, the resin powder particles are forced to move relative to the fibres and the rubbing of the particles against the fibre surfaces enables charge transfer to occur. The wool fibres become positively charged and the resin negatively charged. The filter is overall electrically neutral but locally the random distribution of the resin powder on the wool fibres, and random array of the wool fibres in the filter, means that the electrical field is not uniform and can induce a dipole charge on neutral particles. Naturally charged particles and dipole-induced charged particles are attracted to their opposite charges on the fibres or resin, thereby facilitating particle capture. The electrical charge thus imparted gives wool resin a high efficiency for filtration of sub-micrometre particles of better than 99.5%, whilst having a very low resistance to airflow. The very high electrical resistivity of the resin means that once generated the charge and filter efficiency are maintained for many years, although humid conditions can reduce its life. Wool resin was first developed for use in respirators for combat use in World War I, and today it is still used extensively in the respirator industry. Its combination of low breathing resistance and high filtration efficiency is very competitive against more recent materials. Vacuum cleaners and other freestanding dust collectors take advantage of the high efficiency of wool resin against asbestos and other harmful dust. Wool resin media are also employed in heating and ventilation applications, for clean rooms, for computer suites and as prefilters for high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters. For some, non-demanding, applications, a simple felt can provide suitable filtration performance, without any form of strengthening. However, their low tensile Needle punching is the most common mechanical strengthening technique, which originated in the 1880s with natural fibres, but it is only since about the early 1970s that it has come into prominence because of its suitability to the processing of many synthetic fibre felts. A thick ‘batt’ of several layers of carded fibre is assembled and then compressed into a denser structure by punching with an array of special barbed needles reciprocating at speeds up to 2000 strokes/min, and moving perpendicularly to the felt layer. With perhaps 100 or more needle penetrations per cm Needlefelts are used extensively as bag filters for the filtration of dusts and gases, because of their above-average collection efficiency. Common applications include the cement industry, steel and aluminium plants, spray drying, coal grinding, sand blasting, the food industry, detergent manufacturing, ship unloading, pneumatic conveying and hot gas filtration processes where metal fibre felts and ceramic fibres are used. Some typical applications for filter fabrics of various kinds are given in Most felts are mechanically strengthened by needling, but an alternative, and more specialized, technique employs a set of high-pressure water jets to fix the fibres in place – a technique known as hydroentanglement. Hydroentangled felts are also said to be spunlaced. Just as needlefelts took market shares from some woven fabrics, so now are the newer melt spun synthetics expanding quickly into most filtration applications. These media start as a filament of molten thermopolymer extruded from a fine nozzle. As the filament leaves the nozzle it is quenched rapidly in an airstream, and then laid down on a moving belt below the extrusion nozzle. It is the integral production of filament or fibre followed immediately by its laying down as the medium that distinguishes the When the nozzles, or spinnerets, mounted in a row across the width of the collecting belt are oscillated perpendicular to the direction of movement of the belt, the filaments fall onto the belt in a random fashion, forming a continuous strip of randomly oriented non-woven fibre material. This strip of material is pressed at a temperature sufficient to melt the collected filaments at their points of contact to form a strong Since the late 1960s, these novel manufacturing processes have developed rapidly into a commanding position in the filter media business. The development has been so rapid that a standard set of terms has not yet been agreed on an industry-wide basis – some refer to all such materials as The melt spun materials are usually formed into thin sheets, like paper or cardboard, and are widely used in pleated form, as cartridges, shown typically in The differences between the two main classes of dry-laid spun material are significant in terms of filtration behaviour, but both are available with the same range of finishing processes as are used for woven and needlefelt materials: calendering, singeing and coating. The lamination of different materials is also an important feature of dry-laid spun media. Fabrics make up the largest component of filter media materials. They are made from fibres or filaments of natural or synthetic materials, and are characterized by being relatively soft or floppy, lacking the rigidity of dry paper, such that they would normally need some kind of support before they can be used as a filter medium. The fibres or filaments can be made up into a fabric as they are, by means of some kind of dry-laying process, to produce a felt or similar material. Such ‘non-interlaced’ fabrics are generally referred to as ‘non-woven’, and they are covered later in this section. If the fibres or filaments are first spun into a continuous yarn, then the resultant yarn can be woven or knitted into a fabric, and such ‘interlaced’ materials are the woven fabrics described here. If the material used in the weaving process is a single filament of wire or plastic, then the resultant material may be counted as a fabric, but is more often called a mesh, and is also covered separately later. Textile fibres come from many sources, both natural and synthetic. The natural materials come either from vegetable sources: cotton, flax (linen), jute and wood cellulose, or from animals: silk, wool, fur, hair. The synthetic materials are produced either from natural resources such as glass, ceramics, carbon, metals or reconstituted cellulose, or they are totally synthetic, being extruded from thermoplastic polymers. The naturally fibrous materials all have fibres that are extremely long by comparison with their diameters, except in the case of wood cellulose, where the manufacturing process produces fibres whose lengths are measured only in millimetres. These wood cellulose fibres are too short to spin into a yarn, and are only usable in the wet-laying processes that produce paper and related materials. The remainder of the natural fibres have lengths measured in centimetres and can be over 30 Natural fibres have a diameter dictated by their source, and this is usually less than a millimetre. The synthetic fibres and filaments are mainly formed by some kind of extrusion process from the molten state, with a diameter to match that of the spinning nozzle through which they are extruded. Their diameters can thus exist in a wide range, from much greater than those of natural products, to considerably finer sizes. The length and diameter of a natural fibre may be increased by converting the material into a yarn, although yarns may also be made up of filaments. Because of their much greater length, filaments may just be bundled together to make a yarn, although the bundles are usually twisted to give a reasonably constant diameter. The shorter, staple, fibres have to be twisted quite tightly, after being spun to line them up, in order to give adequate strength to the resultant yarn. Yarns made from filaments are usually thin, smooth and of a lustrous appearance. Staple yarns are usually thicker, more fibrous (hairy) in appearance and with little or no lustre. Yarns can also be made up from tapes of various kinds. In the case of filter media, these tapes are often fibrillated, or made of a perforated or porous material. Woven fabrics are made up from single filaments, or multifilament yarns, or from twisted staple yarn. The last of these is normally used as a single strand, but two or more spun strands may be combined into ply yarns, where the strands are twisted together, usually (but not necessarily) in the opposite sense from the twist in each strand. Fabrics can be considered as a direct, and physically stronger, alternative to papers and are employed in a similar manner for pleated elements, etc. Fabric elements were originally the most commonly used type of filter medium for fine filtration and are generally comparable with modern paper media as regards to the performance achievable. Until the appearance of treated paper elements, they were regarded as a superior type, although the two are now strictly competitive for similar duties. Some typical filtration performance curves for these materials are shown in For a similar design of element, fabric would probably be preferred for larger sizes of filter, or where a degree of true absorption is required as well as mechanical screening. The description ‘fabric’ is rather loose, compared with the term ‘paper’, which is quite specific. Fabrics can comprise a whole range of materials (as in Fabrics can be woven from yarns of many sorts. It is usually the case that The properties of a fabric, especially as regards its behaviour as a filter medium, depend very much on the way in which the yarns are woven together. Many properties, however, are intrinsic in the nature of the basic fibre or filament, and of the way in which it is made up into a yarn. There are three basic types of yarn in wide use for filter media: The key feature of yarn type that affects filtration performance is that, with monofilament fabrics, filtration occurs in the spaces between the filaments, while, with multifilament and staple yarns, filtration can also occur within the yarns as well as between them – so the tightness of the twist in the yarn becomes important. The physical and chemical properties of a yarn are largely those of the fibres or filaments making up the yarn. In addition to the natural fibres (mainly cotton, but with some wool and silk), and a small, but growing, number of inorganic fibres, the majority of the filter fabrics are formed from a wide range of synthetic polymer fibres. The basic material of a woven fabric (filament or fibre) and the way that this material is formed into a yarn are major factors in the choice of a fabric as a filter medium. The variety of available woven fabrics is virtually unlimited even if only the materials from which the filaments or yarns are made, and the complexity of the yarn, are considered. To these must be added the structure of the woven fabric itself: the way in which the yarns are woven together, and the finishing process (if any) applied to the fabric after weaving. Woven fabrics are made up from yarns interlaced in a particular and regular pattern called a The binding system, or weave, is the basic factor that determines the character of the woven fabric. There are three main types of weave (plain, twill and satin) that are used in industrial textiles, although there are many other more complex systems. The differences among the weaves depend upon the pattern formed as the weft yarns are woven over or under the longitudinal warp yarns. In   In addition to cleaning, fabrics of all kinds will usually undergo some kind of Monofilament fabrics are woven from extruded synthetic filaments produced in diameters from 30 Synthetic monofilament fabrics, because of their ductility and memory, may be flexed repeatedly without work hardening and fatigue. They may be folded or dented with less chance of damage compared with a metal cloth, and they are lighter in weight. Some applications require the filter medium to have the physical properties of the synthetic monofilament, but with a metallized surface for static electricity dissipation. Combined mono- and multifilament fabrics are now available with useful additional characteristics. Thus such a material is used on disc filter segments, which is elastic and expands during the blowback stage to help with cake release. New belt press filters and large automatic filter presses have put tremendous demands on the physical properties of the filter fabrics, which are being met by heavy dense monofilament fabrics. The two-layer, core-sheath monofilament is an interesting development, which can combine a strong core with good dirt-repellent properties. Thus the core could be made from strong polyester, coated with a sheath of fluoropolymers. The weaving of wire is no different, in principle, from the weaving of any other yarn: warp wires are set up along the loom and weft wires across it. The product is a roll of A wide variety of wire meshes is produced by weaving individual wires of either ferrous or non-ferrous metals on looms up to 2 In a woven wire mesh, each warp or weft wire bends where it passes over or under a wire of the other kind. This crimping of the wires occurs as part of the weaving process for fine wires, but the crimp has to be imposed on the wire above a certain thickness, before it is fed into position. Although this adds a stage to the weaving process, it has the valuable benefit of holding the crossing wires in place should the wire mesh move or vibrate. Woven wire cloth has been widely used for filtration for well over 100 years and is available in a wide range of materials and mesh sizes. It can be woven from virtually any metal ductile enough to be drawn into wire form, preferred metals being phosphor bronze, nickel–chrome stainless steels and monel. Other materials widely used include aluminium alloys (combining good strength with lightweight and good corrosion resistance), copper (cheaper than bronze but not suitable for corrosive conditions), brass (stronger than copper but more subject to corrosion) and mild steel or coated mild steel (such as galvanized or tinned). Nickel, nickel–chrome alloys and titanium may be used for high-temperature duties. Special alloys such as Inconel, Hastelloy and Incoloy are also used. The minimum practical size of wire that can be used depends on the alloy from which it is made, the strength required in the mesh, the operating temperature, and the degrees of corrosion and abrasion likely to be experienced in service. Thus, finer wire diameters in aluminium, brass, bronze or copper are not normally used for other than light duties. Stainless steel wire on the other hand is available and is used down to 15 The key dimensions of wire mesh are illustrated in The number of apertures per unit length, The open screen area, Sets of test sieves are available, matching the various standard ranges of mesh size. These are supplied in standard-sized holders, which fit one into the other, and which can be held in the frame of a shaker machine. The design of the mesh holder is important, since it is essential that the mesh be held fast and taut. There should be a bevelled entry to the mesh area to ensure that all of the material to be sieved is transferred to the mesh area when hand-sieving at an angle of 30°. The weave of any mesh is usually one of six basic types, but there are also some minor variations. Square mesh ( Twilled weave is the next strongest, with each weft wire progressing one wire at a time, alternately crossing over two and then under two warp wires, producing a marked diagonal pattern ( For filtration purposes, the most widely used forms of woven wire are the Dutch or Hollander weaves, wherein the warp and weft wires are of different diameters, generally with a corresponding difference in the relative numbers of warp and weft wires. If the warp wires are thicker, the result is the ‘plain Dutch weave’; the alternative is for the weft wires to be the thicker, giving the ‘reverse plain Dutch weave’. The plain Dutch weave is a zero aperture weave (i.e. no openings can be seen at right angles to the mesh surface). It is actually a plain weave, with the larger diameter wires as the warp and straight, while the weft wires are crimped at each pass ( A reverse plain Dutch weave is similar except that the thicker wire is in the weft ( By a similar combination of warp and weft wires of different diameters, two basic forms of twilled Dutch weave are produced. The use of heavy warp wires results in Dutch twilled weave ( A summary of the main types of weave for wire cloth is given in The crimping of the individual wires in a mesh goes a long way towards ensuring the stability of the mesh, and therefore the constancy of the apertures of the mesh, if the mesh is subject to movement or vibration in use. Where absolute stability is required, this can be achieved by sintering the mesh, so that the wires fuse together at their contact points. Sintering is even more important in maintaining the stability of multi-layer meshes. Composite constructions of wire mesh, consisting of several layers of mesh sintered together, are aimed at producing a high-strength porous sheet of greater durability than single layer mesh. At the same time, the layer construction provides filtration in depth, with increased dirt-holding capacity. As a general rule, different meshes are used for each layer, chosen and oriented to provide optimum strength with a minimum of masking of apertures in adjacent layers. Final bonding is then achieved by sintering, resulting in a porous one-piece material that is dimensionally stable with minimum possibility of delamination. The lower layers are usually of coarse mesh to provide the strength; then there will be one or two layers of fine mesh for the filtration, topped by a coarser backup layer. Nominal ratings for such media can be as low as 5 In terms of filtration and separation technology, membranes have become one of the most important components. It is almost impossible to separate membrane media from the processes and equipment in which membranes are used, so this is only the briefest of introductions to membranes, with more detailed coverage in In separation terms, membranes were developed as thin, flexible semi-permeable sheets of regenerated cellulose material, intended to separate species at the molecular and ionic chemical species scales. Their first significant application was the purification of desalination of water by reverse osmosis – a process that works on the mechanism of diffusion and takes advantage of the different rates of diffusion of water molecules and ionic species through the membrane material under high transmembrane pressure. Membranes can be made of many different materials that have molecular scale pores that generate the different diffusion rates needed for the separation. Current commercial membranes are made of solid inflexible inorganic materials, especially ceramics, and an ever-increasing variety of polymeric materials. The small pore openings of the membranes also make them highly efficient for fluid–particle separations, albeit at a high operating cost per flux rate to generate the transmembrane pressure. Membrane applications extend from molecular separations through ultrafiltration and into the microfiltration range. The desire to reduce operating costs of membrane led to the development of the whole field of cross-flow filtration, which also now extends well beyond its reverse osmosis origins. As the term is applied nowadays, membranes can be porous or non-porous, polymeric or inorganic. They can be used for a range of separations including solids from liquids, liquids from liquids, and gases from gases, but in particular it is the filtration of micrometre and sub-micrometre size particles from liquids and gases where membranes have proved their worth in the filtration business. Over recent years, membrane technology has expanded into many industrial sectors, including the chemical, petrochemical, food and beverage processing, pharmaceuticals, electronics, biotechnology and especially the treatment of water. In basic terms, there are three broad types of membrane material: the natural products based on cellulose the synthetic polymer materials, such as polyolefins, polyesters, fluoropolymers the inorganic materials, such as ceramics. To be effective in filtration and related separation processes, membranes must be chemically resistant to both the feed and cleaning fluids, they must be mechanically and thermally stable, they should have high permeability whether for particles or ions or molecules as appropriate, they should be highly selective, they should be stable in operation for prolonged periods, and they should be strong enough to resist the high transmembrane pressures necessary for some membrane processes. When particle separation via a membrane is considered, the size of the hole through which the particle is going to move, or by which it is to be retained, becomes one of the important characteristics. A membrane with pores in the range of Holes smaller than 1 A membrane that has the same chemical and physical structure throughout its thickness in the direction of flux of the separating species is called an A key feature of a membrane is the ease with which the surface may be The development of Membranes are made in a variety of ways, according to how they are to be used, with basic formats as flat sheets, tubes of very different diameters and solid blocks, on the surfaces of which the membrane is later deposited. The various manufacturing processes can be broadly summarized as: sintering of fine graded particles into a variety of shapes (the most common method for ceramic membranes) solvent casting or phase inversion, involving the dissolution of the basic polymer in a solvent (or mixture of solvents), followed by the addition of another solvent to precipitate the polymer, and careful evaporation of the solvent, to make sheet membranes, or, after extrusion, hollow fibres and capillaries the spinning of very fine fibres (of any basic material) that are laid down as a thin web on a strong porous substrate the irradiation of an impervious film, followed by its etching to remove the material from the tracks of the irradiating particles (‘track etching’) forming the polymer into a very thin but impervious film, which is then dimpled all over, and stretched laterally to break the film at each dimple to cause multiple ruptures. Membranes are also made by the photo-etching of metallic sheets, although with a very low proportion of open area. A piece of membrane material that is to be made into a filter medium must be held secure in some way and sealed into a housing so that there is no chance of liquid leakage from one side of the membrane to the other, under the force of the high transmembrane pressure. Most membrane media are used in some form of module, which can be easily inserted in the housing, and removed from it again for exchange or cleaning. Membrane modules are of very different designs and include the following:  Several of the membrane material manufacturing processes can produce sheets like paper or thin card, which can then be pleated; if this pleated sheet is fastened to a cylindrical core, then a Long flat sheets that are laid in a pile with appropriate spacers and supports between the sheets up to the required total thickness; the piled sheets are rolled up tightly, from one of the shorter sides, to form cylinders, which are inserted into cylindrical housing vessels – these are the  With a similar structural principle, the  The earliest membranes were of a single material all the way through, whether symmetric or asymmetric. Nowadays, membranes have been developed with a composite structure, where the base of the membrane is a material providing strength to the membrane, while the surface is a thinner layer of another material, conferring high quality of filtration to the whole structure. The two (or even more) different layers may be combined by lamination or by coating the finer onto the coarser substrate. The full range of membrane formats described above can be found with polymeric materials, but an increasing range is also available with inorganic media, especially ceramic materials. The standard method of forming a ceramic membrane is to make the basic structure from relatively coarse sintered particles, with appropriate flow channels in the structure, and then to lay down a thin layer of fine particles to provide the membrane, which is sintered onto the separating surface. A typical format made in this way, the monolithic block, is illustrated in Metallic membranes are usually formed on a substrate of woven wire mesh, onto which the membrane is laid, either as a sintered layer of fine metal powder or as a metal oxide (and thus, technically being a ceramic membrane). Membranes made from stainless steel and aluminium are used in industry. Pore sizes of these membranes can vary from 2 up to 100 Membrane separations began in the 1960s as an alternative means to distillation for the desalination of salt (i.e. sea) and brackish waters. This was called The various processes in which membranes are now used began with reverse osmosis, which, of course, is a diffusion process, in which water molecules move through the non-porous membrane, leaving the ions and other impurities behind. This is a high-pressure process, needing 30–60 The microfiltration membranes have the largest pore diameters among the various types of membranes. They are applied to separate particles with diameters in the range of about 0.03–10 Ultrafiltration membranes are microporous, with a separation range from about 0.005 Reverse osmosis is the process of choice for the production of drinking water from salt water when energy is cheap and available. Reverse osmosis and nanofiltration are diffusion-driven processes used to separate solvents (usually water) and some ions from a solution. The scale size of the separation is below 5 Other liquid separation systems using Furthermore, The The In the prior section, the discussion on hyperfiltration in particular, media were described whose pores are small enough to separate molecules essentially by their size. The molecular scale separations are also possible by media that absorb or adsorb molecules on their surfaces or body. These operate by different physical processes from typical filtration (and from each other) and are used for different purposes. An absorbent material draws molecules into its interior volume, akin to a sponge in that it can draw fluid into itself and retain this fluid within its structure. The mechanisms of the attraction can be hydraulic (as when a compressed sponge expands and draws in liquid) and can be molecular due to attractive forces between the liquid and pore wall molecules. A fluid drawn in hydraulically can be expressed hydraulically. The fluid molecules that are ‘physisorbed’ onto the media surfaces by hydrogen bonding or other weak molecular forces usually require additional energy to desorb the molecules by a change in phase (such as evaporation or drying). Absorbent materials can act as a filter by removing liquid droplets from a gas stream, for example, provided that they wet the absorbent. Thus, an untreated paper, being an absorbent material, could filter out water droplets from an airstream. However, its usefulness as a practical filter in such a case would be very limited, both as regards to retention of moisture, as it would soon achieve the maximum possible absorption capacity, and to mechanical strength, as it will be weakened by the moisture content (which may also act as a solvent for any binder in the paper). Increased wet strength can be achieved for papers by impregnation with substances like neoprene, or phenol formaldehyde and other synthetic resins. However, the impregnation lowers the absorption capacity, and it is more often the case that papers for use as filters are specially treated to make them non-absorbent, to provide maximum mechanical strength and resistance to solvent action. Natural fibres, such as wool and cotton, and the felts made from them, are also absorbent materials, but the use of such absorbent media purely as absorbent filters is very limited. These materials are widely used as filter media, with their absorptive properties of secondary or negligible significance. Adsorbent media differ from absorbent media in that the molecular attraction of molecules to the internal and external surfaces of the media dominates. These materials may remove liquid drops, but may also effectively remove chemical species from a gas or liquid stream. The adsorbent properties of the medium means that it removes dissolved as well as undissolved chemical species. Depending on the material Specific types of materials, normally in the form of finely divided granular or powdered solids, can exhibit high adsorptive properties when in contact with vapours and non-solid contaminants present in fluids. Adsorbents in the forms of fibres or thin porous films are possible but not as common. Granular adsorbent materials can be suitably contained (e.g. in a packed bed or column) and concurrently act as a mechanical depth filter, trapping the suspended particles within the bed. Adsorbent filters can also be made by combining adsorbent solids into fibrous filter media by layering the adsorbent granules between sheets of fibre media, by embedding particles of adsorbent in the material into the fabric of the filter medium, or by incorporating the adsorbent particles into the fibres themselves (akin to a bead necklace). The granular or powdered carbon materials can be activated by steam or chemical treatment to create a porous structure with very high surface area per unit weight of carbon. Fuller’s earth, a naturally occurring active clay, is also used as an adsorbent. Adsorbent media are widely used for the removal of odours, smokes and fumes in a wide range of applications from domestic (e.g. kitchen cooker-hood filters) to air-conditioning plants and to industrial fume removal. Activated carbon is also the filter medium normally used for water purifying or clarifying on small-scale applications such as drinking water supplies in caravans or boats. Industrially, adsorbent filters are used for the removal of odours from oils, and of odours and tastes from foodstuffs and beverages. An important development in activated carbon formats is the production of charcoal cloth. It has a high adsorption capacity and has the distinct advantage of being strong and flexible, with good resistance to shock and vibration, and hence can be fabricated as a self-supported filter element. It is manufactured from pretreated woven cellulose fibre cloth, reduced to 100% carbon in a controlled atmosphere furnace, maintained so as to ensure the desired strength and adsorptive capacity. The process reduces the cellulose cloths to a quarter of their original weight, yielding an activated charcoal cloth with high porosity and high surface area. Although expensive to produce, charcoal cloth has special applications such as respirators and gas masks. Biological filters are another specialized type of separator for removing chemical species, the latter being dissolved solids (organic matter). The biological or trickle A major group of filter media are those made of rigid structures. Some of these structures may be constructed in ways similar to fabric materials and they may be used for similar filtration applications as fabric materials, but they are not considered fabrics in the normal sense of the word, because they are mostly not flexible. Bonded porous media are sheets and tubes made from bonded components: fibres and granules of natural and synthetic materials. These media are made from granules of plastic and metals, and from fibres of plastic, metals, glass and carbon. They are also made by the laying down of melt spun polymeric fibres or filaments onto a rotating perforated core, so as to create a cylindrical filter cartridge. They are coarsely porous, because in their manufacture it is difficult to form very finely granular solids into useful shapes, though some fibre-based materials are capable of very fine cut-off points. Material compositions are mostly inorganic and some polymers. These media are made by the aggregation of the small particles (granules or fibres) of the basic material into useful shapes, either between rolls or in a mould. The aggregate is dosed with a bonding resin and then heated to a temperature where the resin melts and holds the mass of granules or fibres in the required shape. Alternatively, the aggregate is heated to a temperature close to the melting point of the material, under pressure, so that there is localized melting at the points of contact among the particles (and any binder used in the aggregation is driven off or incinerated). This bonding or sintering process confers an element of rigidity upon the resulting materials, so that they are used, for filtration purposes, either as sheets (including sheets cut into appropriately shaped pieces) or as tubes (open ended or closed at one end), as shown in As already mentioned, a major feature of the inorganic materials included here is their ability to operate at high temperatures. The importance of this particular application is growing. Included under this heading are media made from metal powder and fibres, ceramic powder and mineral wools, glass powder and carbon fibres (used for their mechanical separation ability, not as adsorbent). Metal media are mostly supplied in sintered form, since any materials that escape from the medium would be quite harmful downstream. Sintered metal fibres have a very high porosity, a low resistance to flow and a high dirt-holding capacity. The fibres are long with controlled diameters ranging from 1 to 30 Ceramic filter elements have a particular application for higher fluid temperatures and for handling corrosive fluids. Elements made from vitreous bonded refractory ceramic aggregate also have a high resistance to physical and thermal shock. Ceramic elements can be cast or moulded in various element forms with varying degrees of porosity and uniformity of structure. Void volumes are typically up to 50%. Microporous types can be produced with pore sizes down to 1 Mineral wools can also be regarded as a ceramic material. They are rather like natural felts, with random fibre distribution in three dimensions, offering a tortuous path for filtration in depth. Their densities are low, permeabilities are high, and with suitable packing, very fine filtration can be achieved with minimum pressure drop. It is often necessary, however, that flow velocities be kept very low in order to avoid bunching of the fibres, with a consequent drop in efficiency. This somewhat limits their application with liquid filtration, although they are widely used for pure air filtration and the removal of solid particles from gases. In the latter respect mineral fibres may be used at working temperatures well above those possible with other non-metallic filters, e.g. at temperatures of 500°C or even higher for short periods. Performance down to sub-micrometre size is possible with mineral wool filter pads. In the case of ultra-fine gas or air filtration, a nominal optimum velocity for flow rate is 10 Glass fibres in blanket or pad form are widely used as primary stage air filters. By modification of the conventional spinning process, the blanket can be manufactured with progressively increasing density from one side to the other, e.g. sparsely packed large diameter fibres on the dirty inlet air side, gradually changing to more densely packed smaller diameter fibres towards the outlet surface. This effect is produced by an ageing process, which conditions the blanket, followed by a further operation to expand the fibres. Expansion produces an aerated filter medium of greatly increased volume and thus high porosity. Binders added prior to this stage can act as fibre lubricants to assist expansion. The expanded blanket can be oven-treated to cure the binder and cement the fibres together to produce a rigid, lightweight mass. Medium and fine fibreglass filter pads are produced from a blend of glass fibre strands and glass microfibres bonded together with a binder to form thin sheets. A typical filter medium pad is constructed by interleaving a continuous length of glass fibre medium, concertina-folded over wire mesh or perforated aluminium separators. Ultra-fine filters such as HEPA and ultra-low penetration air elements use a sheet form of medium produced only with glass microfibres. The complete element may be constructed as previously described, interleaved with spacers cut from microglass paper. Other, non-glass materials, such as melt blown and spun-bonded polymeric materials, are starting to be used in place of glass fibres. Similarly, commercial carbon fibres produced in fibre diameters of the order of 5–10 Perforated metal sheets are more rigid and can be made stronger than woven wire cloths and so they find particular applications in strainers, coarse filters and screens. The punched holes need not be circular: various standard forms of perforated metal sheets are shown in Certain limitations are also imposed by the materials of construction. Close-spaced 0.5 With punched holes it is generally impractical or uneconomical to produce holes that are smaller in diameter than the thickness of the plate. This restriction is removed if the holes are drilled, which then offers the possibility of producing small openings in plates whose thickness can be selected based on strength requirements. Also, drilling can be used for metals that are too hard to be punched. Further, to reduce flow resistance and eliminate clogging, conical or stepped holes can be drilled in a thicker plate as shown in the profiles of Where greater robustness is required, or where there are special requirements for handling the product, plates with slots rather than holes are widely used. These may be punched (in thin plates), cast (in thick plates) or milled. Milling is particularly suitable for producing thin clean slots, which may be further finished by electropolishing if required. Examples of some slot profiles as used on milled plates are shown in Very fine holes or slots in flat sheets can be made by electrolytic processes, although the open areas are also small for the finer sizes of perforation. The processes involve either photo-etching or electroforming. Photo-etching removes metal from a Expanded metal sheets are made by a repetitive process that first cuts a sheet into a series of short slits, and then stretching the sheet to open up these slits into the characteristic diamond apertures ( A quite different use for metal in making filtration media comes in the structures that are built up from individual bars, rods or wires that may have been processed to A screen surface can be formed by assembling a number of separate flat or round bars. The huge flat or sloping screens (grizzlies) used for separating crushed ores in mineral processing works are often made in this way. Thick wires or rods can be moulded into a trapezoidal cross section, with two parallel sides of unequal length, and two sloping sides joining them. If these ‘wedge wires’ are mounted parallel to one another, with their wider flat faces adjoining but not quite touching, a very effective screen is formed. These structures can be assembled in flat or in a cylindrical geometries (as in A particular form of wedge-wire screen is the The forms of filter media discussed above are assembled of components (fibres, granules, wires) that are structurally connected together and are not free to move independently of each other, though the structure may be flexible. Here loose materials are discussed as filter media, whose components are free to move relative to each other but are confined by the walls of a container. Loose granular or fibrous materials within a containing vessel frequently are used as packed beds that act as depth filters. As a fluid carrying particles passes through the packed bed, the particles are captured throughout the depth of the packing material. If the particles are large enough relative to the pore openings, a filter cake may also form on the inlet surface of the packing material. Typical depth filters are considerably thicker than the thickest of woven or non-woven media. The depth filter is typified by the conventional sand filter, which clarifies water by depth filtration mechanism as the water flows through a bed of graded sand that may be 1 Deep-bed filters are of very simple construction: a vessel (usually cylindrical), a supporting grid at the base of the vessel, and the bed of granules – plus the necessary inlet and outlet piping. Effectively, the medium is the filter. Gravity and fluid pressure are commonly used to supply the necessary energy to flow the water through the bed. Deep-bed filters are often used in water purification and sewage treatment facilities in part due to their low operating cost and to the ease of scale-up to handle large volumes of water daily. The media used in deep-bed filters must be inert, resistant to fracture yet easily prepared in batches of graded particle sizes. In addition to sand, which is the classic and most common material, other media materials include ilmenite, alumina, magnetite, anthracite and quartz. Coke and pumice have also been used but, because of their high internal porosity, they are troublesome to clean and consequently give rise to the danger of uncontrolled breeding of bacteria. The suitability of a granular material for use in a deep-bed filter depends on both the application and the type of filter. Conventionally, there are two main types that operate with gravity flow downwards through a 0.6–1.0 A size classification of particles of one material composition (all particles have the same intrinsic mass density) by fluidization results in classification of the particles in the bed by size with the smallest particles at the top. Hence, the downward flow operation of the filter means the incoming slurry is exposed to the smallest pore first and therefore is more easily clogged than if the largest particles were on top and smallest at the bottom. A better operation is achieved by using a multi-layer filter. Two or more materials of different densities and sizes make up the bed, so that the hydraulic classification of the bed particles during cleaning places the finer, denser particles below the coarser, less dense particles (with filtration flow downwards). The most modern versions of the rapid sand filter use a moving bed of sand, whereby both filtration and cleaning proceed continuously and simultaneously. Recent evidence suggests that such filters can be as effective as membrane filtration plants in the removal of such pathogens as Anthracite is usually one of the materials in a multi-layer bed. The anthracite particles are lighter and larger than sand particles, such that a mixed bed of the two provides good filtration in depth. The larger spaces between the anthracite particles enable high flow rates to be achieved, with low pressure drop losses, while the large surface area of the anthracite is efficient in removing algae, bacteria and turbidity. Closely related to deep-bed filtration in principle is precoat filtration, which uses a bed of inert solids formed on the upstream surface of a relatively coarse filter medium to act as the filter medium. Many materials can be used for this purpose such as short chopped cellulose or synthetic fibres. The most popular solids for this purpose are kieselguhr (diatomaceous earth) and perlite. These can only be used where the collected solids are not wanted for subsequent treatment. Kieselguhr is also used as a filter medium in its own right, again for clarification duties, being used by itself or in combination with cellulose fibres, as in the filter sheets used for beer clarification. The majority of the filter media discussed thus far are inherently porous materials and structures, usually continuous in original format, with an intrinsic porosity consequent upon their method of original manufacture. Somewhat like the assembled bar types of media described in In many of these types of filters, as assembled, they present a filtering surface at the outer face of a cylinder, with the method of assembly having created a series of apertures of controllable width. Filtration occurs mostly at this outer face, which can thus be considered as surface filtration. It also allows easy cleaning by the passage over this outer face of a brush or scraper, to remove collected dirt, and this can be done with the filter closed off from the fluid flow, or while filtration is actually occurring (thus making an automatic strainer). Edge filters apply cartridge elements where the element is composed of a stack of discs or washers of paper, felt, plastic or metal, clamped together in compression. Liquid flow takes place from the outer edge inwards between the discs, which may be in intimate contact in the case of non-rigid disc materials, or through the controlled clearance space between individual discs, provided by spacing washers. Such a construction has the advantage that the collected contaminant can be scraped from the upstream surface more easily and completely than it can be from a screen, and this cleaning can be performed during operation of the unit. In addition, this type can be manufactured with inherent self-cleaning properties, so that cake build-up on the upstream surface can be virtually eliminated. An edge filter element employing stacked paper discs is shown in A further property of such an edge filter, employing unimpregnated paper discs, is that it can trap and retain finely dispersed water in fuels, oils or similar fluids. It is even possible to remove dissolved water by the provision of moderate heat and vacuum. The presence of water will, however, substantially increase the back-pressure of the filter due to the swelling of the discs, further restricting the clearance space available for flow. This can, if necessary, be used to operate a warning device that water is present in the fluid being filtered. While the performance of such a paper element is often better than that of a pleated paper element, its flow resistance, and thus back-pressure, is very much higher. Size for size, its capacity is appreciably less. However, it is one of the best types of filters for removing very fine solids from liquids, even colloidal graphite from oils. It is virtually immune to the effects of shock pressure and its element life is long, with a minimum of maintenance requirements. Cleaning can usually be accomplished quickly and efficiently by a reverse flow of compressed air. The ultra-fine filtering properties may inhibit its use for applications in which frequent cleaning is impractical to remove the build-up of ultra-fine solids. The edge filter is thus mainly made of individual rings or discs stacked together, with spacers between them as required, or with dimples on the face of the disc to provide flow channels. The same effect can be achieved by the use of a continuous helical ribbon or flat spring compressed together to give the required spacing between consecutive turns. Stacked disc filters are similar to the edge filter in appearance, in that they have an array of disc-shaped components held on a central core. The stacked disc filters differ however in that the discs are actually hollow, with filter media over the faces of the disc. They employ individual discs, porous on both sides and are stacked over a perforated inner tube with intermediate spacing washers creating a flow space between each pair of discs. Flow is between and subsequently through the filter discs and into the inner tube. The discs typically have fine metal wire screens supported on a coarser backup screen to provide effective use of the full filtration area. The complete disc assembly is clamped together inside an outer, cylindrical straining screen that prevents passage of larger particles into the spaces between the discs. Performance is governed by the mesh elements or filter screen apertures, typical standard openings being from 0.25 to 0.025 This particular form of filter is thus mesh aperture controlled, rather than an edge-type controlled. The design provides a large surface area in a compact volume, with a moderately low pressure drop. A completely different constructed cartridge has a perforated cylindrical core around which is wound a continuous filament or yarn. With a plastic filament or metal wire, the core may be threaded and the first layer of the filament is wound into the threads, giving the required degree of spacing of consecutive turns. The cartridge may have just one layer of the filament providing the same as that of an edge filter. The cartridge may have multiple layers of filament, which are usually wrapped at opposite angles, layer by layer, to give the cartridge a component of depth filtration. Cartridges are based on a wide variety of yarn materials embracing both natural and synthetic fibres. The yarns used are mostly spun from short staple fibres, the fibrillated surface of which is brushed or teased to produce a fuzzy surface or nap, which contributes importantly to the filtration mechanisms. If monofilament yarns are used, they are generally texturized or crimped in some fashion before being formed into a cartridge. The filtration characteristics of a yarn-wound cartridge depend on the type Most commonly, a multifilament or staple yarn is used. The cartridge is constructed by continuously winding the yarn in a carefully controlled open pattern around the central core, which is typically a perforated metal or plastic tube open at each end. The matrix so formed typically has a graded structure with pores of decreasing size from outside surface towards the inner core surface by varying the tension (tightness) of the windings. With such a gradation in the pore sizes the fluid flow direction is inward to achieve the best overall filter performance regarding particle loading and filter life. Despite its early origin, in the 1930s, the 63 There are many new developments in filtration and separation including applications, material and mechanisms of separations. One common theme is to reduce the fibre diameters to improve filter efficiency of smaller particles with focus on the most penetrating particle size. These media could fit into the woven and non-woven categories previously discussed. These small fibres are separately discussed in this section because the developments of media with extremely small fibres are rapidly changing and new commercial media are expected. Filter media manufacturers have for a number of years made non-woven media with a blend of submicron- and micron-sized fibres. Some recent efforts are producing media sheets or layers in media of only submicron fibres. A technical challenge is to economically make submicron fibres in sufficient quantities for commercial applications. A number of processes and patents have issued on methods to produce submicron and nanofibres including electrospinning, force spinning and fibre splitting. Some existing commercial processes such as melt blowing, under the right conditions, can produce submicron fibres. Many of these methods produce fibres with significantly varying size distributions with some of the fibres in the submicron range and some in the micron range. Technically, the term ‘nanofibre’ refers to fibres having diameters less than 100   Slip flow phenomena occurs when the fibre diameters approach the mean free path distance between the molecules in a gas stream. For air at room temperature and atmospheric pressure the mean free path is about 63 Electrospinning currently is the most popular method to make arbitrarily long submicron fibres and nanofibres in the laboratory. About 2 Very thin fibres of polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) were produced by a variation of the electrospinning process. The left-hand image in Another approach to form media to capture smaller particles is organic–inorganic aerogel technology. The aerogels are technically not made of fibres but of a network or cage structure. The walls of the cages are made up of columns of connected silica nanospheres. These columns resemble very short length nanofibres. The bonded silica particles have diameters in the order of 10