A retrospective analysis of 24 cases of minimally invasive, open reduction, and internal fixation of intra-articular calcaneal fractures is presented. Collected data included articular step-off, medial wall displacement, and Boehler's angle, in addition to other descriptive characteristics of the fracture and case series. The operative technique is described in detail including the optimal screw constructs. Arthroscopic assistance was used in 10 of the cases. The articular step-off of the posterior facet, medial wall displacement, and Boehler's angle all displayed statistically significant change between the preoperative and postoperative periods (P < .0001). These results were consistent with the goal of restoration of articular congruity, calcaneal morphology, and calcaneal height. There were no soft tissue complications. The mean overall follow-up duration was 2.8 years (range 1 to 10 years). Of the 18 patients who were followed for more than 1 year (range 1.0 to 10 years), none went on to subtalar fusion. The results of this study suggest that a minimally invasive approach can improve radiographic parameters consistent with the ultimate goals of operative reduction of calcaneal fractures, and can be used to achieve satisfactory results with minimal risk of wound complication. Level of Clinical Evidence: 4In the past, successful operative reduction of intra-articular fractures of the calcaneus was based on anatomic restoration of the posterior facet of the subtalar joint in addition to restoration of height, width, and length Aside from the potential for wound complications, some patients present with fractures that have intra-articular disarray but the overall morphology is not morbidly altered. These patients might be well served by simple articular restoration, yet through a less invasive approach. The use of minimally invasive techniques for operative reduction and internal fixation of intra-articular calcaneal fractures has become more prevalent in the past 10 years The purpose of this study was to review a single surgeon's results of minimally invasive reduction with percutaneous fixation in the management of intra-articular calcaneal fractures. In particular, we wanted to determine the rate of soft tissue complications and if any of the patients went on to have a subtalar fusion. We also wanted to determine the efficacy of a minimally invasive approach in restoring the congruity of the posterior facet and the medial wall displacement, as a measure of overall calcaneal morphology. Last, several useful technical maneuvers are presented that may make the execution of this operative approach more efficient. A total of 129 operative intra-articular calcaneal fractures were evaluated and treated operatively by the senior author (J.M.S.) from January 1998 to January 2007. Inclusion in the study required the following criteria: Evaluation consisted of standard preoperative radiographs including Broden and axial views and computerized tomographic (CT) scans. These imaging studies were used to classify the fracture pattern and to determine the morbid malalignments for surgical planning Standard weight-bearing postoperative radiographs were obtained at the time of last follow-up. Select radiographic parameters were measured preoperatively and postoperatively by the senior author (J.M.S.), using either a ruler on hard copy radiographs or a digital caliper on electronic images. Boehler's angle was measured on the preoperative and the latest postoperative lateral radiographs in standard fashion ( The patient was placed supine on the operating table with a large sandbag under the ipsilateral hip, and placed under general or spinal anesthetic. A thigh tourniquet was often used for hemostasis. In those cases where there was significant varus malposition of the calcaneal tuber, a Shantz pin was inserted into the posterolateral portion of the heel. The tuber fragment was then mobilized distally and medially, with simultaneous valgus thrust to align it to the sustentacular block of bone. Once accomplished, temporary Steinman pin fixation was delivered percutaneously from the inferior portion of the tuber across the fracture and into the sustentaculum tali under fluoroscopic control ( A small horizontal stab incision was then made directly over the sinus tarsi. The depressed lateral portion of the posterior facet was then manipulated with a bone pick to obtain anatomic apposition with the medial portion of the posterior facet. When the posterior facet was reduced, a 1.6-mm Kirschner wire (K-wire) was inserted percutaneously, just inferior and parallel to the subchondral cortex to maintain the corrected position ( Adequate visualization of the reduction was obtained either by extending the incision distally enough to directly visualize the articular surface, or with arthroscopic assistance. The incision was extended in those cases where the primary disruption of the posterior facet was located more laterally ( When the scope was used, the 70° 4.0-mm arthroscope was inserted into the subtalar joint via a lateral portal made in the sinus tarsi, several millimeters anterior to the lateral process of the talus. The arthroscope was carefully placed so that it was posterior to the interosseous talocalcaneal ligament, and passive inversion of the subtalar joint often facilitated placement of the instrument. After identification of the primary fracture line ( Irrespective of the method of visualization, once the fracture was reduced, permanent fixation consisting of 3.5-mm cortical or cancellous screws was placed percutaneously just inferior to the subchondral cortex, in lag fashion across the fracture. The target in all cases was the sustentaculum tali ( Postoperative care consisted of initiation of passive and active range of motion of the subtalar and midtarsal joint after the first postoperative visit within 10 days of surgery. Weight bearing was initiated no earlier than 6 weeks postoperative in a removable immobilizing boot. Radiographs were taken at the first postoperative visit and 6 weeks, 3 months, and 1 year after the operation. If the patient was seen thereafter, radiographs were obtained and the last films were used in the analysis. A statistical description of the 24-patient case series can be found in  It is clear that wound complications following minimally invasive open reduction, internal fixation (ORIF) of calcaneal fractures are greatly diminished compared to the extensile lateral approach Multiple studies have demonstrated the difficulties related to visualizing the quality of anatomical reduction of the posterior facet intraoperatively Direct visualization via arthroscopy along with percutaneously placed screws for fracture reduction affords the least amount of soft tissue disruption while allowing anatomical restoration of the joint surface It is generally accepted that open reduction and internal fixation yields better results than nonoperative treatment for displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures It is also interesting to note that restoration of Boehler's angle was the most difficult parameter to normalize in our group of patients, even though improvement of that parameter reached statistical significance. Incomplete reduction of this angle translates into a loss of height, which was thought to worsen the outcome and complicate any subsequent salvage type of surgery, such as talocalcaneal arthrodesis To date, it is difficult to prioritize the exact parameters related to joint depression fracture of the calcaneus that correlate with clinical outcomes. The results of this study demonstrate the capacity to restore bony contour with minimally invasive techniques, but it is unknown whether this may be sufficient to slow the onset of articular demise. However, if bony morphology and contour can be normalized or nearly so, then the ultimate remedy for subtalar arthritis is facilitated. It is clear that arthrodesis following neglected or poorly reduced calcaneal fractures is more difficult than in those with near-normal morphology A limitation of this study is that there is no functional outcome measure of our patient population other than using subtalar fusion as an end point. Although subtalar arthrodesis is commonly accepted as a clinical outcome indicator, we do not believe that there is a strong correlation therein. The retrospective nature of this observational study precluded the use of a more meaningful outcome assessment tool. Furthermore, the operating surgeon assessed the outcomes reported in this investigation. In addition, we would have liked to have followed some of these patients for a longer period of time, although it is likely that the radiographic measurement recorded in this study would not have changed much over time. Our experience has shown that the clinical result does not appreciably deteriorate over time, which is probably due to the observation that the inherent stiffness of the subtalar joint is realized shortly after the fracture.