Basic oxygen furnace slag (BOFS) exhibits highly alkaline properties due to its high calcium content, which is beneficial to carbonation reaction. In this study, accelerated carbonation of BOFS was evaluated under different reaction times, temperatures, and liquid-to-solid (L/S) ratios in a slurry reactor. CO2 mass balance within the slurry reactor was carried out to validate the technical feasibility of fixing gaseous CO2 into solid precipitates. After that, a multiple model approach, i.e., theoretical kinetics and empirical surface model, for carbonation reaction was presented to determine the maximal carbonation conversion of BOFS in a slurry reactor. On one hand, the reaction kinetics of BOFS carbonation was evaluated by the shrinking core model (SCM). Calcite (CaCO3) was identified as a reaction product through the scanning electronic microscopy and X-ray diffraction analyses, which provided the rationale of applying the SCM in this study. The rate-limiting step of carbonation was found to be ash-diffusion controlled, and the effective diffusivity for carbonation of BOFS in a slurry reactor were determined accordingly. On the other hand, the carbonation conversion of BOFS was predicted by the response surface methodology (RSM) via a nonlinear mathematical programming. According to the experimental data, the highest carbonation conversion of BOFS achieved was 57% under an L/S ratio of 20 mL g−1, a CO2 flow rate of 0.1 L min−1, and a pressure of 101.3 kPa at 50 °C for 120 min. Furthermore, the applications and limitations of SCM and RSM were examined and exemplified by the carbonation of steelmaking slags.Recently, scientists have found that an increase of greenhouse gas in the atmosphere enhances global warming ( Industrial solid wastes, such as steelmaking slag, are relatively cheaper feedstock than natural ores. Therefore, CO Identifying the effect of key operating factors on carbonation performance is crucial to reaction design and system optimization. There are several theoretical models available for evaluating the performance of carbonation using a CaO-based material, such as random pore model ( The ground BOFS was provided by the China Hi-ment Corporation (Kaohsiung, Taiwan). The ground BOFS was sieved by a standard sieve with mesh #325 (i.e., < 44 μm). After sieving, BOFS samples were placed in an oven at 105 °C to eliminate surface moisture and then collected in an air-tight bag. Deionized (DI) water (18.2 MΩ cm  To evaluate the effect of operating factors on carbonation performance in a slurry reactor, a response surface was introduced using the response surface methodology (RSM) coded with Design Expert 8.0 software (Stat-Ease, Inc., USA). The operating factors for the slurry reactor system considered in this study include reaction temperature (i.e., 30, 40, 50, 60 and 70 °C), L/S ratio (i.e., 5, 10 and 20 mL g The composition of fresh BOFS was analyzed at the Chemistry Analysis Laboratory in China Hi-ment Corporation, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. Acetic acid and phosphoric acid were used for digesting various ingredients in BOFS samples. A micro-digestion method was applied at high temperature and pressure to ensure completely dissolution of BOFS samples. The concentrations of various metal ions in the extracted solution were measured by an inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES). After carbonation, the reacted BOFS slurry sample was filtered with a 0.45 μm membrane to separate the solid and liquid phases. The solid sample was then dried in an oven at 105 °C for 1 d to completely remove moisture. The dried BOFS samples were analyzed by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), scanning electronic microscopy (SEM), and X-ray diffraction (XRD). In contrast, the concentrations of metal ions in the filtrate (i.e., liquid phase) were measured with an atomic absorption spectrometer (AAS, PerkinElmer AA800, USA). In addition, the concentration of total inorganic carbon (TIC) in the liquid phase was determined using an Aurora 1030W TIC Analyzer (O.I. Analytical, Canada). The surface micro-structure of the BOFS samples before and after carbonation was analyzed by SEM (Hitachi S-800, Tokyo, Japan). In addition, XRD (X’ Pert Pro, PANalytical, Almelo, The Netherlands) was applied to identify and characterize crystalline materials using monochromatic X-rays. The XRD patterns of a BOFS sample before and after the carbonation reaction were collected from 20° to 80° with a scanning time of 1 s per step. TGA (TGA-51, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) was used to determine the carbonation conversion of BOFS before and after carbonation. A modified TG-DTG interpretation method ( It has been reported that CaCO A non-linear program was formulated to estimate the maximum carbonation conversion of BOFS in a slurry reactor. The carbonation conversion of BOFS (  Aqueous carbonation is a neutralization reaction and occurs spontaneously. The affinity of each chemical element for the carbonate formation depends on its total content and solubility product constant. Therefore, prior to the carbonation experiment, the concentrations of dissolved reactive elements, such as calcium and magnesium that leached from the BOFS into solution were measured. In the case of L/S = 2, the total calcium content from BOFS into solution should be 182.5 g/L, based on the XRF measurement in The CO  Shrinking core model (SCM), developed by When the chemical reaction between reactants is the rate-limiting step, Eq. When the diffusion of carbonate ions (i.e., reactant) through the ash layer is the rate-limiting step, the relationship between the conversion and reaction time can be illustrated by Eq. When the mass transfer of the reactants through the boundary layer at the liquid–solid interface is the rate-limiting step, Eq. The results indicated that the ash-layer diffusion was identified as the rate-determining step [Eq.  In addition to the theoretical kinetic model using SCM, the RSM, from the statistics point of view, was also introduced to evaluate the effect of the relating operational parameters, including reaction time, temperature, and L/S ratio on the carbonation conversion of BOFS. The carbonation conversion of BOFS in a slurry reactor predicted by the developed response surface mode (δ A non-linear program (see details in Section The temperature and L/S ratio for optimality were determined to be 62 °C (i.e., A = 0.6) and 20 mL g Since the function of carbonation conversion was found to be negative definite, the determined condition of Eq. In this study, two different approaches, i.e., SCM (from the kinetic point of view) and RSM (from the statistics point of view), were utilized to evaluate the effect of operating factors on carbonation conversion of BOFS. SCM has been used to determine the rate-limiting step in a heterogeneous reaction because of its conceptual and mathematical simplicity. The additional contribution of the SCM is that the key design parameter of reactor, i.e., diffusivity of the reactant, can be obtained for process scale-up and system optimization. Likewise, RSM is developed based on the experimental design from the statistics point of view to predict the maximal response of system performance. In this study, based on the developed RSM, several candidates were revealed to determine the maximum carbonation conversion, which indicated that the conversions predicted by the RSM were in good agreement with the experimental data. However, using the same operating conditions of candidates as suggested by the RSM, the predicted carbonation conversions of BOFS by the SCM were slightly lower than that by the RSM, as shown in In the SCM, there is an inherent assumption that complete carbonation conversion of BOFS should be eventually reached. However, from the experimental data in a slurry reactor, it was observed that the full carbonation conversion of BOFS will never occur, with increasing time. This implies that other factors, such as mineralogy of particles, particle size changes, and pore blockage should be considered in addition to the diffusion limit of reactants into the BOFS. For instance, the mineralogical composition of BOFS are complex ( Furthermore, the buffering capacity of the BOFS slurry will change with the different L/S ratios and reaction times, thereby resulting in different reactant concentrations ( In this study, different operating factors, including temperature, L/S ratio and reaction time, were evaluated for CO The authors wish to thank the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at