Background
                  Successful radial head arthroplasty relies on reproduction of anatomy. We hypothesized that the radiocapitellar synovial fold could serve as a reference point in radial head prosthesis sizing. Our study aimed to define the relationship between the synovial fold and the radial head in elbows with and without lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL) injury.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  We performed magnetic resonance imaging evaluation of 34 elbows to determine the normal relationship between the radiocapitellar synovial fold and the radial head. Next, we used cadaveric dissections to evaluate the anatomic relationships with the LUCL intact and disrupted, as well as in the setting of sizing with a radial head prosthesis. The fold–to–radial head distance (FRHD) was measured on all images and analyzed to determine the relationship of the synovial fold and radial head.
               
                  Results
                  The FRHD in cadavers with an intact LUCL and native radial head measured an average of 1.5 mm proximal to the radial head. With the LUCL disrupted and a native radial head, the FRHD measured an average of 1.2 mm proximal to the radial head. The mean difference between the groups was 0.5 mm (P = .031), suggesting that the fold migrated distally in the cadavers with a disrupted LUCL.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The radiocapitellar synovial fold may be a helpful landmark for radial head sizing. The synovial fold is always just proximal to the articular surface of the radial head. Using this information, the surgeon can prevent overlengthening as the implant should not be placed proximal to the fold.Radial head fractures account for up to 5.4% of all fractures and can present a significant treatment challenge when comminution precludes anatomic reconstruction. Proper radial head sizing is critical to successful clinical outcomes as implanting a radial head prosthesis that is too large in length, known as “overstuffing” the radiocapitellar joint, can lead to loss of elbow motion, erosions of the capitellum, and early-onset arthritis secondary to alterations in elbow joint mechanics. While helpful in aiding the surgeon to implant an appropriately sized prosthesis, all of these anatomic landmarks exist medial to the radial head implant, and visualization after implantation of a trial or final prosthesis may be difficult. In addition, the radial head does not sit perpendicular to the forearm axis as the carrying angle of the elbow and curve of the proximal radius influence the orientation of the plane of the radial head articular surface with respect to the forearm axis. Thus, medially based landmarks may be insufficient to define the proper plane to restore the native radial head articular position. Lateral and posterior reference points in conjunction with the medial landmarks would allow the surgeon to more accurately define the plane to size and position the radial head prosthesis. In addition, visualization of a posterolateral anatomic structure would likely be easier to visualize through a laterally based surgical exposure. During embryonic development, synovial folds or plicae are thought to be remnants of synovial membrane septa that are present during articular development. To determine whether the radiocapitellar synovial fold is a structure with a constant anatomic relationship to the radial head, we retrospectively reviewed 34 magnetic resonance images (MRIs) without intra-articular contrast of the elbow. There were 14 female and 20 male patients with an average age of 37 years (range, 17-72 years). The indications for the elbow MRIs included distal biceps tendon injuries in 7 patients, lateral epicondylitis in 6, intra-articular loose bodies in 2, medial epicondylitis of the elbow in 4, an osteochondral lesion of the capitellum in 1, a triceps tendon injury in 1, and partial medial ulnar collateral ligament injuries in 13. All patients were in the “anatomic position” with the elbow extended and the forearm supinated during the MRI scans. By use of T2-weighted images, the radial synovial fold was identified on 30 of 34 MRIs (88%). The fold was measured on coronal and sagittal cuts. The fold–to–radial head distance (FRHD) was defined by the perpendicular distance from the tip of the fold to a plane connecting the apices of the subchondral surface of the 2 most proximal aspects of the radial head. The FRHD was measured in the coronal and sagittal planes ( All MRI measurements were performed using imaging software (Centricity Enterprise Web; General Electric Medical Systems, Fairfield, CT, USA). We evaluated interobserver reliability of the measurement technique with 3 observers independently performing all measurements. To evaluate intraobserver reliability, we then had the 3 observers repeat the measurements on the same 10 randomly selected MRIs 2 times with a 1-week interval between measurements. To confirm that the anatomic relationship between the synovial fold and radial head is not changed by LUCL injury, we used 9 fresh-frozen cadaveric elbows that were disarticulated at the glenohumeral joint. The mean age of the specimens was 69.3 years (range, 56-83 years), and there were 3 male and 6 female specimens. All elbows were examined and found to be free of elbow arthritis, congenital anomaly, gross oncologic process, or prior elbow surgery. We obtained 3 series of anteroposterior (AP) elbow fluoroscopic images with the forearm supinated at different stages of the study for each specimen. We made an extensor digitorum communis split approach The radial head was resected, and an anatomic radial head system (Acumed, Hillsboro, OR, USA) was used to complete the steps of radial head replacement. The final implant was selected to match the measured resected radial head to restore proper radial head height ( Three authors then performed measurements on each set of radiographs to evaluate the relationship between the synovial fold and radial head. The FRHD was defined by the perpendicular distance from the 2 clips in the synovial fold and a line drawn tangentially to the subchondral bone of the radial head articular surface ( All radiograph measurements were performed using imaging software (Centricity Enterprise Web). We evaluated interobserver and intraobserver reliability of the measurement technique with 3 observers independently performing all 9 FRHD measurements and then repeating measurements on 4 elbows 1 week after the initial measurements were done. Continuous data are presented using the mean, standard deviation (SD), and range, while categorical data are summarized using counts and percentages. Measurements on each set of radiographs were taken to compare the synovial fold and radial head, including the FRHD, within 3 specific groups (LUCL intact–native radial head, LUCL disrupted–native radial head, and LUCL disrupted–prosthetic radial head). Comparisons between groups were done using the The intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) was used to measure the level of both intraobserver reliability and interobserver reliability for FRHD measurements within the 3 groups previously discussed. The ICC assessed the consistency of measurements made by the 3 observers measuring the same quantity for interobserver reliability and repeated measurements on 4 elbows for intraobserver reliability. The ICC is given along with the 95% confidence interval (CI) across all FRHD measures and then by subgroup. Correlations of less than 0.60 were considered poor to fair; between 0.60 and 0.74, good; and above 0.75, excellent. While the synovial fold was present on 88% of the reviewed MRIs, the fold was present in all cadaveric specimens and reliably identified the radiocapitellar joint—immediately adjacent and proximal to the radial head cartilage. When traced along the capsule, the semicircular fold also marked the proximal edge of the lesser sigmoid notch articular cartilage. On MRI, the average FRHD was 0.9 mm (SD, 0.5 mm; range, 0.1-2.8 mm) in the coronal plane and 0.8 mm (SD, 0.4 mm; range 0.3-2.9 mm) in the sagittal plane. All FRHD measurements were positive, indicating that the synovial fold was always proximal to the plane defined by the subchondral surface of the radial head. In cadaveric specimens, the FRHD in cadavers with an intact LUCL and native radial head measured an average of 1.5 ± 0.4 mm (range, 0.9-2.3 mm). With the LUCL disrupted and a native radial head, the FRHD measured an average of 1.2 ± 0.6 mm (range, 0.4-2.3 mm). The FRHD with the LUCL disrupted and the radial head prosthesis in place averaged 0.5 ± 0.8 mm (range, 0-2.7 mm). A statistically significant difference was found when the FRHD in cadavers with an intact LUCL and native radial head was compared with the FRHD in cadavers with a disrupted LUCL and a native head. The mean difference between the groups was 0.5 ± 0.4 mm (95% CI, 0.1-0.8 mm; We found excellent interobserver reliability among the 3 observers for all measurements, with an ICC value of 0.91 (95% CI, 0.83-0.95) for the FRHD across all cadavers. Excellent reliability was also found for the FRHD in the cadavers with an intact LUCL and native radial head, with an ICC value of 0.79 (95% CI, 0.49-0.93); in the cadavers with a disrupted LUCL and native radial head, with an ICC of 0.82 (95% CI, 0.50-0.95); and in the cadavers with a disrupted LUCL and replacement radial head, with an ICC of 0.94 (95% CI, 0.83-0.98). The average difference in MRI measurements between observers for the FRHD in the coronal and sagittal planes was 0.2 mm. The average difference in fluoroscopic measurements between observers in the cadaveric FRHD for all specimens was 0.3 mm. With regard to intraobserver reliability, we again found excellent intraobserver reliability among the 3 observers for all measurements, with an ICC value of 0.92 (95% CI, 0.84-0.96) for the FRHD across all cadavers. In the cadavers with an intact LUCL and native radial head, we found an ICC value of 0.82 (95% CI, 0.50-0.95) for the FRHD; in the cadavers with a disrupted LUCL and native radial head, 0.90 (95% CI, 0.63-0.98); and in the cadavers with a disrupted LUCL and replacement radial head, 0.80 (95% CI, 0.45-0.94). Sizing of radial head arthroplasty continues to be a clinical challenge and can lead to poor results when complicated by overlengthening. Using MRIs, we demonstrated that the radiocapitellar synovial fold is a structure with a constant anatomic relationship to the radial head. Our measurements indicate that the plane defined by the proximal subchondral bone of the most proximal aspect of the radial head sits slightly less than 1 mm distal to the most prominent aspect of the radiocapitellar synovial fold in both the coronal and sagittal planes. Although there was a small degree of variability in this measurement between patients, the native radial head was always distal to the synovial fold. Similarly, this anatomic relationship was confirmed in our cadaveric specimens as the fold was present in all specimens and averaged 1.5 mm from the subchondral surface of the radial head on radiographs. However, it is important to note that the FRHD was measured from the subchondral bone on the radiographs, and the majority of this distance was likely made up of the thickness of the radial head articular cartilage. After the radial head was replaced, the FRHD was 0.5 mm. This decrease in distance to the fold represents the replacement of the radial head articular surface with the metal implant, which—unlike articular cartilage—can be measured on radiographs. Yeung et al To determine whether the relationship between the radiocapitellar synovial fold and the radial head was affected by injury, we simulated significant soft-tissue damage to the lateral aspect of the humerus by stripping off all soft-tissue attachments on the lateral epicondyle and lateral ridge of the humerus to include the LUCL and the common extensor origin. This type of soft-tissue injury is frequently associated with comminuted radial head fractures, The limitations of our study include a relatively small number of specimens. This cadaveric study attempts to re-create an LUCL injury with soft-tissue stripping, and it is unknown whether this accurately simulates the clinical scenario of terrible-triad fracture-dislocation. However, this technique has been used in other cadaveric studies to simulate LUCL injury. We evaluated the use of the radiocapitellar synovial fold as a landmark to clinically help find the appropriate radial head replacement length. Both cadaveric and MRI evaluations confirmed that the radiocapitellar synovial fold is an anatomic structure with a constant anatomic relationship to the radial head. We also demonstrated that this anatomic relationship between the synovial fold and radial head is not significantly changed by a simulated LUCL injury in a cadaveric model. The proximity of the fold to the radial head confirms the potential benefit as a guide when sizing the radial head arthroplasty length. Our study is meant to supplement the existing sizing references. We believe the radiocapitellar synovial fold may be of significant utility as a radial head sizing landmark given that this is a posterolateral structure—both making it easily visualized while performing the lateral approach for the arthroplasty and allowing the proper plane for the radial head articular surface to be determined in conjunction with the medial landmarks. This study shows that the radiocapitellar synovial fold is on average 0.8-1.5 mm from the subchondral bone of the radial head and should always be proximal to the articular surface of the radial head. Using this information, the surgeon can prevent overstuffing as the implant should not be placed proximal to the synovial fold. This cadaveric study was completed with an educational grant in the amount of $19,000 from Acumed (Hillsboro, OR, USA). The outside source of funds was not involved in data collection, data analysis, or preparation or editing of the manuscript. The outside source of funds was used to fund the cadaveric specimens and implants used in the study. Marc J. Richard is a paid consultant for Acumed. All the other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. The authors thank Dr. Matthew Ramsey for providing the inspiration for this investigation.