The present paper aims to investigate: 1) the impact forces in terms of variables like: mill speed, slurry concentration, and slurry filling; 2) the key points of load orientation, namely the shoulder, toe, impact, and pool angle in wet grinding; and 3) the influences of the slurry pool formation on the mill power draw. In this work the influence of these operating parameters were investigated using a pilot mill (1000∗500mm). To this end, a Copper ore (−1000μm) was used to prepare slurry at 50% solid concentration by mass. The tests covered a range of slurry filling (U) from 0 to 2.5 with ball filling 30% of mill volume and 6 different speeds between 60% and 85% of critical speed. It is observed as the mill speed increases, the shoulder angle will increase and the impact angle will decrease. By formation of the pool and exertion of the floating (buoyancy) forces to the particles inside the mill, the toe angle increases 15–25°. The results delineate that the increase in the mill speed leads to a remarkable increase in the magnitude and frequency of the impact forces. An increase in slurry filling and the resulting formation of the pool, the impact forces will decrease. It is found that with the increase in slurry concentration, the slurry will act as a damper decreasing the impact forces. Results show that there are a definite trend between the power draw and the slurry filling.Mills are difficult to investigate because they are complicated dynamic systems and dependent on multiple factors. They are generally stopped for maintenance purposes only Mills work in the two forms of dry and wet conditions (grate discharge and overflow discharge). In wet grinding, however, depending on the ore that has to be fractured, water is used in the mill as a factor to remove the grinded stones from the mill in the form of slurry. This method has some disadvantages, including the corrosion role of water against metals and its damping role against the impact forces inside the mill which leads to the decrease in mill efficiency Maleki-Moghaddam et al. Forces exerted on the liners/lifters by the cascading motion in tumbling mills (wet and dry) was measured by Moys, et al. Effects of operational parameters on the motion of grinding media and power in milling were investigated In this work, the effect of the operating parameters of mill, slurry filling, slurry concentration, and mill speed on the power draw, load orientation, and impact forces were experimentally investigated using a pilot mill. The present work provides further insight on the slurry pooling phenomenon. It should be noted that Katubilwa and Moys A pilot mill (1000 This experiment was partly based on taking videos and photos from the contents of a pilot mill to investigate the load orientation. A scaled plate was placed on the fixed frame of the mill so as to observe the key-point angles of the load orientation after taking each photo. Two 500 For investigation of the impact forces in the load, a quartz force sensor mounted through the mill lifter walls was employed to measure the impact load on the lifter. The load cell is mounted on the liner plate; a metal plate of 6 The feed used for the pilot study is a Sarcheshmeh copper ore the specific density of which is 2700 To investigate the impact forces in terms of slurry filling level at different slurry concentration, the tests covered slurry concentrations at 40%, 50%, 60%, and 70% by weight percent and 18% ball filling. At first, the mill was filled by balls to 30% of the mill's internal volume; then, it was tested by different speeds (60–85% of the critical speed) in dry conditions. For each experimental condition, the mill was set to work for 60 The summary of the load orientation results in terms of slurry filling at different speeds for ball filling 30% is presented in  The impact angle is presented in this article for the first time alongside other parameters during the slurry pool formation. The impact angle θ From According to The shoulder angle θ The pool inside the mill starts forming after U The pool angle was 120° at the time of formation and therefore, the pool height came to 25 When there is a relative motion between a fluid and an object floating inside it, the object is influenced by the pure force due to the act of the fluid. If the object moves inside the adhesive fluid, both the shear force and the compressive force will affect the object; the force parallel to the movement direction is drag force and the force perpendicular to the movement direction is lifting force. Drag force and lifting force cannot be calculated analytically unless in exceptional conditions and, therefore, only experimental results are useful. Another force exerted on the object while falling into the adhesive fluid is gravity and buoyancy forces. Buoyancy force exerted to the object is equal to the weight of the fluid moved equal to the object volume The mill speed is very effective on the amount and situation of the impact forces inside the mill.  The slurry pool formed in mill is very effective on absorption of the ball and ore energy. As shown in the following figures, with the increase in volume of the fluid inside the mill and the formation of the pool, the impact forces will decrease. Impact load results in terms of slurry filling at different speeds for J The increase in fluid volume inside the mill and the resulting formation of pool, the impact forces will decrease. The rate of this decrease is more significant in higher speeds and by formation of slurry pool, depending on the mill speed, can be a decrease of two to ten times of the dry condition. Prior to the slurry pool formation, the impact load decreases, after the slurry pool formation (U If the percentage of slurry solid is low, it causes formation of a pool in the mill, the contact between metal to metal, the increase of the balls consumption and the escape of the material among the balls. Also, a large volume of the mill is filled with water which practically reduces the mill efficiency. Besides, in the next stages, the drying process is costly. On the other hand, at very high density and viscosity, the slurry acts as a damper and creates resistance of the ball's movements against impact. As a result, the speed of impact grinding will improve by decreasing the slurry viscosity. Increase in the slurry concentration leads to an increase in fluid density and viscosity and packing of the mill content, and so a considerable decrease in impact forces. At a slurry concentration greater than 70%, close to a packed bed containing all water in the interstices, it is expected that the slurry will be extremely viscous and this leads to the coating of the slurry and balls on the mill walls. The higher amount of slurry, the more coating occurs, so the impact forces decrease with higher U and increased grinding time.  Power results in terms of slurry filling at different speeds for ball filling 30% are shown in At first, the mill works in dry conditions, by increasing the slurry to the mill contents, the fluid fills pores of balls and fills porosity between the solid and as a result the power draw increased. This process continues until all of the holes between the solid materials to be filled and the power is attained to the maximum value, and then Power at The main objective of the present research was to investigate the effect of the slurry pool formed inside the mill on damping of the impact forces, load orientation and power draw. The mill grinding mechanism is a combination of both impact and abrasion mechanisms. As a result, an investigation of impact forces is essential to optimize the comminution. The pilot mill (1000 The impact angle decreases by the increase in mill speed. The toe angle is not dependent on the mill speed. The toe angle jumps increasingly by the formation of the pool inside the mill. The toe angle increased 15 The shoulder angle increases by the increase in mill speed. The pool angle is not dependent on the mill speed but will decrease by the increase in slurry filling. Increase in the mill speed leads to the increase in the magnitude and frequency of the impact force; this will influence the impact position as well. The slurry pool formed inside the mill is very effective on the absorption of the impact forces; the increase in the fluid volume inside the mill and the formation of pool will considerably decrease the impact forces. An increase in the slurry concentration leads to the decrease in the amount of impact forces. The experiments with the pilot mill showed that the mill power drawn increased with the mill speed. With the increase in slurry filling inside the mill, the power will initially increase (8–13%). After this, the increase in the slurry volume inside the mill and the formation of pool will considerably decrease the power. This research was accomplished by financial support of