The effects of sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) pretreatment on the chemical compositions and enzymatic saccharification of rice straw were investigated. The enzymatic digestibility of rice straw is enhanced after pretreatment since pretreated solids show significant delignification with high sugar availability. During pretreatment, an increasing temperature and Na2CO3 charge leads to enhanced delignification, whereas an increased degradation of polysaccharides as well, of which xylan acts more susceptible than glucan. The sugar recovery of enzymatic hydrolysis goes up rapidly with the total titratable alkali (TTA) increasing from 0% to 8%, and then it reaches a plateau. The highest sugar recovery of rice straw after pretreatment, 71.7%, 73.2%, and 76.1% for total sugar, glucan, and xylan, respectively, is obtained at 140°C, TTA 8% and cellulase loading of 20FPU/g-cellulose. In this condition, the corresponding delignification ratio of pretreated solid is 41.8%, while 95% of glucan and 76% of xylan are conserved.The inevitable depletion of fossil fuels and the growing concerns over the environmental impact have led to an increasing interest in exploring alternative, sustainable energy sources ( Biomass is composed of cellulose (40–50%), hemicellulose (25–35%) and lignin (15–20%) ( Ethanol production from lignocelluloses comprises of the following main steps: hydrolysis of hemicellulose and cellulose; fermentation; separation of lignin residue; recovery and concentration of ethanol; and wastewater handling. Of which, a low-cost, advanced pretreatment of the raw materials, which perhaps has a great impact on all the other steps in the process as well as the whole cost of bioethanol conversion, should be seriously considered ( Recently, green liquor used as a pretreatment of Kraft pulping or biomass conversion has attracted much attention of some researchers. Their experimental data also confirmed that as a promising pretreatment agent, green liquor results in a higher retention of polysaccharides and increased delignification selectivity. Therefore, an enhancement of pulp qualities and competitive sugar recovery of enzymatic hydrolysis can be obtained ( Rice straw was provided by a papermaking plant in Eastern China. Air dried raw materials without classification was cut to a length of 3–5 All the chemicals such as sodium carbonate were analytical grade and purchased from Nanjing Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., of China and used as received. The pretreatment was carried out in an electrically heated oil bath containing 10 bombs of 1 L capacity rotated at a speed of 6 A laboratory KRK refiner (Φ 300 Lignin and carbohydrates contents of raw and pretreated materials were analyzed using the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) procedure ( Filter paper activity of cellulase was determined following the standard method recommended by the Commission Biotechnology, IUPAC ( The chemical compositions of rice straw significantly differ depending on many factors such as growing areas, cultivars, harvest seasons and storage conditions. The sugar composition of the cellulose and hemicellulose from herbaceous fiber materials found that glucose and xylose are the predominant sugar components, respectively, with arabinose appearing in noticeable amounts ( The total lignin in rice straw is 17.0% (Klason 13.6% and acid soluble 3.3%). The high acid soluble lignin content (about 20%) is due to the acid hydrolysis of ester bonds between substantial amount of hydroxycinnamic acids such as The relatively high amount of acid soluble lignin and non-silica ash in rice straw, as well as its loose structure, make it feasible to be pretreated in mild conditions such as weak acid, weak alkali, low temperature and short time, etc. In the meantime, the easily degradable hemicellulose, which occupies 40% of the total sugar, also requires a gentle pretreatment condition to prevent its excessive degradation. The effects on weight loss and chemical compositions of pretreated rice straw are important indices for evaluating the effectiveness of its pretreatment. The yield of pretreated solid and pH of spent liquor of rice straw pretreated with Na The solid yield of rice straw pretreated with Na The pretreatment liquor pH of auto-hydrolyzed rice straw (TTA charge 0%) was 5.9–6.6, which means the acidic degradation of carbohydrate was limited. The content of 1% NaOH extractives in rice straw is around 50% ( The ability of delignification in pretreatment is probably differs from the lignin properties (content of When the TTA charge is 0% (auto-hydrolysis), little Klason lignin at each temperature is removed. However, the removal of acid soluble lignin increases with the upgoing pretreatment temperature. It means that acid insoluble lignin is stable during auto-hydrolysis, and the reduction of total lignin is mainly caused by the solution of acid soluble lignin. The relatively low pH of spent liquor at high temperature results in the partial cleavage of α-ether bonds in lignin. Both Klason lignin and acid soluble lignin tend to be degraded while their removals become gentle with the increasing TTA charge at the same temperature. At a same TTA charge, total lignin removal is increasing with the pretreatment temperature. For example, when the TTA charge is 20%, the removal of total lignin increased from 39.5% to 72.5% with the temperature rising from 120 to 150 The correlation between the pretreated solid yield and delignification of rice straw pretreated with Na The removal ratios of polysaccharides in rice straw pretreated with Na The yield of pretreated solid, the contents of polysaccharides, lignin and ash (based on the weight of original materials) in rice straw pretreated with Na Enzymatic hydrolysis is a step involves cleaving the polymers of cellulose and hemicellulose using enzymes in the production of bioethanol. It is usually carried out under mild conditions, i.e., low pressure and long retention time. Hydrolysis efficiency of biomass increases when combination of enzymes such as cellulase, xylanase and pectinase are employed rather than only cellulase ( The enzymatic hydrolysis in this study was carried out with an enzyme cocktail mixed by cellulase, xylanase and β-glucosidase (1 It is clear that a higher enzyme loading results in higher sugar yield, thereby higher sugar recovery at the same pretreatment condition, as it was found by According to the curves of total sugar recovery of pretreated rice straw in The curves of glucan and xylan recovery of pretreated rice straw in Since the ratio of delignification during pretreatment is a crucial factor that greatly affects enzymatic hydrolysis, the relationship between the total sugar recovery in enzymatic hydrolysis and delignification ratio of rice straw pretreated with Na In sum, the mild alkaline sodium carbonate pretreatment shows promising potential on improving the enzymatic saccharification of rice straw. Lignin and polysaccharides of rice straw pretreated with Na The authors are grateful for the financial support of