The pressure leaching of synthetic zinc silicate is studied in the present paper. Five key parameters were explored, namely, sulfuric acid concentration, the final pH of leaching pulp, leaching temperature, water content and iron addition. The experimental results obtained show that sulfuric acid concentration, the final pH, iron addition, water content and leaching temperature have significant effect on the leaching behavior of zinc and silica. Higher leaching temperature and final pH improved filtration characteristics of the leaching pulp. The final pH affected the co-precipitation of silica and iron (III) oxide. Once all these five parameters were optimized, the Zn extraction percentage was found to be as high as 97% and the extent of Si dissolution as low as 0.6%; the filtration rate increased to 1057L/m2·h. The kinetic study showed that the leaching process follows shrinking core model with diffusion control with an apparent activation energy of 16.4kJ/mol in the temperature range of 110–170°C. The empirical reaction order with respect to the concentration of sulfuric acid is 1.0, which is also consistent with a diffusion-controlled process.Zinc oxide ores are an important source of zinc metal after zinc sulfide ores. Oxidized ores contain Zn in various carbonate and silicate minerals, such as smithsonite (ZnCO Silica gel is generated according to Eqs. More recently, we have studied the pressure leaching of high silica Pb–Zn oxide ore using air as pressurized gas in sulfuric acid medium. Under optimum conditions, the extraction percentage of Zn is up to 96% and the extent of dissolution of Si, Pb, and Fe are as low as 1%, 2%, and 6%, respectively. The leach residue pulp had good filtration performance ( The synthetic zinc silicate used in the present study was prepared in the laboratory. The X-ray Diffraction (XRD) pattern of the materials is shown in Leaching experiments were conducted in a 2 During the leaching experimental procedure, about 50 The study for the effect of sulfuric acid concentration on the extraction of zinc and the dissolution of silica was carried out by varying concentrations in the 80–160  The water content of the samples plays an important role in controlling the dissolution of silica. According to If water is excessive, H If water is restricted, however, the reaction may proceed in the following way: Combining the two reaction equations as above, one can obtain the following equation. The zinc sulfate produced by reaction can absorb available water, thus preventing silica gel from hydration ( Most of the iron is present as goethite (FeOOH) and franklinite, with little iron contained in zinc oxide ores in nature. In this study, the effect of iron content in pressure leaching was determined by adding ferric sulfate chemical reagents. Similar leaching conditions as in previous experiments were employed: sulfuric acid concentration: 90 Thus, the higher the ferric sulfate dosages, the lower the final pH. According to Mei's theory ( In view of the fact that some of the leaching pulp was difficult to filter, the effect of raising the leaching temperature on filtration and on the extraction of Zn, Si is shown in The dehydrated SiO Dissolution of zinc from the synthetic zinc silicate in sulfuric acid solution may be represented by the reaction expressed in Eq. The leaching was carried out in the temperature range of 110–170 In order to obtain the kinetic equation and apparent activation energy of synthetic zinc silicate dissolution in sulfuric acid medium, the experimental data in Based on the experimental data in The apparent activation energy was determined based on the Arrhenius equation: The -lnk versus 1/T data were plotted for the four temperatures. The regression analysis showed that the linear relationship is also significant. The activation energy (Ea) was, hence, determined to be 16.39 The effect of H  The experimental results show that sulfuric acid concentration, the final pH, iron content, water content and leaching temperature have significant effect on the leaching process. Air partial pressure was primarily used for the maintenance of higher temperatures which were required for the reaction. In order to let leaching pulp have a good filter performance, the sulfuric acid concentration can not be excessively high; the final pH of leaching slurry is preferably about 5 and at higher temperature. A certain amount of iron can promote the leaching of zinc through the regeneration of sulfuric acid. Silicon (IV) and iron (III) would be completely co-precipitated when the mass ratio of silicon to iron in the leaching solution was about 3.6:1 and the final pH of the slurry was about 5. The problem of poor filterability of the leaching slurry can be solved by controlling the leaching at higher temperatures. This is because higher temperatures can effectively promote the dehydration of silicic acid, decrease the solution viscosity and reduce the amount of water in the reaction system. The kinetic data fit a shrinking-core model well. The leaching process follows the kinetic model 1 The authors thank Li Yong-Gang, the Engineer of Technology Center of Yunnan Metallurgy Group Co., Ltd, Kunming for providing the facilities to carry out this work.