A magnetite middling was used to compare the liberation effect of the magnetite fine ground by a vertical stirred mill and a ball mill. The magnetite middling contained a high content of magnetite intergrowth with the particle size mainly distributed in the range of 40–150μm. The new generated −38μm products were concentrated by magnetic separation. Particle size distribution, the degree of mineral liberation and section micrograph of new generated −38μm products were measured by laser particle size analyzer, mineral liberation analyzer (MLA) and scanning electron microscope respectively. It was found that stirred milling improved the degree of liberation of magnetite selectively. The degree of liberation of magnetite in new generated −38μm product of stirred milling is 8.1% points higher than that of ball milling and stirred milling mainly improved the degree of liberation of magnetite in +10 to −38μm size fractions. In the size fractions with identical P80, the degree of liberation of the magnetites in the products of stirred milling is greater than that of ball milling, with the value varied from 2.4% to 29.1% points. The iron grade of magnetic separation concentrate of stirred milling is 5.2% points higher than that of ball milling. The average particle size of new generated −38μm products by stirred milling is finer when comparing with that by ball milling. The stirred mill was fit to use for fine grinding the middling with a high content of complex intergrowth, especially appropriated for milling P80 10–30μm minerals to liberate more valuable metals.Stirred mills are increasingly used to regrind the fine disseminated ores to liberate the valuable minerals with the obvious advantage of high energy efficiency. Since early 1990s, tower mills were first used in metalliferous concentrating, other fine and ultrafine mills such as IsaMill and Stirred Media Detritor (SMD) have been developed and used in the regrinding circuit ( Different stress intensities of comminuting equipments could be corresponding to the specified breakage mechanisms of minerals. It is believed that compression is more related to crushers, impact to ball mills and abrasion to stirred mills ( In our previous work, we have found that the iron grade and recovery of fine-grained magnetite can be improved by regrinding with the stirred mill ( The raw material was a magnetite rougher concentrate from Shizhuyuan nonferrous metal Co Ltd., Chenzhou city, PR China. In the ore dressing plant, the rougher concentrate was reground-magnetically separated to produce magnetite concentrate. In order to improve the iron grade of concentrate, the rougher concentrate must be efficiently reground to 95% −38 Due to −38 The rougher concentrate was magnetically separated in three steps to remove the liberated gangue and then sieved to remove the −38 The middling sample was then fine ground in the stirred mill and the ball mill. The ground product was sieved to remove +38 Part of the new generated −38 Two kinds of mills, a vertical stirred mill and a ball mill, were used to compare the liberation effect of the fine ground magnetite. The vertical stirred mill was a laboratory pin stirred mill. A six-pin stirrer was attached to the gearbox and had a variable speed. The grinding chamber of approximately 9 L was fitted on the gearbox shaft. 11 Rougher concentrate was magnetically separated in the φ500 electromagnetic separator. Magnetic separations of new generated −38 Particle size was tested by screening and laser particle size analyzer. The degree of liberation and micrograph of the magnetite were analyzed using scanning electron microscope and corresponding software. Particle size distribution analysis was carried on the CILAS 1064 laser particle size analyzer. The mass percent of −38    Abundant cracks also exist in the liberated magnetites, which segregate the single magnetite particle into small grains. The grain size is less than 10 The section micrographs of −38    Because the particle size distributions of −38  In the new generated −38  The degree of liberation of the magnetites in the products of stirred milling is greater than that of ball milling in the same size fractions. In the −10 The degree of liberation for magnetite in the size classes with identical P80 of the new generated −38 In the size fractions with same P80 of the analyzed size classes, the degree of liberation of the magnetites by stirred milling is greater than that by ball milling, with the value varies from 2.4% to 29.1% point. For example, in the size fraction with P80 18.7 The above results indicate that stirred milling can liberate magnetite with a higher degree, and a higher grade of concentrate can be produced in the later magnetic separation pricess (this can be found from the magnetic results in Section The degree of liberation for quartz of new generated −38 The particle size, degree of liberation of magnetite and micrograph of new generated −38 In the size class with identical P80, the degree of magnetite of stirred milling is higher than that of ball milling, while the degree of quartz of stirred milling is almost the same as that of ball milling. It indicates that stirred milling can improve the degree of magnetite selectively. This can be attributed to that the stress applied to the mineral particles of the stirred mill is mainly attrition, which can rub out the gangues on the outer layer of the particle from the magnetite. The stirred mill is fit to use for fine grinding the middling with a high content of intergrowth to enhance the minerals to fracture along the interfaces, especially appropriated for milling P80 10–30 Form the above results, it can be found that the liberation effect of magnetite can be improved by fine grinding with the stirred mill and a higher grade concentrate can be acquired from the fine ground product of stirred milling. To verify these results, the raw material (magnetite rougher concentrate) was ground by the experimental stirred mill and ball mill. When grinding to the same particle size (95% −38 Stirred milling improved the degree of liberation of magnetite selectively. In the all three different particle size distribution classes compared, the degree of liberation of magnetite by stirred milling is all higher than that by ball milling in the same size class. The degree of liberation of magnetite in new generated −38 Stirred milling improved the efficiency of magnetic separation of ground magnetite and iron grade of the concentrate. The iron grade of magnetic separation concentrate of stirred milling is 5.2% points higher than that of ball milling. The stirred mill was fit to use for fine grinding the middling with a high content of complex intergrowth to improve the degree of liberation of the target mineral. It was especially appropriated for milling P80 10–30