The depleting of the available conventional energy supplies together with an industrial shift towards unconventional resources like heavy oil/bitumen has become more pronounced. The steam-based heating methods are primarily used by the oil industry for the heavy oil/bitumen recovery. However, the thermal recovery methods are energy-intensive and have limited applications, especially for both thin and deep reservoirs. Therefore, there is a high priority need to investigate alternative approaches. To date, the most progressive alternative technique that has proven its potential during pilot-plant tests is nanocatalytic in-situ heavy oil/bitumen upgrading via hot-fluid injection. Hence, the continual improvement of this technique is of utmost importance. This study aims to propose a new injecting nanofluid system suitable for high-temperature injection into the reservoir with consecutive heavy oil/bitumen upgrading and recovery. Here we report a new type of copper-based nanofluid using a blend of vacuum gas oil (VGO) and vacuum residue (VR) as the mother solvent. The nanoparticles were prepared by low-temperature hydrothermal synthesis route. Their detailed surface, morphology and size characterizations were achieved by X-ray diffraction, dynamic light scattering and scanning electron microscopy. The stable nanofluids were prepared by dispersing copper-based nanoparticles in a mixture of VGO and VR, at different ratios and temperatures. A set of measurements to determine the thermal conductivity and viscosity of the nanofluid with different loading of nanoparticle were performed. The thermal conductivity values of nanofluid systems are substantially higher than that of the base fluids. The nanofluid for 2 wt% of copper-doped aegirine nanoparticles dispersed in VGO and VGO/VR mixture exhibits a maximum thermal conductivity of 20% and 24%, respectively. It was found that the thermal conductivity of nanofluids increases with decreasing the hydrodynamic particle size. Moreover, the presence of chemo-physical interactions between nanoparticles and base fluid further enhances the thermal conductivity. Also, the temperature augmentation in a range from 80 to 110 °C exhibited a positive effect on thermal conductivity enhancement of vacuum residue-based nanofluid system. This particular nanofluid may find potential applications in enhancing heavy oil upgrading and recovery.The 2018 BP Energy Outlook indicates the importance of fossil fuel-based energy in the global energy market up to the 2040 year ( The in-situ production of bitumen from oil sands reservoirs relays on the lowering the oil viscosity through heating the reservoir. The thermal enhanced oil recovery (TEOR) processes are the most commonly practiced methods for heavy oil extraction. TEOR can broadly be divided into two main categories, namely: steam injection and in situ combustions ( Herein, we proposed a naturally-derived nanofluid system with enhanced thermal conductivity, a key parameter in thermal EOR using in-house prepared copper-doped aegirine. The copper aegirine is develop based on the iron-silicate pyroxene mineral, known as aegirine (NaFeSi The chemicals and reagents such as sodium hydroxide (NaOH, 99 wt% purity), anhydrous ferric chloride (FeCl Copper-doped aegirine nanoparticles (7.5 wt% Cu-doped on FeNaO The copper (II) oxide (CuO) nanoparticles were synthesized by calcination of copper (II) nitrate precursor and used as a control sample. 10.0 g of Cu(NO The crystalline structure for the prepared nanoparticles was identified using X-ray diffraction (XRD). XRD was also performed to estimate crystalline domain size by using X-ray Ultima III Multi-Purpose Diffraction System (Rigaku Corp., The Woodlands, TX) with Cu Kα radiation operating at 40 kV and 44 mA with a The surface area and porosity of the prepared materials were measured following the Bruneur-Emmett-Teller (BET) method. The analysis was accomplished by performing nitrogen physisorption at 77 K using TriStar II 3020, Micromeritics Instrument Corporation, Norcross, GA. Before the analysis, the samples were degassed at 423 K and pre-treated inside the sample holder cells under a flow of nitrogen overnight. A field emission electron microscope Quanta 250, manufactured by FEI, a type of scanning electron microscope (SEM), was used to investigate the size and morphology of the prepared materials. The tested materials were prepared by placing a tiny amount of powder over a carbon tape. Then, the carbon tape sample holder was taped in order to allow the extra amount of powder to release out. After that, the tape with material powder was inserted inside the microscope chamber. Selected images were taken under different magnifications. The two-step method was implemented to prepare all types of nanofluid systems considered in this study following the schematic representation shown in The thermal conductivity (TC) of the prepared nanofluid systems was measured right after the sonication process and placed in such a way to ensure identical conditions of measurements for all samples. The TC measurements were performed using a TP08 probe (Hukseflux, Holland) connected with a computer via Field Point relay system which was fulfilling the role of controller unit for data collection and voltage supply (National Instrument, USA). The TP08 probe offers a practical and fast measurement of thermal conductivity of the medium. The probe is directly inserted into a cell filled with the target specimen. The cell has a specific dimension that the wall effect on the TC measurements are minimized. The probe has a heating element inside which acts as a heat line source where the increase in the sample temperature is automatically registered every 3 s over a period of 200 s; synchronizing with Field Point relay system. The TC of each sample is calculated using a graphical technique from the straight line constructed by plotting the amount of heat released against time in a semi-log plot. Five thermal conductivity measurements were recorded in 1 h for each sample and each temperature to ensure that the sample was at thermal equilibrium, and the averaged value was presented as a final TC. The thermal conductivity probe was firstly calibrated and validated with the known thermal conductivity solution using 5% agar gel, which has a thermal conductivity value close to pure water (0.6 W/mK) at 293 K. The calibration results showed the uncertainty of measurements to be about 2%. Dynamic light scattering (DLS) analysis was performed to estimate the average hydrodynamic particle size of prepared nanoparticles in the nanofluid solutions. For this purpose, the Zetasizer Nano Series system from Malvern Instruments Ltd. was utilized to analyze the size of solid particles suspended in liquid media. To get the permissible level of optical transparency in dilution, it was decided to fix the concentration of nanoparticles at 20 ppm (0.002 wt%) and follow the procedure of nanofluid preparation as described earlier. After applying the sonication of nanofluids for 30 min, the DLS analysis was conducted. The rheological behavior of VR and VR-based nanofluid were evaluated using a rheometer (MCR 302, Anton Paar). The rheometer is equipped with 25 mm cone-and-plate geometry which has a cone angle of 1 and truncation of 47 μm. A Peltier temperature system (P-PTD 200) attached to the chamber provides a temperature range from 233 to 473 K with high heating and cooling rates of 40 K/min with an accuracy of 0.1 K. A stainless-steel concentric cylinder was used to determine the dynamic viscosity of VR-based nanofluid over temperature range from 353 to 383 K. The nanofluid was placed between the concentric cylinders and allowed to achieve temperature stabilization for 5 min. To ensure accurate results, the rheometer was calibrated with pure ethylene glycol at 298 K, and the viscosity results were within a maximum deviation of ±2%. The viscosity measurements were taken in triplicates and the averaged value was presented in the results within averaged with a maximum standard deviation of ±4.5%.   To get an insight into the surface atomic structure of the prepared materials, the optimized (001) surfaces of presented nanocrystalline materials are depicted in Moreover, it was reported that the surface area of nanomaterial might play a significant role in TC enhancement, as heat transfer takes place at the surface of the particles ( The effects of the as-prepared nanoparticles on the enhancement of the thermal conductivity of different base fluids were investigated by dispersing them into conventional oil such as mineral oil (MO) and glycerol oil (GO). This would allow us to understand the interaction behavior of nanoparticles with the oil media before applying it in a complex oil matrix like VR and VGO. The enhancement of thermal conductivity of mineral oil-based nanofluid was investigated by dispersing different concentrations of as-prepared materials into the mineral oil matrix. Another important finding is the TC enhancement of CuO nanoparticles with a peak at 15% for 2 wt% loading. At this concentration, the difference between CuO and CuAeg nanoparticles became more pronounced. These observations can be attributed to the fact the CuAeg nanoparticles have less tendency to aggregate according to DLS analysis presented in To prevent settling of larger particles and investigate the effect of particle loading on the TC of more-viscous media, glycerol-based fluid was chosen as a based-media for nanofluids. The enhancement of thermal conductivity of CuO and CuAeg nanofluids at different loadings in VGO-based fluid is represented in Based on that, it can be concluded that the CuAeg nanoparticles exhibited the highest TC enhancement with the maximum enhancement of 21.3%. Therefore, our proposed nanoparticles, CuAeg, will be used with 2 wt% loading for further investigations and perform experiments using VGO-VR mixtures as a possible carrier fluid for thermal EOR methods. As discussed early, the CuAeg nanoparticles revealed a high TC enhancement in the oil-based media. Therefore, the thermophysical properties of VGO-VR matrix using CuAeg nanoparticles were investigated in this part of the study as a potential fluid for thermal EOR. The effect of VR addition to VGO matrix on the TC value with and without nanoparticles loading is shown in As shown in the figure, at a fixed amount of CuAeg nanoparticles loading (2 wt%) the thermal conductivity of VR-VGO matrix is noticeably increased with the increasing of VR concentration. Interestingly, this enhancement on TC of VR-VGO matrix in the presence of nanoparticles is much higher than that without nanoparticles, at the same experimental conditions. However, a reduction on the thermal conductivity of VGO-VR nanofluids was noticed at 5 wt% VR, before it starts increasing with VR concentration with the presence of 2 wt% CuAeg nanoparticles. This drop in the TC enhancement can be attributed to several factors; namely: First, the VR is a solid material at room temperature conditions which has a critical effect on viscosity and complexity of the base fluid after dissolution, thus isolating the nanoparticles. Second, the possible formation of cluster network structure of matrix being introduced after 5% of VR dosage ( Because the VR exists as a solid-state at room temperature, the effects of temperature on the TC and viscosity of CuAeg On the other hand, by adding a 2 wt% of CuAeg to the VR medium, the enhancement in TC was more noticeable, which correlates with major studies on nanofluids and their TC dependence on temperature ( The fact that a decrease in viscosity aligned with reduction of asphaltene cluster size was proven by many researchers, in which the nanoparticles could change the aggregation mechanism of asphaltenes and cease its growth ( This study is a first attempt to investigate the main factors that stand behind TC enhancement of oil-based nanofluid systems, which might have favorable effects on heavy oil/bitumen recovery while applied during thermal EOR methods. The effect of CuAeg and CuO nanoparticles on TC properties of mineral oil, glycerol and VGO-VR was investigated under 0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 wt% loadings. The CuAeg nanoparticles showed a high TC enhancement rate, which has the smallest crystalline domain size and demonstrated the smallest average hydrodynamic particle size inside the base fluid media. The thermos-physical properties of VGO-VR nanofluids with a fixed concentration of CuAeg nanoparticles were investigated. It has been proven that the increase of VR concentration in VGO matrix from 0 wt% to 20 wt% leads to higher TC value of the base fluid. Moreover, a linear increase in TC values was observed in VGO-VR nanofluids when 2 wt% CuAeg nanoparticles were loaded to the matrix. It was also found that TC of VR nanofluids with 2 wt% CuAeg exhibited stable upwards trend with respect temperature augmentation. At 383 K, the TC was determined to be 0.254 W/m K, which is 23.5% higher than TC of neat VR. Along with TC enhancement, a significant decrease in viscosity was observed in VR-nanofluid after adding CuAeg nanoparticles and under elevation of temperatures. These valuable findings can open doors for further investigations of nanofluid TC properties in boundaries of the study of in-situ nanocatalytic upgrading of heavy oil/bitumen via hot fluid injection. Therefore, this study is intended for proposing a new hot injecting nanofluid system suitable for enhanced thermal oil recovery with consecutive heavy oil/bitumen catalytic upgrading. This nanofluids could also be used as catalysts during hot fluid injection where SAGD operation is inapplicable. The catalytic activity of the injecting hot nanofluid has been addressed in previous study ( The authors are grateful to