The mechanism of bacterial leaching of chalcopyrite catalyzed by silver ions is studied in this paper. The copper and iron ions in the chalcopyrite crystal lattice are replaced by the silver ions, the silver ions then combining with the sulfur to form silver sulfide. The ferrous ions are oxidized to ferric ions by the thiobacillus ferrooxidans. The ferric ions can convert the silver sulfide into silver ions. Using this mechanism, a new kinetic model of bacterial leaching of chalcopyrite in the presence of silver ions was established. The model accurately predicts the copper recovery rate in the bacterial leaching of chalcopyrite in the presence of silver ions.Bioleaching metallurgy is attracting ever more attention in mineral processing. The extraction of valuable metal from sulfide ores by bacterial leaching is widely used in many countries ( The bioleaching recovery rate of chalcopyrite in the presence of silver ions is far larger than that of bacterial leaching free of silver ions. The authors consider that the covalent radius value of the silver ions is similar to that of the copper and ferrous ions which are leached in the system ( One of the main controversies in bioleaching concerns the bioleaching mechanism and kinetic modeling, i.e. whether the direct bioleaching mechanism or the indirect bioleaching mechanism has been considered. If the modeling is based on the direct bacterial leaching mechanism, it is therefore based on the sulfides acting as nutriments for the bacteria, and the presumption that the growth character of the bacteria should accord with the Monod equation ( According to the direct bioleaching mechanism, the bacteria are adsorbed onto the surface of the sulfides minerals and can oxidize the sulfides. However, according to the indirect bioleaching mechanism, the bacteria oxidize the ferrous ions into ferric ions and then the ferric ions oxidize the sulfides. During the process of the bioleaching of chalcopyrite catalyzed by silver ions, Eq. During the bioleaching process, where ferric ions act as the lixiviating solvent, the radius change of the mineral particle with leaching time can be expressed by the following equation ( radius of sulfide particle molecular weight of the sulfide initial radius of sulfide particle grade of sulfide mineral kinetic factor (constant) concentration of ferric ions leaching time density of the sulfide shaping factor of sulfide particle chemometrics constant efficient diffusing coefficient resistance constant It is suggested that the behavior of silver ions in the bioleaching of chalcopyrite catalyzed by silver ions is the same as that of ferric ions in the bioleaching process of chalcopyrite without silver ions, and that the kinetic equation be expressed as follows: The first item in the square brackets in the denominator of Eq. The After the silver ions were added, the silver ion concentration decreased rapidly during the initial stage of bioleaching. The silver ion concentration then increased slowly during the rest of the bioleaching stage. The main reason for the silver ion concentration “drop” is that the silver ions can combine easily with sulfide or the elemental sulfur into a silver sulfide deposit. In fact, during the initial stage the copper recovery rate was very low because time was needed for the Integrate and simplify Eq. Eq. The chalcopyrite concentrate used in this study was sampled from a copper mine in Pengzhou, Sichuang Province, China. The chalcopyrite was analyzed by X-ray diffraction. The main ingredients were pyrite, chalcopyrite, and quartz. The total copper content reached 0.97%. The ore was analyzed by phase analysis and the copper content in the free copper oxide minerals reached 1.65% of the total copper content. The copper content of the combined copper oxide minerals reached 17.34% of the total content. The copper reached 75.13% in the primary copper sulfides, 5.88% in the secondary copper sulfides. The following elements were found by chemical analysis: Cu 0.97%, Fe 17.32%, SiO All experiments were carried out in 250 ml bottom baffled Erlenmeyer flasks containing 5.0 g concentrate sample and 90 ml of the iron-free 9 K liquid substrate, and were inoculated with a 10 ml solution of The numbers of The mineral leaching experiments were performed using 50, 100, 200 mesh particles. The parameter values for the different particle sizes are as follows. Comparisons between the modeling data and the experimental data are illustrated in It is shown in  It can be seen from Based on the shrinking core model, a modified kinetic model is established in this paper for chalcopyrite bioleaching catalyzed by silver ions. The copper recovery obtained from the experiments accords well with that calculated from the kinetic model. The modified model can explain the phenomena occurring in the bioleaching solution. Both the theoretical studies and experimental results have shown that the rate-controlling step during the bioleaching is the silver ions replacement of metallic ions in the chalcopyrite. The diffusion of silver ions in the chalcopyrite particle is a key step. The modified kinetic model clearly shows that silver ions play an important role in chalcopyrite bioleaching catalyzed by silver ions. A key subject project financial contribution from the Ministry of National Land Resources of PR China to Prof. M.H. Wang is gratefully acknowledged.