This paper presents modeling of rock spalling induced by a dynamic pulse using the finite-discrete element method, for the purpose of tunnel support design to withstand blasting. 1D and 2D model results are compared to analytical spalling equations and field test findings. It was found that only the 2D models are suitable for support design. A distinction between heavy spalling and light rockfall is made based on an estimation of the ratio of the peak stress of the arriving wave to the rock tensile strength. Accordingly, different design approaches are suggested: for heavy spalling a low impedance isolating layer between the tunnel liner and surrounding rock is recommended. For light rockfall, a simplified static FEM analysis procedure is presented.A blast coupled in rock imposes extremely high pressures that cause complex fracturing mechanisms to occur. The close field response of the rock has been studied by many researchers: Design of a tunnel support system to withstand the close field blasting impact would be impracticable ( The most extensive tests of damage to tunnels from blasting took place between the years 1948–1952, conducted by Engineering Research Associates together with the US Army Corps of Engineers (COE) and the US Bureau of Mines ( Field tests to investigate tunnel support performance under blast loads have been conducted by various authors. Most commonly, peak particle velocity (PPV) is used as a damage threshold. Different authors have used numerical methods to simulate the response of tunnel support to blast loads ( Rockbursts are another form of dynamic loading that may be imposed on a tunnel. Rock bursting into the tunnel occurs as a result of high stresses in deep mines or tunnels. A comprehensive discussion on tunnel dynamic support design based on the findings of the ERA tests can be found in the COE manual (  Analytical equations for the first spall thickness and first spall velocity were derived by Subsequent to the detachment of the first spall a new free face is formed and the remainder of the compressive pulse, now with a peak stress of Numerical models of bars subjected to a dynamic 1D load are set up in order to compare results of spalling to the analytical equations. Modeling is undertaken using the code ELFEN, a hybrid Finite-Discrete Element (FDEM) code that incorporates fracture-mechanics principles to allow for the realistic simulation of brittle fracture-driven processes ( Four models are set up as shown as illustrated in The model geometry consists of a bar in the dimensions of 0.5 Spalling occurred in all four models as shown in The difference in spall velocity may be attributed to mesh effects. In ELFEN, fracturing cannot be simulated with a structured mesh. The fracture is not formed all at once as a clear cut through the material. Separate cracks initiate and coalesce to cause full detachment. Some portion of the wave continues to travel to the intact bar before the full detachment of the first spall occurs. In turn, there is a lower amount of trapped energy in the detached fragment and this causes spall velocities to be lower. It is unclear if the analytical equations based on tests on steel bars are a better representative of the true behavior of a rock sample. It can be argued that irregularity of the mesh serves as a good representation of reality as rocks tend to exhibit a great deal of heterogeneity at both the laboratory and field scales. It is assumed that formation of a clear cut through rock will seldom occur, as the fracturing process is affected by the randomness of the rock grain size distribution, pre-existing micro-cracks, and strength anisotropy. The authors are unaware of publications discussing laboratory tests on rock specimens which could help better explaining the observed difference in spall velocity. When comparing both the analytical and the ELFEN 1D models to results recorded in the ERA tests two significant differences are found. Firstly, when comparing the first spall velocities to the PPV measured at the tunnel free face, in the field tests first spall velocities were significantly higher than the PPV whereas in the 1D analytical equation and models the first spall velocity is slightly lower than the PPV at the tunnel free face. Second, in the field tests the size of subsequent spalled layers decreases whereas in the 1D theory and models the first spall has the maximum thickness. The suitability of the 1D simplification is questioned as blast waves propagate spherically. Moreover, tunnel roofs are typically arch shaped rendering the 1D approximation even less suitable. To investigate the influence of the problem geometry on spalling, 2D models are set up with input parameters identical to those of the 1D models listed in The model geometry is shown in Results of fracturing of the 2D models are presented in Tracking the fracturing evolution for the models showed that the first crack initiation occurs at a distance above the center of the tunnel equal to the solutions derived from the 1D theoretical Eq. Models with a tensile strength greater than 4 In the ERA field tests, light damage zones were characterized by detachment of rock occurring only due to pre-existing joints and at low velocities of 0–1 In general terms, results of the 2D models are in better agreement with observations from the ERA field tests than the simplified 1D models. In particular, the latter, despite their appealing simplicity and relatively short run times cannot account for geometrical 2D effects on tunnel spalling; the 1D simplification would likely provide misleading results in terms of spall size, velocity, and occurrence. In a previous paper, Rock bolts and/or shotcrete liners are widely used as support systems for ensuring the stability of underground excavations. In order to prevent spalling into the tunnel, a support system consisting of bolts alone could not be effective; even when considering a closely spaced support system, fracturing and spalling could occur between bolts. A combination of shotcrete and bolts is arguably a more efficient means of support. Yet proper modeling of the bolts would have to consider not only the bolts themselves, but also account for a complicated 3D dynamic interaction between the bolts, the grout, the rock, and the liner. The addition of wired mesh or fiber reinforcement to the tunnel liner increases the liner’s bending capacity and imparts ductility to an otherwise brittle material. In order to avoid the complexities involved with the simulation of bolts and/or wire mesh reinforced concrete, the support considered for this paper is a homogenous fiber reinforced concrete liner. As demonstrated in Section Numerical investigations conducted by Using a two-staged decoupled approach where the magnitude of spalling is initially assessed in a separate stage and the corresponding forces subsequently imposed on the liner structure, could lead to highly erroneous conclusions. Once the wave reaches the rock-liner interface transmission and reflection of the of the incident wave stress Concrete generally has similar impedance values to rock. Consequently, the wave traveling from the rock to the concrete will be transmitted almost fully, and the reflected wave will be of negligible magnitude. Thus, fracturing could propagate into the concrete liner and cause failure. Counter intuitively, applying a high strength concrete would result in an increased transmission into the concrete which could exacerbate the liner response. Possibly, a densely spaced steel mesh in the concrete liner could reduce or even prevent spalling of the concrete. Another apparent solution is to separate the liner from the rock by means of an intermediate isolating layer made of a material with low impedance, such as Styrofoam. The isolating layer would reflect most of the energy and allow the liner to resist potential impacts while it is intact. The drawback of this solution is that the liner would only serve as a dynamic support, and an initial and separate lining would have to be installed to accommodate for the static loading. The limiting factor for the thickness of the isolation layer should be dictated by the tunnel’s anticipated static displacement. To compare the performance of a tunnel liner with and without an isolation layer, two models are considered in this paper. The models are identical with the exception of the rock-liner boundary condition. For the first model, the liner is assumed to be bonded to the rock, and the adhesive strength for the bond between the liner and rock is assumed to be 1 The properties of the fiber reinforced concrete are listed in For the model with the liner bonded to the rock, under low thickness values of 20–25 Simulated results of fracturing are shown in However, even when isolation is applied, a considerable thickness of 65 When the liner is isolated from the rock a decoupled approach where the liner is modeled as a standalone structure is acceptable. A simplification of the problem from a series of small impacts to an impact of an equivalent single block (  The first layer of spalls that carries the greatest velocity will impact the liner first. Thus, the subsequent layers will impact on the first spalls when they are traveling at some speed and contribute less energy to the system. Spalling from walls with horizontal components cause vibration modes different than spalls from the roof with vertical components. The superposition of the modes may cancel each other out. Some of the energy is dissipated by inner collisions between the rock pieces. However, finding the ranges for suggested values of the reduction factor In the ERA tests light damage to the tunnel was found to occur under PPVs of 1–2 As an example, an analysis is carried out using the FEM code Phase2 ( The problem is staged as follows: Initial stage to allow stress distribution of in-situ stresses. Softening of the inclusion to account for deformations that occur prior to support installation, according to the core replacement technique proposed by Installation of liner. Degradation of the rock material above the tunnel, activation of joints at its boundaries, and activation of vertical load. Support capacity diagrams of bending moment vs. thrust are presented in By using a toolbox approach to modeling liner response to rock mass damage due to blasting, the authors propose a new approach to support designs to account for blast induced damage. The modeling procedure is summarized in This paper has initially shown that numerical modeling using a hybrid FDEM code to model spalling behavior in 1D produces results in agreement with analytical solutions. However, comparison of spalling behavior in 1D and 2D models with respect to damage to tunnels shows that there are significant differences between the two modeling approaches and that 2D modeling is better at simulating the damage observed in physical tests, in terms of velocity, size, and occurrence of spalling. A distinction was made between light and heavy blast loads, where only under heavy blast loading fracturing propagates downwards from the initial crack formed above the tunnel. The implication for heavy loads is that isolating the liner from the rock is necessary. Simulated results showed that slender liners bonded to the rock failed due to their lack of capacity to withstand the dynamic impacts of the spalls, whereas for thick bonded liners the spalling process progressed into the liner itself rendering such a support as ineffective and even hazardous. Modeling of a fiber reinforced concrete liner showed that very thick liners are required to withstand heavy spalling. Alterative support systems should be considered using 3D models. A preliminary discussion was presented, proposing a simplified method of an equivalent block impacting the support structure in order to avoid computationally intensive modeling. For light loads which are defined by a low stress to tensile strength ratio, a simplified analysis method was proposed using static FEM analysis.