Traumatic dislocations of the first metatarsophalangeal joint were first described by Mouchet in 1931. The anatomical complexity of the first metatarsophalangeal joint makes this injury one of a kind. There have been a limited number of case reports of this injury. The ability to reduce the dislocation by nonoperative measures depends largely on the type of dislocation and involvement of the sesamoid complex. We report a case of a 35-year-old male with complete dorsal dislocation of the first metatarsophalangeal joint with second metatarsal head fracture. On review at 12 months he was pain free, fully mobile and pleased with the result.
                  The papers principle message is that significant injuries to the metatarsophalangeal joint may be associated with fractures of adjacent bone segments, which may change diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. Also, the evolution of patients with this kind of injury after reduction is not well know today, at short, medium and long term. Thus could be considered to be a further development of Jahss's classification.Dislocation of the first metatarsophalangeal joint is an uncommon injury. In 1980, Jahss reported on two cases in approximately 25,000 patients and reviewed 12 additional cases in the literature We present a case of dorsal dislocation of the first metatarsophalangeal joint associated with second metatarsal head fracture. A 35-year-old man sustained a hyperextension injury to his right foot, when moving away, to escape from a herd of camels. He was unable to move his toes. History and physical examination revealed a healthy male with no significant past medical or surgical history. He denied any current medications or allergies. He related occasional alcohol and tobacco use. On examination the forefoot was very swollen, bruised and tender. There was a wound on the plantar side of the metatarsophalangeal joint of the right hallux measuring 2 Lateral and anteroposterior radiographs ( Under general anaesthesia, the dislocated metatarsophalangeal joint was reduced, through the plantar wound. The joint capsule was found ruptured. The intersesamoidal ligament was identified and noted to be sectioned. The flexor hallucis longus tendon was interposed between the sesamoids and the first metatarsal head. There was no fracture of the two sesamoids. Following reduction the first metatarso-phalangeal joint was unstable and was stabilised using a Kirschner wire for 6 weeks ( Traumatic dislocation of the first metatarsophalangeal joint is a rare injury The stability of the joint is attributed to the relationship of multiple osseous and soft tissue structures. The anatomy and pathomechanics of the injury have been well described in several previous reports As described by Jahss, type I injuries are caused by pathologic dorsiflexion of the first metatarsophalangeal joint We are reporting a type IIA injury. This was confirmed intraoperatively by identification of rupture of the intersesamoidal ligament. The tendon of flexor hallucis longus was displaced dorsally and interposed within the joint space between the sesamoids and the metatarsal head. There was no fracture of the two sesamoids. The mechanism of injury that causes dorsal dislocation of the proximal phalanx on the first metatarsal is forced hyperextension. As the mechanism of forced dorsiflexion continues, the intersesamoid ligament will rupture, resulting in wide separation of the sesamoid with an avulsion fracture of one of the sesamoid bones. As part of this continual process (if the force is great enough), comminution may develop from a crushing injury of the sesamoid against the metatarsal condyle Both these mechanisms of injury have been described in Jahss's original classification. As previously reported Hallux rigidus has been reported as a complication of dislocation of the first metatarsophalangeal joint. In cases of first metatarsophalangeal joint dislocation, some authors reported after variable term of follow up the occurrence of restricted motion of metatarsophalangeal joint, showing early phase of hallux rigidus