Objective
                  The aim of this study is to investigate the osteogenic differentiation human dental follicle cells (hDFCs) cultured with in osteogenic induction medium (OIM) without dexamethasone (DEX), and to analyze the gene expression profile during osteogenic differentiation.
               
                  Methods
                  hDFCs, which isolated from dental follicle tissue from impacted third molar teeth, were cultured with OIM with or without DEX. Osteogenic differentiation of hDFCs was examined using Alkaline phosphatase activity and Arizarin red staining. Gene expression analysis was performed by Microarray and real time-PCR.
               
                  Results
                  We showed that hDFCs have the capacity to differentiate into osteogenic lineages in osteogenic induction medium lacking DEX. We also analyzed gene expression profiling of hDFCs during osteogenic differentiation. BMP6 is up-regulated in both the presence and absence of DEX. In addition, BMP6 enhances gene expression levels of DLX-5, Runx2, and Osterix, which are transcription factors associated with osteogenic differentiation. BMP6 also stimulates phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8 which are transcription factors associated with BMP signalling at protein levels. Additionally BMP6 stimulates mineralization of hDFCs monolayers examined by Arizarin red S staining.
               
                  Conclusion
                  These findings suggest that hDFCs can differentiate to osteogenic lineage cells osteogenic induction medium without DEX, and BMP6 is a key gene in the osteogenic differentiation of hDFCs, and has therapeutic utility for bone regeneration and bone research.The dental follicle is an ectomesenchymally derived from the neural crest, which has connective tissue surrounding the tooth germ that contains stem cells and/or progenitor cells of the periodontium. DEX is a synthetic glucocorticoid used in supplements to induce osteogenic differentiation in various species-derived stem/progenitor cells. We previously reported that immunochemistry of the stem/precursor cell marker Notch-1 and STRO-1 in hDFCs cultured in GM and microarray analysis. The aim of this study was to investigate the key regulators in hDFCs during osteogenic differentiation and mineralization. In the first part of this study, we performed gene expression profiling of hDFCs cultured in OIM in the presence and absence of DEX, or in growth medium (GM). Next, because BMP6 was up-regulated in both OIM DEX (+) and OIM DEX (−) culture when compared to controls (GM). BMP6 is a member of the transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) super family and it has been known to induce osteoprogenitor cells to differentiate into osteoblasts and know that acting on an early stage of bone forming stem cells. hDFCs were obtained from patients aged 14 and 20 years after obtaining informed consent as reported previously. For induction of osteogenic differentiation, hDFCs or hMSCs from the 5th to 6th passage were seeded at 3.1 Cell monolayers were washed twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS), fixed with 10% formalin solution for 30 Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was assayed using a StemTAG™ Alkaline Phosphatase Activity Assay Kit (Cell Biolabs, San Diego, CA). ALP activity is represented as units indicating the release of 1 Total RNA from hDFCs was isolated using miRNeasy Mini Kits (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Gene expression profiling was performed using SurePrint G3 Human GE microarray 8 cDNA was synthesized using a GeneAmp RNA PCR kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Real-time PCR was performed using DyNAmo SYBR Green qPCR kit (Finnzymes, Espoo, Finland). The PCR mixture, containing 20 Whole cell lysates of hDFCs were prepared using Qproteome Mammalian Protein Prep kit (QIAGEN, Germantown, USA). Each aliquot of the extract containing 45 Data are expressed as means We examined mineralization in hDFCs and hMSCs cultured in osteogenic differentiation medium with or without DEX using alizarin red S staining ( We next measured ALP activity in hDFCs cultured with OIM DEX (+), OIM DEX (−) and GM. The ALP activity in hDFCs cultured with OIM DEX (+) and OIM DEX (−) was significantly higher than in those cultured in GM on days 13 and 16 ( We performed microarray analysis to determine the genes regulated in hDFCs during osteogenic differentiation. We used a two-fold change in normalized expression density as the cut-off point to determine differentiation between culture days 0 and 17. A total of 7091, 6727 and 5476 genes showed differences in expression in culture with GM, OIM DEX (+), and OIM DEX (−) on day 17, as compared to day 0, respectively ( BMP6 is part of the Vitamin and Mineral Metabolism group ( We confirmed BMP6 expression in three hDFC samples obtained from three donors during osteogenic differentiation; BMP6 was up-regulated with both OIM DEX (+) and OIM DEX (−), as compared to GM treatment on day 17 ( Our results suggested that BMP6 has an important role in hDFCs during osteogenic differentiation; therefore, we evaluated the effects of BMP6 on osteogenic differentiation of hDFCs by examining the expression of Dlx-5, Runx2, and Osterix, which are osteoblast-associated transcription factors. When BMP6 was added to hDFCs cultured in OIM DEX (−), expression of Dlx-5, Runx2, and Osterix and was markedly up-regulated when compared to GM and OIM DEX (+) and OIM DEX (−) lacking BMP6 on days 4 and 10. Expression of Osterix increased more markedly in the later period when compared to Runx2 and Dlx-5 ( Alizarin red S staining was stronger in hDFCs cultured with OIM DEX (−) containing BMP6, as compared to that without BMP6 on day 18 ( This study showed that all hDFCs obtained from the five donors were capable of mineralization under In order to investigate the genes associated with osteogenic differentiation and/or mineralization, we profiled the changes in gene expression in hDFCs between culture day 0 and day 17, which is the mineralization stage. We observed that BMP6 is up-regulated in both cultures of OIM DEX (+) and OIM DEX (−) but is not up-regulated in GM culture. Among BMP families, BMP2 and 4 were not up regulated cultured with OIM DEX (+) on day 17 by microarray analysis ( Next, we examined the effects of BMP6 in osteogenic differentiation of hDFCs. The expression levels of Dlx-5, Runx2 and Osterix, Dlx-5, which is member of the Dlx family of homeobox genes, is expressed in developing and differentiating cartilage, bone and teeth, In our study, the increase in Osterix expression occurred later than those of Dlx-5 and Runx2. Osterix is therefore downstream in the hierarchal regulatory relationship. Osterix regulates the expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, such as osteopontin (OPN) and osteomodulin (OMD), which are involved in terminal osteoblast differentiation. In this study, BMP6 stimulated the mineralization of the hDFC monolayer and apparently increased ECM production through a signalling pathway involving these transcription factors such as Dlx-5, Runx2, and Osterix. We here in showed that BMP6, the expression of which is elevated in hDFCs cultured with OIM DEX (+) and OIM DEX (−), stimulates mineralization. We conclude that hDFCs have a capacity for mineralization in the absence of DEX, and are useful for analyzing gene regulation during osteogenic differentiation and mineralization. None. None declared. Not required. We would like to thank Prof. Abiko (Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nihon University of Dentistry, Matsudo) for his valuable advice and helpful discussion. We also wish to acknowledge Ms. Asayo Imaoka for her invaluable assistance with the oligonucleotide microarray technology. This study was supported by a