The aim of the present investigation is to recover the copper, tin, lead and nickel from scrap printed circuit boards. Leaching and electrowinning have been employed to separate and recover these metals. Two stage leaching was employed wherein the first stage consisted of leaching the scrap board with 0.1M CuCl2 and 3.0M HCl resulting in the dissolution of tin only. In the second stage leaching, the residue of the first stage was treated with 0.5M CuCl2 and 3.0M HCl resulting in the dissolution of copper, nickel and lead from which lead is precipitated as PbCl2 by cooling.
                  Next the electrowinning was employed to recover copper from a solution containing copper and nickel. Electrolysis was carried out in a two compartment cell divided by a cationic exchange membrane. A Box– Behnken experimental design has been applied to relate the current efficiency with current density, ratio of cuprous to cupric ion concentration, concentration of hydrochloric acid and electrolysis time. The current efficiency was found to increase with current density and concentration of cuprous ion.Electronic scrap like printed circuit board (PCB) is one of the most complex recycling materials among the wastes that contain copper. The metals present in the majority of cases are gold, silver, copper, tin and lead. At present only precious metals such as silver and gold are recovered from discarded boards. Other metals are precipitated as hydroxides and sent to the landfills. Mechanical recovery methods like density difference In hydrometallurgy, leaching is commonly used for the dissolution and recovery of metals. Acid extraction is a very effective means of leaching the metal contents because a low pH destabilizes numerous inorganic constituents. The effectiveness of the acids follows the order of nitric acid Kim et al. have reported a process for copper leaching from waste PCBs using electro-generated chlorine in hydrochloric acid All the chemicals used in the study were analytically pure. The etchant solution taken for the study was prepared synthetically using scrap Printed Circuit Board laboratory grade chemicals. To study the combined effect of operating parameter such as current densities, concentrations of cuprous, cupric ion and acid and at different time intervals on current efficiency Box–Behnken method of experimental design has been used. Grounded powder of scrap printed circuit board materials received from M/s NSB Electronics Ltd, Bangalore as such was thermally treated at 500 The experimental set-up of the batch reactor used for electrowinning studies consisted of rectangular cell divided by a cation exchange membrane (Nafion 400 series) to separate the anode and cathode compartment. Rectangular graphite plates were employed as both anode and cathode. The plates (4 Response surface methodology is one of the methods to design the experimental runs. In the present study the Box–Behnken method has been selected for the experimental design. Box–Behnken is a three level design with the central points. In general, the response of the experiment depends on the experimental conditions. This means that the experimental result can be described as a function of the experimental variables by the following polynomial equation Conventional leaching with acidic cupric chloride is commonly used for the dissolution and recovery of metals. The leaching of copper in chloride media has advantages like high solubility of metal complexes, stability of monovalent copper and high leaching rates Cupric chloride is added to the leaching solution as a kind of oxidant which provides cupric ions to oxidize the copper into Cu The following reactions take place during copper deposition from chloride baths: At cathode At anode To study the effect of various operating parameters such as current density, the ratio of cuprous to cupric ion, HCl concentration and electrolysis time on current efficiency have been studied and analyzed using response surface methodology. The current efficiency (CE) indicates the fraction of the total current passed for the targeted reactions (6) and (8). Hence CE related to deposition of copper was calculated using the following Eq. (11): The response surface methodology (RSM) is a statistical modeling technique employed for multiple regression analysis using quantitative data obtained from properly designed experiments to solve multivariable equations simultaneously. Response surfaces can be visualized as three-dimensional plots that display the response as a function of two factors while keeping the other factors constant.  The prediction of current efficiency using the above equation has been compared with experimental observation values. It was found that current efficiency has RSM has been applied to study the electrowinning of printed circuit board waste and the results presented in both surface and contour plots are given in The main effect plot for current efficiency is shown in the The optimization of current efficiency is shown in The significance of regression coefficients were analyzed using Analysis of variance is used to determine the significant effects of process variables on current efficiency is shown in The electrochemical behavior of acidic cupric chloride was investigated by cyclic voltammetry. Hydrochloric acid and cupric chloride system have been employed as leaching agent for recovery of copper from scrap printed circuit board wastes. A two stage leaching was employed wherein the first stage consisted of leaching the scrap board with 0.1