The properties of nucleating and growing struvite crystals are important aspects to pellet agglomeration and growth mechanisms in fluidized bed reactors (FBR). A new approach, using a laser to sense crystals of approximately 650 nm, was used to measure the induction time of nucleating struvite. The ability of the laser to indicate an approximate size ensured the presence of crystals in solution for zeta potential (ζ) measurements. This is the first study where ζ was measured for nucleating and growing struvite crystals, and it was not negative like aged crystals; it changed over time as the solution conditions changed, generally started positive and became more negative as precipitation proceeded. The time where ζ≈ 0 can be related to supersaturation ratio (SSR) and optimal agglomeration locations within FBR systems. SSR values between 2 and 6 are recommended to reduce ζ values for extended periods and to improve struvite FBR agglomeration processes.The precipitation of struvite from phosphorus-rich wastewaters has been well studied, but the agglomeration and growth mechanisms for struvite to form into a pellet are not well understood. Success with fluidized bed reactors (FBR) have produced large enough agglomerates to separate from colloidal material found in wastewater, and have produced high-quality pellets valued for specialized fertilizer applications [ With the inefficiencies of phosphorus release from digested biosolids, and the loss of fines from phosphorus recovery technologies, a good portion of the available phosphorus in wastewater is not being recovered. If it is assumed 55–65% of the phosphorus is released in biosolids digestion, based on volatile solids destruction [ Struvite pellet formation is currently accepted to be an agglomeration of smaller crystals; therefore, studying the development of these crystals is important in the understanding of pellet formation. The first step in crystal formation is nucleation. Nuclei are defined as very small, new crystals formed from a supersaturated solution, and the time it takes to form is called the induction time. Struvite induction times, for primary nucleation, have typically been measured with a drop in pH readings of the solution [ A consideration for agglomeration is the crystal's surface charge and repulsive forces between crystals. Any repulsive force acting between crystals must be smaller than attractive forces for agglomeration to take place. The measurement of zeta potential (ζ) is a means of estimating repulsive forces between particles in solution. Struvite ζ has been previously investigated by a number of researchers, and reported values for aged struvite in suspension range anywhere from +32 to −35 mV depending on solution composition, but most reported values are negative [ The objectives of this work were to relate a specific size of struvite crystal to induction time, and to determine the ζ values of precipitating and growing struvite from solution. It was hypothesized that the ζ values would change as the precipitation reaction proceeded, and these values could be utilized for FBR process design and optimal agglomeration conditions within FBRs. Experiments were carried out within an 11.5 cm square beaker made of clear Plexiglas with a magnetic stirrer, including a digital RPM readout. Two chemical solutions were prepared using distilled water and analytical grade chemicals; one contained ammonium dihydrogen phosphate and ammonium chloride (NH An alternative method to sense struvite induction time was utilized along with the traditional method of a drop in pH. The first method used a 650 nm laser, a 650 nm narrow bandpass filter (638–672 nm), and sensor to detect the onset of struvite nucleation by a decrease in the solution transmissivity. The first indications by the laser are from crystals approximately the same size as the laser wavelength reflecting the light away from the sensor. A 650 nm struvite crystal would be approximately 1000 unit-cells in size. A potentiometer was used to establish a baseline for the initial mV reading through the ammonium and phosphate solution prior to the addition of the magnesium solution. The laser mV output, pH, and temperature were logged using a simple PC and an Arduino microprocessor, and conductivity was measured manually with a hand-held Horiba pH/conductivity D-54 meter in conjunction with sample collection. Solution samples of 50 mL were collected after complete mixing of the stock solution, and at the end of the experiment to calculate SSR values. Final solution samples were filtered with 0.45 μm filter. The 50 mL samples were acidified with one or two drops of a 1:1 HCl:H Laser induction times were determined from the time of initial mixing of the two solutions until an indication of a change in the solution with a reduction in the transmitted laser beam. The laser induction times were determined for each experiment using a simple algorithm from the logged laser mV data; this consisted of smoothing out the data by five-point averaging, and then the induction time was determined from a decrease in three consecutive mV values from the initial baseline reading. Measured induction times for the pH probe method were estimated from the time of initial mixing at t = 0 of the two solutions until an initial decrease from the peak pH value was observed. Experiments were performed with five different synthetic wastewater compositions corresponding to different municipal wastewater treatment processes. The compositions assumed anaerobic digestion to produce centrate, and the nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations represent typical values from: Non-biological phosphorus removal process, Biological removal process with thermophilic digestion, Digested conventional activated sludge, Nitrogen limited centrate with high phosphorus content, Composition with very low overall concentrations. The experimental procedure used for nucleating struvite, and measuring and logging the data was exactly the same as in section Temperature averaged 24.0 °C ± 1.0 °C. Experiment labeling consisted of the wastewater composition number 1 through 5 as the hundreds digit, and the experiment run number is in the tens and one digit. Zeta potential measurements for aged struvite crystals were undertaken in an indifferent electrolyte of distilled water and 0.01 M NaCl between a target pH of 9.4–10.0. A solution of NH A Malvern Mastersizer Hydro 2000S was utilized for a particle size distribution analysis of the aged solutions. Triplicate tests were performed separately, but utilized the same procedure as the aged ζ tests for the 0.01 M NaCl solutions at a pH of 9.6, and for each NH The composition of the synthetic crystals was analyzed for purity and molar ratios, and found not to be 100% pure struvite. Molar ratios of Mg:N:P were 1.02:1.0:1.12. XRD analysis (see Liquid samples were analyzed for orthophosphate and ammonia by continuous flow analysis using a LACHAT QuickChem FIA+ 8000 Series [ Struvite precipitation and growth depends on how saturated the solution is with the ions that form the crystal lattice. The solubility product ( The ion activity product (    There are many reported equilibrium constants in the literature, but current work has determined a new struvite pK According to classical nucleation theory, the homogeneous nucleation rate (J) in units (nuclei/cm It is assumed the nucleation time is much longer than the growth time during the nucleation period (t The attractive and repulsive forces between struvite crystals were analyzed to determine if one was more dominant than the other, and provide some insight into struvite solution stability criteria. The total force ( For low potentials (<25 mV), where the electrical energy is small compared to the thermal energy, Equation   It can be seen in  The large variability in estimated induction times for low SSR values for both methods indicates a necessity for method improvement, or additional method development. The pH method was found to have the lowest CV value in all the SSR ranges, indicating it has a higher precision than the laser method. The accuracy of each method is a challenge to compare, as the true value of induction time is dependent on how it is measured, and the size of struvite nuclei at the induction time has not been defined before. The mean differences for all of the SSR ranges show that the laser consistently estimated shorter struvite induction times. The laser method's fast response time and ability to indicate an approximate size is an advantage for determining other process parameters of struvite nucleation and crystallization, like the location of nucleation in an FBR, and is important in ensuring crystals are present for the ζ nucleation experiments. To rule out any influences from mixing speed, the data sets of RPM 200, 400, and 600 were linearized with Equation The SSR and mixing speeds used in this research were lower than other published data (SSR 3–12 compared to 9–19, and RPM of 200–600 compared to 360–1060) [ XRD examination confirmed the solid samples as crystalline struvite structure from SSR 6, 9, and 12 from the induction time experiments, when compared to the database (see Aged struvite crystals, in a 0.01 M NaCl solution at an average equilibrium pH value of 9.7 ± 0.2, were found to have an average ζ of −9.6 mV, and varied between −8.2 and −16.2 mV with standard deviations of individual readings of ±0.8 mV. Struvite crystals in 3.6 mM, 13.4 mM, and 22.6 mM NH Soluble substances, like struvite, are difficult to test in solution because the substance can dissolve and cause changes in the particle surface and ionic strength of the solution system [ The lowest molarity NH All struvite ζ data in the literature were determined using different ionic concentrations where no two solutions are alike, and often the solution composition is not reported. Exact methods are unclear in many studies, but the general practice is to precipitate struvite and then measure the ζ in the precipitation solution. Not knowing the solution conditions makes it very hard to compare results, but some trends are noticeable from the reported data. pH has been found to be a controlling factor in struvite ζ. All reported data sets show a decreasing trend in the ζ values with an increase in pH [ An example of one experiment illustrating the relationship between ζ and SSR can be seen in  Composition 1 experiments did not exceed an initial pH value of 7.6, and composition 4 did not exceed an initial pH of 6.6, compared to pH values above 8 or 9 reported in literature for the precipitation of struvite. The pH was not kept constant throughout the experiments, but dropped to a pH of 6.9–7.1 for composition 1, and to 6.2–6.3 for composition 4 within the 42 min. The trend for wastewater composition 2 ( Compositions 3 and 5 have similar regression lines, except they diverge around 30 min ending 10 mV apart from one another ( To determine the time at which the ζ turned from positive to negative (ζ ≈ 0) and the corresponding SSR, the data was fit to second-order polynomial fixed-effects models in RStudio. This time represents a specific location within FBR systems and is important for where optimal agglomeration conditions are occurring. A parametric-bootstrap procedure was utilized to estimate the variability in the crossing time due to the high standard deviations associated with the ζ measurements. One thousand pseudo measurements were randomly created from Gaussian distributions for each data point for all experiments, which illustrated the minimum and maximum-crossing times could occur within the first few minutes right up until the very end of the experiments. Within the larger data set group of 1-A the higher SSRs correlated with longer time frames to reach a zero ζ as seen in The SSR value at the minimum and maximum crossing time is between 2 and 8 for 90% of the bootstrap procedure, and 2–6 for 95% of the actual data. This suggests that the solution composition between these low SSR values contributes to the low magnitude of the ζ values for all of the wastewater compositions. Other researchers have also suggested low SSR values to be optimal as a control parameter for struvite pellet formation, and for limiting fines losses in the recovery process [ Changing solution conditions (ionic strength) and crystals larger than the Zetasizer measuring limits are most likely the cause of the high variability in the ζ measurements, and the high standard deviations associated with them. The increase in amplitude in the induction time laser signal between 550 and 850 s, and the increase in laser intensity from 850 s to the end of the experiment (as seen in Attractive and repulsive forces between the struvite crystals during the nucleation experiments were examined. Comparison calculations were made using a shear plane distance from the surface of 1.0 nm; based on an average between the size of a hydrated magnesium ion of 0.60–0.86 nm [ The first objective of developing a size dependent sensor for measuring struvite induction time was demonstrated to be significantly faster at sensing changes in solution characteristics than the typical pH-based approach. Struvite induction time is greatly dependent on solution supersaturation, with insignificant effect from mixing speed at low SSRs, where FBR conditions are optimal. The ability to indicate an approximate size ensured the presence of crystals in solution for ζ measurements during nucleation and growth of struvite crystals. Struvite ζ of nucleating and growing crystals in solution were investigated for five synthetic wastewaters. ζ values changed over time as the solution conditions changed, and became more negative as crystal precipitation and growth progressed. The charge of these crystals is important for inter-particle interactions within FBR systems, which impacts the likelihood for them to agglomerate into a pellet. Lower initial SSRs can produce low ζ values within ± 5 mV for an extended period throughout the precipitation process, and would be desirable for agglomeration within an FBR. Using a high pH for nucleating struvite not only creates large amounts of unwanted crystals, but also creates conditions of high positive initial ζ; this can take longer to reach the point of zero charge and optimal agglomeration conditions. pH and magnesium concentrations had the greatest influence on struvite ζ. Magnesium molar concentrations should exceed phosphate concentrations to promote lower magnitude ζs. SSR control is important for ζ and struvite agglomeration control. SSR values between 2 and 6 are recommended to improve FBR agglomeration processes. Future studies are underway to better control struvite agglomeration and pellet formation in an FBR system. The authors would like to express their sincere gratitude to the late UBC Research Associate, Frederic A. Koch, for his guidance and enthusiasm in this project. The authors would also like to thank Laís Mazullo M. Pereira from Universidade Federal de Pernambuco in Brazil who assisted with the laboratory nucleation experiments. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors, although partial funding for this work came from   The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at