Solvent extraction of zinc(II) from and into ammoniacal media has been investigated using commercial LIX84I extractant. The effects of aqueous solution pH, total ammonia concentration and temperature on extraction of zinc(II)and ammonia stripping of loaded organic phases were examined. The extraction and stripping behaviors of zinc was also compared in the absence and presence of tributyl phosphate (TBP). The results indicate that LIX84I presents a good potential for zinc extraction in the ammonical solution. However, TBP has an antagonistic effect on zinc extraction with LIX84I. The extraction behavior of Zn(II) presents a special swing phenomenon in the both cases with and without TBP. The slope analysis and IR spectra indicate that each zinc ion can coordinate with two LIX84I molecules, whereas TBP molecules could bond with the LIX84I molecules, thus depressing zinc extraction. The zinc loaded organic phases can be effectively stripped with the ammoniacal media, especially increasing the ammonia concentration. Zinc stripping is more easy for the mixed system with TBP than the individual LIX84I system. Moreover, the extraction of zinc is an exothermic process, whereas the ammonia stripping of zinc is an endothermic process. The extraction and stripping isotherms indicate that the direct enrichment of zinc(II) from and into ammoniacal media can be achieved with the commercial LIX84I. These results are helpful for the hydrometallurgical recovery of zinc from the non-traditional resources.In recent years, due to the continuous increase of zinc demands and inadequate supply of zinc concentrates, the development and utilization of non-traditional zinc resources including low grade oxidized ores Because of the low grade of non-traditional zinc resources, the concentration of zinc ions in the leachates could be unable to meet the need of downstream processes, especially the electrowinning. Thus, the separation and enrichment of zinc ions from ammoniacal liquors is an important process during the recovery of complex zinc resources Generally, the hydrometallurgical recovery of zinc includes the solvent extraction and the followed electrowinning. Most of loaded organic phases containing acidic and chelating ligands are stripped with mineral acids to enrich the valuable metals for electrowinning. For example, when Chen el al. treated the low-grade oxidized zinc ores with ammoniacal media, zinc was firstly extracted with the organic phase containing LIX54 and TOPO, and then stripped with sulfuric acid. Finally zinc was recovered from the acidic pregnant electrolyte as metal form by electrowinning Herein, we reported the direct enrichment of zinc(II) from and into ammoniacal media with the commercial2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime (LIX84I). The effects of extractant concentration, aqueous solution pH, total ammonia concentration and temperature on zinc extraction were examined. Meanwhile, the stripping behaviors of loaded organic phases with the ammoniacal solutions have been studied by consideration of the effects of aqueous solution pH and temperature. Moreover, the extraction and ammonia stripping behaviors of zinc was compared in the absence and presence of TBP. The commercial extractant of 2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime (LIX84I) was kindly offered by Cognis Corporation. Tributyl phosphate (TBP) was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Two extractants were used without further purification. The molecular structures of LIX84I and TBP were given in The extraction experiments were performed in an airtight vial by mixing equal volumes (5 FT-IR spectra of the fresh and zinc-loaded organic phases were collected with a Nicolet 6700 spectrophotometer with a resolution of 4 The extraction behaviors of Zn(II) in the ammonium solutions were investigated in the pH range from 7 to 12.5 for individual LIX84I system (0.6 The distribution diagram of zinc species was presented in Although LIX84I is a common extractant for copper extraction in the ammonical media, zinc of above 90% can be effectively extracted with LIX84I alone. The results indicate that LIX84I also presents a good potential for zinc extraction in the ammonical solution. Because LIX84I has been widely commercialized in the industry application, the effective extraction of zinc with LIX84I will promote the hydrometallurgical recovery of zinc from the low grade oxide ores and complex scraps. Meanwhile, it is worth noting that the extraction efficiency of zinc is lowered throughout the whole pH range investigated when adding TBP into the LIX84I solution, indicating that the TBP has an antagonistic effect on zinc extraction with LIX84I. This behavior is not same with that of β-diketone extractants, where the neutral tributylphosphate or trioctylphosphine oxide generally has a synergistic role on zinc extraction In order to further clarify the special extraction behaviors of zinc, the dependence of zinc extraction on extractant concentration is compared at pH 8 and pH 11. For the individual LIX84I system, as shown in In order to clarify the interaction between zinc ions and the extractants, the FT-IR spectra of organic phases for LIX84I system and the mixed system before and after extraction have been analyzed and compared. As shown in For zinc extraction from ammoniacal media, LIX84I molecules in the organic phase, ammonia molecules in the aqueous phase and other ligands can compete coordination with free zinc ions In common, the metal-loaded organic phases containing LIX84I are stripped with strong acid through the cation change reaction. The investigation mentioned above indicates that the ammoniacal media have a good potential to strip zinc from the loaded organic phases containing LIX84I through adjusting aqueous solution pH and ammonia concentration. For zinc recovery from ammoniacal media, the process can be effectively shortened if zinc can be directly stripped and enriched into ammoniacal solution. The zinc-loaded organic phases were previously obtained via solvent extraction at pH 12. And the zinc concentration is 1.83 The effect of temperature on extraction of zinc ions from ammoniacal solution was studied in the range from15 to 45 The effect of temperature on stripping of zinc ions from the loaded organic phases was also studied in the range from15 to 45 In order to study the enrichment capacity of LIX84I system for zinc from ammoniacal solution, the extraction isotherms and McCabe-Thiele diagram are showed in By consideration of zinc recovery from and into ammoniacal media, the ammonia stripping isotherm of zinc from the loaded organic phase was also examined. The stripping phase is ammoniacal solution of pH 9.5 containing 4 The extraction of zinc(II) in ammoniacal solutions and ammonia stripping of loaded organic phases have been simultaneously studied using commercial LIX84I extractant in the absence and presence of TBP. The extraction behavior of Zn(II) presents a special swing effect in the both cases with and without TBP. Especially, zinc extraction is greatly enhanced beyond pH 9.5. However, the extraction efficiency of zinc is lowered throughout the whole pH range when adding TBP into the LIX84I solution, indicating that the TBP has an antagonistic effect on zinc extraction with LIX84I. The slope analysis and IR spectra of organic phases indicate that each zinc ion in the ammoniacal media can coordinate with two LIX84I molecules, whereas TBP molecules could not coordinate with the extracted zinc complexes of LIX84I but bond with the LIX84I molecules, which is unfavorable for zinc extraction due to the decrease of free LIX84I concentration. The zinc loaded organic phases can be effectively stripped with the ammoniacal media. The stripping efficiency increases firstly and then decreases, which is just the opposite behavior of zinc extraction. Increasing total ammonia concentration can effectively improve zinc stripping. Moreover, zinc is more easily stripped from the mixed system than the individual LIX84I system. Rising temperature is unfavorable for zinc extraction, but favorable for ammonia stripping of zinc loaded organic phases. The extraction and stripping isotherms indicate that the direct enrichment of zinc(II) from and into ammoniacal media can be achieved with the commercial LIX84I. These results will be helpful for the hydrometallurgical recovery of zinc from the low grade oxide ores and complex scraps. This work was financially supported by the