Two different fabrication processes of collagen/hydroxyapatite (Col/HAp) hybrid structures were compared to investigate the inorganic/organic systems of (i) HAp nanocrystals combined with Col molecules (Col-M/HAp) and (ii) Col fibrils hybridized with the HAp nanocrystals (Col-F/HAp). The Col-M/HAp and Col-F/HAp were synthetized through the chemical reactions of the Col molecular or fibril states with HAp, indicating that the HAp crystal growth was effectively enhanced by the Col. It was found that the hybrid structures (i.e., aggregated and/or intermolecular dityrosine cross-linked states) of the Col-F/HAp with the higher density would be close to those of the fish scale. In the Col-F/HAp, the Col molecules firstly formed the fibrils to interact with the HAp nanocrystals at the hole zone.Biomineralization is the self-assembly process where an inorganic such as calcium compounds precipitated in an organic matrix, and the nucleation, crystal growth and morphology and orientation are regulated by the organic matrix interactions In this study, the self-organization process of Col/HAp hybrid structures was investigated. We specifically compared two hybridization processes of the HAp nanocrystals with Col molecules and the precipitating of HAp nanocrystals to Col fibrils to elucidate the HAp/Col hybridization states. The type I Col used in the experiment was made from tilapia skin (Nippi Inc., Japan), which diluted to the solution concentration at 3 mg/mL with acetic acid (5 mM). There are two self-organization processes for synthetizing the HAp/Col hybrid structures as follows. 2.24 mL of calcium chloride aqueous solution (CaCl In order to evaluate the physicochemical properties of the Col fibrils in the HAp/Col hybrids, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) was used to change the Ca ion from HAp into soluble metal complexes The characterizations of synthetized samples were conducted upon Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR: FT/IR-4600, JASCO Co., Ltd.) spectrometer, wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence (XRF: ZSX Primus II, Rigaku Co., Ltd.) spectrometer, X-ray diffraction (XRD: Smart Lab, Rigaku Co., Ltd.) using CuKα radiation, field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM: S-4800, HITACHI Co., Ltd.), nitrogen (N The FT-IR spectra of Col-M/HAp, Col-F/HAp and HAp were shown in From the resultant chemical compositions of the Col-M/HAp, Col-F/HAp and HAp (   N Excitation spectra under the luminescence detection wavelength at 421 nm of Col-M/HAp, Col-F/HAp and Col-F, and Col-M/HAp-EDTA, Col-F/HAp-EDTA and Col-F-EDTA, and their separated and integrated spectral peak area ratios of The FT-IR spectra of the Col-M/HAp-EDTA, Col-F/HAp-EDTA and Col-F-EDTA, and their photographs were shown in The Col-M/HAp and Col-F/HAp were synthetized through the chemical reactions of the Col molecular or fibril states with HAp. These self-organization processes were investigated as compared with the fish scale hybrid structures, where the precipitated HAp nanocrystals effectively interacted with the Col. The hybrid structures (i.e., aggregated and/or cross-linked states) of the Col-F/HAp with the higher density was close to those of the fish scale. In the Col-F/HAp, the Col molecules formed the fibrils firstly, and the precipitated HAp nanocrystals would be regulated by the fibril surfaces. This study mainly concentrated on the self-organization processes of the HAp and Col hybrid structures, which was very important for understanding the formation mechanism of natural hard tissues. The tissues were composed of the highly-ordered and hierarchical HAp/Col nanostructures. The artificial preparation of the structures utilizing the biomimetic technology will be reported by our group. This study was supported by a grant from the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 