We examined the added value of 3-dimensional (3D) prints in improving the interobserver reliability of the Sanders classification of displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures. Twenty-four observers (radiologists, trainees, and foot surgeons) were asked to rate 2-dimensional (2D) computed tomography images and 3D prints of a series of 11 fractures, selected from cases treatment at our level I trauma center between 2014 and 2016. The interobserver reliability for the Sanders classification was assessed using kappa coefficients. Three versions of the Sanders classification were considered: Sanders classification with subclasses, Sanders classification without subclasses, and the combination of Sanders types III and IV because of the high incidence of comminution in both types. The reference standard for classification was the perioperative findings by a single surgeon. The 3D print always yielded higher values for agreement and chance-corrected agreement. The Brennan-Prediger–weighted kappa equaled 0.35 for the 2D views and 0.63 for the 3D prints for the Sanders classification with subclasses (p = .004), 0.55 (2D) and 0.76 (3D) for the classification without subclasses (p = .003), and 0.58 (2D) and 0.78 (3D) for the fusion of Sanders types III and IV (p = .027). Greater agreement was also found between the perioperative evaluation and the 3D prints (88% versus 65% for the 2D views; p < .0001). However, a greater percentage of Sanders type III-IV were classified with 2D than with 3D (56% versus 32%; p < .0001). The interobserver agreement for the evaluation of calcaneal fractures was improved with the use of 3D prints after “digital disarticulation.”Numerous classifications are available for displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures (DIACFs) The most commonly used and cited classification of DIACFs is the Sanders classification Three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction images are now available, and, after segmentation, it is possible to disarticulate a single bone and print it using a 3D printer. Thus, the aim of the present study was to evaluate the added effect of evaluating segmented 3D prints of the fractured calcaneus on the interobserver reliability of the Sanders classification for DIACFs. After approval by the ethical committee, the CT images of 11 patients with DIACFs were selected from the 29 unilateral DIACFs treated between April 1, 2014 and January 25, 2016. The CT images were recorded using the Aquilion One Volume CT scanner (Toshiba, Tokyo, Japan), with a table pitch of 0.641, collimation of 0.5 × 64, slice thickness of 0.5 mm, slice increment of 0.5 mm, and rotation time of 0.5 second. The images were anonymized. The patient age ranged from 15 to 73 (average 50) years. The male/female sex ratio was 10:1. Of the 11 DIACFs, 8 were Sanders type II (6 IIa and 2 IIb), 2 were Sanders type IIIab, and 1 was Sanders IIIac, according to the perioperative evaluation by the first author (D.M.), who validated the classification during the surgical procedure. Only 11 cases were included to limit the number of observations for every rater, because to assess many more could have been source of confusion or resulted in a lack of concentration. These 11 cases were slightly more than the maximum number of Sanders classification cases possible (n = 8). The 2-dimensional (2D) CT images were coronal view series only, because it was on those views that the Sanders classification was based. The 3D images were created after reconstruction and segmentation, with digital removal of the adjacent bones, the talus and cuboid, using Mimics™ software (Materialise™, Leuven, Belgium). Stereolithographic 3D images were printed using a standard 3D printer (Ultimaker™ 2, Ultimaker, Geldermalsen, Netherlands) in 1 color, with an estimated cost of a few euros per print. We recruited 24 observers: 7 radiologists, 11 trainee-surgeons, and 6 surgeons with experience in foot surgery and use of the Sanders classification in their practice. All observers were instructed about the classification with the standard reference drawing before beginning the evaluations . No time limit was imposed on the observers. The 2D images and 3D prints were randomly presented to each observer. The reference drawing of the Sanders classification was available and was used for each case by all the observers when classifying the 2D images and 3D prints. In the present study, the focus was on a thorough evaluation of the interobserver reliability. Thus, we devoted all the available time of the observers to the assessment of as many subjects as possible (instead of halving the number of scored subjects by requiring a repeated score). Furthermore, the interobserver agreement typically implies a lower bound for the intraobserver agreement (because the intraobserver disagreement propagates to the interobserver level). A similar choice was made in other studies of reliability. Of the 6 studies we found on reliability The distribution of the Sanders classification scores was compared between the 2D images and 3D prints using the method presented by Durkalski et al In accordance with the recommendations by Von Eye and Von Eye Examples of different calcaneal fractures as 3D prints and 2D images are provided in With the 2D images, the agreement with the reference standard (accuracy) was significantly lower ( When our observers were asked to categorize the calcaneal fractures according to Sanders classification with subclasses using classic 2D CT images, the result was a low interobserver agreement of only 32% compared with 53% with the 3D prints ( When classifying the fractures according to the Sanders classification without the subclasses, the interobserver agreement increased from 49% (all observers rating 2D images) to 72% (all observers rating 3D prints; The Sanders classification of DIACFs has had only fair interobserver agreement in the published data, and several investigators have sought to improve it using 3D imaging. Veltman et al Our low interobserver agreement for the Sanders categorization using 2D CT imaging were in line with those from other studies The use of 3D prints of calcaneal fractures improved the interobserver agreement, probably because they provide a clear overview of the fracture anatomy. This improvement was less marked among experts, probably owing to their extensive knowledge of the Sanders classification. Another proof of the added value of 3D prints of DIACFs is the agreement with the reference standard (accuracy). The 3D prints offer nearly the same view of the fracture as during a surgical procedure, in 1 color and without soft or bony tissue masking the fracture. Agreement between raters assessing 3D prints will probably be close to the agreement between raters assessing a fracture during a surgical procedure. With 3D prints, the observer has a realistic view of the fracture and can rotate it as needed, instead of the usual 2 directions of a DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine) viewer. The use of 3D prints could become the reference standard once more investigators are using it. Finally, fusion of Sanders types III and IV in a simplified classification makes sense because of the high incidence of comminution present in both types. The greater percentage of agreement and higher κ values are indications in favor of this fusion. A notable weakness of the present study was the limited number of experienced foot trauma surgeons involved. Despite its popularity, the use of the Sanders classification is not widespread in Belgium. Also, the use 3D prints of DIACFs is not widespread, probably because creating the prints is time consuming. However, it is not expensive; our models cost <$5 each. In addition, our study was a feasibility study, and further research is needed to assess any eventual effects on fracture reduction and outcomes. In conclusion, in the present study, we have shown that the use of 3D printed calcaneal fractures had a clear added value in achieving good interobserver agreement using the Sanders classification. This technological progress, if its uses becomes more widespread, will likely help to better categorize DIACSs and, therefore, help determine the optimal treatment. Finally, this method will likely facilitate the comparison of results from different investigators and could become the new standard of imaging. Additional studies evaluating the relationship between 3D print use and the quality of fracture reduction and outcomes are also necessary to define the further role of this technology. We acknowledge Dimitri Petridis, MD, PhD (independent medical practitioner, Waterloo, Belgium) and Walter Coudyzer (Department of Radiology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium) and all the observers who participated in the present study.