The tarsal navicular is part of the medial column of the foot. It articulates with the talus as well as the cuneiforms. The navicular can be injured with repetitive loading, such as in an athlete, resulting in a stress fracture. Patients complain of pain over the medial midfoot, especially with axial load. Plain radiographs may be normal, and MRI, CT or bone scan may be necessary to confirm the diagnosis. Nonoperative management can be successful with cast immobilization. For competitive athletes with delayed union or nonunion, surgical repair may be indicated. This is accomplished with interfragmentary screws and autogenous cancellous bone graft. Cast immobilization is important to prevent motion at the fracture site during the postoperative healing period. Nonweightbearing restrictions are used for eight to twelve weeks, or until radiographic bony union is verified. Using a comprehensive rehabilitative program, full motion and strength can be expected with eventual return to full athletic activity.The tarsal navicular is a pear-shaped, biconcave bone that makes up part of the medial column of the foot, articulating posteriorly with the talus and anteriorly with the cuneiforms. The vascular supply of the navicular is from the dorsalis pedis and medial plantar artery. The navicular is part of the medial column of the foot. It articulates with the talar head proximally and the 3 cuneiforms distally. The talonavicular joint works in concert with the calcaneocuboid joint, as the 2 joints comprise the transverse tarsal joint and function as a single joint. During locomotion, the navicular bone plays an important role in providing stability and accommodative motion of the foot as part of the transverse tarsal joint. Stress fractures of the tarsal navicular, as with other stress fractures, are the result of repetitive cyclical loading leading to bone failure. Navicular stress fractures typically are located in the sagittal plane in the central one third of the bone, with several kinematic and anatomic factors contributing to the characteristic location. During foot strike, the navicular is compressed between the talus and the cuneiforms. However, the compressive load is thought to be unequally distributed creating an area of maximum shear stress near the central zone of the bone especially with the foot in plantarflexion. Anatomic variations also have been proposed to contribute to an increased risk of navicular stress fractures. The presence of anatomic variations in patients with navicular stress fractures have been reported and include a short first metatarsal, long second metatarsal, pes cavus, pes planus, metatarsus adductus, talar beaking, and limited subtalar motioin and ankle dorsiflexion. Although navicular body fractures have been described in a classification scheme, navicular stress fractures have not. Generally, stress fractures are nondisplaced, and the fracture line is in the sagittal plane. Navicular stress fractures can be described as partial or complete. Furthermore, complete fractures can be described as nondisplaced or displaced. Stress fractures of the tarsal navicular commonly occur in high-performance athletes participating in sports such as track, football, basketball, and soccer. On physical examination, the foot is characteristically without swelling or ecchymosis over the fracture. Dorsiflexion of the ankle and or subtalar motion may be limited. Patients typically have tenderness to palpation at the “N” spot on the dorsal aspect of the navicular bone. Conventional weight-bearing radiographs in the 3 standard projections are obtained when navicular stress fracture is suspected. Radiographic changes have been classified into 4 types Bone scanning is a much more sensitive screening tool, and changes may be seen as early as 48 hours after injury. Nondisplaced fractures are most appropriately treated with the patient in a nonweight-bearing cast for 6 to 8 weeks. Weight-bearing activity commences after the pain and tenderness resolve. Torg et al Surgical treatment is considered for fractures that are displaced, incomplete with comminution, and for delayed union or nonunion. Early operative treatment is considered for athletes with complete or incomplete fractures for whom a prolonged course of recovery is undesired. Using general or regional anesthesia, the patient is placed in the supine position, and a padded pneumatic tourniquet is placed on the upper thigh. The medial approach is made over the talonavicular joint between the anterior tibial and posterior tibial tendons ( Internal fixation is achieved with two 3.5-mm or 4.0-mm cannulated screws. One is placed through the surgical incision from dorsomedial to plantar lateral. A second screw is placed through a small incision dorsolaterally, in a crossed screw manner. Alternatively, 2 parallel screws are used ( The navicular stress fracture also can be approached from a dorsolateral incision. This is approach is advantageous in a stress fracture in the lateral half of the navicular. An incision is made over the extensor tendons on the dorsum of the foot, lateral to the dorsalis pedis artery. The extensor tendons are retracted laterally, and the dorsolateral aspect of the navicular is exposed. The fracture is debrided, bone graft impacted, and two screws placed through this incision. An additional dorsomedial screw can be placed through a separate, small incision. The wound is closed in layers, and the foot and ankle are maintained in neutral position with a well-padded splint. The patient is restricted to nonweight-bearing activity and instructed to elevate the extremity. The patient is maintained in a nonweight-bearing short leg cast for 8 to 12 weeks. Radiographs of the foot are used to monitor healing. Once healing begins, the patient progresses to weight-bearing activity as tolerated in a walking cast. Upon bony union, the patient is permitted to ambulate out of the cast and begin rehabilitation. With a well cushioned, wide, accommodative shoe, walking is allowed, as tolerated, with ambulatory aids used on an as needed basis. Physical therapy is used to monitor and direct functional recovery. Joint mobilization and range of motion is emphasized for the ankle, subtalar, and transverse tarsal joints. Strengthening and coordinated motion is followed by closed-chain exercises, and sport-specific exercises. A brace is not required, but a total contact orthotic device with a medial arch may be beneficial during the rehabilitation and return to sport phase. The recovery of strength and motion follows the progression of recovery into a return to sport phase. Running is permitted on a gradual, pain-free schedule, and increased on a weekly basis. Cutting is introduced before drills specific to the patient’s sport. The orthotic device is used for at least 12 months, and thereafter, on an as needed basis.