This study investigates the behavior of gold adsorption from cyanide leaching solution onto activated coconut shell carbon. The experimental was designed according to CCD implemented with RSM and a quadratic model was developed for regression analysis. The effects of important parameters including pH, agitation rate, adsorbent concentration and adsorption time were studied to find the best operating conditions, and the optimized value of pH, agitation rate, activated carbon concentration and adsorption time was found to be 11, 40rpm, 1.25g/L and 3h, respectively. Under these conditions, the adsorption rate was found to be about 87.11%. Also, the optimal conditions were established on industrial cyanide leaching solution and the results demonstrated that adsorption rate of gold could be obtained about 89.25%. Adsorption behavior was kinetically investigated using pseudo first-order and pseudo second-order models among which data were mostly correlated to pseudo first-order model. The further analysis of kinetics indicated that intra-particle diffusion was the rate-limiting step. Adsorbate–adsorbent interactions at 298k was assessed by Langmuir, Freundlich, and Temkin isotherm models from which Freundlich model had the highest consistency with the experimental data.Gold is a precious metal commonly used by humankind in a wide variety of fields including the electrical and electronic industries, medicine, jewelry and as a catalyst in various chemical processes Gold is treated from its ores hydrometallurgically by the cyanide leach process. This method has high sensitivity, low operational costs and capable to extract gold up to 98% In the recovery stage, the gold cyanide complex ion (Au(CN) Despite that a wide series of scientific research have been carried out on the adsorption of gold from leached liquors Samples of gold ores were collected from the Sarigoni (Qorveh) gold mine in Kordestan province, Iran. Samples were firstly crushed in a jaw crusher and then were ground by a laboratory rod mill. Thereafter samples were pulverized such as particles were less than 74 The main chemical composition of samples was characterized by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and the results are listed in Sodium cyanine (NaCN, 95%) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were purchased from Merck and used for cyanide leaching process. Activated carbon was prepared from Haycarb PLC Sri Lanka which its characterization is listed in First, the cyanidation (cyanide leaching) experiments were carried out in a tumble bottle under optimal condition of Sarigoni (Qorveh) gold processing plant at ambient temperature, pH of 11, liquid to solid ratio of 2, sodium cyanide concentration of 1 After cyanide leaching, the cyanidation solution was transferred to a tumble bottle and all adsorption experiments of gold were conducted by means of the traditional bottle-on-rolls method. Experiments were performed at the desired agitation rate and pH by placing a weighed amount of the activated carbon with 1000 Also, in order to kinetics and equilibrium study, the adsorption capacity of gold ion was calculated using Eq. The important factors affecting the adsorption of gold cyanide complex such as the pH (9.5, 10, 10.5, 11, 11.5), agitation rate (35, 40, 45, 50, 55 In order to conduct the adsorption experiments, the exploratory plan was developed to optimize and investigate the influence of the important factors toward gold adsorption recovery utilizing Design Expert delicate product (Demo v. 7.0.0, Stat-Ease, Inc.), central composite design (CCD). Response surface methodology (RSM) is an effective statistical technique for modeling and analyzing problems where the response is influenced by several factors and the aim is to get an optimum response  In order to describe the behavior of factors on the gold adsorption rate, it is first necessary to choose a suitable model. Therefore, experimental data in The ANOVA was used to determine the adequacy of the model and its significance and also to determine the effects of the factors (   In addition, 3D response surface plots were applied to gain a better understanding of the influence of factors on the gold adsorption as shown in pH has a significant effect on the adsorption potential of the activated carbons as it is known to affect both the speciation of the metal adsorbates as well as the surface charge of the adsorbent. The study of the pH also helps to have an insight on the mechanism of binding of the adsorbates onto the surface of the adsorbent It is also observed from The quadratic effect of agition rate was statistically significant, but in practice, it had not considerable effects on gold sorption ( The adsorption performance of gold from the cyanide leaching solution was optimized to obtain the maximum adsorption rate using Design Expert software. Useful information about the mechanisms, properties and affinity of adsorbents toward each adsorbate can be achieved using the equilibrium adsorption isotherm studies The Langmuir model is based on the assumption that there is no interaction between solute molecules and adsorbent. According to this model, the adsorption occurs in a single layer (forming a molecular monolayer), the surface of the adsorbent is homogeneous and the energy of adsorption is constant The essential characteristic of Langmuir isotherm is expressed by a dimensionless constant separation The Freundlich isotherm assumes that adsorption occurs over a multilayer adsorption onto heterogeneous surface. The following formula can be used to determine the Freundlich isotherm The value of 1/ Temkin isotherm is utilized to interpret the effects of some indirect adsorbent/adsorbate interactions on adsorption isotherm. The Temkin isotherm can be expressed as Study of adsorption isotherm mathematical models for gold was carried out to investigate the adsorption behavior of gold from cyanide leaching solution at temperature of 298 under optimal condition achieved and results are summarized in Study of adsorption kinetics is one of the key aspects used in the evaluation of adsorption of as a unit process. In this work, to investigate the mechanism of sorption, the Lagergren pseudo-first-order and the Ho’s pseudo-second-order adsorption models were applied to fit experimental data. The Lagergren equation is represented by the following expression The kinetic data were further examined using Ho’s pseudo-second-order kinetics model The kinetics investigation of sorption of gold onto activated carbon was conducted at two different initial gold concentrations (2 and 4 The intra-particle diffusion mechanisms and rate controlling steps influencing the adsorption of gold were also examined with Weber–Morris equation According to Cheunga et al. The impact of experimental variables, including pH, agitation rate, amount of adsorbent and adsorption time in the gold adsorption from cyanide leaching solution on activated carbon was studied. A response surface method using a central composite design was applied to evaluate, model and optimize the influential factors. A second-order quadratic model was developed to describe the behavior of adsorption process. The significance of independent variables was tested by analysis of variance (ANOVA). ANOVA analysis demonstrated that the linear effect of activated carbon concentration, linear effect of adsorption time, quadratic effect of adsorbent dosage and quadratic effect of agitation rate had the highest degree of importance in sorption of gold from cyanide leaching solution, respectively. The optimum pH, agitation rate, activated carbon concentration and adsorption time was found to be 11, 40 The authors wish to thank the manager and personnel of the Sarigoni (Qorveh) gold mine for their support during this research. SA and VKG sincerely acknowledge the National Research Foundation (NRF), University of Johannesburg (UJ) and Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), South Africa, for funding to this project.