Rock fracture process is associated with the degradation and mobilization of the mechanical and strength properties of rock. A number of true triaxial cyclic loading and unloading tests were carried out on three types of hard rocks (i.e., granite, marble and sandstone) to investigate the evolution of the rock properties as a function of accumulated damage. In addition to stress and strain measurements, acoustic emission (AE) signals were monitored and used to associate different stages of crack development with different stages of the mechanical and strength parameter evolution. Young's modulus and five strain increment ratios were calculated from the measured increments of stresses and strains in each cycle. It was found that hard rocks exhibited profound deformation anisotropy and directional dilation. A general trend of decreasing volumetric strain reversal stress and peak stress with increasing plastic strains was observed for all the tested specimens. The evolution of the strength properties of rock under true triaxial compression was investigated using a linear 3D hard rock failure criterion and was found to be generally consistent with the cohesion weakening and frictional strengthening concept. The influence of the intermediate principal stress on the evolution of the rock properties was also discussed.Underground excavations in civil and mining engineering are very common. The mechanical characteristics of rock have been extensively investigated to improve the efficiency of the design and safety of the construction of engineering structures. In fact, rock failure is a progressive fracture process, Since the 1970s, stiff closed-loop servo-control test machines have been used to acquire the stress–strain behaviors after the peak stresses in the uniaxial and triaxial tests. Numerous studies In this research, true triaxial cyclic loading and unloading test results on three types of hard rocks are used to capture the evolution of Young's modulus, strain increment ratios, cohesion and friction during the entire failure process. The linear Mogi criterion is used to calculate the cohesion and internal friction angle under true triaxial compression. An acoustic emission (AE) technique is also used to monitor the fracture signals corresponding to crack propagation. The tested cuboid specimens (50 × 50 × 100 mm True triaxial cyclic loading and unloading tests were carried out using Northeastern University's Mogi-type true triaxial system. Feng et al.   Generally, the deformability in the Compared with the response of the granite specimen and the sandstone specimen around the peak stress, the marble specimen exhibits remarkable ductility in its stress–strain curve. With decreasing After peak stress, the granite and sandstone specimen undergo relatively rapid stress drops; additionally, Rock failure is associated with the process of crack development in rock specimens. Crack propagation is accomplished by energy release. This behavior can be monitored and recorded by the AE technique. Most AE hits are generated in the post-peak stage. More specifically, the number of AE hits begins to rapidly increase when From the viewpoint of cumulative energy, the rock specimen before peak stress seldom releases energy. After peak stress, every stress drop leads to a rapid increase in the cumulative energy. This cumulative energy trend also shows that intense crack development primarily takes place after peak stress and that the macro-failure plane may form at the point where obvious stress drops occur (presented by black dotted rectangular boxes in  Deformation anisotropy is widely accepted to be reflected by the elastic parameters, such as Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio. In true triaxial compression tests, however, Poisson's ratio is not equal in the A cycle in this study starts with a loading stage and ends with an unloading stage (as presented by the solid line in different colors in In true triaxial tests, As mentioned in Section  Generally,  With increasing  The rock strength is determined by cohesion ( However, the Mohr-Coulomb criterion cannot reflect the intermediate principal stress effect. Following Mogi, The strength parameters can be determined by four steps. Firstly, the peak stresses of the granite, the marble and the sandstone published in the paper     To study the evolution of rock properties of hard rocks, true triaxial cyclic loading and unloading tests were carried out on Beishan granite, Jinping marble and Pakistan sandstone. The following important conclusions can be drawn. Deformation anisotropy of hard rocks is clearly observable in the true triaxial test results: the tested specimens have the largest deformability in the With an increase in the equivalent plastic strain, the plastic strain increment ratio The volumetric reversal stress A three-dimensional hard rock failure criterion is used to determine the strength parameters. Cohesion The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. The authors sincerely acknowledge the financial support from the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at