Introduction
                  Secondary intramedullary nailing (SIN) following external fixation (EF) of tibial shaft fracture is controversial, notably due to the infection risk, which is not precisely known. The present study therefore analysed a continuous series of tibial shaft SIN, to determine (1) infection and union rates, and (2) whether 1-stage SIN associated to EF ablation increased the risk of infection.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  Factors exist for union and onset of infection following tibial shaft SIN.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A retrospective series of SIN performed between 1998 and 2012 in over 16-year-old patients with non-pathologic tibial shaft fracture was analysed. EF pin site infection was an exclusion criterion. Fractures were graded according to AO and Gustilo classifications. Study parameters were: time to SIN, 1- versus 2-stage procedure, bacteriologic results on reaming product, post-nailing onset of infection, and time to union.
               
                  Results
                  Fifty-five patients (55 fractures) were included. There were 16 closed and 39 open fractures: 7 Gustilo type I, 26 type II and 6 type IIIA; 33 AO type A, 14 type B and 8 type C. Mean time to SIN was 9±9.6 weeks (range, 4 days to 12 months). There were 23 1-stage procedures, and 32 two-stage procedures with a mean 12-day interval (range, 4–30 days). Twelve reaming samples were biologically positive without secondary infection. There were 4 septic complications (3 abscesses, 1 osteomyelitis), and 1 aseptic non-union required re-nailing. The union rate was 96%. The sole factor of poor prognosis was severity of fracture opening. One-stage SIN did not increase infection risk.
               
                  Discussion
                  The present results were better than reported in the literature, where the rates of Gustilo IIIA and IIIB fracture and pin site infection are, however, higher. Tibial shaft SIN is a reliable procedure, with infection risk correlating with Gustilo type and time to surgery. Surgery should be early, before onset of EF pin site infection. A 1-stage attitude appears feasible in early SIN.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV. Retrospective study type.Secondary intramedullary nailing (SIN) of tibial shaft fracture after external fixation (EF) is controversial due to infection risk, which can be as high as 44% fusion and of infection rates, and; whether performing SIN as a 1-stage procedure associated to EF ablation increased the risk of infection. The study hypothesis was that factors exist for healing and onset of infection following tibial shaft SIN. A retrospective continuous series of files from 1998 to 2012 was analysed. Exclusion criteria were: age under 16 years, fracture on pathologic (tumour) or infected bone (osteitis), and EF pin site infection. Inclusion criteria were: tibial shaft fracture with primary EF and SIN. CRP levels at the time of nailing were required to be EF ablation and SIN were performed either as 1- or as 2-stage procedures, in the latter case with provisional lower limb immobilization in a posterior splint. In case of 2-stage procedure, the indication was sought and the interval calculated. SIN was deemed early if performed within 2 months. Bacteriology samples were taken from the SIN reaming product. The interval between EF ablation and SIN was calculated. Any surgical approach to the fracture site during SIN was noted, as were procedures to promote fusion. Age at trauma, gender, trauma mechanism and any associated lesions were recorded. Fractures were graded according to the AO In post-SIN course, deep infection (abscess, osteomyelitis, etc.) according to Dellinger's criteria The principal assessment criterion at follow-up was fracture consolidation at a minimum of 18 months post-trauma, with consolidation defined as continuity regarding at least 3 of the 4 cortices on AP and lateral radiographs. The tibial axis at fusion was measured on AP and lateral radiographs. Population homogeneity was assessed on the non-parametric Mann-Whitney test, comparing median ages. The Fisher exact test was used to assess correlations between the various study factors and onset of infection or fusion delay. Statistical analysis used NCSS V6.0 and StatXact V4.0 software. The significance threshold was set at 5%. Results were expressed as mean Between 1998 and 2012, 55 tibial shaft fractures were managed in 55 patients by emergency EF followed by SIN. All patients showed fusion at follow-up. There were 41 male and 14 female patients; mean age, 39.4 SIN was performed before 2 months in 31 cases and after in 24. Mean fracture-to-SIN interval was 9.2 weeks (range: 2–52 weeks; SD: 9.6 weeks). Only 11 SIN procedures were performed later than 4 months. In 23 cases, SIN was performed in 1-stage following EF ablation; in 32 cases, it was performed in a second stage, at a mean 13 days (range: 4–30 days; SD: 6 days) after EF ablation. The fracture was approached to ease the passage of the reamer guide in 8 cases, systematically associated with Intra-operative reaming product samples were positive in 12 cases: nine one methicillin-resistant one one group G Adapted antibiotherapy was administered for 6 to 8 weeks. There were no secondary infections, and fusion at end of follow-up was obtained in all cases. The primary fusion rate was 94.5% ( one nail dynamization (removal of locking screws) at 3 months, achieving fusion by 6 months; one hypertrophic aseptic non-union, managed by repeat nailing, achieving fusion within 4 months; and; one nail ablation due to osteomyelitis (Gustilo type I open fracture, with negative bacteriology), managed by EF. At fusion, there were no cases of Fusion was unrelated to early versus late SIN ( There were 4 deep infections (7.2%; 4/55): one abscess on distal locking screw (Gustilo type II open fracture, negative bacteriology, 1-stage SIN) managed by surgical drainage and 3 months’ antibiotherapy; one abscess on distal locking screw (Gustilo type II open fracture, negative bacteriology, 2-stage SIN) managed by surgical drainage and 2 months’ antibiotherapy; one fracture site fistula (closed fracture, negative bacteriology, 1-stage SIN) at 4 months post-SIN, managed by surgical resection and 3 months’ antibiotherapy; and; one osteomyelitis at 6 months post-SIN (Gustilo type I open fracture, negative bacteriology, 2-stage SIN) managed by nail ablation, new dynamic monoplane Orthofix™ EF and 3 months’ antibiotherapy. All 4 fractures showed fusion at follow-up, without recurrence of infection. Onset of infection was unrelated to early versus late SIN ( Secondary intramedullary nailing following external fixation of tibial shaft fracture has not been validated due to the complications rate, especially for infection, where it can be as high as 44% The study involved certain limitations: the number of SIN procedures performed after the 4th month post-trauma was small (20%, 11/55), probably explaining the absence of correlation between fusion rate and time to SIN; there was only a low rate of Gustilo type III open fracture (11%, 6/55), compared to the reports by Matsoukis et al. EF pin site infection was an exclusion criterion for SIN; it considerably increases the risk of deep infection in nailing, which may be as high as 71% The literature SIN after EF ablation may be performed in 1 or in 2 stages. The 2-stage procedure has the theoretic advantage of skin healing at the EF pin sites. Many authors, such as Wheelwright and Court Brown The contribution of positive reaming product bacteriology in the absence of clinical, biological or radiological signs of underlying infection is debatable. The present series included 12 positive findings, mainly in single samples. In older cases, treatment was determined by the surgeon, without multidisciplinary team discussion (surgeon, infectologist, bacteriologist). Most of these positive results on single samples therefore probably corresponded to contaminations. All 4 cases of post-SIN infection showed sterile culture on reaming products. Reaming product sampling, however, should be systematic, with at least 3 samples, with postoperative antibiotherapy continued until direct and culture results are available Secondary intramedullary nailing after external fixation is a controversial treatment option. The present results, with a fusion rate of 94%, confirm its efficacy so long as cases of EF pin site infection are excluded. Statistically, the sole factor significantly increasing infection risk was skin wound severity on the Gustilo classification. In Gustilo type IIIB and IIIC fracture, SIN does not show superiority, in terms of fusion or infection, to Ilizarov-type circular EF. Performing EF ablation and SIN in 1-stage did not seem to increase the risk of infection, and simplifies the procedure: single anesthesia, shorter hospital stay. This recommendation for a 1-stage attitude goes against most literature reports, but those series included high rates of EF pin site infection. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.