The effect of mineralogy and texture on the beneficiation of goethitic ores from two different origins is highlighted. Sample A having 54.47% Fe with 8.57% loss of ignition (LOI) indicates the presence of vitreous and ochreous goethite, martite and microplaty hematite as the major minerals. Sample B contains 56.90% Fe with 14.4% LOI. There is a pisolithic laterite containing vitreous and ochreous goethite, quartz, kaolinitic clay and there is no hematite mineral. The liberated minerals in −150+100μm size class are 74% for Sample A and 37% only for Sample B which shows that the Sample A appears to be more amenable to beneficiate. A concentrate of 46.7% with 63.22% Fe could be recovered from Sample A while subjected to gravity separation followed by wet magnetic separation. The Sample B does not respond to gravity and magnetic separation due to its complex mineralogy. However, calcination of the Sample B followed by magnetic separation gives the encouraging results. Thus, anomalous behaviour of the goethite dominated ores in beneficiation is attributed to the different textural and liberation characteristic.Iron ore is the basic raw material used for iron and steel making. The principal impurities associated with iron ores are silica, alumina, sulphur and phosphorous. The high grade hematite iron ores require simple crushing and washing. As the grade of ore is declining, run-of-mine ore needs intense washing before shipment. Depending upon the origin and mineralogical characteristics of the ore, beneficiation methods vary from simple crushing and screening to complex concentration processes. Basically, the processes based on gravity and magnetic separations and flotation have been used for concentration of low grade iron ores. Today the low grade iron ores are goethitic/lateritic in nature. Goethite is one of the important ferruginous mineral in lateritic rock, lateritic iron ore and important part of the iron ore slimes. It occurs as vitreous goethite and ochreous goethite. It is formed during chemical weathering of iron ores and banded iron formation. It can incorporate variable amounts of other elements such as Al, Mn, P, Si, Cd, Ni, Cr, V, Zn and Co in the crystal structure due to its adsorption capacity The concept of the paper is to assess the impact of mineralogical and textural effect for ascertaining the possible beneficiation scheme for the goethitic types of ores from different origins. Iron ore samples with contrasting chemistry from two different origins of eastern and middle part of India were taken in the present investigation. The Sample A represents 54.47% Fe with 4.90% SiO The mineralogical and optical characterization of the Sample A were studied through optical microscopy technique to establish the characteristics of hematite and/or goethite dominated ore types. The ore fragments exhibit various ore textures. Some of the grains are of high grade exhibit a texture of dense martite, microplaty hematite and goethite-martite. The fragments of low grade (lateritic ore) exhibit ochreous goethite-vitreous goethite texture. Goethite occurs with colloform structure, fracture fillings/cavity fillings and pisolith enclaving clay at the core ( Characterization study of the Sample B under zoom microscope indicates the occurrence of goethitic pisoliths within a goethite-clay matrix. The pisoliths exhibit concretionary colloform structure with alternate shells of clay and goethite under microscope. These pisoliths are fractured and subsequently filled with the secondary goethite enhancing the concretion ( The association of gangues with the iron bearing minerals were studied through liberation using wild zoom stereo microscope (Leica make). Degree of liberation of two samples in the ore crushed to 1.68 The top size of the as-received Sample A was −10 The beneficiation study of Sample A was also carried out by direct crushing and grinding of the as received ore sample to −0.15 In view of the poor liberation characteristics of the Sample B, conventional beneficiation study was carried out by crushing and grinding of the sample at finer sizes viz, 150, −74 and 44 Characterization of minerals and their association in the ore dictate the process of beneficiation of the samples. Interlocking of the minerals in two ore samples shown in The Sample A was beneficiated through two schemes. The first beneficiation scheme of Sample A was carried out involving comminution, scrubbing, washing, gravity and magnetic separation. In this scheme, attempt was made for a stage-wise recovery from coarser feed fraction to produce a sinter grade concentrate, and pellet grade concentrate by beneficiating the finer fraction. Second scheme was the direct milling of the ore sample to 150 Scheme 1: from washing and size classifications of the Sample A, three fractions were generated, ie., −6.3 Scheme 2: the Sample A was beneficiated by stage crushing and grinding of the as-received ore sample to 150 The comparison of the concentrates having same Fe grade obtained through the above two process schemes suggests that the intermediate product (middling) generated in the second scheme carries high iron values ( Characterization of the Sample B indicates the presence of pisolithic laterite which attributes with goethitic pisoliths, cemented by a goethitic matrix. In this case the gangue minerals do not get significantly liberated even at a size of 74 Researchers attempted heat treatment of goethitic iron ore, namely, reduction roasting for beneficiation through phase transformation As noted in Based on TG-DTA studies, calcination of the sample B was conducted with different feed sizes. Scheme 1: heat treatment with fine feed size Initially, the heat treatment of the Sample B was attempted at finer size. The feed size of −1 Scheme 2: heat treatment with coarse feed size Heat treatment studies with −6 and −10 The characterization and beneficiation studies of two different types of goethitic ore show contrasting behaviour due to the mineralogical association and their texture. Sample A possessing lower Fe content was found to be amenable to beneficiate than Sample B having higher Fe. Both sinter and pellet concentrate could be produced by processing of coarse and fine fractions of feed adopting a conventional beneficiation process for Sample A. The stage wise grinding and beneficiation (Scheme I) shows that the recoverable product is 46.7% with 63.22% Fe. It reveals the improvement in the yield and recovery ( In the second process scheme of Sample A, 40% pellet grade concentrate with 63.11% Fe could be produced along with 12.7% intermediate product assaying 60.48% Fe. The goethitic ore Sample B possessing different mineralogical texture does not respond to the magnetic separation. However, it can be upgraded to 63%–64% Fe by heat treatment (400–500 Heat treatment of the ore crushed to 10 Understanding of the nature of goethite and grain morphology is important in the prospective of beneficiation of the ore. The authors would like to extend their sincere thanks to Ministry of Steel for funding the research work (GAP 0224).