Lignocellulosic materials, which consist mainly of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin, are among the most promising renewable feedstocks for the production of energy and chemicals. Bioethanol is a major biofuel that can be produced from lignocellulosic materials. Its production typically involves a hydrolysis-fermentation route, which has three main steps: pretreatment to get fermentable sugars, fermentation to produce bioethanol, and a separation process to obtain highly concentrated bioethanol. The pretreatment step has been recognized as a technological bottleneck for the cost-effective development of bioprocesses from lignocellulosic materials. In this work we analyze the potential of several pretreatment methods for bioethanol production from lignocellulosic materials. Simulations based on stoichiometric relations and yield data were conducted to evaluate the energy requirements of each pretreatment method. Other parameters were also considered such as the cost of chemicals, consumption of water, and constraints on the composition of inhibitors. Performance benchmarks were identifies using targeting techniques and these benchmarks were used to assess the actual performance of the alternatives. The combination of the evaluated parameters with target production values obtained from reported yields served as the basis for identifying the most promising pretreatment options and for defining areas of opportunities. This approach uses limited information, but it provides reliable results in order to reduce the number of pretreatment alternatives. The target production usage gives an estimation of the global process efficiency without the completed flowsheet defined.Lignocellulosic materials (LCMs) have been recently considered as potential sources of energy and high value chemicals. A key advantage of LCM is the avoidance of the competition with food production. Furthermore, there are abundant source for LCM including waste materials. One of the potential uses of LCM that has attracted particular attention is the production of bioethanol. A biorefinery based on LCM to produce bioethanol has three principal steps, which are pretreatment, hydrolysis-fermentation and a separation process. According to the literature ( In this work we present a quick and effective selection of alternatives based on reliable results from limited information. Because of the importance of energy issues for a bioethanol technology, this work focuses initially on a comparison of pretreatment system from an energy consumption point of view. First, a preliminary screening was conducted based on several reported pretreatment methods to choose those with the highest potential. Then, a conceptual design of each pretreatment process was modeled using the ASPEN Plus process simulator in order to estimate the energy and mass requirements for each pretreatment method. Process integration techniques were then used to conserve the usage of water, chemicals, and energy. Finally, the results were compared against the performance target values for bioethanol production obtained from conversion values from fermentation steps to detect the most promising pretreatment methods. Lignocellulosic materials are characterized by three components, cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin. These components are complex polymers, and there is not a complete knowledge about their interaction.  In a biorefinery based on lignocellulosic materials, which has sugars as intermediates, it is necessary to break down the feedstock's structure, and then to get sugars from cellulose and hemicellulose. For this reason, we need a pretreatment system before the conversion step; the pretreatment goal is to prepare the feedstock in order to improve the sugars conversion. A first analysis is conducted on the processes of These methods use water without any other chemical. In steam explosion (SE), biomass is treated with saturated steam at high pressure, after which the pressure is suddenly decreased ( The acid addition increases hemicellulose solubilization rate in comparison with the LHW or SE methods, so that the degradation effect can be minimized ( Alkaline pretreatment breaks the bonds between lignin and carbohydrates and disrupts the lignin structure; this effect depends on the lignin content of the materials. When low temperatures (50–65 In the ammonia fiber explosion method (AFEX), the lignocellulosic materials are exposed to concentrated liquid ammonia at high pressure, and then the pressure is suddenly reduced ( This method involves simultaneous prehydrolysis and delignification. A solvent mixture and an acid catalyst are used to break the internal lignin and hemicellulose bonds (   Components such as acetic acid, formic acid, furfural, 5-hydroxymetylfurfural and phenols could be produced in some of these pretreatment methods. The concentration of some components may increase in the conversion steps while other components may be decomposed by yeast into other products.  Usually, furfural and acetic acid are found as the most representative inhibitor components in the conversion step. The concentrations of these components were used in evaluating the inhibition effect of the pretreatment systems. First, we denote the composition change from pretreatment to conversion step (SSF) as Δ In the furfural case, we used the smaller Δ Depending on the pretreatment method and the type of conversion configuration that could be used, we defined three different scenarios for the recycle implementation ( The weight of insoluble solids (WIS) for the conversion step in the experimental scale usually ranges from 5% to 10% ( Part of our analysis included the estimation of bioethanol production targets for each pretreatment. First, we defined the average composition given in The overall conversion data reported for SE in Based on the assumed average composition, the cellulose units that could be converted are 40(0.94)(0.85) For LHW, DA, AFEX and LIME pretreatments, the yield data for glucose and xylose, obtained by using enzymatic hydrolysis (EH), are reported as ‘sugar amount obtained/total theoretical sugars’, where total theoretical sugars We took conversion values of 95% for glucose and 60% for xylose ( Finally, for the organosolvent case, it was reported that 88.14% of the initial cellulose remained as solid after pretreatment, and 97% of this fraction was converted into glucose by using EH. For our case, 40(0.8814)(0.97) The final target values for bioethanol production for all the pretreatments methods, as volume of bioethanol per tonne of dry biomass, are reported in In this work, we used a conceptual design to simulate the pretreatment processes. The energy consumption was used as a preliminary screening metric in order to reduce the number of alternatives to be considered for full design. Subsequently, the analysis was complemented using other parameters such as inhibition, water consumption, and chemical cost. The information in Usually, the experiments were run on a dry biomass basis, although the feedstock has some moisture. In order to include the water in the feedstock we defined an average moisture percent; when we compared all the pretreatment cases this value turned out around 40 Since we are interested in complementing the simulation results with the target estimations, it is convenient to expresses the energy consumption per tonne of dry biomass. In order to simplify the flow mass estimations, we defined the load unit of 1 tonne dry biomass by residence time of each method; this load unit easily permits to link the target production and energy consumption. In Aspen Plus, we selected the unit flow as tonne/h; for instance, in the DA case the residence time is equal to 20 When the AFEX and Lime pretreatment methods are used, no important reactions take place. In the case of LIME a percent of lignin (14% of initial) is removed from the solid phase, and for the AFEX pretreatment the main part of the raw material remains as solid. For the other pretreatment methods the principal reaction that takes place is the hemicellulose hydrolysis. We took all of the five carbon sugars as xylose sugar. The cellulose conversion to glucose is also included in low percent. There are other secondary reactions that can occur in the pretreatment step, from which we just included the production of furfural and acetic acid. Conversion values for these products have been reported by The components involved in the simulations are presented in In this section, we report the flowsheets that were prepared for the simulation of each pretreatment option; at this stage of our analysis, the simulations were run without including any kind of integration to make an initial comparison of the energy requirements. The steam explosion flowsheet is shown in  Two flash units were used in order to simulate the LIME pretreatment, whose flowsheet is given in For the organosolvent pretreatment we included a hydrous ethanol recovery system. The complete flowsheet is shown in Energy is consumed for heating, cooling and power duties. For the organosolvent pretreatment case, the energy required for the column is not included; however, just from the heating and cooling costs reported in In this part of the work, simulations including the stream recycle were run. In all pretreatment cases we analyzed the energy and water consumption. For the SE, LHW and DA cases, the inhibition potential and moisture content in feedstocks were evaluated. For AFEX the pretreatment cost was evaluated as a function of ammonia cost and energy cost. In the Lime case, a direct recycle implementation was not possible. Simulations were run for different final vapor fractions and different moisture percents in each pretreatment case; the main fraction of the recycle was composed of water and small amounts of furfural and acetic acid. The direct recycle reduces the fresh water consumption. The mass flows for the liquid fraction and solid fraction leaving the pretreatment were obtained. The component flows for furfural and acetic acid were also obtained and their compositions were estimated. It is important to mention that in all cases the temperatures obtained in the flash units were lower than the pretreatment temperatures. In the DA case, the amount of sulfuric acid is small and not economically feasible to be recovered. We only include the sulfuric cost in the final results. In general, for the three pretreatment cases the amount of fresh water estimated for each vapor fraction had not important differences. Locally, the water consumption improved when the flash vapor fraction increased, but globally, when we included the dilution step there were not significant differences for the total water consumption, because the WIS was fixed to 10%. The energy cost performance as a function of recycle vapor fraction in each pretreatment is shown in The furfural and acetic acid compositions were evaluated at the minimum energy cost, and the values remained constant after the solid dilutions for different moisture values ( In this pretreatment option there are not reactions; therefore, the steam leaving the pretreatment only contains ammonia and water, and the pretreatment integration involves the recycle of such mixture. When the vapor fraction increases the ammonia amount in the recycle increases, but also does the water amount; in order to achieve the optimum moisture in the pretreatment tank more water has to be removed from the feedstock. The energy consumption of the drying step is not taken into account. We complemented the AFEX pretreatment flowsheet ( The search was conducted as a function of the vapor fraction, and we stopped at a value of 0.85 because for higher values the flash temperature became higher than the pretreatment temperature (90 In the LIME pretreatment case it is not possible to implement a direct recycle integration. However, lime could be recovered from the wash water using the well-established kiln process ( The available information for Lime pretreatment is not enough to define the water recycle implementation from the waste water; therefore, we did not include such recycle in this analysis.  The total pretreatment energy cost was obtained per tonne of dry biomass treated, while production targets represent the gallons that could be produced per tonne of dry biomass. Based on these values we can get two important factors for the comparison of the pretreatment methods. One is the ratio of the cost to the production target, to obtain a unit cost for the biorefinery due to pretreatment operations. The other one is the reciprocal of this ratio, which could be interpreted as an efficiency index for each pretreatment option. For DA and AFEX cases, the lowest prices for sulfuric acid and ammonia reported in the web site ( The direct recycle implementation, whenever possible, improved the pretreatment cost and the fresh water consumption. The moisture content had an effect in the DA and SE pretreatments; in the first case, the energy cost increased with the moisture content, while for SE the energy cost decreased when the moisture increased. In the SE pretreatment the inhibition was significant when the solid–liquid separation was used (scenario 1); therefore, the solid–liquid separation is not recommendable for this pretreatment option. In LHW and DA the inhibitor compositions stayed below constraints in scenarios 1 and 2; these two pretreatments showed and advantage compared with SE by providing more sugars for the conversion step. SE shows the lowest pretreatment contribution to the cost per gallon of bioethanol, but a potential disadvantage due to inhibition, particularly for relatively high amounts of waste in the overall process. In the LHW, DA and AFEX cases, the inhibition aspect is not significant, and they showed similar unit costs for the base economic scenario; DA and AFEX were more sensitive to increases in chemical prices. It should be noted that the LIME pretreatment could have a better performance if it were based on poplar wood, since higher sugar yields have been reported for this type of material ( An analysis of several pretreatment methods for the production of bioethanol from lignocellulosic materials has been presented. First, screening from the several options reported in the literature led to the selection of six alternatives that were first analyzed from an energy consumption point of view. Subsequently, other factors were included in the screening. These factors include inhibition and the consumption of chemicals and water. The actual performance was benchmarked versus the theoretical production targets. The combination of the cost for each pretreatment method with the calculation of production targets based on reported yields provided the unit cost for the potential biorefinery due to the pretreatment stage. The initial analysis with no type of integration detected the steam explosion and the dilute sulfuric acid hydrolysis methods as those with the lowest energy requirements. When the recycle was implemented, steam explosion, liquid hot water, dilute sulfuric acid hydrolysis and ammonia fiber explosion options became more energy-efficient methods. However, from the perspectives of inhibition and waste minimization, SE was found to be a less desirable pretreatment approach. The costs of DA and AFEX were found to be particularly sensitive to the price of chemicals. The authors thank the economic support from