Slags from metallurgical processes represent a potential resource of metals but also waste materials that have not been successfully beneficiated to date. For this study, a bulk slag sample from a copper smelter was evaluated under chemical and bacterial leaching conditions to test the solubilization of Cu and Zn in acidic, sulfate-rich solutions. Fayalite, magnetite and glassy silicates as well as Cu-sulfides and sphalerite were the major phases of the slag. The acid demand of the slag was satisfied with a 24h contact time with sulfuric acid. A mixed mesophilic culture capable of oxidizing iron and sulfur and dominated by Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans, A. ferrooxidans, and Leptospirillum ferriphilum was used for bioleaching. The maximum extent of Zn leaching was 14%, contrasted with 83% Cu in experiments with an initial pH of 2.1–2.2, 10% pulp density, 10gL−1
                     S0 addition, 5% inoculum, and 25d contact time. Biological S0 oxidation was an important source of acid in bioleaching experiments. Ferric iron did not enhance the solubilization of Cu and Zn appreciably.Reclamation of metals from slag materials has been of interest for waste management purposes as well as for resource recovery. In the absence of sustainable technology of large-scale processing of slag waste streams, stockpiling in heaps and tailings is a common approach but is potentially ridden with environmental problems due to stormwater, wind and dust and accidental leakage of drainage water. The chemical and mineralogical composition of metallurgical slags vary considerably with the pyrometallurgical process and the mineral concentrate ( Pyrometallurgical processing of mineral concentrates leads to the formation of fayalite (2FeO·SiO Low pH is one of the key parameters in slag dissolution. Acid demanding phases in slags include the formation of orthosilicic acid (H Hematite is, however, usually formed at elevated temperatures including those in pressure leaching ( Acid demand can be met in the bioleaching approach by the addition of appropriate reduced sulfur compounds that are oxidized to sulfuric acid ( Microscopic fungi such as A mixed culture of iron-oxidizing acidithiobacilli and The slag sample was collected from the copper flash smelting process at Boliden Harjavalta, Finland. Slag is formed as a by-product of sulfide concentrate smelting in a flash smelting furnace. Iron in the concentrate is oxidized in the process and fluxed with silica sand to form fayalite, 2FeO·SiO For this study, a bulk sample of slag was collected from freshly produced final slag at the Boliden Harjavalta smelter. The sample was stored under water in a closed container at 4 A mesophilic bacterial consortium, designated PS, was used in the study. The consortium was originally enriched from water and sediment samples collected at the Pyhäsalmi Mine, in the south of Oulu Province, Finland. Based on analyses of 16S rRNA gene sequences, the consortium contained Immediate and 24 Initially, the potential toxicity of metals dissolved from the slag was tested by leaching 10% slag suspension chemically for 3 The bioleaching experiments were carried out using the PS culture (5 The results from the acid consumption test are shown in In the initial toxicity experiments, Fe Changes in pH, redox potential and dissolved metal concentrations during the bioleaching of the slag in shake flask cultures including the chemical control are shown in Chemical controls continued to have acid consumption, increasing the pH to approximately 2.8. Fayalite dissolution in acid solutions ( Compared with fayalite, the glassy silicate phase is more heterogeneous and its leaching or proton attack has not been detailed. Ferrous iron dissolved from fayalite is oxidized to ferric iron by bacteria in acid solutions ( Ferrous and ferric iron could also be derived from proton attack of magnetite (ideally Fe Ferrous iron was depleted in biotic flasks, indicating biological iron oxidation ( The low concentrations of total iron indicated that Fe Copper was present as covellite (CuS) and bornite (Cu Zinc was primarily dispersed in glassy silicates, fayalite and magnetite phases and was also present as sphalerite (ZnS) ( The linearity of dissolution over time suggests that Zn was solubilized from the main silicate matrix and magnetite, which were responding to the acid production in S The dissolution of Cu and Zn was the highest in flasks supplemented with S The leaching of Zn may have been limited by pulp density related effects, as the Zn yields in the 24 Other factors contributing to relative leaching yields include the particle size and temperature. The mixed culture oxidized both Fe We thank Geoffrey Puzon and Jason Wylie from CSIRO Land and Water for valuable comments on the manuscript. Anna H. Kaksonen acknowledges support of