The Au/palygorskite (Au/Pal) composite was prepared via supporting gold species on the surface of palygorskite. Results indicated that the dehydration of palygorskite showed obvious effect on the Au0/Au3+ molar ratio, and the generated hydroxide radicals (−OH) played a special role in the formation of Au-Au2O3 coexistence system. Au2O3 nanoparticles were formed on the hydrated (010) palygroskite surface, while Au nanoparticles were mainly on the surface of unhydrated (100) palygroskite. The decomposition of Au2O3 to metallic Au was promoted by increasing calcination temperature. However, this process would be hindered by –OH radicals produced at high temperature. The Au0/Au3+ molar ratio changed nonlinearly with the calcination temperature. The dehydration was beneficial to the formation of the chemical bonds between Au species and palygroskite. Au-Au2O3 coexistence expanded the application of gold supported composites. Atomic-level interfaces between Au species and palygorskite surface were also investigated. Realizing Au-Au2O3 coexistence by dehydration of palygorskite could provide a novel method for the synthesis of advanced mineral-based composites.Gold has been studied for decades due to its special activity in nanosize and has been widely applied in many fields such as catalysis ( Palygorskite (formula (Mg,Al,Fe) In this paper, the effect of dehydration of palygorskite on the Au-Au HAuCl Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) was conducted by a JEM 2100 XPS was employed to analyze the Au species of Au/Pal composite. The Au 4f spectra were characteristic of metallic Au with Au 4f Binding energy of Au The molar ratio of Au TPR was conducted to reveal the existence condition of gold oxides ( Our previous work has identified the coexistence of Au and Au XRD patterns of Au/Pal calcined at different temperatures ( FTIR was employed to understand the band change. Bands at 790 and 1430 Gold nanoparticles stabilized on palygroskite surface were schematically depicted ( The formation of Au-Au This work was supported by the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (51225403), the Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20120162110079) and the Hunan Provincial Natural Science Fund for Innovative Research Groups and Hunan Provincial Innovation Foundation for Postgraduates (CX2012B122).