An impurity species, butylbis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinate (‘butyl phosphinate’), has recently been identified in the Murrin Murrin solvent extraction (SX) circuits. The present work established that this species is formed via direct reaction between tributyl phosphate (TBP) and the phosphinic acid extractant found in Cyanex 272 and that the reaction is first order relative to the concentration of each reactant. The observations are consistent with the reaction progressing via a bimolecular nucleophilic substitution (SN2) mechanism whereby nucleophilic attack of substrate TBP by the phosphinic acid anion occurs, resulting in cleavage of the C–O bond and ejection of dibutyl phosphate anion.
                  The butyl phosphinate formation rate has been determined under synthetic extract, strip and aqueous-free conditions, the latter at temperatures between 40 and 75°C. In the absence of an aqueous phase, the rate coefficient was found to be 0.43±0.02M−1 per annum (95% confidence interval) at 70°C with an activation energy of 122kJ/mol. Based on the present data and historical SX plant operating information, a model to estimate annual butyl phosphinate generation and its build-up in the Murrin Murrin SX circuits over the last decade was developed. The estimated accrued level of 31g/L butyl phosphinate by June 2009 is comparable to the measured 32–35g/L.Cyanex 272 is a commercial solvent extraction (SX) reagent used to separate cobalt from nickel in sulfate media ( The first known product arising from chemical degradation of Cyanex 272 has recently been reported ( This recently-identified species had been observed to be growing in the Murrin SX circuits over the prior 10 The Murrin zinc and cobalt SX circuits in which this species formed both used a combination of Cyanex 272 and tributyl phosphate (TBP) in Shellsol 2046 diluent. As butyl phosphinate was not observed in several commercial Cyanex 272-containing systems where TBP was absent, it was concluded that the impurity was most likely formed in the plant organic by reaction (either directly or indirectly) of a component of Cyanex 272 (phosphinic acid or phosphine oxide impurity) with TBP ( Hydrolysis is a common degradation pathway for TBP used in the nuclear industry ( The present work aimed to identify the mechanism by which butyl phosphinate forms and assess its rate of formation under various conditions and relate this back to the known butyl phosphinate concentration in the Murrin system and their historical operating conditions. Two major series of experiments were performed, the first primarily under aqueous-free conditions to determine the mechanism and rate of butyl phosphinate formation, the second to establish the effect of various aqueous solutions and metal loading levels on the formation rate. A series of organic solutions containing differing concentrations of phosphinic acid and trialkyl phosphate (TBP or Relevant organic (60 A second series of tests ( In systems with no metal extraction (experiments 24–39), relevant organic (60 The initial and final day loaded organic samples (experiments 40–47) were separated from the corresponding aqueous phase via filtering through Whatman 1PS filter paper before being stripped (A:O 3:1, 100 GC analyses were performed using a Varian 3800 gas chromatograph equipped with a flame ionisation detector (FID). The chromatograph was fitted with an SGE forte BP-1 fused silica capillary column (30 Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC–MS) analyses were performed using a Saturn 2000 mass spectrometer (MS) as the detector. Acetonitrile-based chemical ionisation (CI) and electron impact (EI) ionisation were used. Helium (1.0 To enable the ready elution of the phosphinic acid extractant, samples (100 Prior to the commencement of this work, a scoping study undertaken to assess whether butanol or TBP reacted with Cyanex 272 to generate butyl phosphinate indicated that it was the latter. Given this outcome which was subsequently confirmed — see GC traces highlighting the generation of butyl phosphinate in a 20-5-70C system (see Increasing the concentration of Cyanex 272 (phosphinic acid) from 2 to 20% v/v (0.054–0.54 Increasing the concentration of TBP from 1 to 10% v/v (0.036–0.36 These results indicate that the rate of butyl phosphinate formation primarily under aqueous-free conditions is dependent on the concentrations of both phosphinic acid and TBP. This relationship can be expressed as a standard rate expression; The linear response of butyl phosphinate generation to changes in both phosphinic acid and TBP concentrations ( Insertion of the relevant reagent concentrations and butyl phosphinate formation rate into Eq. The fact that the reaction occurs in the absence of an aqueous phase indicates that degradation has the potential to occur throughout all stages of a process, i.e. mixing, settling, and storage. This reaction and its possible relevance to other SX systems containing an acidic extractant and TBP are of interest. In addition to phosphinic acid, Cyanex 272 contains impurities such as phosphine oxide. In order to establish whether phosphinic acid or the phosphine oxide (or any other impurity species) was reacting with TBP, a sample of pure phosphinic acid was isolated as described previously ( The rate of butyl phosphinate formation in the 20-5-70C system when in the presence of a 100 Of the four 20-5-70C experiments performed using Cyanex 272 under anhydrous conditions, two were performed using Murrin TBP (experiments 6 and 7) and two were performed using TBP sourced from Aldrich (experiments 4 and 5). The results overlapped, confirming TBP and not an impurity specific to the Murrin-supplied reagent is associated with the reaction. It was possible that phosphinic acid could react with trialkylphosphate species other than TBP. If so, the reaction of TEHP (instead of TBP) with phosphinic acid might be expected to result in an analogous 2-ethylhexyl phosphinate species. This reaction (experiment 13) was undertaken using the same molar amount of TEHP (0.18 Hydrolysis of TBP generates butanol and dibutyl phosphate. Although butanol does not react with phosphinic acid ( The effect of temperature (40–75 The activation energy (E This format is equivalent to a straight line equation y The quantity of butyl phosphinate formed throughout the trial in the different systems at 70 Butyl phosphinate was not formed in any of the systems containing butanol (experiments 24–29), confirming this alcohol is not associated with butyl phosphinate formation. The rate coefficients derived from the two anhydrous tests (experiments 30, 31) were found to be comparable with the result of 0.43 Tests done under metal-free extract conditions (experiments 36, 37) and under extract conditions in the presence of 10 The two Murrin SX circuits are used to sequentially extract zinc and cobalt from the nickel rich, sulfate-based feed solution. Complexation of cobalt with phosphinic acid at low (0.12 Like cobalt, complexation of zinc with phosphinic acid at low (0.15 It should be noted that all of these tests were performed under continual agitation conditions and therefore are likely to be more representative of the rates expected under mixing conditions. It is possible that the rate observed under non-mixing conditions such as those prevailing in the settling stage of a commercial operation differ, with the rates for stripped or partially loaded organic being more aligned to the results obtained here under anhydrous conditions. This possibility ideally requires further investigation. The current results preclude butyl phosphinate formation via reaction of phosphinic acid with any species arising from TBP hydrolysis. Instead, they demonstrate that it is formed via direct reaction between phosphinic acid and TBP, with the rate of formation being first order relative to both TBP and phosphinic acid concentration and thus second order overall. Hydrolysis of alkyl phosphates proceeds through nucleophilic substitution arising from attack of the P–O–C linkage by a nucleophile which can occur via two distinct processes ( Given a pK Increasing the steric bulk of the substrate (alkyl phosphate in this case) results in inhibition of S It was previously determined that butyl phosphinate was present in the Murrin plant organic solutions at 32–35 Based on the present work, the key parameters affecting butyl phosphinate generation are the following: Phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) concentration. TBP concentration. Organic temperature. Aqueous strip acidity. Metal (Co and Zn) loading levels. Based on the five years of analysed data, the following was concluded: The average Cyanex 272 and TBP concentrations in the Murrin SX circuits were about 21% (0.54 The average organic temperature was 60 Average zinc and cobalt loading levels and strip acidity in the relevant stages and average residence time in the various stages of the Murrin circuit were assessed. Rates during mixing and settling were assumed to differ as discussed above. Specific parameters are not disclosed for confidentiality reasons. These conclusions were assumed to be valid over the entire life of the Murrin operation. On the basis of points 2 and 3 above, the average rate coefficient was estimated to be 0.12 Given the known level of butyl phosphinate in the circuit in 2009, it was of interest to assess whether the calculated annual rate of formation would reasonably allow the observed circuit concentration to be reached. Such a calculation requires the ongoing rate of loss of butyl phosphinate from the circuit to also be known. As the amount of Cyanex 272 added to the circuit per annum to compensate for ongoing losses was known, it was originally intended to assume the percentage of butyl phosphinate lost per annum matched that for Cyanex 272. However, two species are readily detected in Cyanex 272 by GC analysis, namely the phosphinic acid extractant and the phosphine oxide impurity. Although not reported, quantitative analysis of Cyanex 272 phosphinic acid and the phosphine oxide impurity was undertaken at the same time the butyl phosphinate in the Murrin circuit was quantified ( Based on the known average annual loss of phosphinic acid being about 40% and the ratio of phosphine oxide to phosphinic acid in the circuit organic being about 1.4 times the ratio present in fresh Cyanex 272, it was estimated that phosphine oxide was being lost from the circuit at about 28% per annum. Combining the calculated rate of formation with this estimated percent annual loss (both calculated using a monthly interval, i.e. 0.79 This model is sensitive to operating temperature. Increasing the average operating temperature from 60 It should be noted that this analysis using the phosphine oxide species as a reference material was possible due to only Cyanex 272 being added to the circuit over the relevant timeframe. Substitution to an alternative reagent with a different phosphine oxide concentration such as Ionquest 290 (phosphine oxide impurity The impurity species butyl In the absence of an aqueous phase, the rate coefficient was found to be 0.43 Complexation of 0.28 Based on the current results and historical SX plant operating information, the rate of butyl phosphinate formation at the Murrin plant was calculated to be about 27 Mr. John O'Callaghan and Dr. Sian Miller of Minara Resources are thanked for providing information pertaining to the operation of the Murrin Murrin solvent extraction circuits. The support of the