The paper discusses the elution of platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide from strong base anion exchange resins, namely Amberlite PWA5 and Minix, with the use of acidic thiourea, potassium thiocyanate and zinc cyanide. It is shown that thiocyanate ions and zinc cyanide were effective eluants for strong base resins. Acidic thiourea, however, was found to be ineffective in eluting platinum cyanide from strong base resins, but eluted palladium cyanide. The concentration of the eluting agents was found to affect the elution to a noticeable degree, with no significant effect imparted by the elution temperature and flow rate. Overall, it can be concluded that platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide can be effectively eluted from strong base anion exchange resins, with the use of potassium thiocyanate and zinc cyanide. However, split elution alternatives, such as acid washing, should be investigated to separate platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide from the base metal cyanides loaded on the resins.Recently the hydrometallurgical extraction of platinum group metals (PGM) from a low-grade concentrate by heap leaching with cyanide has been investigated ( The use of ion exchange resins for the recovery of gold and silver cyanide complexes from either low or high-grade cyanide solution has received considerable attention over the past few decades, both on laboratory and industrial scale ( The elution of aurocyanide from strong base anion exchange resins have been achieved in investigations involving, namely acidic thiourea, zinc cyanide and thiocyanate ( Using aurocyanide elution as an example, the elution mechanism for acidic thiourea, zinc cyanide and thiocyanate, are shown in Acidic thiourea provides a fast and simple elution option, because no regeneration of the resin is required, however, it cannot be used in cases where the loading of iron on the resin is high, because of the precipitation of double metal complexes such as Zn Therefore, due to the lack of in depth information on the elution of PGM-cyanides from ion exchange resins, the present study was initiated to investigate the effect of different eluting agents commonly used in the gold industry for the elution of Pt(CN) Two commercially available strong base anion exchange resins, Amberlite PWA5 and Minix, were obtained from The Dow Chemical Company Ltd. The two resins were selected to have different exchange capacities and functionalities, with Minix having an exchange capacity of 0.3 The two resins were transferred to columns, where the resin beds were backwashed with distilled water to remove smaller particles from the bed. This was followed with a second wash with an excess amount of water. The resin beds were then treated with 6 bed volumes of 2 Synthetic solutions were prepared using K In the cases when ZnCN Each resin was loaded by contacting 5 For elution with acidic thiourea, thiourea was dissolved in Analar-grade hydrochloric acid, in the required amounts, as will be presented during the discussion of the results. For zinc cyanide elution, ZnCN All elution experiments were performed in glass columns with internal diameters of 12 The concentration of each metal in either the loading or eluate solution was determined with the use of either Inductively Coupled Plasma – Mass Spectroscopy (ICP-MS) or Inductively Coupled Plasma – Optical Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-OES). During this investigation the effectiveness of eluting platinum and palladium cyanide complexes with the use of either acidic thiourea, zinc cyanide and thiocyanate were evaluated. The conditions that were used for each elution method were determined from the optimal conditions found in literature ( It has been reported in the literature that thiourea dissolved in HCl solution, is the most effective medium for the stripping of palladium and platinum from adsorbents or ion exchange resins ( For thiocyanate elution, either ammonium thiocyanate or potassium thiocyanate can be used. This drop in pH during elution of resins that contain high amounts of iron and zinc, results in the formation of double-metal complexes that poison the resin and in the loss of cyanide due to the increased volatilization of HCN above pH Both Minix and Amberlite PWA5 were loaded with a solution that contained 10  The elution results for Minix and Amberlite PWA5 with acidic thiourea are shown in The elution profiles for Minix and Amberlite PWA5, eluted with potassium thiocyanate are shown in From The elution profiles for Minix and Amberlite PWA5 with zinc cyanide are shown in For the elution of Amberlite PWA5 using zinc cyanide, it can be seen from   From The ineffective elution of platinum cyanide from both Minix and Amberlite PWA5, with the use of acidic thiourea, can be explained by the reactivity of Pt(CN)  From  The effect of different parameters, such as eluant concentration, temperature and elution flow rate, with the three eluting agents was evaluated. The investigation was performed by changing only one parameter at a time, and keeping the other parameters constant. Amberlite PWA5 was the only resin used during the investigation. The average metal loading on Amberlite PWA5, is the same as shown in The effect of hydrochloric acid and thiourea concentration on the rate of platinum cyanide, palladium cyanide and aurocyanide elution are shown in No significant effect of the hydrochloric acid concentration on the elution efficiency of aurocyanide and palladium cyanide was observed at the specific conditions tested due to almost complete elution at all conditions. The thiourea concentration, however, did have an effect. 32% of aurocyanide and 25% of palladium cyanide eluted using a 0.1 Over the entire hydrochloric acid and thiourea concentration range investigated, no elution of platinum cyanide was observed. Thus, no further attempt was made to investigate the effect of temperature and elution flow rate on the elution of platinum cyanide with acidic thiourea. The effects of variations in the concentration of potassium thiocyanate, temperature and elution flow rate on the rate of platinum cyanide, palladium cyanide and aurocyanide elution, are shown in The elution efficiency of all metal cyanide complexes improved with increasing potassium thiocyanate concentration between 0.5 and 1 The elution temperature had little effect on the elution efficiency of aurocyanide, over the temperature range investigated. However, for palladium cyanide and platinum cyanide, an increase in temperature reduced the elution of both these complexes from Amberlite PWA5. The elution flow rate affected the elution of aurocyanide, with the highest elution of this complex achieved with a flow rate of 5 The effects of variations in the concentration of zinc cyanide, temperature and elution flow rate on the rate of platinum cyanide, palladium cyanide and aurocyanide elution, are shown in The elution efficiency of aurocyanide was improved with an increase in the zinc cyanide concentration over the entire range investigated. No general trend could be observed for the effect of zinc cyanide concentration on the elution of palladium and platinum cyanide, with both these complexes eluted to > The elution temperature did not affect the elution of all three metal cyanide complexes considerably. An improvement in the elution of aurocyanide (≈ Again, as with the potassium thiocyanate elution, an increase in flow rate from 5 BV/h to 20 BV/h resulted in a decrease in elution of aurocyanide from 55% to 42%. Elution flow rate had no significant effect on the elution of palladium cyanide and platinum cyanide, with > For the investigation in the presence of base metals, Amberlite PWA5, was loaded with a solution containing 5 The elution profiles for Amberlite PWA5 eluted with potassium thiocyanate and zinc cyanide are shown in From From The concentrations of metals in the eluates of Amberlite PWA5, eluted with potassium thiocyanate and zinc cyanide are shown in   In the case of both elution methods, no split elution alternative for the separation of platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide from the base metal cyanides was observed. The reason for this is the rapid elution of copper and iron cyanides relative to those of platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide. This study compared the elution performance of acidic thiourea, potassium thiocyanate and zinc cyanide, for the elution of platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide from strong base anion exchange resins. Effective elution of platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide could be achieved with the use of potassium thiocyanate and zinc cyanide. Acidic thiourea was found to be ineffective in eluting platinum cyanide from strong base resins, but could effectively elute palladium cyanide. It was concluded that a possible kinetic effect was imposed on the reaction between platinum cyanide and thiourea, by the acidic conditions of the eluant. The experimental findings revealed that the elution of platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide were faster and more complete from Amberlite PWA5, which contained tri-ethyl functional groups and an exchange capacity of 1.0 It was also found that the concentrations of the different eluants affected the elution of platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide from Amberlite PWA5 most significantly. The elution temperature and flow rate had no significant effect on the elution of these two complexes from Amberlite PWA5. The variations in the hydrochloric acid and thiourea concentrations proved ineffective in removing platinum cyanide from Amberlite PWA5, and thus no further effort was made to investigate the effect of temperature and flow rate on elution with acidic thiourea. Effective co-elution of the PGM-cyanides and base metals cyanides from Amberlite PWA5 could be achieved with the use of both potassium thiocyanate and zinc cyanide. The elution of both metal cyanide groups, however, proceeded rapidly, and no split elution alternative could be observed at the elution conditions investigated. However, split elution alternatives, such as acid washing, should be investigated to separate platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide from the base metal cyanides loaded on the resins. Overall, it can be concluded that platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide can be effectively eluted from the commercial strong base anion exchange resins, with the use of potassium thiocyanate and zinc cyanide. The financial support of