The assembly process of nanostructures plays a crucial role in controlling the morphology of nanomaterial in a microemulsion system. However, controlling the assembly process of nanostructures becomes complex and difficult, due to the multiple factors of microemulsion system. Herein, we report a facile synthesis of amorphous caddice-like silica NWs by a self-assembly process in an oil-in-water (O/W) microemulsion system. In our method, the mass ratio of tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) to dimethylbenzene (DMB) would directly control the morphologies of silica nanostructures. Interestingly, the proper low-concentration TEOS in oil phase favors the formation of silica NWs due to the self-assembly of nanosized oil droplets with silica porous shell, driving by the surface tension of oil droplets. The mean diameters of NWs could be slightly adjusted from 67nm to 82nm by prolonging reaction time. The as-obtained silica NWs exhibited an excellent adsorption capacity and rapid adsorption rate for methylene blue dye due to the negatively charged hydroxyl groups and high specific surface areas.Silica nanomaterials have attracted great interest because of their remarkable properties and widespread potential applications in scientific and technological fields Emulsion synthesis is a facile and mild solution-phase approach to prepare silica nanostructures This work reports a facile synthesis of amorphous caddice-like silica NWs by a self-assembly process in an oil-in-water (O/W) microemulsion system. In our method, the mass ratio of tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) to dimethylbenzene (DMB) of oil phase would directly determine the morphologies of silica nanostructures. Interestingly, the oil phase with proper low-concentration TEOS favours formation of silica nanowires through the self-assembly of nanosized oil droplets with silica porous shell, driving by the surface tension of oil droplets. The possible formation mechanism of silica NWs were hypothesized. In addition, the adsorption capacity and adsorption behavior of MB on silica NWs has been investigated and analyzed by adsorption kinetic models and isotherms models, respectively. All of chemical reagents were of analytical purity and purchased from the Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Company without further purification. Microemulsion system used in this experiment was reported in the published literature Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were recorded on a JEM-2100F microscope operating at 200 The batch equilibrium experiment was carried out by 30 In order to investigate the mechanism of adsorption, Lagergren pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order equation models were analyzed. The linearized form of pseudo-first-order equation is expressed as follows The equilibrium adsorption isotherm plays an important role in understanding the mechanism and process of adsorption. The Langmuir model assumes that adsorption process takes place at specific homogeneous sites, resulting in a monolayer adsorption processes. The Freundlich model is employed to describe heterogeneous system with multilayer surface phase. The linearized form of Langmuir model is presented by the following equation  To well understand the formation process of silica NWs, samples formed at different reaction times were examined by TEM technology ( In order to further investigate the formation process of silica NWs, the effect of mass ratio of TEOS to DMB on the morphology control was analyzed ( Aiming to clarify effects of the content of ammonia solution on the formation of silica NWs, different content of ammonia solution was used in synthesis of silica NWs (Fig. S3). When the content of ammonia solution was 20 Based on above results, a model for the formation process of silica NWs was proposed ( An assembly process of building blocks is actually a packing of building blocks. The driving force and shape of building blocks for the self-assembly process are two key factors that govern the self-assembly of building blocks substantially The formation of silica porous shell of oil droplets is another important factor for self-assembly process. In our experiments, the oil phase with high concentration of TEOS cannot be sufficiently dispersed and form micron-sized aggregates due to the instantly rapid formation of solid silica ( Based on proposed formation mechanism of silica NWs, the mean diameter of NWs is mainly depend on the size of oil droplets. According to our previous report The adsorption ability of the as-prepared silica NWs herein was tested by adsorption of methylene blue (MB) dye. The Lagergren pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order kinetic models were used to further investigate the kinetic behavior of the adsorption process The equilibrium adsorption isotherm played an important role in understanding the mechanism and process of adsorption MB is a basic cationic dye and can dissociate a positive ammonium cation in aqueous solution In summary, caddice-like silica NWs have been successfully synthesized through a self-assembly process in an oil-in-water microemulsion system. The mass ratio of TEOS to DMB of oil phase would directly control the morphologies of silica nanostructures. Interestingly, the oil phase with proper low-concentration TEOS favours formation of silica nanowires through the self-assembly of nanosized oil droplets with silica porous shell, driving by the surface tension of oil droplets. It is a key for forming oil droplets with silica porous shell to optimize the reaction rate by controlling reaction conditions. The mean diameters of NWs can be slightly adjusted from 67 This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: