Statement of problem
                  Radiotherapy results in diminished bone remodeling capacity and an elevated risk of osteoradionecrosis, which can negatively influence the survival rate of dental implants. Patients receiving radiotherapy are advised not to receive dental implants during or soon after completing their radiotherapy.
               
                  Purpose
                  The purpose of this animal study was to investigate a 2-stage implant placement technique designed to diminish applied trauma on irradiated bone.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Two groups of white New Zealand rabbits received radiotherapy in ascending doses (2, 4, 8 Gy), while a nonirradiated group served as control. Three weeks after completion of the last radiotherapy session, one of the irradiated groups and the control group received titanium dental implants bilaterally in the femur head. For the second irradiated group, an osteotomy was performed, and the surgical wound was left to heal for 2 weeks before implant placement. All animals were sacrificed 4 weeks after implant placement, and histomorphometric analysis was used to study bone-implant contact (n=14, α=.05).
               
                  Results
                  Statistical analysis revealed significantly higher (F=159, P<.001) bone-implant contact in the 2-stage (40.2 ±1.9) implant placement technique than in the immediately placed implants (21.2 ±2.3) in irradiated bone. Both of the groups had a significantly lower bone-to-implant contact ratio than the non-irradiated control (64.2 ±3.8).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Within the limitations of this animal study, the 2-stage implant placement technique could be used to reduce trauma in irradiated bone and to improve wound healing around dental implants. The success rate of dental implants inserted in patients receiving radiotherapy could be improved by using the 2-stage implant placement technique. Irradiation of the maxilla and mandible is known to damage osteoblasts and osteoclasts, hindering the mineralization process and reducing its healing and remodeling capacity. Similar findings have been reported in animal studies, as inferior bone quality was observed around implants inserted in irradiated bone (roughly one-third) and that the notable incidence of fibrous integration was 7-fold higher. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of the 2-stage implant placement technique on the osseointegration of implants inserted in an irradiated animal model. The null hypothesis was that this technique would not improve osseointegration compared with the 1-stage technique. The experimental animal protocol was approved by the ethics committee, Faculty of Dentistry, Alexandria University, Egypt, and by the animal welfare association. The study included 21 adult male white New Zealand rabbits of average weight (4.0 to 5.0 kg) at an average age of 6 months. The animals were housed separately in properly ventilated stainless steel compartments and had direct access to water and diet. Room temperature was maintained at 24 ±4°C with a 12-hour illumination time. The animals were divided into 3 groups: 2 groups received a radiotherapeutic protocol composed of 3 single doses of 2, 4, and 8 Gy of gamma radiation, delivered to the femur head bilaterally at a rate of 0.83 Gy/minute, using a linear accelerator medical device (Mobetron; Intraop). The source-bone distance was maintained at 80 cm, and the field size was limited to 5×5 cm. A protective shield was placed on the remainder of the rabbit’s body, which was maintained under sedation by using the protocol described subsequently. Nonirradiated rabbits served as controls. All surgical procedures were performed by an experienced surgeon (M.N.A.) under sterile conditions in a veterinary operating theater. General anesthesia was induced by intramuscular injection (solution of ketamine, 35 mg/kg, and zylazine, 5 mg/kg). Local anesthesia (lidocaine 2% plus 1 mL of 1:100 After 2 weeks, the surgical site of the 2-stage implant placement group was re-exposed, the protective membrane was removed, and curettage was performed to remove the blood clot from the drilling site. After debridement, the implants were screwed with minimal trauma. The surgical wound was closed in the same manner, and the animals were subjected to the same postsurgical recovery protocol. After 4 weeks, all animals were sacrificed using a lethal dose of sodium pentobarbital (100 mg/kg). For histomorphometric analysis, the blocks were immediately fixed in 4% buffered formaldehyde and then dehydrated in graded ethanol solutions. The specimens were then defatted by immersion in xylene and embedded in pure transparent chemically polymerized methyl methacrylate resin (methyl methacrylate 99%; Sigma-Aldrich). After 3 days of polymerization time, the specimens were cut along the long axis of the implants, using a diamond-coated saw attached to a precision cutting device (Micracut 150 precision cutter; Metkon). Cut sections were polished using 800-, 1000-, and 1200-grit silicon carbide paper and stained using Stevenel Blue and Van Gieson stains. Digital images were made using stereomicroscopy (Olympus BX 61; Olympus Corp), equipped with a high-resolution camera (E330; Olympus Corp). The histomorphometric analysis was performed by an experienced examiner (M.A.A.) using image analysis software (Olympus CellM&CellR, v3.3; Olympus Soft Imaging Solutions). The perimeter of the implant was traced using the automatic tracing option of the software, and the amount of mature bone, stained red, which made direct contact with implant surface was manually traced. The bone-implant contact ratio was measured as the ratio of direct bone contact in relationship to the total implant perimeter. This process was performed within and outside the implant threads. Examiner reliability was determined by re-evaluating randomly selected digital images. All images were given a number and a computer software randomly selected images of each test group. The collected data were expressed as mean and standard deviation and were analyzed with software (SPSS Statistics v15.0; SPSS Inc) using 1-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Bonferroni post hoc tests for pair-wise comparisons (n=14, α=.05). The interexaminer reliability of 0.85 to 0.90 indicated the accurate interpretation of collected images. All inserted implants achieved observable initial stability without signs of infection or inflammation. Statistical analysis revealed significantly higher (F=159, Histomorphometric analysis revealed that the bone-implant contact between threads and outside threads was significantly diminished in implants placed immediately in irradiated bone ( Unlike other tissues, bone is characterized by a remarkable capacity to regenerate and organize. Stramandinoli-Zanicotti et al Radiation is known to reduce the number of osteogenic cells, reduce the cytokine capacity (TGF-β1), and hinder the remodeling capacity of bone. The theory investigated in this study was to decrease the amount of imposed trauma upon irradiated bone caused by sequential osteotomy and final compression of the inserted implant by giving the osteotomy site some recovery time followed by insertion of the implant in an already healing socket. The 2-stage placement technique was associated with higher bone-implant contact ratio than the conventional technique. An important observation was the absence of inflammatory cellular infiltration, indicating the proper recovery of bone ( Within the limitations of this animal study, the 2-stage implant placement technique improved the outcome of implants inserted in irradiated bone.