Calibre rolling of Mg–3Al–1Zn alloy at 300 °C led to development of fine grain size of 3 µm. Subsequent annealing, from 5 to 6000 minutes at 300–450 °C, revealed faster grain growth initially up to 60 minutes, which became sluggish on prolonged annealing. The time exponent for grain growth kinetics (n) suggests bi-linear behaviour with n = 0.11 and 0.008 over these time scales. The activation energy, based on various n values, varied over wide ranges that made the understanding of the mechanisms for grain growth difficult. This problem is explained by concurrent evolution of texture and grain boundary structure. The effect of grain growth on hardness at ambient temperature was found to follow the H–P type relationship.Annealing temperatures Isothermal annealing time Grain size (after annealing) Initial grain size Yield strength Rate constant Growth law index (time exponent) Grain boundary migration rate Driving force Intrinsic mobility of a boundary in the pure material Time at which grain growth would have started on completion of recrystallisation Activation energy for grain growth The Hall–Petch constants Magnesium is available abundantly in the nature and, owing to high specific strength, its alloys are becoming popular in aerospace, automobile, biomedical, architecture and electronic industries The plastic deformation distorts the microstructure, and it causes the thermodynamically unstable state by introducing dislocations and other defects, which leads to increase in stored energy. This energy tends to revert to a stable state on subsequent annealing. This process of annealing results in three phenomena: recovery, recrystallization and grain growth Mg-alloy AZ31B in the form of rolled plate of 50 mm thickness and having chemical composition (wt %): Mg–Al 3.0, Zn 1.0 and Mn 0.2 was used. The calibre rolling was carried out at a temperature of 300 °C to 12 × 12 mm The samples of 10 × 5 × 5 mm Metallographic specimen was prepared as per the ASTM The microhardness measurement was carried out before and after annealing for all the specimens. The machine used was LM300AT, LECO make. The weight used was 15 gm and dwell time was kept at 15 seconds. Yield strength ( The microstructure of the as received plate, as shown in For all the conditions of temperature and time employed for annealing the microstructures remained equiaxed, but with the increased grain sizes. The evolved grain size will be called as The hardness measured as a function of annealing time at different temperatures is plotted in As plotted in Normal grain growth data can usually be fitted to an equation of the form: If the measured growth law index is  The Lücke–Detert theory The Gordon and Vandermeer theory The Cahn and Lücke–Stüwe theory The addition of solute, even in the parts per million ranges, was observed to reduce boundary mobility drastically. It is also a common observation that the addition of a small amount of solute increases the measured activation energy for boundary migration to higher values; sometimes much larger than for any identifiable atomistic process. Rath and Hu The initial grain size This relationship can be used to measure the activation energy for grain growth (Q) accurately. The difference ( There exist very few studies on annealing of Mg-alloy AZ31 upon processing by various methods of plastic deformation, as summarised in As pointed out earlier for the variation in The grain size ( Following the relationship between yield strength and hardness, viz. Eq. Similar plots were considered for grain sizes obtained at annealing temperatures of 300, 350, 400 and 450 °C individually, and the Hall–Petch constants A close examination of the values of Grain refinement in Mg–3Al–1Zn alloy was achieved from 33 µm in as-mill rolled state to 3 µm upon calibre rolling of about 76% at 300 °C. Annealing of these samples for 5–6000 minutes at 300–450 °C and analyzing the grain growth along with its effect on hardness, at room temperature, leads to the following conclusions: Grain growth occurs from initial grain size of 3 µm up to 20 µm and is faster initially up to 60 minutes, but then becomes sluggish at longer annealing time. The grain growth kinetics law reveals two values of growth law index with The activation energy Micro-hardness varies as a function of grain size following the Hall–Petch type relationship with the equivalent H–P parameters We express our thanks to Dept. of Metallurgy, Government Polytechnic Kolhapur, for providing the testing facility.