Published by Cambridge International Science Publishing Limited in association with Woodhead Publishing Limited Cambridge International Science Publishing Limited, 7 Meadow Walk, Great Abington, Cambridge CB21 6AZ, England  Woodhead Publishing Limited, Abington Hall, Granta Park, Great Abington, Cambridge CB21 6AH, England  Published in North America by CRC Press LLC, 6000 Broken Sound Parkway, NW, Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487, USA First published 2008, Cambridge International Science Publishing Ltd, Woodhead Publishing Limited and CRC Press LLC © 2008, Cambridge International Science Publishing Limited The authors have asserted their moral rights. This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reprinted material is quoted with permission, and sources are indicated. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the authors and the publishers cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials. Neither the authors nor the publishers, nor anyone else associated with this publication, shall be liable for any loss, damage or liability directly or indirectly caused or alleged to be caused by this book. Neither this book nor any part may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, microfilming and recording, or by any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from Cambridge International Science Publishing Limited and Woodhead Publishing Limited. The consent of Cambridge International Science Publishing Limited and Woodhead Publishing Limited does not extend to copying for general distribution, for promotion, for creating new works, or for resale. Specific permission must be obtained in writing from either Cambridge International Science Publishing Limited or Woodhead Publishing Limited for such copying. Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation, without intent to infringe. British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress. Woodhead Publishing ISBN 978-1-84569-407-4 (book) Woodhead Publishing ISBN 978-1-84569-461-6 (e-book) CRC Press ISBN 978-1-4200-7044-6 CRC Press order number: WP7044 The publishers’ policy is to use permanent paper from mills that operate a sustainable forestry policy, and which has been manufactured from pulp which is processed using acidfree and elementary chlorine-free practices. Furthermore, the publishers ensure that the text paper and cover board used have met acceptable environmental accreditation standards. English translation by Cambridge International Science Publishing Ltd Typeset by Thymus Solutions Ltd, Mumbai, India Printed by TJ International Limited, Padstow, Cornwall, England