Spinel lithium manganese oxides (LMOs) are the most effective lithium adsorbent for the recovery of lithium from an aqueous solution with high selectivity. Developing a systematic method to apply LMOs powder will have a profound impact on the effective and practical process of lithium recovery. We previously fabricated a reservoir system in which the LMO powder was packed in the inside of fabric membrane and then tested by dipping it in an aqueous solution. However, this method exhibited lower adsorption capacity compared with that of LMO powder by stirring in an aqueous solution. Here, we demonstrate a new method to selectively recover lithium from an aqueous solution through an integration of several columns filled with LMO powder. Briefly, our system comprises a series of columns equipped with fabric filters that accumulate LMO powder onto the fabric membrane in which the aqueous solution containing Li+ ion is introduced into the system by applying pressure. We report that the multi-stage column (MSC) uniformly packed with LMOs exhibited higher adsorption capacity (30.7mg·g−1) compared with that (12.3mg·g−1) of a reservoir system at a lithium concentration of 30mg·L−1. To confirm the feasibility of the multi-stage column (MSC), we also tested it to the recovery of lithium from Salt Lake, which was artificially manufactured.Lithium resources are the raw materials for various industry-related products, such as cathode materials for rechargeable batteries, light aircraft alloys, catalyst, and nuclear fusion fuel, which play a significant role in the growth of the economy. Recently, the demand for lithium has been accelerated due to the rapid growth of the worldwide lithium battery market ( There are several methods, such as adsorption, solvent extraction, and coprecipitation, to extract lithium from seawater, brine, and geothermal water ( A number of researchers have recently reported the fabrication of spinel-type lithium manganese oxides (LMOs), such as LiMn In this study, we present a new process using a multi-stage column (MSC) for the highly efficient recovery of lithium from an aqueous solution. Our approach was based on the integration of multiple columns that contain LMO powder onto the filter membrane and manipulation of the flow of aqueous solution as a function of the applied pressure. In addition, this paper describes details of the column design and the effect of controllable pressure for the supplied aqueous solution into the system, as well as the application of LMO powder using the MSC to the recovery of lithium from artificially manufactured Salt Lake. The application of LMO powder using the MSC resulted in dramatic enhancement of the adsorption capacity of lithium from the aqueous solution without recovery difficulty of LMO powder after the end of process. Spinel type lithium manganese oxide was synthesized via a solid state reaction using Li  The experiment was conducted using the following four steps. In the first step, LMO powder was packed inside the column by circulating the solution of LMO powder and distilled water using the diaphragm pump. In the second step, 0.5 The influent solution flowed into the channel of each spacing PE plate to uniformly pack LMO powder onto the fabric filter of the multi-stage column (MSC) and then was discharged through the multiple channels of the MSC so that the pressure that could be caused from the fabric filters of the column was minimized. The adsorption reaction of lithium adsorbent was investigated using 30 The lithium adsorption capacity ( LMO powder was prepared via a solid state reaction at 500 Prior to the adsorption experiment, the LMO powder packed onto the filter membrane of the column was treated by circulating 0.5 Two kinetic models were applied to understand the phenomena of Li Pseudo second-order model: Intra-particle diffusion model: The pseudo second-order model assumes that the rate-limiting step in the adsorption reaction could be chemical sorption or chemisorption involving valence forces through the sharing or exchange of electrons between the sorbent and sorbate ( We applied this process to recover lithium from an aqueous solution containing various ions, such as Li From the results, the MSC tested in this work showed increased adsorption capacity and faster adsorption rate of LMO powder by introducing the compressed aqueous solution into the system. Although the reservoir system manipulates the use of adsorbent powder without the formation using binders, the limited flow of aqueous solution onto the adsorbent powder reduced the adsorption efficiency. The feasibility of MSC to recover lithium from aqueous solution containing various ions was confirmed, which can be potential process for the recovery of lithium. In this work, we proposed a multi-stage column (MSC) system for the lithium recovery process using a LMO powder. To solve the problem of the difficult recovery of powder-type adsorbents and improve the recovery process of such adsorbents, the following improvements were implemented: adsorbent powder was packed inside a MSC equipped with a fabric filter and a compressed aqueous solution was supplied into the system. An adsorption test of the MSC was conducted to examine the pressure effect of the compressed aqueous solution in the system on the adsorption capacity and the adsorption rate compared with those of the reservoir system. The results demonstrated that the adsorbed Li This research was supported by the national research project entitled “The Development of Technology for Extraction of Resources Dissolved in Seawater” of the Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources (KIGAM), funded by the