A process for the recovery of silver present in processed radiographic films is described. It is based on heating the films with oxalic acid solution to boiling temperature to separate the inorganic component from the polymer substrate. Recovery of silver is achieved by melting. The process recovers good quality silver and offers a very high yield. The process can be scaled up to small pilot plant.India is ranked as the third largest country in the world for the use of silver The ever-growing ecological considerations and stringent laws are driving the whole world to a system of increased recovery, regeneration and recycling of industrial wastes. Moreover, the principle focus of recycling effort has been post-consumer products. Industries constitute a formidable source of pollution and radiographic industries produce large amounts of solid and liquid wastes. The wastes consist primarily of two components—organic and inorganic that make regeneration and/or recycling worthwhile. Organic wastes can be further categorised into small molecules such as hydroquinone and large molecules consisting of polymer substrate. The inorganic component consists of metallic and non-metallic parts; the latter comprises mainly fixer and bleach solution containing high concentrations of sulphates and nitrates. The metallic part consists of silver, the recovery of which is of paramount importance. A large number of publications report the recovery of silver from liquid waste The first step is commonly leaching which may be either chemical The processed radiographic films (with an average content of 10 g of silver/kg) were procured from B.M. Hospital, Mysore and cut into small pieces. Oxalic acid used was of commercial grade. The film pieces (200 g) were boiled with 500 mL of 1% (w/v) oxalic acid solution for about 5 min at boiling temperature of about 97 °C. The completion of the peeling process is indicated by the disappearance of the black colour of the film and appearance of clear blue of the polyester or triacetate film. The sludge was separated by filtration, dried and further subjected to melting to recover pure silver. The determination of the silver content of the processed radiographic films was carried out by dissolving the sludge in hot 1:1 (v/v) sulphuric acid. The resultant Ag The effect of oxalic acid concentration on the peeling process of inorganic component from the processed X-ray films was studied. The time needed for the peeling process can be reduced by increasing the concentration of oxalic acid. From the results, we observed that the peeling time is shortened from 5 to 1 min when the concentration of oxalic acid was increased from 1% (w/v) to 10% (w/v). The time needed for the peeling process increases with increasing quantity of the processed film in a fixed volume of 100 mL of 10% (w/v) of oxalic acid solution, i.e., 1 min (25 g) to 10 min (250 g) at boiling temperature (≅97 °C) with occasional stirring. The temperature has profound influence on the peeling process and temperature above 80 °C (6-min peeling time) is required. Reliability of the data depends upon the reproducibility. Hence replicates ( The process has been scaled up in a small pilot plant consisting of a 100-L stainless steel vessel fitted with electrical coils to maintain ≅97 °C. At the bottom of the vessel, a mesh was provided to hold the films to be treated; stirring was by injection of air. A hoisting apparatus raises the film residue once the treatment was finished, allowing the inorganic sediment to settle. The sediment was rinsed with water, filtered and transferred to a crucible. The treatment time (5 min) of the pilot plant was in conformity with that observed in the laboratory. For an understanding as to whether the proposed method is economically and technically feasible, the following studies were carried out and the results are presented below. First, the consumption of oxalic acid was less than 1 g/kg of the film. Second, the leaching solution, oxalic acid can be used repeatedly. For this, 30 replicates each with 100 g of radiographic film was carried out in our laboratory. Third, the concentration of oxalic acid was periodically determined by simple volumetric procedure Considering these, a low concentration of 1% (w/v) oxalic acid with a treatment time of 5 min is preferred to a higher concentration of 10% (w/v) oxalic acid solution with 1-min process time. Sixth, there is a risk of danger in the formation of silver oxalate, which is explosive. However, in the laboratory and pilot scale, we did not observe the formation of any amount of silver oxalate. The recovery of silver from processed radiographic films can be easily carried out by treatment with oxalic acid solution. It is a low cost reagent, the process is simple and the consumption is low. Oxalic acid is harmful, but less toxic than sodium cyanide and nitric acid, which are commonly used for silver recovery. Further, the degradation products of oxalic acid—CO One of the authors (S. Suresha) is thankful to the University of Mysore, Mysore for the award of a Senior Research Fellowship.