Rock mechanics always develops with improvement of rock testing technique, especially the improvement of rock testing machines. The latter has been gradually separated from material mechanics and has evolved to an independent subject. In early stages of its development, rock testing was carried out by ordinary material testing machines. Then, the discovery of the principles of stiff testing machine The rapid growth of deep resources and energy exploitation is greatly relying on the knowledge of the mechanical properties of deep rock The testing machine XPS-20 The maximum axial load is 10,000 The high-temperature triaxial pressure chamber has a high-precision control, of which the temperature sensitivity is less than 0.3%. Stress, deformation, pore pressure of inlet and outlet, temperature, torque and other parameters can be recorded automatically. The stiffness of the whole machine is greater than 9×10 The testing machine consists of four parts: host loading system, high-temperature triaxial pressure chamber with temperature controlling system, auxiliary installing system, and testing system. The host loading system is the force source of the testing machine. The high-temperature triaxial pressure chamber with temperature controlling system is used for holding pressuring and heating the specimen. The auxiliary installing system is specifically designed for installing coal (rock) specimens in the high-temperature triaxial pressure chamber. The testing system can measure the temperature, pressure, deformation, permeability and acoustic emission, etc. of coal (rock) specimens. The host loading system consists of the following three parts: (1) The host framework consists of four-vertical columns with “bottom-push style”, i.e., the piston moves upwards to press the specimen. Its vertical and lateral forces can both reach 10,000 (2) The hydraulic pressure system is the power source of the host machine. The pressure is generated by three hydraulic pumps. The working pressure of the pump station is 25 (3) The main console controls the movements of the host system. Its operation is fulfilled through a computer combined with a control panel. Incremental loading process is controlled using a computer program; while the adjustment of the presser and the movements of the material holding cylinder are controlled by the control panel. Axial and lateral loads are applied separately. The loading methods include constant load, constant load rate, constant displacement, constant displacement rate, saw tooth wave load, etc. The high-temperature triaxial pressure chamber is not only a core component of the testing machine but also an important component producing the required temperature and pressure in the entire experiment. It is a thick-walled cylinder made of thermoplastic die steel (H13). The phase transition temperature of the cylinder is 800 The heating, temperature adjustment and temperature measurements in the high-temperature triaxial pressure chamber are implemented by the temperature-controlled cabinet. The operation diagram of the high-temperature triaxial pressure chamber is shown in The high temperature triaxial pressure chamber is heated using direct current that is generated by 380 The auxiliary installing system is designed for setting up coal (rock) specimens. The designed maximum force is 2000 The deformation of a specimen can be calculated by measuring the positions of the axial and lateral presser. The measuring instrument is a grating ruler. The measuring precision is ±0.005 The specimen load is calculated by the pressures converted from hydraulic pressures measured at the upper and lower chambers of the hydraulic cylinders with pressure gauges. The surface temperature of a specimen is measured by three thermocouples deployed with 120° between each other at the upper, middle and lower parts of the circumference near the specimen. In order to increase measurement accuracy and reliability, an additional thermocouple is placed at the middle part of the specimen galvanic symmetrically. The real-time data of the thermometers can be transferred to a computer through the communication port. Based on the temperature value set in one of the four thermometers, the temperature in the heat stress chamber can be controlled automatically by the temperature-controlled cabinet. The permeability-measuring instrument consists of inflatable tools, high-pressure gas cylinders and flow meters, etc. The medium used for testing is nitrogen (N An AE-04 four-channel acoustic emission detection system is used. Its preamplifier gain is 40 The appropriate heating element and heating mode can generate temperature environmental in the high-temperature triaxial pressure chamber. The carbon fiber tape used at early heating stage is found to be easy to burn and break, so it is substituted by the alloy resistance film. The alloy resistance film has the following advantages: (1) a wide range of elongation and tensile resistance capacity; (2) longer usage duration; and (3) high temperature durability. The alloy resistance films can produce nearly uniform temperature distributions around the specimen. We changed the distribution of the heating power of the varistor by thickening the varistor in appropriate part of the sample and changing the resistance distribution of the varistor winding around the specimen to produce a uniform temperature field [ The alloy resistance used is nickel-chromium alloy film named Ni80Cr20. It has good deformation characteristics, thermal stability and mechanical strength. It also has advantages such as better seismic and antioxidant capacity in thermal states. It has been widely used for electric heating and heat treatment in chemical industry, machinery, metallurgy, national defense and other industries. Its main technical parameters include maximum temperature of 1100 In the development of this machine, the insulation and sealing between the upper part of the high-temperature pressure chamber and the upper presser of the test machine, the insulation and sealing between the axial presser at the lower part of pressure chamber and the axial presser of testing machine and those between H13 pressers above the specimen in the pressure chamber are important not only for the safe operation of the apparatus, but also for determining the accuracy and reliability of the experimental results. The materials for sealing and insulating are required to have highly stable performance at the conditions of high pressure and temperature. A layer of high temperature insulation pads is placed in the gap between the high-temperature pressure chamber and the platform underneath it. A layer of asbestos or mica plate is placed between the upper part of the high temperature and pressure chamber and the upper presser of the testing machine. Insulating plastic cast for high temperature is pasted around the ventilation (water) hole on the upper presser of the host machine play a role in sealing and insulating. To prevent the leakage of N Similarly, a seal groove plus copper pad are used to seal between two H13 pressers above the specimen in the pressure chamber. The coal specimens tested are taken from three gas coal seams in Xinglongzhuang Coal Mine in Yanzhou, China. Large lump coal samples were cut from mining face of 500  It should also be pointed out that the compression of the H13 presser at 600   For each temperature, upon completion of the thermal decomposition reaction, additional axial load was applied to the sample and the corresponding deformation was measured. Young’s modulus at that temperature is then calculated based on the observed stress–strain curve. When the sample temperature is higher than 300 The calculation of Young’s modulus is described as follows. In cylindrical coordinate system, the stresses are expressed as: The granite sample, Luhui Granite, was collected from Pingyi in Shandong Province in China. The collected lump granite sample was cut into a cylindrical blank. Then it was refined to meet the experimental requirements. The processed granite specimen was a gray, dense and crack-free cylinder with the diameter of 200.3 At all-around hydrostatic pressure of 25 In comparison with the linear expansion coefficient and temperature of the granite presented by Xu and Yu in The maximum of the thermal expansion coefficient of the Luhui granite occurred at 460 Our test results show that under stresses corresponding to about 1000     The performance and technological innovations of a self-developed 20 This paper also presents the test results of coal specimens at high temperature and high pressure. The tests revealed the stress–strain characteristics of the coal specimens at high temperature, particularly the enhanced plastic features. Young’s modulus decreases in a negative exponential function in regarding to the temperature. Test results revealing the thermal deformation and failure mode of the large-size granite specimens at high temperature and high pressure, and the changing of the thermodynamic parameters of the specimen, such as Young’s modulus, with temperature, are also presented as examples of tests carried out using the testing machine. The following findings are drawn from the test results: (1) The “X" shape fractures during failure of the granite specimen at high temperature and high pressure indicate a shear failure; (2) The linear thermal expansion coefficient of granite increases with temperature while its Young’s modulus decreases with the temperature. The elasticity modulus decreases with the temperature in an exponential function with the temperature.