In this study, copper and nickel in ammoniacal/ammonium chloride solutions were separated by using an extractant mixture of Acorga M5640 and trialkylphosphine oxide (TRPO). The effects of contact time, Acorga M5640 concentration, modifier concentration, total ammonia concentration, and phase ratio on the extraction and separation of both metals were determined. The addition of TRPO into Acorga M5640 organic phase exerted antagonistic effects on copper and nickel extractions. The antagonistic effect of the extractant mixture was significantly stronger on the extraction of nickel than on that of copper. More than 99.96% of copper and less than 6.6% of nickel were extracted using a mixture of 10vol.% Acorga M5640 and 2vol.% TRPO in kerosene from an ammoniacal solution initially containing 3.0g/L each of copper and nickel under optimal extraction conditions. The separation factor of copper over nickel reached 35,250.The associated metals copper and nickel in oxidized ores, ocean manganese nodules, or other secondary materials are normally leached using ammoniacal solutions as their ammine complexes ( The chelating extractant M5640 is a salicylaldoxime derivative commercially used to extract copper in both acidic and alkaline media; this extractant is superior to other copper extractants because it has higher selectivity toward copper than iron and readily allows stripping ( The extractant M5640 was received from Cognis Co., Ltd. TRPO (a mixture of C An ammoniacal solution containing copper and nickel was prepared by dissolving copper chloride and nickel chloride in ammoniacal/ammonium chloride solutions. The concentration of both Cu(II) and Ni(II) in the solution was maintained at 3.0 In the extraction experiments, 10.0 The effect of different contact time (0.5 The effect of M5640 concentration varying from 0 to 20 The effects of different concentrations (0 to 10 The effect of different total ammonia concentration ([NH Different ores can produce different metals content. Therefore, it is essentially to evaluate the effect of initial concentration ratio of copper to nickel in aqueous solutions, and the results are presented in The effect of different phase ratios on the extraction and separation of copper and nickel from the ammoniacal solutions containing 3.0 The equilibrium isotherm for copper extraction ( The extraction and separation of copper and nickel from ammoniacal/ammonium chloride solutions were studied using a mixture of M5640 and TRPO. The extraction kinetics of copper were faster than that of nickel. The mixed extractant exhibited significant antagonistic effects on the extraction of copper and nickel, especially on that of the latter. The separation factor of copper over nickel increased from 4812 in absence of TRPO to 35,250 with the addition of 2 The authors gratefully acknowledge financial supports from the