The mechanism and kinetics of the carbothermic reduction of a natural chromite was studied at 1300–1500°C in the presence of silica. Thermogravimetry, X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDAX) and metallography were the experimental techniques used. Silica affected the reduction at and above 1400°C. A two stage reduction mechanism was established. The first stage, up to about 40% reduction, is primarily limited to iron metallization and zoning is observed in partially reduced chromites. In this stage silica does not interfere with the reduction. The second stage is mainly confined to chromium metallization and formation of a silicate slag alters the reduction mechanism. Ion-exchange reactions between the reducible cations (Cr3+ and Fe2+) in the spinel and the dissolved cations (A13+ and Mg2+) in the slag allow further reduction. Due to the very high driving force for the diffusion, the overall process is shifted toward a more chemical reaction controlled mechanism. A generalized rate equation was then applied to the individual metallization curves of iron and chromium from which respective rate constants and diffusion coefficients were derived. The rate constants were in the range 6.74×10−4–9.01×10−4
                     s−1 for iron and 7.20×10−4–8.50×10−4
                     s−1 for chromium reduction at 1500°C in the presence of silica. At 1500°C, the corresponding diffusion coefficients were in the range 3.14×10−8–4.78×10−8
                     m2/s for Fe2+ diffusion in the spinel and in the range 1.70×10−8–2.03×10−8
                     m2/s for the respective diffusion of Cr3+. Finally using Arrhenius plots activation energies were derived.Ferrochromium is one of the most important alloying materials used in the production of stainless and high-alloy ferritic steels. At present, high-carbon ferrochromium is produced in submerged-arc furnaces. Disadvantages of this process are the limited use of chrome ore fines and friable chrome ores and the fact that more than two-thirds of the total electrical energy consumption (4000–4200 The solid-state carbothermic reduction mechanism and kinetics of a natural chromite from the LG-6 layer (the sixth layer of the lower group of chromite seams) of the Bushveld complex of South Africa has been investigated in some detail: the most significant results at temperatures of about 1400 Information on the enhancement of chromite reduction in the presence of fluxes is very limited. It was shown ( Because satisfactory information on silica-fluxed reduction of chromite is lacking, this study was undertaken to investigate the reduction of LG-6 chromite by graphite in the presence of silica. The details of the mechanism of reduction of LG-6 chromites in the presence of silica was published earlier ( The second stage was primarily confined to chromium metallization, and formation of a silicate slag altered the mechanism. The slag phase agglomerated and even embedded partially reduced chromite particles. An ion-exchange reaction between the reducible cations (Cr The chromite ore used in this study was from the LG-6 layer of the Bushveld Complex. The ore was washed and tabled to separate any gangue material. The chemical composition of the chromite after washing and tabling is shown in Powdered spectroscopic graphite of very fine particle size (38 The reduction experiments were carried out in a molybdenum wound furnace surrounding a thermogravimetric system supported from bottom. Details of the experimental set-up and procedures are available elsewhere ( Only the chromium and iron oxides were regarded as the reducible components of the spinel. After each reduction test, three representative samples of the reaction products were split off by the use of a riffle. The first was analyzed by XRD techniques to determine the phase changes occurring within the chromite particle with increasing degree of reduction. Chemical analyses were performed on the second sample to determine the individual iron and chromium metallizations. The third sample was mounted, polished and submitted for EDAX in order to determine the concentration profiles for chromium, iron, magnesium, aluminum and titanium across a particle. Furthermore, by assuming that the stoichiometric spinel structure was maintained throughout the reduction ( The kinetic curves for chromite samples, obtained from weight loss measurements using the TGA system, appeared to exceed 100%, in particular at higher temperatures and small particle sizes. This was due to partial vaporization and reduction of oxides such as MgO, Al As mentioned earlier above, the effect of silica addition on reduction of chromite at 1300 The disadvantage of the reduction versus time curves is that they only represent the simultaneous reduction of both iron and chromium. For further analysis individual iron and chromium metallization versus time curves have been established by halting the experimental reductions at different retention times, and chemically analyzing the reaction products. The degree of metallization was thus calculated using the following equation. The results of the investigation by electron microscope analysis, SEM–EDAX, and XRD, as well as the full details of the reduction mechanism with its relevant discussions and justifications have been given elsewhere ( From SEM–EDAX studies of the present work ( Again from SEM–EDAX investigations and individual metallization curves, it was firmly concluded that silica addition mainly affected chromium metallization. It was shown that ( Consequently the kinetics of chromite reduction, with regard to the individual metallization was considered as mixed controlled, not only the solid-state diffusion of the respective species through the product layer, but also the interfacial chemical reaction between the respective oxides and the reducing gas are rate limiting. Thus it was decided to develop a generalized rate equation for the individual iron and chromium reductions. The experimentally determined metallization curves represent the following: The generalized rate equation expressed as:     The conversion function for chemical reaction controlled process where particles are assumed spherical is expressed simply as: In Eq. Using the relationship: Excellent agreement of experimental and calculated values could be achieved with correlation coefficients between 0.98 and 0.99. An initial slight deviation between model and calculated data was primarily due to the fact that during experiments some time is necessary to adjust to a constant temperature and atmosphere. At the initial stages the reduction appears to be more chemical reaction controlled. The slight deviations at the later stages of reduction were due to the fact that complete reduction was not always achieved during experiments and that at the final stages a change in the particle size occurred. The rate constants were in the range 6.74 It is thus evident that adding silica at higher temperatures results in a reduction rate much less controlled by diffusion but dominated by chemical reaction rate. Finally using Arrhenius plots of the type log The The mechanism and kinetics of the carbothermic reduction of chromite was studied at 1300–1500 Activation energies derived from Arrhenius plot were 61.4