The silica sand used in the study consists of poorly sorted angular grains of clear quartz loosely cemented together by kaolinite clay. Lances of high-grade kaolinite were also present in the ore body. A large portion of silica is produced in the USA, the UK, France, and Canada using a process described in this chapter depending on impurities present in the ore body.Introduction Silica sand deposits Beneficiation of silica sand Introduction Process used in beneficiation of silica sand Attrition scrubbing washing method Production of high-grade silicate using leaching process Attrition scrubbing flotation Beneficiation of silica sand that contains various impurities—three stage flotation method Beneficiation of silica–kaolin sand Chemical analyses of pure silica sand used for various applications References Silica is an important product in industrial minerals. Silica has many industrial applications in abrasives and polishes; in glass manufacturing, fillers and extenders, silica brick manufacturing as a catalyst; in specialty coatings, cleaners ceramics, electronics optics, and refractories; in ferro-silicon manufacturing and rubber. Processing of silica of specific quality yields several types of specialty silicates. These include: (1) colloidal, (2) fumed, (3) fused, (4) high-purity ground silica, (5) silica gel, and (6) precipitated silica. Colloidal silica is mainly used as a high-temperature binder for silicon wafer, polishing, and precipitated silica. Fused silica is produced by fusion of very high-quality silica sand feedstock in electric arc and resistance furnaces. This converted silica can be used as a filler or electronic encapsulant. High-purity ground silica is a product from silica sand or soft friable rocks as an amorphous silica. It is mainly used in specialty, coating, plastics, rubber, electronics abrasives, and optics. Beneficiation of silica-containing ores depends on the type of ore. Silica sand for example, low in iron, is much in demand, for glass, ceramics, and pottery use. There are a number of different silica deposits that are used in the production of a high-silica product (i.e., over 99% SiO Quartz veins: these deposits are extremely high-grade containing white silica crystals. These deposits occur in eastern Canada and in some places in the USA. Quartzite is a metamorphosed sandstone made up chiefly of quartz sand united by a siliceous cement forming low-porosity rock. Quartzite varies from white to gray and sometimes brown, red, or yellow due to the presence of small amounts of impurities. Some of quartzite deposits may contain up to 99% SiO Sandstone deposits: these deposits contain significant amounts of impurities, i.e., Fe A large portion of silica is produced from quartz veins and quartz sands, while other sources include sandstone deposits. In beneficiation of silica sand, relatively simple processes are used. Some of the processes include: Attrition scrubbing washing Magnetic separation Heavy media separation Reverse gangue flotation Acid leaching A combination of the above methods may be used to beneficiate sand with complete impurities. For many applications, clean sand to over 99% silica with low impurities is required. This method is usually used for beneficiation of high-grade calcite with low impurities of iron and other silicates. The flow sheet used is shown in During attrition scrubbing caustic soda or acid was normally used depending on the type of surface coating of quartz sand. This process was adopted by the British Industrial Sand Company for removal of iron and other impurities from sandstone deposit. In this process a little acid was used due to the fact that iron content of the sand was about 0.5% Fe The leached silica contained less than 0.03% Fe The leaching flow sheet is shown in This method is normally used for beneficiation of silica sand that contains mica and high-iron oxides. Attrition scrubbing is usually done using acid. The beneficiation flow sheet is presented in The flotation is performed at acid pH 2.5–3.5 and controlled with either sulfuric or hydrochloric acid. The collectors usually used are sulfonate-based collectors from Cytec 800 Series (i.e., R801, R827). Using this method, iron content of the Virtually all mica and alumina report to the flotation concentrate. Some of the silica sand deposits from the USA and Canada contain impurities such as pyrite, iron oxides, and feldspar. Beneficiation of silica from these deposits involves A generalized flow sheet for beneficiation of silica sand with various impurities is shown in The sulfide flotation was accomplished using either xanthate or mercapto type of collectors at slightly acidic pH (i.e., 6.0). Iron oxides are floated using natural petroleum sulfonate collectors (Aeroflot R840) The silica sand used in the study consists of poorly sorted angular grains of clear quartz loosely cemented together by kaolinite clay. Lances of high-grade kaolinite were also present in the ore body. Basically, this ore was beneficiated using attrition scrubbing and screening. The flow sheet used is shown in A plus 325-mesh fraction was dried followed by size classification. Each fraction was subjected to magnetic separation, where glass sand of over 99% SiO A large portion of silica is produced in the USA, the UK, France, and Canada using a process described in this chapter depending on impurities present in the ore body. Chemical composition of glass sand used in various applications is presented in