Introduction
                  Off-road trucks are one of the major sources of equipment-related accidents in the U.S. mining industries. A systematic analysis of all off-road truck-related accidents, injuries, and illnesses, which are reported and published by the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA), is expected to provide practical insights for identifying the accident patterns and trends in the available raw database. Therefore, appropriate safety management measures can be administered and implemented based on these accident patterns/trends.
               
                  Methods
                  A hybrid clustering-classification methodology using K-means clustering and gene expression programming (GEP) is proposed for the analysis of severe and non-severe off-road truck-related injuries at U.S. mines. Using the GEP sub-model, a small subset of the 36 recorded attributes was found to be correlated to the severity level.
               
                  Results
                  Given the set of specified attributes, the clustering sub-model was able to cluster the accident records into 5 distinct groups. For instance, the first cluster contained accidents related to minerals processing mills and coal preparation plants (91%). More than two-thirds of the victims in this cluster had less than 5years of job experience. This cluster was associated with the highest percentage of severe injuries (22 severe accidents, 3.4%). Almost 50% of all accidents in this cluster occurred at stone operations. Similarly, the other four clusters were characterized to highlight important patterns that can be used to determine areas of focus for safety initiatives.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The identified clusters of accidents may play a vital role in the prevention of severe injuries in mining. Further research into the cluster attributes and identified patterns will be necessary to determine how these factors can be mitigated to reduce the risk of severe injuries.
               
                  Practical application
                  Analyzing injury data using data mining techniques provides some insight into attributes that are associated with high accuracies for predicting injury severity.Analysis of workplace injuries has been heavily utilized as a means to determine high-risk tasks, prioritize workplace redesign, and determine areas of concern for worker safety in many industries including healthcare, construction, retail and services, and mining ( Clustering and classification are the two widely used methods of data mining for the purpose of pattern recognition. Clustering is among the unsupervised methods of pattern recognition while the classification is a supervised learning method. By an unsupervised method, one means that the data analyzer does not have any prior hypothesis or pre-specified models for the data, but wants to understand the general characteristics or the structure of the high-dimensional data. A supervised method means that the investigator wants to confirm the validity of a hypothesis/model or a set of assumptions, given the available data ( The aim of this research was to gain a better understanding of the factors associating with severe injuries (fatalities and permanent disabilities) in U.S. mining by employing data mining techniques. Clustering and classification were employed for a comprehensive analysis of off-road truck-related accidents and injuries reported to MSHA during a 13-year period (2000–2012). Gene expression programming was used for classification, allowing all injury attributes to be considered and tested to determine which were associated with the highest prediction accuracies. The most explanatory attributes were selected among the available 36 unique attributes in the MSHA database. Then, K-means clustering was used as a means to identify similarity/dissimilarity between the accident records using the selected attributes for the purposes of pattern recognition in the raw data. It should be noted that the goal of this study was not to establish cause–effect relationships between accident attributes and outcomes, but to: (a) use data mining to systematically identify important attributes from MSHA incident reports that are highly associated with the outcomes of accidents (classification), and (b) recognize patterns in the accidents (clustering) given a set of work-related attributes. A dataset comprised of 13 The objective of clustering is to discriminate between dissimilar data by dataset partitioning (clustering). As an unsupervised data mining technique, the aim of clustering is to split a heterogeneous dataset into several more homogenous groups. The optimization task is to maximize the similarity between the in-cluster members and dissimilarity between the out-cluster members. K-means clustering is used to partition a large, highly variable dataset such that like data are grouped together. As an example, one is given a set of Genetic programming (GP) creates a functional relationship between inputs (attributes) and outputs to predict the occurrence of the output based on the properties of the attributes. Genetic programming can be represented as a hierarchically structured tree comprising functions and terminals. Proposed by The GEP algorithm was used for classification of the off-road truck-related injury dataset. The objective was to identify the most explanatory (independent) variables (attributes) to be used in the subsequent clustering sub-model. One advantage of GEP over conventional classification algorithms (such as support vector machines and artificial neural networks) is that it can select the best explanatory features to achieve the highest fitness or accuracy. Hence, all available independent variables included in the incident reports, including both the categorical and numerical variables, were initially used in the GEP model building as explanatory variables. The injury severity was converted into a binary variable with: class 0 for those severe truck-related incidents that resulted in either fatalities or permanent disabilities, and class 1 for all other injuries. Two-thirds of the records (3,888) were used for training the algorithm and the remaining (1,943) for model testing. The fitness function was set as the sensitivity/specificity to achieve maximum classification accuracy. K-means clustering was used to group similar injuries therefore maximizing the similarity of records in each cluster. All data (both severe and non-severe) were analyzed together and separated into clusters. A brief analysis of the MSHA injury data was performed to give an understanding of the types of data available in the injury records. A temporal illustration of off-road truck-related fatalities and disabilities ( Most of the severe injuries were sustained while the employee was operating the off-road truck. In the 56 severe accidents (57 victims) that occurred while operating a truck, 46 employees sustained fatal injuries and 11 employees were permanently disabled. The four main causes of these accidents (as identified in the report of the MSHA investigation) were: (i) losing control of the truck, (ii) berm/dump failure, (iii) unsafe/careless actions, and (iv) truck/component mechanical failure. In the category of “unsafe/careless actions,” MSHA identified that the underlying root causes were either associated with poor safety training, management and enforcement with managerial causes, or failure of the employees to obey safety regulations (personal issues). In nearly all of the 26 accidents (affecting 27 victims) that occurred during the “maintenance/repair” activity, either the employees' failure to regard safety regulations or a component/equipment malfunction/failure caused the injuries. A major cause of fatalities in this category was failure to block off/lockout the truck/bed. This was either due to the employees' unsafe actions or the mechanical malfunction of the equipment. In the “other” category, 17 fatal accidents resulted in 15 fatalities and 7 permanent disabilities. The main causes of this category were: (i) the operator(s) exited the cab while operating the equipment and (ii) unsafe/careless minor repairing attempts. Gene expression programming utilized all available variables in the incident records to determine those that best predicted injury severity. The important GEP parameters (number of chromosomes, head size, and number of genes) were determined through a grid search algorithm to achieve the maximum classification accuracy. A grid search is an exhaustive search in the pre-specified domains of the parameters of interests. In this case, using the grid search, the best results (highest accuracies) were achieved when the three parameters were set to 34, 11, and 5, respectively. The resulting best model is shown in the GEP expression tree in In order to examine the accuracy of the GEP classification algorithm, the whole database was modeled with the widely-used traditional method of logistic regression for binary classification ( Using the GEP sub-model's output, the resulting clusters from the K-means clustering were defined based on their most dominant attribute, which discriminated them from the other clusters while maintaining the highest similarity inside the cluster. Therefore, the clusters were defined based on their attributes as specified in Truck-related fatalities have been previously examined in the literature. An analysis of fatal truck-related accidents during the period 1995–2006 revealed the three most frequent causes of the haul truck-related fatalities as: (i) failure of victims to respect haul truck working area, (ii) failure to provide adequate berms, and (iii) failure of mechanical components ( Gene expression programming was found to successfully predict severe accidents in mining based on available injury data. The accuracies obtained using GEP for both the training and testing data are comparable or superior to those reported in car and traffic accident studies ( Minerals processing mills and coal preparation plants essentially formed their own cluster (cluster 0). Therefore, there appears to be a unique element to these plants that created different truck-related injury scenarios from the other subunits. Typically, this subunit includes mills, coal preparation plants, breaker operations, shops, and yards associated with one specific mine. These are non-production locations and likely utilize differing types of equipment and have different geographies and layouts from the pits or underground mining locations. Also of the 653 incidents in this cluster, in the past 13 The interesting pattern in Cluster 1 is that in 55% of all cases, the victim had been inspecting the truck for maintenance/repair with non-powered hand tools. Moreover, over half of the accidents were related to either the coal or stone operators. Although this cluster did not include any severe injuries, it is clear that the use of hand tools for vehicle inspection creates a hazard at mines. Also similar to cluster 0, in this cluster the highest numbers of accident were recorded in June–August period. Unlike cluster 0, in cluster 1 the share of the inexperienced employees for all of the accidents is not very high with respect to more experienced employees. Also, a majority of the accidents (78%) took place in either strip or open pit mines. With 2,352 accidents, cluster 2 was the largest cluster in this study. Interestingly all of the accidents in the past 13 With 187 accidents, cluster 3 was the smallest cluster in this study. Similar to cluster 1, no severe accidents had been reported since 2000. Over 60% of the accidents were associated with a non-specified activity and coded as code 6 (other). Therefore, the activities preceding accidents in this cluster were not within the more frequent accident causing activities (e.g., getting on/off truck, handling supplies). In terms of the victim job experience this cluster did not differ from clusters 1, 2, and 4 (see Similar to cluster 2, one interesting pattern in cluster 4 is that no accident (severe or non-severe) had been recorded in one half of the year. Unlike cluster 2, all of the accidents in cluster 4 occurred in the first half of the year since 2000. Again, this pattern (along with the pattern in cluster 2) is a reasonable justification for conducting seasonal studies for improving safety in all of the mining sites in this cluster. Thus, the main reasons for zero accidents in the first half of each year and a total of 2,192 in the second half should be identified. Also, nearly 90% of these accidents occurred at surface mines. Cluster 4 was also found to have the highest number of severe accidents. More in-depth analysis would need to be conducted to determine the key differences between the accidents in clusters 2 and cluster 4 to determine what appears to be a seasonal division in accidents contributing to increased accident severity. More training may be needed to address the injuries in this cluster. This study was limited to data associated with off-road trucks in mining. Thus all other injuries that were not associated with off-road trucks were not included in this study. It is unclear whether this hybrid methodology will have sufficient accuracies when applied to other types of injuries. Furthermore, the study analyzed only the accident reports within the period January 2000 to December 2012. Data included in this analysis were limited to that provided in the MSHA incident reports which have been collected, organized, and released to the public by NIOSH. Increasing the level of detail provided in incident reports will likely result in improved injury clustering and classifications. It is also important to note that correlation does not equal causation and no causal relationships are implied based on the results of this analysis. A more in-depth analysis will be necessary to determine causal factors for injuries sustained in each cluster. In conclusion, clustering, classification, and a hybrid methodology of both—using K-means clustering and gene expression programming—was shown to be effective when analyzing mining injury data. In particular, the GEP classification sub-model had a better performance than the traditional method of logistic regression in accident type classification. Furthermore, the identified patterns in the accident database using the clustering method are not achievable with the traditional injury data analysis which uses counts and cross-tabulations. Therefore, determining the most dominant attributes for specific types of injuries (classification) and separating (clustering) the data based on these attributes may allow researchers to better understand the nature and causal factors of mining injuries. Clustering could likely improve traditional injury analysis methods. Injuries sustained in minerals processing mills and coal preparation plants, and injuries sustained during the operation of trucks, should be analyzed separately from larger datasets. The use of non-powered hand tools for off-road truck inspections, ingress and egress from off-road trucks, and newer employees operating dump trucks should be investigated further to determine ways to prevent these severe and non-severe accidents. While this analysis was limited to those injuries associated with off-road trucks, it is expected that larger, broader injury data analyses will also benefit from this hybrid clustering-classification methodology. Analyzing the injury data using data mining techniques provides some insight into attributes that are associated with high accuracies for predicting injury severity. Off-road truck-related injuries continue to plague the mining industry resulting in fatalities, permanent disabilities, and other less severe injuries. Many factors contribute to these injuries, and many of these are likely preventable. This analysis revealed that injuries associated with the use of non-powered hand tools for off-road truck inspections, ingress and egress from off-road trucks, and newer employees operating dump trucks are areas deserving of attention to determine ways to prevent future injuries.