Thermal diffusivity values obtained using a transient method both from heating and cooling information and apparent specific heat of surimi made from silver hake and mackerel as a function of temperature (60–110 °C) and added potato starch content (3% and 7%, w/w) were determined. The water content of all samples was kept constant at about 77% (w/w) in order to determine the effect of starch. Thermal diffusivity and apparent specific heat of all samples increased with temperature. The effect of temperature on diffusivity was found significant (p=0.001) in all samples at temperatures above 85 °C. This effect may be caused by structural changes as temperature is raised. Thermal diffusivity increased with temperature more rapidly in samples with high levels of starch than in those with no starch. However, thermal diffusivity of silver hake surimi preset at 40 °C for 30 min did not show a significant increase (p<0.05) over the temperature range studied. Thermal diffusivities calculated from cooling and heating data were significantly different (p<0.05).
                  The differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) thermograms of silver hake and mackerel surimi showed three endothermic peaks. When starch was added to surimi samples an endothermic peak having a large area was observed, which overlapped the third highest temperature peak of surimi samples. No significant shifts in the endothermic peaks of myofibrillar proteins were detected with increasing starch content. Transition temperatures for starch–surimi system were higher than those for starch–water system. There were deviations in the apparent heat capacity function calculated from DSC measurements in surimi samples containing starch. These are attributed to gelatinization of starch and modification of water structure.Surimi is a semi-processed, wet, frozen, washed fish myofibrillar protein concentrate. It is an odorless and tasteless material which is the primary constituent of the important Asian food product called “kamaboko”. Surimi has binding, gelling and emulsifying properties, leading to it being used as a functional protein ingredient in several products ( Generally, 2–3% of salt is added to solubilize the myofibrillar proteins and to increase water hydration capacity ( Various ingredients such as starch and/or egg albumen are added to surimi to improve its physico-chemical properties. Starch is usually added to surimi to improve gelling properties and final textural properties. Depending upon product, 0–10% starch is usually added to surimi-based products ( Gelation of starch is thought to arise from the formation of a three dimensional network which binds the swollen granules. Factors involved in the gelatinization of starch are mainly type, size and previous history of starch granules, concentration, temperature, cooking time, agitation, types, and amounts of added ingredients. Starch gelatinization is accompanied by melting of crystallites, loss of birefringence, granule swelling, and increase in viscosity. Knowledge of thermal properties of surimi, may be useful in design of processing equipment, in process calculations of heating and cooling rates or times, and in calculating the process energy requirements, and also in the development of new processing techniques. Thermal properties of concern during food processing include specific heat, thermal conductivity and thermal diffusivity. Thermal diffusivity, The specific heat and thermal conductivity of surimi are also important properties required for study of heating and cooling of food materials. These quantities are generally temperature dependent and can be defined respectively as: Thermal conductivity, specific heat and density of Pacific whiting surimi paste at different moisture contents were measured and modelled at the cooking temperature ( During the formation of surimi gels, heat to the product is mainly transferred by conduction. One can specify how fast heat diffuses through surimi by knowledge of its thermal properties. Thus, it is possible to calculate the temperature history in surimi in different process conditions. There are two techniques to measure of thermal diffusivity: steady state and transient. These methods have been reviewed by different authors: The objectives of this work were to measure thermal properties ( Surimi was prepared from silver hake and mackerel in the departmental Pilot Plant ( Thawed surimi was introduced into a vacuum mixer (Stephan UMC 5 Electronic Mixer, Hameln, Germany). Sodium chloride (3%, w/w) and ice were added to give the final moisture content of 77 g/100 g, and then the mixture was chopped for 5 min. For starch containing samples, potato starch and ice were added to the above formulation and chopped in the vacuum mixer for 5 min. The sample codes used in the text, the composition for the surimi samples and apparent densities which were determined from a weight measurements of known volume of food in the thermal diffusivity tube are shown in The apparatus and method for the measurement of thermal diffusivity used in this work was previously described by The surimi sample was introduced into the thermal diffusivity tube by means of a sausage stuffer (F. Dick Sausage Stuffer, Deizisau, Germany), thus minimizing the amount of entrapped air in the thermal diffusivity tube. The bottom assembly was then put in place. An air space of about 2.5 cm was maintained at the top end to provide additional air insulation. The top assembly with a thermocouple was also put in place ensuring that the thermocouple was located at the mid-length of the thermal diffusivity tube. Initially, temperature of the surimi samples was approximately 5 °C. The thermal diffusivity tube was placed in a programmable temperature controlling oil bath (Haake N3-B Heater/Circulator and Haake PG-10 programmer; Haake Instruments Inc., Saddle Brook, N.J.). An additional external agitator was also used to provide turbulent flow in the oil bath. The measurement was started when surface and centre temperatures had equilibrated to 20 °C. The oil bath was heated at a constant rate of 1.0 °C/min to 124 °C. When the heating ramp was completed, the center and surface temperature were allowed to equilibrate to 124 °C. The programmed cooling at a constant rate of −1 °C/min was carried out until the oil bath temperature had reached 40 °C. Temperatures below 40 °C were not reached because the oil became too viscous and it was difficult to control the constant cooling rate at 1°C/min. Thermal diffusivity values at temperatures below 40 °C were, therefore not calculated for both heating and cooling ramp studies and eliminated during the multi-stage regression process. Both during heating and cooling, centre and surface temperatures of the thermal diffusivity tube and the oil bath temperature were recorded at 1 min intervals using a Kaye Ramp II scanner/processor. The calculation of thermal diffusivity was done using a computer program described by Thermal diffusivity values of the surimi gels were calculated during both heating and cooling periods using a transient state method ( Measurement of specific heat was carried out using a Perkin-Elmer Differential Scanning Calorimeter-II (The Perkin-Elmer Corporation, Norwalk, CT). The base line for the experimental temperature range was standardized each day. All samples were encapsulated in stainless steel large volume capsules (approximately 0.075 ml) and sealed with o-rings. Sample and reference pans were weight-matched before the sample was loaded. First, sealed empty sample pans (no-sample run) were placed in both sample and reference holders and covered with metallic sample covers. After temperature equilibration at 6.85 °C, they were scanned from 6.85 to 106.85 °C heating at 10 °C/min. The same procedure was repeated either with a known mass of sapphire standard (62.51 mg), or with a surimi sample (7–13 mg). Sapphire and samples were placed in the sample holder and an empty pan in the reference holder was employed as a reference. The “no-sample run” provided the base line from which deflection, due to heat capacities of the sample and sapphire were measured. The methodology for specific heat determination is described elsewhere ( Five replications for each sample were undertaken. The accuracy of this method was checked by determining the specific heat of distilled water. The agreement of the samples with the literature ( A Perkin-Elmer DSC-2 interfaced to a Perkin-Elmer Thermal Analysis Data Station was used to determine the enthalpy, onset temperature and peak temperature of the surimi samples. The samples were hermetically sealed in stainless steel pans, held for 1 h at 5 °C and then analyzed. Then samples placed in one holder and an empty sealed pan placed in the reference holder. The samples were heated at 10 °C/min from 10 to 110 °C. Examination of the temperature difference between the surface and center of the cylinder indicated it was not constant while heating and cooling. Thus indicating that thermal diffusivities were not constant in the temperature ranges examined. Thermal diffusivity data from heating experiments are shown in The temperature dependence of thermal diffusivity is strong in foods containing high amounts of water such as surimi. It might be assumed that thermal diffusivity of samples changes with temperature in the same proportion as changes to the thermal diffusivity of water. The thermal diffusivity of water as a function of temperature ( The thermal diffusivity/-temperature relationships differed with various samples and whether diffusivities were measured during heating or cooling. Both first-order linear and quadratic models were fitted to the data (  The addition of starch generally increased the thermal diffusivity of surimi gels. The change in thermal diffusivity with temperature was low for the samples in which starch was not added. On the other hand, the samples containing starch generally showed a substantial change in the thermal diffusivity in the upper portion of the temperature range. A Bonferroni For silver hake surimi, once the average product temperature reached about 100 °C, temperature began to have a significant effect on the thermal diffusivity values. Although, there was no clear-cut pattern, different behaviour was observed for silver hake and mackerel surimi. The critical temperature decreased with increasing starch content for silver hake surimi samples. However, for mackerel surimi, the critical temperature was the same for samples with 3% added starch but increased to 100 °C when 7% starch was added. Since moisture content was kept constant, this variation might be related to differences in fat and protein contents and, therefore, chemical and physical interactions among these compounds. The thermal diffusivity values for both silver hake and mackerel surimi obtained during heating and cooling did not match and were significantly different ( No significant differences in the thermal diffusivity values of silver hake samples obtained from either heating ramp experiments among all treatments have been found (Bonferroni The surimi paste gels rapidly at about 80–90 °C but slowly at 40–50 °C. It has been reported that cooking a gel which has been slowly set at 40–50 °C provides a stronger gel than cooking without 40–50 °C set ( No trend between the thermal diffusivity and product composition over the temperature range tested was found. This finding agrees with Thermal diffusivity values predicted in this study may be used in heat transfer calculations to ensure the safety of surimi-based products. While these values are dependent on product composition the data reported here should serve as a guide to thermal process scientists and engineers. The exact mechanism of thermal gelation of surimi is not fully understood. Gel matrix formation is affected by many factors such as myofibrillar protein concentration, state and amount of water, pH, time/temperature of comminution and interactions between myofibrillar proteins and added ingredients ( The slightly higher fat and protein content of the mackerel surimi as compared to the silver hake might have affected starch gelatinization and gel formation. Gelatinization of starch upon heating does not occur instantaneously at a specific temperature. White potato starch gelatinizes at about 62–68 °C whereas sweet potato starch starts to gelatinize at about 82–83 °C ( DSC of the silver hake and mackerel surimi showed three major endothermic peaks ( Three small endothermic transitions at 48, 56 and 71 °C were observed for MK0 and were also attributed to the denaturation of myofibrillar proteins. These peaks occurred at higher temperatures than those of silver hake surimi, possibly due to higher fat content of mackerel surimi. The DSC characteristics of surimi starch systems were noted in In general, the specific heat of both types of surimi increased with increase of temperature ( It was found that there was no significant difference in specific heat among surimi samples that had the same water content and were heated at the same temperature ( Further studies examining the effect of moisture, fat, protein, and starch contents would be desirable. Knowledge of the effect of those variables on surimi thermal properties would be beneficial to engineers and scientists. In addition, the heat stability of myofibrillar and its effect on thermal properties should be examined in more detail. Thermal diffusivity values over a temperature range of 65–105 °C were calculated from heating and cooling ramp experiments from two different surimi products. It was found that thermal diffusivity from heating and cooling were substantially different, presumably due to physical changes resulting from gelation. Temperature and composition of the material have significant effect on thermal diffusivity. Generally, thermal diffusivity values were higher in surimi samples containing starch. Some deviations were observed on specific heat curves of surimi samples containing starch, presumably due to starch gelatinization. Addition of starch changed the thermal properties of the systems including a change in gelatinization range and increase in onset and peak temperatures. These changes may be attributed to differences in the hydration properties of the particular components and their interactions (e.g., altering the structure of water). Thermal behavior of two surimi samples presented a complex picture since a number of events were occurring. These events appear to be associated with composition of surimi samples and possibly due to different thermal stabilities of silver hake and mackerel myofibrillar proteins.