A newly developed numerical simulator of two-phase flow using three-dimensional finite element method is presented in this paper. It is described that the fundamental simultaneous equations, the deduction to implicit pressure explicit saturation formulation and their fmite element discretization method. Furthermore, its practical application to the numerical simulation project of predicting Horonobe natural gas product is also introduced.In recent years, the necessity of evaluating multiphase flow engineering problems is becoming more and more outstanding over the world. It rises from diverse newly blooming fields such as compressed air energy storage underground,  The time derivative in R.H.S. of the dominating equations can be deduced and expressed as the function of  Eliminating Make λ Time derivative of the variable are approximated as follows, The same discretization method is applied to renew the value of saturation accordingly. The numerical simulation project in the survey of natural gas productivity in Horonobe town, Tensio County, Hokkaido Prefecture was supported by Japan Nuclear Cycle Development Institute (JNC) in the end of 2002. There, from up to down, the underground strata are mainly divided into three layers, i.e., Upper Koetou (0 ∼ −48m), Lower Koetou (−48 ∼ −435m) and Wakanai (−435m ∼). The simulation consists of 250 and 500 m deep single vertical well in case of plain and lining, single horizontal tunnel at depth of 125, 250, 375, 500 m respectively, double neighbouring well models and some parametric study. The physical mechanical parameters are shown as  The volume compression of gas The solubility of gas into water is shown as The vertical model (only one-fourth is adopted because of its symmetry) is illustrated as The horizontal tunnel model is illustrated as The geometry of models is shown in The initial pressure condition is set according to The side surfaces of vertical well model are set proof for flow (Exterior boundaries are wide enough to avoid any visible influence. Flow rate there approximates zero accordingly) and saturation is fixed as initial values. The pressure of top boundary is fixed as zero (It in actual corresponds to one atm.); that of bottom is fixed as 7Mpa. The exterior boundaries of horizontal tunnel model are set pressure fixed as the corresponding subsurface water pressure distribution. The well and tunnel walls are set pressure fixed as zero. As a preliminary estimate, stepwise excavation is not functioned in the program temporarily. The simulation results consist of pore pressure, saturation, solubility distribution change, total gas and water well or tunnel output and portion of vicinity of well bottom (one diameter height) after 24 hour and 2 year. The following figures are some of examples. The predicted gas product amounts are acceptable. Through simulation, it arrives at that the Koetou layer plays the main role due to its greater permeability. In special, horizontal tunnel at −250m needs ventilation study as it contributes most to product. Unlike vertical well, gas accumulation tendency around horizontal tunnel keeps going on because gas doesn't rise up like that around vertical well according to their different pressure gradient. This makes the permeability of gas in the vicinity of tunnel are gradually improved along time going by. As one of example of double well model results, The parametric study arrives at that the variation of solubility is insensitive to gas product, while variation of initial saturation (shown as The 3D FEM two-phase flow program with friendly user interface is preliminary established. Finite element method makes the software to be able to flexibly dispose more complicated mode geometry. Its functions and efficiency have also begun to be examined through practical application. This work offers a console to lift a series of our existing single flow software to the advanced version of multiphase flow.