Badly compacted mixtures will develop undesirable properties of low stiffness, bad fatigue resistance, bad durability, etc. that is not expected from a good pavement. This paper is to evaluate the compactibility of hot asphalt mixtures (HAM) made with crump rubber modified bitumen, which was manufactured by incorporating the waste shredded-tire rubber particles in base bitumen in different sizes and concentration. Type of binder and binder viscosity during compaction has a great effect on the compactibility of HAM. Compaction Coefficient (CC), which is variation in porosity line throughout compaction, could be related with the energy needed to compact the mixture. Less energy is needed for the mixture having low CC. Modification of bitumen with rubber makes the mixture less compactable when compared with the mixtures made without rubber.It is rather difficult to quantify the workability of asphalt mixture and it is influenced by many factors, including aggregate type (shape, size and texture), aggregate gradation, binder grade, binder content, mixing and compaction temperature. Workability of asphalt mixtures can be related with the compactibility of mixtures. Compactable mixtures were assumed more workable. Leeds workability method The workability of asphalt mixture is defined as the property, which allows producing, handling, placing, compacting a mixture with minimum application of energy. It is an important practical requirement that asphalt mixtures are tolerant to a wide variation of laying conditions and that in relatively adverse conditions. They will still spread easily and compact sufficiently well to give a durable surfacing. Too harsh a mix may cause it to tear under the screed of the spreading machine and render compaction more difficult. Badly compacted mixtures will develop undesirable properties of low stiffness, bad fatigue resistance, bad durability, etc. that is not expected from a good surfacing. Workability of fresh concrete, on the other hand, is defined as the fluidity, mobility and compactibility of the cement, water and aggregate mixture The only workability-meter for asphalt mixture developed by Marvillet and Bougault A recent work conducted on workability of hot mix asphalt The purpose of this investigation is to show the compactibility determination of rubberized mixtures using by Gyratory Testing Machine (GTM). The values derived during the compaction process i.e. compaction coefficient (CC) and workability index (WI) can be used to determine the mixture behaviour before and during compaction. In this investigation binder used was 50 and 100 penetration grade base bitumen in the control mixtures. Properties of the base bitumen used in this experiment are given in Different sizes of shredded-tire rubber particles were incorporated in the base bitumen to assess the compactibility and to improve the properties of the mixtures. The rubber concentrations were selected between 2% and 20% in bitumen by weight. An adjustable speed vertical shaft mixer was used to mix the rubber and bitumen. The mixing speed used was 200 The aggregate gradation selected was the optimal aggregate gradation obtained by experimental dry compaction test (DCT) The aggregate, filler and binder are heated at 150 The standard 63.5 1° 0.7 30 These conditions were found to be equivalent to the energy used in the standard compaction using the Marshall hammer (50 blows) Generally, in any hot asphalt mixture, compactibility of the mixture increases with increasing binder content and compaction temperature. A typical relationship between porosity and the logarithm of the number of GTM revolutions for the mixture made with 100 penetration bitumen in different binder content is given in The WI is defined as the inverse of the constant ( The decrease rate in WI is greater for the mixtures made with the 100 penetration base bitumen. It is also clear that the addition of larger size decreases the WI as shown in The mixing temperature was kept constant in all mixtures of this investigation, i.e. 150 In this work, variation in porosity during compaction is also studied, i.e. slope of porosity line or the constant The CC values of crumb rubber-modified mixtures, on the other hand, were slightly complex. The CC values of the mixtures made with rubberized bitumen having high rubber content were found lower than the mixture made without rubber especially made with low binder content. It could be due to the rebound of the mixtures after compaction. It was quite difficult to remove the rubberized mixture samples from the mould when compared with the control samples. WI values depend on the height of the sample before compaction. Gyratory compactor can be used to assess the workability and compactibility of bituminous hot mixtures. WI and CC are rather easy parameter to asses the mix properties. CC, which is variation in porosity line throughout compaction, could be related with the energy needed to compact the mixture. For instance, less energy is needed for the mixture having low CC, when compared with the mixture having high CC. Effect of mixing temperatures on the compactibility should be study to get the desirable pavement.