Soil amendment with sewage sludge (SS) from municipal wastewater treatment plants is nowadays a common practice for both increasing soil organic matter and nutrient contents and waste disposal. However, the application of organic amendments that are not sufficiently mature and stable may adversely affect soil properties. Composting and thermal drying are treatments designed to minimize these possible deleterious effects and to facilitate the use of SS as a soil organic amendment. In this work, an arid soil either unamended or amended with composted sewage sludge (CSS) or thermally-dried sewage sludge (TSS) was moistened to an equivalent of 60% soil water holding capacity and incubated for 60 days at 28 °C. The C–CO2 emission from the samples was periodically measured in order to study C mineralization kinetics and evaluate the use of these SS as organic amendments. In all cases, C mineralization decreased after the first day. TSS-amended soil showed significantly higher mineralization rates than unamended and CSS-amended soils during the incubation period. The data of cumulative C–CO2 released from unamended and SS-amended soils were fitted to six different kinetic models. A two simultaneous reactions model, which considers two organic pools with different degree of biodegradability, was found to be the most appropriate to describe C mineralization kinetics for all the soils. The parameters derived from this model suggested a larger presence of easily biodegradable compounds in TSS-amended soil than in CSS-amended soil, which in turn presented a C mineralization pattern very similar to that of the unamended soil. Furthermore, net mineralization coefficient and complementary mineralization coefficient were calculated from C mineralization data. The largest losses of C were measured for TSS-amended soil probably due to an extended microbial activity. The results obtained thus indicated that CSS is more efficient for increasing total organic C in arid soils.During the last years the amount of sewage sludge (SS) from urban wastewater treatment plants has increased steadily with consequent environmental and economic problems related to its disposal ( However, before land application, SS should be subjected to appropriate treatments, designed to enhance the stability of OM and to avoid a number of harmful effects on soil properties as well as many health hazards that may result from an inadequate use ( From an environmental and agronomical point of view, a correct management of the SS in agriculture relies mainly on two aspects: efficient increase of the SOM and adequate match of the release of mineral nutrients to crop demand. Therefore, the knowledge of C mineralization dynamics in SS-amended soils is of intrinsic interest. The effects of composted sewage sludge (CSS) on soil properties and C mineralization have been the focus of intensive research, but only a limited number of investigations have dealt with the effects of thermally-dried sewage sludge (TSS), and even fewer studies have been conducted on C mineralization in soils amended with TSS. Thermally-dried sewage sludge is richer in N and soluble organic carbon (e.g., aminoacids and carbohydrates) than CSS, two factors that can stimulate the soil microbial metabolism and consequently the mineralization of C. Even if carried out over short time periods, the use of laboratory methods involving incubation of soil-waste mixtures under controlled conditions can supply accurate information about C mineralization dynamics. In addition, C mineralization data obtained can be fitted to kinetic models, which allow calculating the fraction of potentially mineralizable C and its mineralization rate and, therefore, the real benefits of applying these organic wastes to soil ( The aim of this work was to describe comparatively the dynamic and kinetics of C mineralization in an arid soil amended with either TSS or CSS and in the same soil unamended. These results can be used to evaluate the degree of maturity and stability achieved in both organic amendments and, therefore, their environmental safety and agronomic efficiency. The CSS used in this work was collected from a mixture of three SS originated from three municipal wastewater treatment plants in Madrid (Spain) metropolitan area, which has been subjected to a windrow composting process for three months. The TSS sample was collected from the wastewater treatment plant SUR in Madrid metropolitan area where the SS is dried in a process that use hot air at temperatures ranging from 380 °C to 450 °C. The soil sample used in this experiment is characterized by a sandy loam texture (sand, 580 g kg Carbon mineralization was studied in an aerobic incubation experiment carried out in a closed system. A hundred grams of air-dried and 2-mm sieved sample of soil homogeneously mixed with CSS or TSS, according to the field rates of 80 Mg ha Six different models have been used in this experiment to describe the C mineralization in the samples studied. The first model referred herein as zero-order ( The second model was used by Another approach is the first-order exponential equation (   Another variation of the first-order model is the first-order E model ( which uses an additional parameter Finally the special model ( Model parameters for each treatment examined were calculated by non-linear regression analysis with the Quasi-Newton iterative method from cumulative C–CO The net mineralization coefficient (NMC) and complementary mineralization coefficient (CMC) were calculated to assess the mineralizing capacity of soil in the presence of the SS and the susceptibility of TSS and CSS to mineralization ( The Daily Complementary Mineralization Coefficient (DCMC) was also calculated as the CMC for each day of experiment. Besides the half-life time Analytical data were subjected to one-way ANOVA test. Mean separation was performed with the least significant difference (LSD) test when During the experiment, daily release of C–CO The maximum C–CO  The zero-order model shows the worst fit for the experimental data, probably because it doesn't consider the variation in the degradability of organic C with the incubation time. This result is in agreement with previous studies of other authors for organic wastes of different origin ( Values of rapidly mineralizable C ( As  Despite of the low values of Net mineralization coefficients are similar for control and CSS-amended soil and significantly lower than the values obtained for soil amended with TSS ( The addition of CSS makes a smaller contribution of organic matter than the input made by adding TSS to the soil ( The analysis of the DCMC could be helpful to know when the new equilibrium in the soil microbial population is reached and when sowing may take place. Values of DCMC found for CSS increase very slightly as incubation proceeds with a daily mineralization rate very similar to the control, suggesting that this amendment is mature enough for field application. However values of DCMC for TSS still continue to increase after 60 days of incubation. These results reveal an extended microbial degradation of organic matter in TSS-amended soil with respect to the basal levels of microbial activity in the unamended and CSS-amended soil. Soil amended with TSS shows a greater degree of carbon mineralization because the organic matter of the TSS is not stabilized yet, and the maturation process takes place in the soil. Meanwhile the C–CO The authors are grateful to the Consejería de Educación de la Comunidad de Madrid, European Social Fund and Council of Madrid for their financial support. C. Plaza is a researcher of the Ramón y Cajal Program funded by the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science.