The control policies that are used in inventory management systems assume that orders arrive in the same sequence as they were ordered. Due to changes in supply chains and markets, this assumption is no longer valid. This paper aims at providing an improved understanding of the phenomenon of order crossovers and the conditions for the occurrence of order crossovers.
                  Order crossovers are caused by differences in lead times and in the time between orders. These differences originate from several sources. This paper distinguishes three types of order crossovers according to the sources of the differences encountered. It reviews literature on these sources of differences that may cause crossovers.
                  From a detailed analysis of the effect of contemporary changes in modern inventory management on the possibility of occurrence of the various types of order crossovers, we conclude that order crossovers should be taken into account in the inventory policies that are implemented in Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems. The type of order crossovers that firms will encounter more frequently are predominantly expected order crossovers and general order crossovers. Modern ERP systems are not able to handle these types of order crossovers effectively. The types of industries that have a higher probability of facing these order crossovers are either located upstream in the supply chain, or use natural resources, or order strategic materials from multiple suppliers or from abroad. A case study of a tobacco firm that encountered order crossovers confirms these findings. The firm estimated that the potential cost savings of taking expected order crossovers into account were 30%.Order crossovers occur when orders do not arrive in the same sequence as they were issued. In the field of inventory management, such a sequence change is a strange phenomenon that has not received much attention in the literature. Inventory management literature generally assumes that order crossovers do not occur or can be neglected. Although there do exist various valid reasons for this assumption (as will be shown in This paper explores the effect of the changes that are taking place in the field of inventory management on the occurrence of order crossovers. But first, we have to define order crossovers more precisely.  Let the moments in time of issuing order  The arrival time of an order is a function of its ordering moment and the order lead time. This lead time may be different per order, so we have    As  Sufficiency holds, as by definition of The main reason for introducing    If       The paper is organized as follows. First,  Models in category 1 do not result in order crossovers, as these inventory models do not consider lead time fluctuations at all. According to Models of category 2 assume that lead times are both static and stochastic, i.e. the lead times are identically distributed. One of the most common assumptions encountered in this category is that order lead times are independent stochastic variables. With this assumption, it is much easier to determine or approximate the compound distribution of demand during lead time, which is needed for determining the inventory control policy (  Only a small number of papers build category 2 models that truly represent one of the fundamental problems in case of static stochastic lead times. The other fundamental problem: the occurrence of order crossovers as a result of independent lead times in category 2 models, has received some attention in the literature. Models of the third category consider order crossovers that are the result of deterministic processes, generating dynamic lead time fluctuations. These lead time differences can result from contract changes, expediting, dual sourcing policies from different geographical areas, transportation mode changes, etc. We associate this type of fluctuation with the increased flexibility in modern supply chains. As a result, order crossovers may occur that can be anticipated at the moment of ordering. We denote such order crossovers as Dynamic lead time fluctuations have been studied in the context of order expedition and emergency orders. There is an important similarity between order crossovers and emergency orders. In The fourth category of inventory models recognizes both dynamic and stochastic sources for lead time variations, a combination that may result in From this literature review we distinguish three types of order crossovers, based on the type of lead time fluctuations encountered. The lead time fluctuations can be characterized on two dimensions: static/dynamic and deterministic/stochastic. Stochastic lead time fluctuations may lead to either random (static) or general (stochastic) order crossovers. Dynamic lead time fluctuations may lead to either expected (deterministic) or general (stochastic) order crossovers. Literature on random order crossovers has emerged during the last decade. Literature on expected order crossovers is still very limited. Literature on general order crossovers has not been found. Inventory control literature has for a long time neglected the occurrence of order crossovers. Section 2 has shown that various assumptions behind the models prohibit the occurrence of these order crossovers. Although there do exist several valid reasons for these assumptions, we challenge the validity of neglecting order crossovers itself. Lead times were defined to occur whenever there is a delay between the moment of issuing a requirement and the moment of receiving the ordered goods. Additionally, the ordering cycle includes time that elapses before and after the lead time of that order. Several activities have to be performed and decisions have to made during the ordering cycle, as shown in Since the last decade, huge changes have been taking place in the field of inventory management. Advances in information and communication technology have a strong impact on inventory management practices. Globalization and a continuing focus on flexibility, dependability and cost reduction result in a different design of the order fulfillment function. Finally, supply chains have become more flexible, and the role a firm performs in coordinating the chains in which it is involved may vary strongly. These changes have a strong impact on the elements of the ordering cycle. All five time-consuming elements of First, there has been a strong pressure to reduce the time awaiting review, i.e. the time before an actual requirement will be signalled. The usage of computerized inventory management systems has increased dramatically, which has reduced the average waiting time before an actual requirement is being detected by the inventory manager. Second, the administrative process takes much less time nowadays compared with some decades ago, due to the advancements in Information and Communication Technology (ICT). Electronic data interchange is easily integrated in modern ERP systems, and communication with suppliers and internal actors (departments such as finance, product design and engineering) is faster and more accurate than before. It has also become much easier to apply multiple sourcing for the same product type. Minner reports that there is significant empirical evidence that firms dominantly prefer multiple suppliers ( The third component is the throughput time at the selected supplier. This throughput time depends on the capability and capacity of the selected supplier and the level of integration of the supply chain. Traditionally, suppliers buffered against the risk of capacity unbalances by quoting long production lead times. The developments in modern supply chains lead to the conclusion that throughput times of suppliers have decreased due to the application of modern Supply Chain Management (SCM) principles (e.g. vendor managed inventory) and internal throughput time reduction programmes. Some suppliers even provide insight into the actual capabilities and available capacity in the short term. The fourth component (transportation time) has changed dramatically as well ( Finally, the last component (usage time) has steadily decreased. As a consequence of the lean movement, firms have been reducing their order sizes, and order more frequently. The time between ordering moments decreases. Hence, the probability of having more than one order outstanding at the same moment increases. We conclude from this overview that modern supply chain management faces: Higher probability of more than one order outstanding, due to more frequent ordering and smaller lot sizes. Relatively larger transportation time component of order leadtime and total ordering cycle, due to ICT developments and SCM concepts, such as electronic ordering possibilities and vendor managed inventory. Increased frequency of either changing supplier or using more suppliers, due to electronic marketplaces, trade regulations and transparent markets. More dynamic and less stochastic lead time variations, due to the increase in alternative but dependable supply modes. The combined effect of these developments is a reduction of the time between orders The question arises of whether there are specific industries where we might expect order crossovers to occur. The literature on order crossovers that we examined did not point to specific industries. However, by combining the conditions of Let us first consider the stochastic component. Literature on the bull whip effect (e.g. Dynamic lead time variability may be caused by seasonal patterns, either generated by nature or by cyclic production schedules of the supplier. Industries that face these seasonal patterns are often located upstream in the supply chain. Further, dynamic lead time variability can be caused by different suppliers or supply modes that are available for the same product. If the geographical distance between suppliers or between supplier and the firm is large, the probability of a larger lead time variability increases. The latter type of variability is often faced intentionally, as nowadays many firms choose to outsource production (items positioned within the oval in In summary, we conclude that especially firms that are either located upstream in the supply chain, or use natural resources, or order strategic materials from multiple suppliers or from abroad face a higher risk of encountering inventory order crossovers. This section describes the inventory management problem of a tobacco firm that needs tobacco leaf from all over the world in order to produce cigarettes and other products. It is considered a strategic item for this firm. Tobacco leaf comes from an annual plant that can be harvested four to five months after sowing. Tobacco is found all over the world and a tobacco firm assigns the leaves to different quality groups for its inventory control. Tobacco from different countries may belong to the same quality group, resulting in various ordering moments per quality group during the year. After picking the leaves, the green tobacco has to be cured and the leaves are sorted to grade, fumigated and packed for transport to the harbor in or near the country of origin. In the harbor it is stored to ripen further and it waits until shipment has been arranged to the country where the factory is located. A firm can order tobacco in three ways, depending on the market structure in the country of origin. In some countries, orders can be placed before the sowing takes place, directly with the farmer. In other countries, orders can be placed at the start of the harvesting season, using intermediate suppliers that buy the green tobacco through an auction system. Some countries have an open market structure where grades can be purchased from externally managed stock. Generally, there is only one dominant ordering option available per country of origin. Preference for that ordering option is determined by the consequences for price, lead time, quality, risks regarding availability, and long term interests concerning stable supply relations. Multiple ordering moments result from the large lead time differences that are the result of the available ordering options and from the fact that the harvesting season for grades that belong to the same quality group may be spread over the year if there are several countries of origin. The firm frequently encounters order crossovers for tobacco quality groups when multiple ordering options are used for a group and several countries provide tobacco for this group. We denote these order crossovers as either expected order crossovers or general order crossovers. The ordering option at an ordering moment is known in advance, so large differences in lead times are known in advance, i.e. they may be regarded as deterministic. The stochastic component of the lead times is in some situations present, resulting in general order crossovers, but most order crossovers can be considered to be expected order crossovers. A numerical example of these differences in lead times for several grades is given in  Order crossovers need special treatment in inventory ordering policies. The literature review of We conclude that tobacco firms face order crossovers mainly due to the availability of several suppliers and supply options and the fact that the raw material is both a natural product and a strategic item. The lead time variability is large, due to the different ordering options per country of origin. Lead times are often much larger than the time between ordering moments. The potential cost savings of using inventory control procedures that are able to cope with expected order crossovers are substantial. Order crossovers are generally neglected in inventory control literature. This paper defines order crossovers and gives conditions for order crossovers to occur. A necessary but not sufficient condition for order crossovers to occur is the existence of lead time variability. Developments in modern supply chain management show the need for adequate treatment of the effect of order crossovers on inventory control policies. We distinguish between random order crossovers, expected order crossovers, and general order crossovers. Recently, advantages have been made concerning the inclusion of the random order crossover effect in continuous inventory models. However, expected and general order crossovers have not been given adequate treatment. This paper shows that due to the changes in the field of inventory management, the probability of the occurrence of expected order crossovers increases. These changes are a reduction of the time before issuing an order, more suppliers, more frequent ordering, larger distances between supplier and firm, more supply options with different lead time consequences, and dependable but more variable total lead times. For some types of industry, the problem of facing order crossovers is more current. Firms that are either located upstream in the supply chain, or use natural resources, or order strategic materials from abroad face a higher risk of encountering inventory order crossovers. The example of the inventory control problem of a tobacco firm shows that order crossovers are becoming an important problem and substantial cost reductions can be gained by taking them into account. Expected order crossovers frequently occur in the stock management of tobacco leaf, due to the different countries of origin of the tobacco that belongs to the same quality group, and differences in the possibilities and practice with respect to the time of placing an order. A preliminary estimate of the potential cost savings of using inventory control procedures that take expected order crossovers into account showed that a 30% cost reduction for the items that face expected order crossovers seems possible. Future research should address the effect of these order crossovers on order size and safety stock determination.