A systematic investigation was performed on the hydrogen storage behaviors of ball-milled MgH2-activated carbon (AC) composites. Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) measurement on the desorption temperature was carried out and indicated that the onset and peak temperatures both decreased with increasing AC adding amount, for example, the desorption peak temperature shifted from 349 °C for 1 wt% AC to 316 °C for 20 wt% AC. Furthermore, it is noted that the hydrogen absorption capacity and hydriding kinetics of the composites were also dependent on the adding amount of AC, and the optimum condition could be achieved by mechanical milling of MgH2 with 5 wt% AC. The Mg-5wt%AC composite can absorb about 6.5 wt% hydrogen within 7 min at 300 °C and 6.7 wt% within 2 h at 200 °C, respectively. It is also demonstrated that MgH2-5wt% AC exhibited good hydrogen desorption property that could release 6.5 wt% at 330 °C within 30 min. X-ray diffraction patterns (XRD) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) observations revealed that the grain size of the synthesized composites decreased with increasing AC amount. This may contribute to the improvement of hydrogen storage in MgH2-AC composites.Developing new inexpensive, safe and innocuous materials capable of storing and reversibly desorbing a large amount of hydrogen at both low temperature and pressure is an urgent issue in hydrogen economy. Magnesium hydride is one of the most studied hydrides due to its high hydrogen storage capacity (7.6 wt%) and excellent reversibility, as well as high abundance and low cost. However, it has not been widely adopted commercially because of its high operating temperature and sluggish sorption kinetics In the past several years, MgH Recent promising theoretical studies predicted that the possibility of altering thermodynamics of MgH Here, we re-visit the effect of activated carbon (AC) on the hydrogenation/dehydrogenation of magnesium due to several reasons. The first is to confirm the effect of activated carbon on Mg hydrogenation that is just less than SWNTs but much better than other carbons The samples were prepared from commercial available magnesium hydride (sigma-aldrich) and microporous activated carbon (AC) with BET specific surface area of 1174 m The microstructure and morphology of the synthesized samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The XRD patterns of the samples were performed on a Rigaku MIniflex diffractometer with Co Kα radiation at a scanning rate of 2°/min in the 2θ range from 10° to 90°. The SEM photomicrograph of the samples was taken in a JEOL 6300 microscope with Pt coating. TEM observation was conducted on a FEI Tecnai 20 microscope with an accelerating voltage 200 kV. The TEM samples were prepared by dipping ultrasonically dispersed the powders in heptane on holey carbon grids. The effect of different amount of AC as additives on the decomposition temperature of MgH  SEM and TEM have been used to further clarify the fine microstructures and morphologies of the samples. The particle size and grain size of MgH To explore the relation between different grain sizes and desorption performance in MgH  To gain further insight into the reasons underlying phenomena of AC effect in hydrogenation, we propose the mechanisms as follows for hydrogenation of Mg in MgH The hydrogen desorption kinetics of the MgH The hydrogen capacity and absorption/desorption kinetics of Mg can be markedly improved by adding activated carbon (AC). A systematic investigation of MgH The financial support of UQRS scholarship from the