In this paper, new silicon nitride cantilevers integrated with silicon heaters and piezoelectric sensors have been developed to obtain an improved uniformity of the initial bending and the mechanical stability of the cantilever array for thermo-piezoelectric probe-based data storage. This nitride cantilever showed thickness uniformity less than 2%. Data bits of 40nm in diameter were recorded on PMMA film. Sensitivity of the piezoelectric sensor was measured to be 0.615fC/nm after poling, implying that indentations less than 20nm in depth can be detected. Finally, 128×128 probe array was developed for high speed operation.In recent years, probe-based data storage has been studied extensively to overcome the storage density limits of HDD, optical storages and semiconductor memories In a piezoelectric cantilever, like PZT, the mechanism of sensing is as follows; as the PZT cantilever scans across the indentation of a polymer film, the cantilever deflects along the indentation of the film, causing stress on the PZT film. The variation of stress in the PZT film produces self-generated charges on the surface of the PZT capacitor without applying voltage. The charges are not generated by the absolute stress, but by the variation of stress. Therefore, the piezoelectric sensing method has the advantages of low power consumption, no off-set voltage and high reading speed compared to thermo-resistive sensing method. Furthermore, the power consumption during writing can be reduced by selecting low Tg polymer media because the media is not reflowed during reading process with no tip heating. The uniformity of initial bending and mechanical stability of probe array are crucial for reliable read/write operation in probe-based storage using cantilever array, both of which are not easily attainable with PZT cantilevers made of SOI wafer. The thickness of silicon layer in the thermo-piezoelectric cantilever, which greatly affects the initial bending of the PZT cantilever, is not uniform due to non-uniformity of the thickness of the device layer of SOI wafers and non-uniformity of etch depth during tip etching process. In this work, we have developed a probe-based data storage concept with the silicon nitride cantilever array consisted of silicon tip heaters and piezoelectric sensors to improve the uniformity and the mechanical stability of the probe array. The silicon nitride film formed by low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) method has superior thickness uniformity and mechanical stability compared to silicon device layer of SOI wafer. However, the formation of silicon tips on silicon nitride cantilevers is very complicated because silicon film cannot be epitaxially grown on silicon nitride film. Grow et al. developed the silicon nitride cantilevers with silicon tips by growing silicon nitride film on the silicon tips In this work, we developed the silicon nitride SOI wafer with silicon nitride buried layer to make the silicon nitride cantilevers with silicon tips. The silicon nitride cantilever shows uniform initial bending and good mechanical stability compared to silicon cantilever. The PZT sensor and the silicon tip heater are formed on the silicon nitride cantilever as shown in Fabrication process for the cantilevers is summarized in After depositing LPCVD oxide film with 200 After the wafers were diced into individual cantilevers, the tips on the cantilevers were heated to record a series of data bits on a polymer media. For polymer media, 40-nm thick PMMA film was prepared by spin coating method.   To measure the sensitivity of the PZT sensors, the induced charges were collected with various cantilever deflection, as shown in Using the fabricated cantilever, a series of data bits were written on a PMMA media, as shown in To detect smaller bits, we are attempting to increase the aspect ratio of the indentations and increase the signal to noise (S/N) ratio. The depth of the indentations was below 20 For high speed operation of probe-based data storage, 128 Silicon nitride cantilevers integrated with silicon tip heaters and piezoelectric sensors have been developed using nitride buried SOI wafers to obtain the uniform initial bending and the mechanical stability of the cantilever array. Data bits of 40 This work is supported by the National R&D Project for Nano Science and Technology (Project M1-0212-29-0000) of MOST.