Introduction
                  Distal humerus fractures are rare and challenging to treat. Anatomic reduction of the articular surface and stable osteosynthesis are mandatory for satisfactory results. The transolecranon approach allows superior visualisation of the joint. However, controversy exists regarding how best to fix the osteotomy. The purpose of the present study was to investigate the eligibility of a one-third tubular hook plate for osteosynthesis of olecranon osteotomies in distal humerus type-C fractures.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  A consecutive series of 34 patients who were treated through an olecranon osteotomy and underwent fixation using a one-third tubular hook plate were identified. Thirty-one patients (17 females, 14 males) with a median age of 50 years (14–87, standard deviation (SD) 18.3) were available for a comprehensive assessment after a mean of 12.3 months (6–20, SD 3.7). Using the Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen (AO) classification, six (19.4%) fractures were categorised as type C2 and 25 (80.6%) were categorised as C3. Physical and radiological examinations were performed. The Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) and the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand score (DASH) were evaluated.
               
                  Results
                  Mean extension–flexion ROM was found to be 102° (50–145°, SD 25). Pronation and supination were only slightly compromised. The mean MEPS was 87.2 points (50–100, SD 12.4). Fourteen patients (45.2%) were rated as excellent, and 15 (48.4%) were rated as good. One patient was rated fair, and one patient was rated as poor, respectively. Mean DASH score was 24.4 points (0–65, SD 20.3). Complications regarding the osteotomy occurred in seven patients (22.5%). Revision surgery was necessary in five cases (16%). At follow-up, all osteotomies went on to union. Mild joint degeneration (Broberg I) was found in 10 patients (32.2%). Implant removal was carried out in 15 patients (48.4%).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Based on this study, the osteosynthesis of olecranon osteotomies using a one-third tubular hook plate can be regarded as a safe procedure with a low complication rate. The implant needed is widely available and cost-efficient, in contrast to specially designed plates or nails.Fixing fractures of the distal humerus is one of the most challenging procedures in operative trauma care, particularly when articular comminution and diminished bone quality are present. Adequate exposure of the fracture fragments is needed to allow precise anatomic reduction and proper placement of the implants. The importance of an early initiation of physical therapy is frequently reported. This study attempted to determine the usefulness and complication rates of the one-third tubular-hook-plate technique in the treatment of olecranon osteotomies in distal humerus fractures. Thirty-four skeletally mature patients with operatively treated isolated type-C fractures of the distal humerus (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen (AO) classification) The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board of the department involved. Each patient provided written and informed consent. Thirty-two patients met the inclusion criteria. One patient died for reasons not related to the index procedure. As a result, 31 patients (97%) were available for a comprehensive assessment. The assessment included a review of the patient charts and detection of complications that arose during the treatment course. Complications were grouped as minor and major: they were deemed major if significant impairment resulted or surgical intervention was needed. At follow-up, a standard physical examination was performed. In addition to range-of-motion (ROM) measurement and testing the stability of the elbow joint, the Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) Postoperative antero-posterior and lateral radiographs were used to evaluate the quality of osteotomy reduction and fixation. A step or gap of <2 The duration of the operative procedures was not evaluated for this study because it was mainly influenced by the treatment of the distal humerus fracture rather than repair of the olecranon osteotomy. The frequency of implant removal with respect to the olecranon was recorded. The surgical procedure was performed with the patient under general anaesthesia, in the supine position, with the involved arm on an armrest. A tourniquet was used, depending on the surgeon's preference. Using a posterior midline incision, medially and laterally full-thickness flaps were developed. The ulnar nerve was identified and mobilised routinely; however, anterior transposition was carried out depending on the position of the implant at the medial epicondyle. After blunt dissection of the triceps at the medial and lateral intermuscular septae, medial visualisation of the olecranon joint was performed to identify the bare area. Depending on surgeons’ preference, an interfragmentary screw hole for refixation was drilled before performing the osteotomy. Using a thin oscillating saw, an apex-distal configured osteotomy of the olecranon was created, approximately 2.5 At 24–48 Statistical analyses were performed with the Predictive Analytics Software (PASW) Statistics 18 software package (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Data are represented as means and standard deviations. This study investigated 31 patients with osteotomies of the olecranon fixed with a one-third tubular hook plate. The average age of the 17 women and 14 men was 50 years (14–87, standard deviation (SD) 18.3). The dominant arm was involved in 11 cases (35.5%). Six (19.4%) fractures of the distal humerus were classified as C2, and 25 (80.6%) were classified as C3 type. Eight fractures (25.8%) were grade I, and two fractures (6.5%) were grade II open (Gustilo classification). In all patients, the olecranon osteosynthesis was considered stable by the surgeon, and thus did not interfere with the rehabilitation protocol. However, due to distal humerus osteosynthesis, immobilisation of the elbow was needed in five patients for 20 days (7–42, SD 20.2). The mean extension–flexion arc of motion at the time of follow-up was found to be 102° (50–145°, SD 25). There was a mean extension deficit of −20° (−5° to 40°, SD 13.7) in 28 patients, whereas extension was not compromised in only three patients. Mean flexion was 122° (80–145°, SD 19.4). With 81° external (15–90°, SD 16.6) and 85° internal rotation (70–90°, SD 7.3), forearm motion was almost normal. Using the MEPS, 14 patients (45.2%) were rated as excellent and 15 (48.4%) as good. One patient was rated as fair, and one patient was rated as poor. The mean MEPS score was 87.2 points (50–100, SD 12.4). The mean DASH score was 24.4 points (0–65, SD 20.3). With respect to the olecranon osteotomy, a total of 11 complications occurred in seven patients (22.5%). The details of the two minor and five major complications are displayed in As measured from the postoperative radiographs, there were no osteotomies with a gap or step of more than 2 Degenerative changes of the elbow joint at stage I (according to Broberg) were found in 10 patients (32.2%). Heterotopic bone formation was present in four patients (two type-I patients and two IIa patients, according to Hastings classification). At final follow-up, the hook plate had already been removed in 15 patients (48.4%). Implant removal was performed upon patient request. The hook plate was reported as bothersome in only two cases (6.4%). The purpose of the study presented was to determine the usefulness and complication rates of the one-third tubular-hook-plate technique in the treatment of olecranon osteotomies in distal humerus fractures. Although nearly 81% of the patients presented with type-C3 fractures, 14 excellent and 15 good results were found in the MEPS. The mean MEPS score was found to be 87.2 points and the mean DASH score was 24.4 points. All osteosynthesis of the olecranon osteotomy were considered stable to allow early initiation of physical therapy by the treating surgeon. In total, 11 complications occurred in seven patients (22.5%). Surgical intervention due to complications was necessary in five cases (16%). The implant was reported as bothersome with subsequent implant removal in two patients. Intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus are rare and difficult to treat. However, good functional results can be obtained when anatomic and stable joint reconstruction is achieved, and early initiation of physical therapy is realised. Enthusiasm for the transolecranon approach is somewhat limited by the various complications resulting from the osteotomy and its fixation. However, the functional results found in our study were excellent or good in the vast majority of patients (>90%) ( As in all patients the hook-plate osteosynthesis was considered as stable, the approach did not hinder the rehabilitation protocol. In contrast to the promising functional results, we found an overall complication rate of 22.5% related to the osteotomy. In detail, two patients suffered minor and five major complications. The amount of minor complications seems to be negligible as the postoperative and rehabilitative course was not affected. Additional surgery concerning the osteotomy and fixation was necessary in the five patients with major complications (16%). Comparing 13 patients with olecranon osteotomies and 13 patients treated with a triceps split approach for the treatment of open supracondylar fractures, McKee et al. observed improved scores on the DASH and Mayo Elbow questionnaire following use of the triceps split technique. Removal of symptomatic implants at the olecranon was performed in two patients (6.4%) in our series, which is remarkably less than in the studies aforementioned. These findings are comparable with those of Coles et al., who found symptomatic osteotomy fixation in 8%. The removal rate of symptomatic implants was distributed equally between intramedullary screw and plate fixation in his study (∼6.5%). Since Gainor found 30% nonunion in transverse osteotomies, it is now well accepted that the olecranon osteotomy should be performed in a chevron style to maximise the bony contact area. The nonunion rate reported in the literature is nearly identical with the rate found in our study and ranges from 6.4% to 9%. Using tension band wiring for refixation of both intra- and extra-articular osteotomies, Sane et al. reported 36% of patients to have non-anatomic reductions. Dislocation of the olecranon osteotomy was encountered in four patients (12.9%) of our series. In all four patients, unrestricted ROM exercises were permitted. At least in two patients, compliance might have been questionable. In another patient, the beam screw did not penetrate the anterior cortex of the coronoid process, thereby weakening the construct stability. The rate of wound infection is reported with up to 10% in the literature. In summary, the encountered complications in our population described remain manageable, particularly when compared with complex reconstructive issues at the distal humerus as a result of inadequate articular visualisation. Our data indicate that plate fixation of olecranon osteotomies is a suitable method. Biomechanical studies strongly support the use of plates. There are some potential advantages to the use of plate osteosynthesis for olecranon osteotomies. In a biomechanical study, a significantly smaller displacement was found when comparing tension band wiring and posterior plating of osteotomies in embalmed human ulna. The limitations of our study are related to the inherent weakness of a retrospective review and the relatively small number of patients. There was no comparison with techniques other than the olecranon osteotomy approach involving use of a one-third tubular hook plate. Sufficient anatomic reduction of the olecranon was achieved in all patients. However, results were evaluated using plain radiographs in two planes. A threshold of a 2-mm articular step or gap was used on the basis of Murphy et al., who found significantly more degenerative elbow joint changes in patients with incongruences above 2 It needs to be mentioned that the functional results are mainly influenced by the fracture of the distal humerus, rather than the approach used. In addition, the short duration of follow-up might have contributed to the low incidence of osteoarthritis, which is known to develop after many years. The strengths of the study include standardised treatment of the distal humerus fracture with latest-generation angular-stable plates, performance of olecranon osteosynthesis with one single technique and the inclusion of consecutive patients. The use of standard and validated outcome measurements should also be judged as a strength. For future research, prospective randomised trials including different approaches and, in case of osteotomy, different types of osteotomy refixation in larger sample sizes are needed. Only C3 fractures should be included to homogenise the study cohort. In addition, the treatment of the distal humerus fracture should be performed using a single type of implant to exclude potential confounding factors. Evaluating the approaches and related complications, the future studies ought to focus on the osteotomy complications rather than functional result, as this is mainly influenced by the distal humerus fracture itself. Exposure is enhanced by olecranon osteotomy, which facilitates reduction and internal fixation of complex distal humerus fractures, thereby improving the quality of anatomic reconstruction and enabling superior outcome. One-third tubular-hook-plate osteosynthesis after chevron-shaped olecranon osteotomies achieves high primary stability with relatively few complications, thus not interfering with an active ROM postoperative protocol in distal humerus fractures. In addition, the implant is marked by its cost-effectiveness and widespread availability. Anatomically pre-shaped and angular-stable plates as well as specially designed nails might be suitable for refixation of osteotomies, but they are much more expensive. Nonunion and failure rates are in concert with previous studies but the need for implant removal is remarkably decreased. Reviewing our 31 patients, we feel comfortable in recommending the one-third tubular-hook-plate osteosynthesis of olecranon osteotomies as a simple and safe procedure. The authors of the paper “One-third tubular hook plate osteosynthesis for olecranon osteotomies in distal humerus type C fractures: a preliminary report of results and complications” state that there are no conflicts of interest.