The aim of this paper is to analyze different strategies for the solution of a two-stage stochastic problem applied to a copper flotation circuit. In the optimization problem, we want to find the optimal configuration of a superstructure, equipment design and operational conditions such as residence time and stream flows, among others variables. Variability is considered in the copper price and ore grade. This variability is represented by scenarios with respective probabilities of occurrence. Two solution strategies are compared. As a first step, we solve the fully adaptable model, and then two partially adaptive strategies are analyzed. One of the partially adaptive models delivers the best profit, and it is closer to the reality of the operation.Flotation is a physicochemical process that allows the separation of minerals, such as copper sulfide and molybdenum, from the remaining minerals that form most of the parent rock substrate, including contaminants such as arsenic minerals ( Most of the preceding methods for the design of flotation circuits do not consider that the design may contain parameters that cannot be completely defined or values that may be subject to degrees of uncertainty. These parameters and values usually involve external factors, such as product demand, economic factors, environmental factors or internal plant conditions, including kinetic and diffusion constants, which may lead to an inefficient process design ( Large numbers of variables are handled in the design of flotation circuits, some of which may involve uncertainty, such as the feed grade, metal or product price, This study applies two-stage stochastic programming with recourse ( The flotation process depends on several design and operational variables. We consider a superstructure that includes the following three flotation stages: the rougher, which processes the feed; the cleaner, which generates the final concentrate; and the scavenger, which generates the final tailing, as shown in The objective is to maximize the total income with respect to the operation conditions and process design. The decision variables to be optimized are divided into design and The resolution of the stochastic two-stage model can be performed through an equivalent deterministic model (  Consider the superstructure shown in First, solve the fully adaptive model, in which all variables become second-stage variables and change with each scenario. Each scenario is run separately. After determining the optimum for each scenario, as was done in the fully adaptive model, the volume (first-level variable) is fixed to the maximum value of all of the volumes found in each of the scenarios. The reason for fixing to the maximum value is ensure the capacity of each flotation stage. Each scenario is optimized, finding new second-level variables. We denote this Solution Methodology A.  The problem is solved in a computer with an Intel core i7 processor (2.7 Employing solution methodology B ensures that profits are maximized, by finding the optimal configuration and by minimizing costs through the cost of the cells. By employing the methodology of solution A, the variable volume is set to the maximum found, corresponding to scenario 9 (high price, high grade) in the fully adaptive model. These dimensions correspond to the optimum for that particular scenario but are oversized for others, increasing total costs. The difference between the two methodologies is approximately 30,000 US$/y. Although the difference between each methodology is not very large, it is noteworthy that through this methodology is possible to solve the problem and find an optimal solution. Once the resolution of the stochastic model is possible, its effectiveness is evaluated as a tool for the design of the flotation process. The design and profits obtained by the stochastic and deterministic model are compared. In the deterministic model, the resolution is carried out through weighted averages of stochastic parameters. In this case, the feed grade corresponds to 0.56% chalcopyrite, 2.39% partially liberated chalcopyrite and 0.45% tennantite. The price of the metal corresponds to 5018 US$/ton. A single circuit and single cell design are obtained, which should be able to cushion any variability of the parameters. By running each scenario with this configuration to calculate the actual profit, we found that the first scenario, which considers a lower copper price and lower feed grade, is not capable of operating at the design conditions. It is for this reason that the use of mean values it is not the best option. However, it is not possible to determine the real value of total income; therefore, comparison with other alternatives is not possible. A model for the design of flotation circuits under uncertainty has been presented. Uncertainty is represented by scenarios that include changes in the feed grade and in the metal price. The model allows the operating conditions (residence time and mass flows of each stream) and flow structure (tail and concentrate stream of cleaner and scavenger stage) to be changed for each scenario while the fixed design (size of cells in flotation stages) for all scenarios is maintained. The model can be modified to include other uncertainties and other adaptive variables. To solve the two-stage stochastic model, two solution strategies were proposed. The results show that the use of average values for the stochastic parameters leads to an inefficient design and hence a decrease in the profits made in the process. Finally, it can be concluded that the use of stochastic programming can be a beneficial tool in the design of a metallurgical process, specifically the copper flotation process. The optimal configuration is capable of adapting to uncertainty, leading to an increase in the company profits 