The effluent from the secondary clarifier of an Urban Sewage Treatment Plant was oxidized by the combined and simultaneous use of ozone and hydrogen peroxide. The purpose was to increase the wastewater's reuse potential by improving water quality. The removal of dissolved organic chemicals was enhanced by adding periodic pulses of hydrogen peroxide while keeping pH above 8.0 throughout the runs. These conditions led to almost complete mineralization in less than 1h. Under similar conditions, without the addition of hydrogen peroxide, the removal of total organic carbon (TOC) was no higher than 35%. The evolution of TOC was related to the concentration of hydroxyl radicals using a second-order kinetic model in which the exposure to hydroxyl radical was included by assuming a quasi-steady-state approximation. The concentration of hydroxyl radical was computed using the experimental data from ozone and hydrogen peroxide. The kinetic constants for the hydroxyl-mediated mineralization process were determined for wastewaters collected during a 1-year sampling campaign. The results showed that the mineralization process takes place in two periods whose rate constants were linked to the chemical oxygen demand (COD) to biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) ratio and to the chloride content of wastewaters. During the first part of the runs, the specific rate of mineralization was high, before subsequently decreasing after a period of 5–15min by an average factor of 6.4 whose 95% confidence interval was in the 3.4–9.3 range. The moles of TOC removed per mole of ozone consumed were in the range of 9.2–17.7mg O3/mg TOC measured at maximum ozone efficiency, which always occurred within the first 10min.concentration of dissolved ozone (M) equilibrium concentration of dissolved ozone (M) concentration of ozone in gas phase (M) concentration of ozone in the gas leaving the diffuser (M) concentration of hydrogen peroxide (M) concentration of hydroxyl radicals (M) concentration of hydroxide anion (M) concentration of hydroperoxide anion (M) concentration of a given compound (M) concentration of radical scavengers (M) diffusivity of ozone in water (m gas flow rate (m Henry's law constant (dimensionless) kinetic constant defined in Eq. kinetic constant of the reaction between ozone and hydroperoxide anion (M kinetic constant of the reaction between ozone and hydroxide anion (M liquid phase individual mass transfer coefficient (m volumetric mass transfer coefficient (s kinetic constant for the indirect ozonation of a given compound (M mineralization kinetic constant (M kinetic constant of termination reactions (M constant defined in Eq. kinetic constant for the first mineralization period (M kinetic constant for the second mineralization period (M number of pulses of hydrogen peroxide moles of ozone (mol) section of the reactor (m volume occupied by the liquid phase (m height from the diffuser (m) function defined in Eq. gas-hold up (dimensionless) The environmental protection of surface and groundwater, including artificial and heavily modified bodies of water, has been urged upon Member States of the European Union by the EC Water Framework Directive For the removal of organic compounds in wastewater, ozone-based advanced oxidation processes (AOP) are much more efficient than ozone alone. The addition of H This work focuses on the need to provide adequate quality in order to broaden water reuse practices. It is a part of a program financed by the Spanish Government that is undertaking a complete study of the different aspects involved in the reuse of wastewater consistent with the fact that reclamation and reuse practices require careful planning steps. These include the application of advanced oxidation technologies for the use of reclaimed water and the assessment of the fate of chemicals during treatments. This work presents results concerning a 1-year sampling campaign undertaken in the urban STP of Alcalá de Henares (Madrid, Spain), whose wastewaters were treated using an ozone-based AOP to remove organic compounds. The aim was to establish operational boundaries for AOP in wastewater by relating the extent of mineralization to matrix effects associated with seasonal variability, as well as to contribute to the understanding and modelling of O Wastewater was collected from the secondary clarifier of a STP located in Alcalá de Henares (Madrid) that receives a mixture of domestic and industrial wastewater from facilities located around the city. This STP has a capacity of 375,000 equivalent inhabitants and is designed to treat a maximum volume of wastewater of 3000 During the runs, certain samples were withdrawn for analysis after previously removing ozone by bubbling nitrogen in order to prevent further oxidation reactions. The experiments started at pH 8.5 and were always kept above 8.0 by pumping a diluted solution of sodium hydroxide (Panreac) with a feed-back PID control device when necessary. The decomposition of ozone acidified the reaction mixture but the general trend during most of the run was a moderate increase of pH. This effect was attributed to reactions between hydroxyl radicals and carbonate and bicarbonate ions formed during the mineralization process The concentration of dissolved ozone was measured by means of an amperometric Rosemount 499A OZ analyzer calibrated against the Indigo Colorimetric Method (SM 4500-O Total organic carbon (TOC) analyses were performed with the aid of a Shimadzu TOC-VCSH analyzer equipped with ASI-V autosampler. Inorganic anions were determined using a Dionex DX120 Ion Chromatograph with conductivity detector and an IonPac AS9-HC 4  The experiments were conducted in semicontinuous mode with periodic pulses of H The behaviour of wastewater samples during ozonation revealed strong seasonal differences. The pattern of TOC removal revealed differences among samples, although these were not dependent on their belonging to wet or dry periods. The most apparent was the existence of an induction period in some processed samples. In contrast with runs carried out with an injection of hydrogen peroxide, alkaline ozonation alone yielded much lower mineralization rates. Alkaline ozonation initiates with the reaction of hydroxide anion with ozone, a reaction whose second-order constant is relatively small (70 Considering that direct ozonation is negligible and, therefore, the oxidation of a given organic compound, P, takes place only by means of the hydroxyl radical, the mass balance to a volume element yields the following expression: The concentration of HO The combination of the preceding equations yields the following expression for the logarithmic decay of the concentration of a given organic pollutant: The concentration of hydrogen peroxide can be calculated inside each pulse from the ozone consumed within the liquid phase and that transferred from the gas:  The experimental values of the kinetic constant of Eq. The second kinetic period showed quite different behaviour and its kinetic constant did not correlate significantly correlated with that of the first. The profile of the time series representing  The model described by Eqs. Data on ozone dosing for O The maximum at 2.5–7.5 The ozonation treatment of the effluent from the secondary clarifier of an urban STP was carried out by the simultaneous use of ozone and hydrogen peroxide. Kinetic constants for the second-order hydroxyl-mediated mineralization process were determined for wastewaters collected throughout a sampling period lasting almost 1 year. The results showed a TOC decay ranging from 75 to 100% during 1 The authors express their gratitude to the Ministry of Education of Spain (Contracts CTM2005-03080/TECNO and CSD2006-00044) and to the DGUI de la Comunidad de Madrid (Contract 0505/AMB-0395).