The effect of the non-diamond carbon etching on the electron field emission behavior of highly sp2 bonded nanocrystalline diamond films has been systematically investigated by performing hydrogen treatments. Field emission properties and emission patterns of the films are initially enhanced and then degraded with an increase in the hydrogen treatment time. The most uniform distribution of the emission site is obtained for a 1-min hydrogen-treated film, and the reason for this is explained in terms of the increase of triple junction site due to etching of the sp2 bonded carbon by atomic hydrogen. On the other hand, the degraded emission property of the films treated for more than 10 min is due to the decrease of triple junction, which is indirectly confirmed by Raman and Auger electron spectroscopy.Himpsel et al. demonstrated that (111) plane of type-IIb diamond has a negative electron affinity (NEA) Various surface treatments have been conducted to enhance the electron emission properties of diamond. Monolayer coatings of metals such as Co, Ni, Cu, Zr have been shown to improve field emission properties of diamond by shifting the position of the vacuum level However, the role of atomic hydrogen on the diamond growth was known as follows In this study, in order to systematically examine the effect of non-diamond carbon etching on the field emission properties, we prepared the nanocrystalline diamond films with a large amount of non-diamond carbon and performed hydrogen treatments by varying the treatment time. Structural properties, surface morphology, and field emission properties, including emission pattern, have been investigated. Consequently, possible field emission mechanisms are discussed. Undoped polycrystalline diamond films were deposited on an Si substrate by a hot filament chemical vapor deposition (HFCVD) technique using a mixture of methane and hydrogen gases. Low resistivity n-type (100) Si wafers (specific resistivity of 0.015 Ω-cm) were used as substrates. The Si substrates were ultrasonically treated in an ethanol-fine diamond suspension to enhance the nucleation density. The filament temperature, the substrate temperature, the total flow rate, and the total gas pressure were fixed at 2000 °C, 850 °C, 100 sccm, and 15 torr, respectively. Diamond films are deposited at 10% CH The field emission characteristics were measured in a ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) chamber (base pressure<5×10 Raman spectroscopy was used to examine the structural change of the diamond films treated in pure hydrogen ambient and the spectra for these films were shown in The fine structure in the low energy side of the carbon Auger peak can be used to distinguish diamond from graphite. The change in the shoulder around the main carbon peak is very sensitive to the structure of bond hybridization In order to examine the effect of non-diamond carbon etching on the electron emission property, the current–voltage characteristics of the hydrogen-treated samples were investigated and summarized in It is known that field emission property of thin diamond films is better than that of thick films On the other hand, it is known that surface morphology is a factor that affects field enhancement factor. It was confirmed in this experiment that with increasing the treatment time, the grain size of the diamond films slightly decreased from 50 nm to 40 nm and their morphologies have been changed from a roughened to a rounded surface. So, this subtle change of surface morphology could not cause the significant change of the emission patterns shown in It has been proposed that the transport path of field-emitted electrons and the resulting field emission mechanism of undoped polycrystalline diamond depend solely on the non-diamond carbon content in diamond films It has been shown in On the other hand, when the films were hydrogen-treated for more than 10 min, the decreased number of emission site ( By introducing the hydrogen treatment, the influence of non-diamond carbon at the surface of nanocrystalline diamond on electron emission was examined. With increasing the treatment time, the intensity of the D and G peaks downshifted from 1343 cm to 1336 cm