Inter-plant hydrogen integration (IPHI) is getting more attention in recent years, as a result of the increasing demand for hydrogen in refinery processes, such as hydrotreating and hydrocracking. In this work, IPHI with regeneration scheme is analyzed. Indirect integration scheme is adopted, where hydrogen sources from different hydrogen networks are integrated via a centralized purifier, such as pressure swing adsorption (PSA) or membrane separation. The introduced model is able to select the optimum interception unit, which minimizes the total annualized cost. Besides, multi-period consideration is included in the analysis to address the effect of changes in operating conditions of the IPHI network on total hydrogen consumption. Two case studies are presented to demonstrate the applicability and usefulness of the proposed model.Annualized factor Annual working hours Continuous catalytic reformer Cracked naphtha hydrotreating unit Combined process sink Catalytic reforming unit Composite Table Algorithm Length of cross-plant pipeline Diesel hydrotreating unit inlet flowrate to PSA cross-plant flow rate from source (i) to PSA flow rate requirement of sink j flow rate of source i cross-plant flowrate from reject stream of PSA to sink (j) flow rate of fresh hydrogen to sink j flow rate from source i to sink j cross-plant flowrate from purified stream of PSA to sink (j) fuel flowrate of source i flowrate of reject stream of PSA (to fuel) flowrate of purified stream of PSA flowate of purified stream of PSA flowrate sent from the purified stream of PSA to network k Gas Cascade Analysis Gas oil hydrotreating unit Cm capital cost of membrane capital cost of pipelines when membrane is used Hydrocracking unit Isomerization unit Jet fuel hydrotreating unit Flowrate of reject stream of PSA flowrate from reject stream of PSA to network k permeability of hydrogen binary variables indicate the existence or absence of PSA binary variables indicate the existence or absence of Membrane linear Programming fractional interest rate Million standard cubic feet per day Mixed Integer Non Linear Programming the number of years total number of sinks total number of sources Naphtha hydrotreating unit operating cost before implementation IPHI operating cost after implementation IPHI operating cost saving inlet pressure of the membrane pressure of the membrane purified stream Pressure swing adsorption Residue hydrotreating unit binary variables indicate the existence or absence of cross-plant pipeline from purified stream of PSA to fuel system. binary variables indicate the existence or absence of cross-plant pipeline from reject stream of PSA to fuel system. unit cost of fresh hydrogen. impurity concentration of fresh hydrogen stream binary variables indicate the existence or absence of cross-plant pipeline from network k to PSA impurity concentration of source i impurity concentration of purified stream of purifier impurity concentration reject stream of purifier purity concentration of feed to membrane purity concentration of purified stream of membrane binary variables indicate the existence or absence of cross-plant pipeline from purified stream of PSA to network k impurity concentration of sink j after mixing of sources fractions and fresh fractions binary variables indicate the existence or absence of cross-plant pipeline from reject stream of PSA to network k hydrogen recovery of PSA Hydrogen network in refinery consists of a group of hydrogen producers and hydrogen consumers. The hydrogen producers include catalytic reformers, ethylene plants, hydrogen plants or other hydrogen imports. On the other hand, the hydrogen consumers include hydrotreating, hydrocracking, and isomerization units. Hydrogen streams are normally sent from their producers either to the hydrogen headers or to the consumers directly Process integration methodologies, such as Regeneration system is used to achieve higher hydrogen recovery. The purified hydrogen could be sent for reuse/recycle or rejected as fuel After the maximum realization of recovery potential for in-plant hydrogen recovery, a further means to enhance hydrogen recovery is via Several approaches based on pinch and mathematical optimization techniques were developed for IPHI. The first work on inter-plant resource integration was reported by Olesen and Polley Apart from the pinch-based techniques, there are quite some mathematical based works developed for inter-plant resource conservation. Chew et al. Despite of the above developments on IPHI, none of these works has fully considered multi-period operations. In other words, the hydrogen networks were designed using data with one set of process conditions. Hydrogen network designed with this kind of In this work, multi-period consideration is included for IPHI. The methodology developed for Multi-period consideration for IPHI in this paper is an extension of work developed by Ahmed et al. In this paper, the model developed by Ahmed et al. for single network has been extended with some modifications for inter-plant hydrogen networks and regeneration. Indirect hydrogen integration scheme was adapted, where centralized utility facility is included to supply fresh hydrogen feed and interception units are included for hydrogen regeneration. Additionally, selection of the optimum regenerator type (pressure swing adsorption or membrane separation) for IPHI is introduced in this work. Finally, IPHI with multi-period consideration is studied. This work has the benefit of decreasing fresh hydrogen for the participating networks in inter-plant hydrogen integration when the catalyst activity of hydrotreaters in refinery is taken into consideration (multi-period). Two case studies are presented to illustrate the methodology proposed in this paper and to demonstrate the applicability of the model. Given a number of hydrogen networks with single period, each network consists of a set of For inter-plant hydrogen integration with multi-period operation, the periodic changes in the operating conditions of a process involved in hydrogen networks are given to determine the change in the fresh hydrogen for IPHI. The overall objective of the introduced model is to synthesize an indirect IPHI scheme with interception unit selection, where multi-period is taken into consideration. The most commonly used purifiers are PSA and membrane units. For hydrogen network design, there are three main differences between purifiers; product purity, product pressure and hydrogen recovery. PSA units achieve very high purity which can exceed 99.9%, while membrane unit typically give lower purity. Another difference is that the pressure drop through PSA is very low, compared to membrane. It ranges from 0.05 to 0.1 Both of these interception units are known as partitioning units, where a higher quality product stream and a lower quality reject stream are produced. As shown in Note that in case of PSA regenerator, product pressure is nearly the same as the feed pressure  The flowrate balance for a source This work is focused on indirect inter-plant hydrogen integration, so, there is no direct cross-plant pipeline from network k to the other networks as described in Eq. The flowrate sent from the participating networks to PSA Also, in Eq. Material balance around PSA unit is clarified in Eqs. It is assumed that the sources to be regenerated are mixed before entering the interception unit. Hence, there is an infinite number of mixing ratios among these sources The equations developed for PSA are similarly applied to the membrane as follows: Material balance around the membrane gives: Impurity balance around the membrane gives: The lower and upper bounds of the reject stream concentration are included in the model as described in Eq. Where The inlet pressure for membrane is much higher than PSA and a compressor is typically installed with membrane process as described in Eqs. The power cost of the installed compressor with membrane in Eq. The capital cost of in-plant pipelines inside the networks is described in Eq. On the other hand the capital cost of inter-plant pipelines in case of PSA and the membrane system are described in Eqs. The capital cost is annualized by To limit the capital cost of the pipelines, Eq. Eq. The payback period, which is the time to recoup the capital investment cost of the installed purifier, installed membrane compressor, and cross-plant pipelines could be calculated by dividing the capital cost to the saving in the operating cost The saving in the operating cost is the difference between the operating cost for all networks in the base case Note that, the fuel is assumed to be a mixture of hydrogen and methane Multi-period operation refers to the periodic change in operating conditions of a process in order to meet the product specifications and market demands, hence, maintain satisfactory performance. However, catalyst de-activation is the main reason behind multi-period operation of a hydrotreating process. The operating conditions are changed periodically to overcome that loss of catalyst activity, hence, there is a gradual increase in reactor operating temperature from the start-of-run to the end-of-run One of the main advantages of the presented IPHI model with multi-period consideration is that the fresh hydrogen of the participating networks can be decreased when the catalyst deactivation is taken into consideration for hydrotreating units. However, during catalyst life, hydrogen consumption is changing as a result of decreasing the catalyst activity. Hydrogen consumption at catalyst activity 100% at the first period of catalyst life is different from hydrogen consumption at medium and last periods of catalyst life. As a result, the output hydrogen sources from hydrotreating units will be increased according to the decreasing in hydrogen consumption. Hence, the overall hydrogen requirement of hydrogen network would be reduced. Another advantage of IPHI with multi-period is that, there is an IPHI design prepared before operation suitable for all flowrates of all periods of catalyst activity. Hence, in different periods of catalyst life the flowrates of some streams may be higher than their values at the first period of catalyst life when the catalyst is at high activity. The IPHI with multi-period is designed to the maximum flowrates of all operating periods. Any change in flowrates in any one of the operating periods of catalyst life would be covered by the IPHI design. Multi-period consideration for IPHI developed in this paper will account for the changing in the output hydrogen sources of refinery hydrotreating processes according to the catalyst deactivation. For indirect hydrogen integration network, the following key assumptions are considered in solving the problem: The indirect IPHI model in The information available from all operating periods of refinery processes is taken into consideration. Inter-plant hydrogen integration network design will ensure that under all operating periods, the flowrates between sources and sinks are taken as the maximum values across all periods. This case study is used to illustrate the inter-plant hydrogen integration model without change in operating conditions of hydroprocesses units. It involves two hydrogen networks A and B. The hydrogen network A is taken from Deng et al. The two plants ask for different grades of H The fresh hydrogen cost is assumed to be 0.093 and 0.075 The electricity power cost is taken as 0.03 US$/kW The lower and upper bounds of cross-plant flowrates are taken as 10,000 and 700,000 PSA has a product fixed impurity concentration of 0.1%, with a recovery of 90% Membrane has a product impurity concentration of 2%, with a recovery of 95% The hydrogen permeability in the membrane is set as 500 GPU that is equal to 125 times of the impurity permeability The inlet and product pressures of membrane are assumed to be 11.61 and 3.24 The fuel gas price is taken as 2.5 US$/MMBTU The capital cost is annualized in five years with 5% interest rate. The piping distances between the sources and sinks of the networks to the purifier are taken as 500 Eq. LINGO optimization software, Version 14 is used, with nonlinear and global solvers to solve the objective function in Eq. As presented in This case study has been solved to illustrate the applicability of the proposed methodology for multi-period IPHI. It shows indirect IPHI scheme analysis between two hydrogen networks when multi-periods in operating conditions are taken into consideration. This case study involves two hydrogen networks, with Network A taken from Jia In this case study, the effect of changing the operating conditions on the indirect IPHI scheme is analyzed. Using the expected catalyst life and rate of loss of catalyst activity, three operating periods are recorded. From The minimum and maximum impurity concentrations of PSA reject stream for the two networks are found to be 67.0964 and 97.8488 The fuel discharge data for the two networks are unavailable in the base case, so the model is solved without considering fuel cost. Solving the proposed MINLP model for each period to minimize the total annualized cost Eq.  It is worth to notice that the multi-period indirect inter plant hydrogen integration design takes into account the maximum flowrates overall the three periods, so the capital cost is higher than the capital cost in case of single period. The decrease in TAC in the multi-period in this case study may be a result of recording the change in the net hydrogen source rejected from the diesel hydrotreating units of the two networks, according to the change in the catalyst activity. This decrease in TAC can be increased when all the hydrotreating units are taken into consideration. However, due to confidentiality issues, it is difficult to get more data from these refineries or similar industrial plants. Experimental data from the hydrotreating processes is also very limited. The optimum multi-period design, taking into consideration the information available from all the operating periods of refinery processes, is illustrated in This paper proposed a model for indirect IPHI scheme with interception unit placement. The model also considers multi-period operation to address the effect of operating conditions changes in refinery processes, more specifically on catalyst activity. This ensures the designed IPHI networks can remain operable under different operating conditions with minimum total annualized cost. Two case studies are used to elucidate the proposed model. The results showed that a higher decrease in the total annualized cost is achieved with implementation of IPHI than the base case without any integration, since US$ 14.6774 million per year cost saving is achieved in case study 1 with 21.29% saving when fuel cost is taken into consideration. On the other hand, the cost saving is changed according to the operating periods in case study 2, since US$ 55.057 million per year is achieved for operating period 1, US$ 53.111, and US$ 50.648 million per year respectively are achieved for the second and the third operating periods. The operating cost is decreased by approximately 8.4% from single period without taking the catalyst activity and the multi-period into consideration. The network design obtained for IPHI takes into account the changing in all operating periods. Future works should consider the change in the operating conditions for all the hydrogen units besides the DHT units for multi-period consideration in the participating plants.