The purpose of this article is to analyze critically and quantitatively the effect of fluid reactant supply rates and mass transfer on the measurement of the rates of fluid–solid reactions, particularly those with small equilibrium constants. It is shown through a mathematical analysis that the measurement of the intrinsic kinetics of a reaction with a small equilibrium constant (a positive standard free energy of reaction) requires much larger rates of fluid reactant supply and mass transfer rates than that of a reaction with a large equilibrium constant. The overall reaction rate of the former also tends to be slow. Furthermore, the apparent activation energy of such a reaction approaches the standard enthalpy of reaction 
                        (
                        Δ
                        
                           
                              H
                           
                           
                              0
                           
                        
                        )
                     , rather than the true activation energy of the chemical reaction.Reactions between solids and fluids are important in chemical and metallurgical processes. Thus, their quantitative analysis has attracted much attention ( The interaction at the interface, usually involving adsorption, bond breaking and forming, and desorption. Mass and heat transfer within the particle, which may involve transfer in the pores, in the solid phase, or both. Mass and heat transfer from the bulk fluid to the external surface through the boundary layer. The supply rate of the fluid reactant. The first three steps are usually given careful attention by researchers involved in the field ( It is the purpose of this note to show that the often-neglected effect of reactant starvation in the rate measurement is also greatly magnified for reactions with small equilibrium constants. Let us consider a fluid–solid reaction of the following general expression: Examples of equilibrium-limited (small This type of reaction is applicable to the case with When the reactant-containing fluid is supplied at rates sufficiently larger than the overall reaction rate, Assuming Let us examine the dependences of On the other hand, if the reaction has a small Additionally, even when mass transfer rate is very fast, the value of Furthermore, when This result leads to several significant conclusions: Firstly, a severely equilibrium-limited fluid–solid reaction tends to proceed slowly. The smaller the value of This type of a reaction system is illustrated schematically in In this case, we write the mass transfer and reaction rates of The rates of diffusion through the porous product layer are obtained by solving the following equations, assuming uniform total pressure: Eqs. (22)–(27) are solved, assuming The definition of the generalized shrinking-core reaction modulus The parameter Let us again examine the effect of The overall fractional conversion as a function of time can be obtained by relating the With the definitions of If the volume of the product solid is different from that of the reactant, the conversion function for pore-diffusion is modified to Many solid reactants have some initial porosity, allowing diffusion and chemical reactions to occur simultaneously throughout the solid. The progress of reaction in a porous solid is illustrated in The conservation of fluid species per unit volume of the pellet (including the pore space) is given by For many heterogeneous reactions, the molar rate of consumption of the fluid reactant per unit area of the reaction interfaces is given by the following Langmuir–Hinshelwood rate equation: The molar rate of consumption of the solid reactant per unit volume of the solid is expressed by The fluxes of fluid species, The rate of production of fluid species, The solution of Eq. By analyzing the various conversion-vs.-time relationships for porous and nonporous solids, The conversion function Based on the form of the conversion-vs-time relationships given by Eq. (50c), the discussion pertaining to the influence of the equilibrium constant The influence of small equilibrium constant of a fluid–solid reaction on the overall rate has been critically examined. The following conclusions are drawn from this analysis:    