The present study aims at minimizing vibration while drilling and to obtain optimal operating condition to enhance drill performance. In this study, the level of vibration in blast-hole drilling machines in axial and lateral directions was ascertained by placing accelerometers (B&K, Type 4508) at the mast. During the investigation, Taguchi L27 orthogonal array method was applied to optimize the number of experiments for analysis of functional parameters. The signal to noise (S/N) ratio and analysis of variance (ANOVA) were used to investigate the effect of various operational parameters, namely, rotational pressure (Rp), air pressure (Ap), pulldown pressure (Pp) and rotational speed (Rs) during vibration at the time of rock drilling. The multi-linear regression (MLR) and artificial neural network (ANN) techniques were used as well to develop empirical models for predicting vibration for different operating parameters. ANN model was further optimized using genetic algorithm (GA) to obtain optimum value.Open-pit mining activity involves a cyclic process that includes drilling, blasting, ore handling, and hauling. Drilling as a primary step plays a crucial role in the exploration and exploitation of minerals in mining engineering. Mostly, rotary drilling is extensively used in large surface mining projects for overburden excavation throughout the world The researchers have been studying drill string vibration to improve drilling performance and lower the production cost. Various drill string models have been developed based on physical approximation. Dareing et al. Artificial intelligence technique such as ANN, PSO, GA, ACO, GEP, etc. finds its application in the various field of mining research such as ground vibration prediction after blasting operation and drilling performance. Blasting operation is the step performed after drilling of blast-hole. Faradonbeh et al. This paper focuses on the experimental investigation of machine vibration based on its controllable parameters in given geological condition. The controllable parameters are optimized through statistical technique, artificial intelligence technique and regression analysis with minimum axial and lateral vibration to improve blast-hole drill machine performance. As far authors knowledge it is for the first time statistical technique and artificial intelligence is applied in the field of drill string vibration to minimize vibration and hence, to improve blast-hole machine performance. Earlier, drill string models were developed and compared to suppress vibration while drilling. The Previous study also lacks the application of artificial intelligence technologies such as ANN, GA, etc. to predict drill machine vibration. Although this technique has been utilized to predict ground vibration induced by blasting operation. In this study, the axial and lateral vibration of the blast-hole drill machine was considered. The effect of machine operating parameter i.e air pressure, rotational pressure, pull-down pressure, and rotational speed were investigated. During an investigation, based on machine operating parameters Taguchi L The Schmidt rebound hardness test Six experimental drilling holes were studied for determining machine vibration based and the Schmidt Hammer tests were conducted at the referred drilling site to characterize the surface hardness. The configuration of the rotary drill rig and hardness of the rock under which it was operated are listed in During the rock-bit interaction in drilling process, mechanical energy is dissipated through the bit to the rock. The rock is subjected to failure by a combination of pull down pressure on the bit and its rotation pressure. The pull-down pressure and the rotation pressure are varied by operator of the drilling machine, depending upon the rock strata. The force exerted on the bit causes penetration of rock. As the bit penetrates into rock, resistance is offered by the rock surface, which results into vibration of drilling components. Compressed air is used in sufficient volume to ensure a minimum velocity of upward airflow for flushing drill cuttings and keeping the hole clean. In case of its failure, air pressure starts increasing, leading to inefficient rock cutting and vibration. Hence, air pressure is one of the important parameters in drilling operation. A view of a rotary drill with tri-cone bit, used in a well-known northern coal mine of India and the rock-bit interaction are depicted in The machine’s higher operating range is prone to failure due to vibration generated during rock-bit interaction. In general, vibration of 0.1 g is considered unpleasant and vibration of 0.5 g is intolerable The role of controlling factors on drill machine vibration are yet to be fully explored. The present paper highlights the experimental work carried out in an open pit coal mine on a rotary drill machine using a tri-cone roller bit. The paper investigates the severity of vibration in rock-bit interaction during drilling as the drill string rotates at different rotational speeds (80, 85 and 90 rpm). The objective is to use the derived data to alleviate vibration, hence to improve machine health as well as to maximize drilling rates. The concept of vibration has been analysed to find out a definite approach to minimise it by selecting a proper parametric combination. This research work is concentrated on drill dynamics, followed by vibration analysis along lateral (side-to-side) and axial (longitudinal motion along drill string) directions. The vibration measurement along the axis of drill string was considered as Y-axis (i.e., axial direction) and the axis perpendicular to it was considered as X-axis (i.e., lateral). DM-H, Ingersol Rand and Atlas copco brands of drill machines were covered in the study. The machines are powered by electric motor, and self-propelled. The drill machine is specially designed for rotary blast-hole drilling, using tri-cone roller bit. DM-H is an electric-hydraulic drill in which electric motor having power rating of 373 kW is the prime mover. The machine has pull-down capacity range of 0–90,000 lbs. The rotation mechanism is operated by two stage spur gears with two hydraulic motors providing torques up to 10,000 ft-lb. Bit air is supplied by rotary screw compressor rated at 1050–2400 cfm. During experimentation, vibration of drilling machines while in operation was measured using a B&K RT Pro Photon The recording of acceleration was based on variation of rotational pressure (kg/cm The Taguchi method is an efficient design of experiment (DOE) technique, used for statistical analysis For the current experiment, controllable operating parameters i.e rotational pressure (kg/cm Orthogonal arrays are the special standard experimental model proposed by Taguchi. Only a small number of experimental trials are needed to determine the main factors affecting production. In this study for greater accuracy, an orthogonal matrix of Taguchi L27 was used for the experimental test as it provides a basis for Taguchi's method analysis. The Taguchi orthogonal table indicates that all the controlled variables are taken into account equally in the experiments. The minimum number of trials must be greater than or equal to the total degree of freedom. Each line of the orthogonal table represents a different combination of level parameters. The orthogonal Taguchi L27 array is shown in The blast hole drilling machine, used in open-pit mining operation, undergoes severe vibration during interaction with rocks at different layers of rock formation. In the drilling process involving rock-bit interaction, functional parameters play an independent role The vibration versus time plot in terms of acceleration, as shown in The data as recorded suggests that vibration along Y-axis is greater as compared to x-axis. The vibration generated during the initial drilling process was due to drill string instability as well as high pull-down pressure and rotational pressure, which resulted in disintegration of rocks. As the drilling progressed downwards, it encountered rocks with varying degree of hardness. Moreover, changes in functional operations to overcome resistive force of rocks also caused fluctuation in vibration. High vibration along the axial direction can damage drilling components and cause bit wear. Similar test, conducted in ‘Mine Site 2’, showed the peak acceleration and peak RMS values with varying RPM, as presented in The peak accelerations attained were 0.11 m/s  As part of the analysis of vibration signal at various frequencies, Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) graphs in The FFT graph, as shown in In both cases, drilling operation generated greater vibration in axial direction (along Y-axis) as compared to the lateral direction (along X-axis). This was mainly due to variation in operating parameters, i.e., rotational pressure, air pressure, pull-down pressure and rotational speed with rock characteristic at different layers. The operator of the drilling machine feeds the value depending on rock hardness encountered during the drilling process. The pull-down pressure acting on the bit enables it to penetrate into rock. During the process of rock-bit interaction, excess pull-down pressure is generated resulting in vibration along the axial direction. At the same time, rock chips, produced due to drilling, need to be cleared out efficiently for unhindered penetration into the rock. During this period, appropriate air-pressure is also needed for removing rock chips from borehole. Increase in air pressure and rotational pressure results in vibration along the axial direction. The vibration generated along the y-axis is greater during removal of rock chips. If removal of rock chip is slow as compared to the penetration rate of bit into rock, it can generate significant vibration leading to stick slip condition, which again results in axial vibration. Herein lies the importance of determining suitable combination of operating parameters in order to prevent generation of drill string vibration. In the current experiment, the Taguchi method was applied to find out optimum operating parameters for reduced vibration. The RMS acceleration along axial and lateral directions was activated as response factor for the vibration analysis. Taguchi proposes S/N ratio to serve as objective function for optimization, in order to help in data analysis and to predict optimum result. For the present study, S/N ratio was used to analyze vibration generation and drilling parameters. The Taguchi method offers three modes for calculation of S/N ratio: smaller-the-better, larger-the-better and nominal-the-best  As lower value of vibration is desirable during rock drilling, smaller-the-better S/N ratio was chosen for this study. As per the Taguchi method, for attaining the optimum condition, the S/N ratio has to be the maximum.  As the smaller-the-better condition was selected for this study, the desired vibration condition obtained with the maximum S/N ratio for each parameter under this condition is presented in the S/N response graph as in From ANOVA is a statistical method to identify the effect of operating parameters on vibration  As shown in For validation of optimized condition obtained through the Taguchi technique, an experiment was carried out In the above equations, (R The 95% confidence interval for the vibration response along the lateral and axial directions and the confirmation experiment are expressed as: Here, F By substituting F Multi-linear regression (MLR) and artificial neural network (ANN) are statistical methods, mostly used for prediction and forecasting in engineering applications. In the present study, the MLR and ANN have been used for development of an empirical model. MLR is a statistical process by applying which one can study relationship between two or more dependent and independent variables. For the purpose, one has to fit a linear equation to the data, obtained from the study. The MLR technique is also termed as the least-squares model because with this process a line is fitted to data points by means of minimum sum of squares of difference between the value determined during the investigation and the value already predicted. By means of equation, it is expressed as:  In the present investigation, MLR technique was applied to determine relationship between dependent variables, A In the referred two models, VIF values of independent variables can be noted to be equal to 1. As a result, one can conclude that these models are free from multi-collinearity. The ANOVA of the regression models for dependent factors gives p-value of 0.00, which means these models are statistically significant. The ANN is computational algorithm resembling the biological neural network, which is used to establish theoretical relation between independent and dependent variables, based on given experimental data. Nowadays, ANN is widely used in both industrial and research labs. In recent years, it has gained wide popularity for vibration related investigations as well. Vibration and noise control, impact of independent parameters on vibration, etc., are some of the aspects which are studied with the help of ANN. The application of ANN in vibration related issues helps to identify output-based controlling parameters, measured in time domain or frequency domain A neural network involves three layers; input layer, output layer and hidden layer connected to one another Numerous ANN algorithms, for instance, radial basis function The back propagation algorithm comprises error output, i.e., actual node output errors. It is shared between input layer and hidden neurons. This method enables quick convergence in network on the basis of satisfactory local minima for errors. In order to improve functioning of this network, the number of hidden layers is enhanced for conduct of training. One is allowed a maximum number of 1000 epochs (iteration) for carrying out training. In order to resolve the problem of over-fitting, early stopping is possible. In fact, early stopping along with a higher number of training data with cross validation ensure a higher degree of accuracy. Three subsets of data, i.e., 70%, 15%, 15% were created respectively for the purpose of training, validation and testing Hence, an architecture of (4 × 6 × 2) was selected and introduced for solving the drill vibration problem by using ANN. Here, 4 = number of Input, 6 = number of hidden neuron, 2 = number of output  The measured verses predicted values of vibration in terms RMS acceleration along the lateral and axial directions were obtained by using the ANN model. The determination coefficients (R The genetic algorithm is a technique of artificial intelligence used to solve optimization tasks according to the theory of “survival of the strongest” and “natural selection” proposed by Charles Darwin. The genetic algorithm repeatedly changes the population of individual solutions. The genetic algorithm randomly selects individuals from the current population and uses them to produce next-generation children. Throughout generations the population “evolves” to an optimal solution. The genetic algorithm uses three basic types of rules at each stage to create the next generation of the current population The selection rules select the individuals, called parents, which contribute to the population of the next generation. The crossover rules involve two parents to train children for the next generation. Mutation rules apply random changes to individual parents to train their children. A genetic algorithm is widely being used to optimize complex engineering problems where traditional methods have limited scope. In recent trend many integrated artificial intelligence model have been developed for solving optimization problem A systematic investigation was conducted on-field to analyze the effects of drill operating parameters, R The highlights, drawn from the study, are as follows: The vibration experienced in the axial direction during experimentation was 0.113 m/s The following are the underlining points from the Taguchi L The optimum value of parameters for drilling operation for reduction of vibration was obtained by means of mean S/N ratio. The resulting combination of parameters for generation of minimum vibration during rock drilling was found at R The statistical analysis done with ANOVA revealed that R The Taguchi method, MLR and ANN were applied to predict the optimum value. The MLR and ANN were found to be more effective for predicting vibration response with the minimum error, thereby establishing significant relationship between operating parameters. Comparison of empirical models were done for predicting vibration in terms of RMS acceleration, with the MLR and the ANN techniques. The ANN empirical model offered more precise and less non-conformity as compared to the MLR model. ANN model was further optimized using GA to obtain the optimal value of 0.057 m/s The field studies were conducted in Nigahi and Dudichuwa opencast projects of NCL, Singrauli. Experimental investigations were carried out in Advanced Research Lab and Rock Excavation Lab of IIT(ISM) Dhanbad. Authors acknowledge the management of NCL for needful permissions and support.