Bone remodeling that occurs during orthodontic tooth movement is a biologic process involving an acute inflammatory response in periodontal tissues. A sequence characterized by periods of activation, resorption, reversal, and formation has been recently described as occurring in both tension and compression tooth sites during orthodontic tooth movement. We used a longitudinal design to investigate alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity in gingival crevicular fluid (GCF) to assess whether it can serve as a diagnostic aid in orthodontics. Sixteen patients (mean age, 15.5 years) participated in the study. The maxillary first molars under treatment served as the test teeth (TT) in each patient; in particular, 1 first molar was to be retracted and hence was considered the distalized molar (DM), whereas the contralateral molar (CM) was included in the fixed orthodontic appliance but was not subjected to the distal forces. The DM antagonist first molar (AM), free from any orthodontic appliance, was used as the baseline control. The GCF around the experimental teeth was harvested from mesial and distal tooth sites immediately before appliance activation, 1 hour after, and weekly over the following 4 weeks. The clinical gingival condition was evaluated at the baseline and at the end of the experimental term. ALP activity was determined spectrophotometrically at 30° C, and the results were expressed as total ALP activity (mUnits/sample). GCF ALP activity was significantly elevated in the DMs and the CMs as compared with the AMs at 1, 2, 3, and 4 weeks; conversely, in the AMs, GCF ALP activity remained at baseline levels throughout the experiment. Moreover, the enzyme activity in the DMs was significantly greater than in the CMs. In the DMs, a significantly greater ALP activity was observed in sites of tension compared with sites of compression. This difference was not seen with the CMs, in which the enzyme activity increased to the same extent in tension and compression sites. These results suggest that ALP activity in GCF reflects the biologic activity in the periodontium during orthodontic movement and therefore should be further investigated as a diagnostic tool for monitoring orthodontic tooth movement in clinical practice. (Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 2002;122:548-56)In orthodontics, mechanical stress appears to evoke biochemical and structural responses in a variety of cell types in vivo and in vitro. Sixteen orthodontic patients, 10 females and 6 males (age range, 11-21 years; mean, 15.5 ± 3.5 years), were included in the study. The following inclusion criteria were observed: the need for fixed appliance therapy involving distal retraction of 1 maxillary first molar; good general health; no use of anti-inflammatory drugs during the month preceding the study During the 2 months preceding the baseline examination, all subjects received repeated oral hygiene instructions for the use of toothbrush, dental floss, and interdental brush. Before the study began, informed consent was obtained from the patients and from the parents of minor patients, and the protocol was reviewed and approved by the Ethical Committee of the G. D'Annunzio University Medical Faculty. In each patient, the maxillary first molars undergoing orthodontic treatment were used as the test teeth (TT). One of the TT molars, the distalized molar (DM) was to be treated for distal movement whereas its contralateral molar (CM) was not moved distally. The DM antagonist first molar (AM) was used as a control. Orthodontic brackets (MBT, 3M-Unitek; Monrovia, Calif) were placed on the buccal surfaces of the teeth in the maxillary arch, including incisors, canines, and premolars; tubes were bonded on both the DM and the CM. A bilateral 0.018-inch circular cross-sectional dimension nickel-titanium wire (MBT, 3M-Unitek) was used to activate the orthodontic appliance. In addition, teeth from the CM to the contralateral second premolar were laced together with a continuous stainless steel wire (0.010-inch) ligature according to Samuels et al. Clinical examination consisted of assessing the PL visually and assessing BoP within 15 seconds after probing with a 20-g controlled force probe and the PD in 6 sites per tooth (mesiobuccal, midbuccal, distobuccal, mesiolingual, midlingual, and distolingual/palatal). Clinical data were always collected by the same operator (D.D'A.). Contamination of the GCF samples was minimized by recording the plaque scores before carefully cleaning the tooth with cotton pellets, collecting GCF from the isolated area, and recording the PD and BoP as previously described by Griffiths et al. Alginate impressions were taken for study models by the same investigator (G.P.) before orthodontic appliance placement and at the end of the experimental term. Measurements were made on stone models. The distances between the distal aspects of the canines, left or right, and the mesial aspects of each corresponding experimental tooth were recorded at baseline and on day 28; we used calipers capable of measuring to the nearest 0.05 mm. The total amount of displacement for each category was determined by subtracting the first recording from the second. Each crevicular site included in the study was isolated with cotton rolls. Before the GCF collection, any supragingival plaque was removed with cotton pellets, ALP activity was assayed spectrophotometrically The overall percentages of tooth sites positive for plaque (%PL+) and bleeding on probing (%BoP+) and the mean PD were calculated from the %PL+, %BoP+, and mean PD of each DM, CM, and AM at baseline and on day 28. The %PL+ and %BoP+ were considered to be ordinal data; therefore, Friedman's test The DMs underwent a mean distal movement of 1.7 ± 0.3 mm. No clinically detectable movements in CMs and AMs were observed. As shown in Table I; the clinical parameters had similar scores in all 3 experimental groups at baseline, without any statistically significant differences. The 3-way repeated measures ANOVA reveals that the subjects demonstrated significant differences in GCF ALP activity levels among the time points (F-ratio = 13.23; One-way ANOVA showed a statistically significant change in enzyme activity only in the DM and CM groups, in both mesial and distal sites, among the repeated samplings during the study period (Figs 2-4; Table III). At baseline and at 1 hour, in both distal and mesial sites, ALP activity was similar among the 3 groups, without significant differences (1-way ANOVA). At each later sampling time, in mesial and distal sites, statistically significant differences among the groups were seen (1-way ANOVA). In mesial sites, pair-wise comparisons show an enzymatic activity significantly greater in the DMs than in the CMs and AMs from days 7 to 28. In the same sites, GCF ALP activity from the CMs was significantly greater than in the AMs from days 7 to 21. In distal sites, significant differences between the DMs and CMs were seen only on days 14 and 21, whereas the differences between the DMs and AMs were significant from days 7 to 28. In distal sites, statistically significant differences between the CMs and AMs were seen from day 7 to the end of the experiment. Statistically significant differences in GCF ALP activity between the mesial and distal sites were seen only in the DM group ( The aim of this study was to investigate the GCF ALP activity longitudinally during orthodontic treatment in relation to the time of treatment and the type of stress exerted on the periodontium by the tooth movement. Our results show that GCF ALP activity was significantly different among the DMs, CMs, and AMs throughout the analysis; furthermore, the enzymatic activity was dependent on the orthodontic treatment phase. Bone remodeling produced as a consequence of orthodontic tooth movement has been described as a continuous phenomenon leading to bone resorption in pressure sites and bone deposition in tension sites. ALP activity in GCF might be affected by forces deriving from the orthodontic treatment, and its levels are significantly greater in dental sites of tension than in sites of compression. Furthermore, increased ALP activity in teeth bearing orthodontic appliances might be due in part to gingival inflammation produced by plaque-retentive appliances, independently of clinically detectable dental displacements. We are grateful to Dr Christopher P. Berrie for his critical appraisal of the text and to Claudia Bruè for her excellent statistical advice.