Introduction
                  Classification systems guide surgical planning. We reviewed the accuracy of interpreting plain radiographs to classify distal radius fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Pre-operative radiographs of 24 consecutive distal radius fractures were classified using Frykman and AO methods. Classification was repeated intra-operatively under direct vision for comparison.
               
                  Results
                  Mean age of the patients was 51 years. Pre-operative Frykman scores and AO grades were underestimated, compared with intra-operative visual classification (p < 0.001). One over-estimate occurred, while only 3 of 24 cases were classified correctly pre-operatively.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Sensitivity of radiographs to classify Frykman or AO grades was 12.5%, indicating interpretation using plain radiographs alone is often inadequate.Distal radius fractures are responsible for 17% of all bone fractures. The Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen (AO) classification was developed in 1986 and categorises the type of injury on the basis of the fracture's severity. Studies have demonstrated significant inter- and intra-observer differences in AO and Frykman classifications of distal radial fractures. Radiographs are a routine diagnostic modality used to identify the fracture and assess its severity, which consequently influences the management. This study was designed to assess the diagnostic accuracy of pre-operative radiographs in grading distal radius fractures based on the Frykman and AO classification, against intra-operative findings. A prospective study was conducted over a four-month period to identify all patients presenting to our trauma unit who underwent open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) within 4 weeks of an acute distal radius fracture. Patients with open fractures or injuries occurring in skeletally immature individuals were excluded from the study. True antero-posterior and lateral radiographs of each injured wrist were assessed at initial presentation. An intra-operative Frykman and AO classification was subsequently assigned to each patient using direct visualisation of the fracture pattern. The senior author (B.M.) graded the fracture both pre- and intra-operatively. Pre-operative radiographs were anonymised to avoid bias and re-assessed by the senior author before being assigned a pre-operative Frykman and AO classification grade. The design of this study was in accordance to the QUADAS-2 (Quality Assessment Tool for Diagnostic Accuracy Studies-2) guidelines Simple summary statistics were collated using SPSS v20 software (IBM Corp., Armonk, New York). The Wilcoxon ranked sign test was used to evaluate the significance of differences for paired ordinal data, with an alpha level set at 0.05. The prospective cohort constituted 24 consecutive patients who met the inclusion criteria, with a mean (standard deviation) age of 51 (±15) years. There was a female predominance of 66.6% ( The median value (range) for Frykman classification grades at pre-operative assessment was 3 (1–7), and at intra-operative assessment 6.5 (2–8). The median AO grades at the pre-operative and intra-operative assessment were 23B2 and 23B3 respectively. The modal average for the AO grades at pre-operative assessment was 23A2 and 23B3 (range 23A2–23C3), whilst at intra-operative assessment the mode was 23C3 (range 23A2–23C3). Pre-operative Frykman scores were significantly underestimated, compared with intra-operative visual classification ( The Frykman and AO classification was over-estimated pre-operatively in only a single case. The grading remained the same at intra-operative assessment in only three cases. This tells us the sensitivity of radiographs to accurately predict the specific Frykman or AO grade is 12.5%. Our study demonstrates that plain radiographs alone provide an accurate interpretation of the fracture pattern in only 12.5% of distal radial fractures. Even the categorisation of the AO grades into the 3 types (A,B,C) in place of the 9 groups (i.e. A1, A2, A3, B1…), did not improve this diagnostic accuracy. Discrepancy between radiographs and intra-operative assessment of fractures has previously been reported in lateral condyle fractures of the humerus in children, Human error by the assessor may be a factor in the poor accuracy of the radiographs, however quality of plain radiographs as the imaging modality is a more likely culprit. This is evident in the various studies documenting the poor inter-observer reliability and intra-observer reproducibility. The disparity in the grades also suggests that the surgeon was unlikely to have been biased by being able to recall the pre-operative grade during the intra-operative assessment. Using a single surgeon assessor allows potential intra-observer inconsistencies. Evidence reveals that intra-observer agreement for the 3 AO types to be substantial, Anderson et al Orthopaedic surgeons endeavour to classify fractures for academic and practical purposes. Classification systems can help plan the method of fixation and, in the case of distal radius fractures, guide the surgeon in deciding on the type of implant to be used during open reduction and internal fixation. It is clear that interpretation of plain radiographs alone to accurately classify a fracture can be difficult. In particular, those with intra-articular fracture components or significant comminution are often underestimated pre-operatively. It has become common practice to perform rapid pre-operative CT-scanning of intra-articular fractures, especially around the knee All authors have none to declare.