The extraction of gold (I) cyanide in polyethylene glycol-based aqueous biphasic systems has been investigated. Almost all of gold (I) cyanide (>96%) was transferred from salt-rich phase into the polyethylene glycol (PEG)-rich phase without addition of any extractant. No significant influence of solution pH on gold (I) cyanide extraction was observed. The aqueous biphasic systems have high capability of extraction. The gold (I) cyanide in the PEG-rich phase can be easily reduced by addition of zinc. The PEG-rich phase could be reused for extraction of gold (I) cyanide without decrease of extraction capability. The PEG/salt aqueous biphasic systems may provide a potential new technique for gold separation from cyanide solutions because all components of systems are virtually nontoxic and nonflammable.Gold is usually separated from alkaline cyanide solution by carbon adsorption or ion exchange. Traditional solvent extraction has been proven to be a useful technology for selective removal and recovery of metal ions from aqueous solutions with organic solvent and aqueous solution as two immiscible phases. Solvent extraction has not yet known any practical applications from such alkaline solutions although it has the potential to offer improvements over the well-established gold recovery processes. During last few years, there has been a renewed interest in the application of solvent extraction to the recovery of gold using various extractants The aqueous biphasic systems have been extensively studied to separate biomolecules such as protein, nucleic acid, etc. This work has attempted to study the application of PEG/salt aqueous biphasic systems to the partition of gold (I) cyanide. Various parameters such as concentrations of gold (I), salt and PEG, solution pH on the partition of gold (I) were studied. Polyethylene glycol (PEG2000) was purchased from Huamei, China. Beijing Chemical Reagent supplied Na PEG/salt (typically Na The Au (I) concentration both in top and bottom phases has been determined with Spivakov et al. suggested (for the first time) the possible application for metal ion partitioning in aqueous biphasic systems  Most metal ions tend to stay in the salt-rich phase with distribution ratio of much less than 1.0 without any added extractant since they are highly hydrated and interact strongly with water The cyanide solution in leaching of Au (I) must be adjusted to alkali (pH>10, typically) to prevent escape of the poison HCN due to the presence of free cyanide ions in the solution The increase of incompatibility between the PEG-rich and salt-rich phases could enhance the affinity of a solute for a particular phase As shown in  The effect of three different salts forming two phases (Na The molecular weight of PEG used could also influence the observed distribution ratio. The Au(CN) For continuous operation, the PEG/salt aqueous biphasic systems should be reused. Polyethylene glycol-based aqueous biphasic systems can be used to partition Au(CN) The PEG/salt aqueous biphasic systems may provide a potential technique for gold separation from alkaline cyanide solution with cleaner and safer advantages. We acknowledge the financial support of the Collaboration Project between Yunnan Province and Peking University (D9808K), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (39730160) and the State Key Project for Fundamental Research (G1998061307).