Tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome type I, an autosomal dominant condition, is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in a zinc finger transcription factor, TRPS1, which has important roles in development of endochondral bones, teeth, and hair. Clinical manifestations of the patients include short stature, sparse, fine and slow-growing scalp hair, bulbous nose, supernumerary teeth, hip dysplasia, brachydactyly, and cone-shaped epiphyses of the phalangeal bones.
               
                  Objective
                  To clinically, radiographically, and molecular genetically investigate a patient with tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome type I.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Clinical and radiographic examination and mutation analysis of TRPS1 were performed.
               
                  Results
                  Clinical and radiographic examination indicated the patient had tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome type I. Sequencing of the TRPS1 gene revealed a heterozygous pathogenic variant (c.2762G>A; p.Arg921Gln). Oral examination showed supernumerary teeth, large dental pulp spaces, dental pulp stones, microdontia of the maxillary permanent lateral incisors, absence of the mandibular left second premolar and short root of the maxillary right second premolar, and hypoplastic mandibular condyles with long condylar necks.
               
                  Conclusion
                  TRPS1 has an important function in regulating bone and dentin mineralization. Having large dental pulp spaces suggests that impaired dentin mineralization was the result of the TRPS1 pathogenic variant. This is the first patient with a TRPS1 pathogenic variant who had impaired dentin mineralization. This is also the third report showing the association between TRPS1 pathogenic variants and the presence of supernumerary teeth.Tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome type I (TRPS1: OMIM #190350) is a condition with phenotypic variability caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in a zinc finger transcription factor, TRPS1 is a unique GATA-type transcription factor that acts as a transcription repressor or activator ( TRPS1 has important role in bone and dentin mineralization and A 16 year-old boy of mixed European and native American ancestry presented with sparse and slow-growing scalp hair, bulbous tip of nose with hanging columella, a long flat phlitrum, a thin upper vermilion border, and a language-based learning disability ( Radiographic examination at 11 years of age showed avascular necrosis of the right femoral head (Perthes disease) ( The patient had a number of dental anomalies. Two supernumerary premolars in the maxillary right area were removed. His mother reported that the father of the patient had many supernumerary teeth. Unfortunately, he was not available for examination. Oral examination of the patient at age 16 years showed microdontia of the maxillary lateral permanent incisors. A panoramic radiograph at age 15½ years showed absence of the mandibular left second premolar and short root of the maxillary right second premolar. The mandibular third permanent molars were not well aligned. Dental pulp stones were observed in all first permanent molars. The mandibular permanent canines had large dental pulp spaces with thin root dentin. All permanent molars had enlarged dental pulps with normal root length. Hypoplastic mandibular condyles with long condylar necks and impingement of the roots of the mandibular permanent second molar to the inferior border of the mandible were noted ( The study was conducted following approval of the ethics committee, Faculty of Dentistry, Chiang Mai University in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and national guidelines. Informed consent was obtained from the mother to perform a clinical test due to the suspicion for tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome. Bidirectional direct sequence analysis of We report a patient affected with TRPS1 who has a heterozygous c.2762 G > A pathogenic variant. The newly recognized findings found in this patient include large dental pulp spaces and hypoplastic mandibular condyles with long condylar necks. The sequence change is predicted to replace arginine with glutamine at codon 921 of the TRPS1 protein (p.Arg921Gln). This mutant protein is predicted to change a basic (arginine) to a neutral (glutamine) polar amino acid. There is a small physicochemical difference between arginine and glutamine. This base change is predicted to disrupt the B-sheet at the very tip of the GATA-zinc finger domain. The mutant protein is expected to be able to enter the nucleus and form dimers or multimers through the IKAROS-like zinc-finger domains. Therefore this mutant protein has a decreased affinity to DNA and has a dominant-negative effect, as a component of a multimeric protein complex. The amino acid substitution p.Arg921Gln has been reported as p.Arg908Gln (NP_001317528) in Dutch and German patients affected with TRPS types I and III. One of these patients was reported to have intellectual disability. Unfortunately, the presence of dental anomalies was not mentioned ( Even though The presence of supernumerary teeth in our patient and his father suggests that the Our patient had large dental pulp spaces in the mandibular permanent canines and all permanent molars, implying impaired dentin formation. Taurodontism is ruled out because the dental pulp chambers were not vertically longer than usual and the tooth roots were not shortened. The low bone mass and impaired dentin formation found in our patient are likely to be the effect of the In summary, we report a patient with a The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We thank the patient and his family for their kind cooperation and for allowing us to use their medical and dental information for research. This work was supported by the The Thailand Research Fund; The Dental Association of Thailand; and The Faculty of Dentistry, Chiang Mai University.