The ability of some typical gangue minerals and activated carbon to adsorb gold(I) (preg-robbing) in non-ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions was examined at different calcium thiosulfate concentrations. In the absence of calcium thiosulfate, sulfide minerals such as pyrite and chalcopyrite, and carbon were highly preg-robbing with 100% gold being adsorbed within half an hour. The oxide minerals examined including kaolinite, goethite and hematite were significantly less preg-robbing under the same conditions. The presence of free thiosulfate can significantly reduce or eliminate the preg-robbing of gold on mineral surfaces. With an initial thiosulfate concentration of 0.1 M, gold adsorption by oxide minerals was completely eliminated, while that of sulfide minerals and carbon was insignificant at 0.2 M free thiosulfate.
                  Copper(I) was found to enhance the preg-robbing of gold by oxide minerals but to reduce the preg-robbing of gold by sulfide minerals and by carbon. Similar effect of silver(I) was observed except for chalcopyrite. Trithionate, a by-product of thiosulfate degradation, has no significant effect on the preg-robbing of gold(I). Tetrathionate, another by-product of thiosulfate degradation, significantly increases the preg-robbing of gold(I) onto pyrite. Activated carbon enhances the degradation of tetrathionate to trithionate and thiosulfate, the latter helps stabilise the gold(I) in solution.Thiosulfate has received much attention as an alternative non-cyanide lixiviant for gold extraction over the last three decades. Thiosulfate leaching of gold can be classified under ammoniacal or non-ammoniacal systems ( Preg-robbing behaviour of different gold ores and common gangue minerals in ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions has been extensively studied ( In this article, the preg-robbing behaviour of six common minerals and activated carbon in calcium thiosulfate solutions are investigated and discussed. The effect of temperature and addition of CaS Common sulfide and gangue minerals found in gold ores, namely pyrite, chalcopyrite, goethite, hematite, quartz and kaolinite, were used as potential preg-robbers. The mineralogical composition of the ores was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and quantitative XRD techniques at the CSIRO laboratories in Waterford, Western Australia. Goethite, hematite, quartz and kaolinite had a particle size (P A 100 mg L Experiments were performed by bottle rolling 65 mL of the synthetic solutions containing 5 g of the mineral or 1.5 g activated carbon at 25 °C, unless otherwise specified. The bottle roll speed was 60 rpm. The pulp density was chosen based on literature data ( In order to determine the gold, copper and polythionate adsorption isotherms, a fixed amount of mineral was added to the bottles containing increasing initial concentrations of metal ions or polythionate in 0.05 M calcium thiosulfate solutions. Adsorption was quantified in this work as the decrease in concentration of gold(I), silver(I), copper or polythionate ions when the synthetic solution was equilibrated with minerals in sealed, air-tight bottles. The calculations were made using Eq. The mineralogical composition of the solids based on qualitative and quantitative XRD is listed in The residual gold(I) concentration in solutions in the presence of different oxide/silicate minerals: (i) quartz, (ii) kaolinite, (iii) hematite and (iv) goethite, in the absence of free thiosulfate and the adsorption of gold(I) on minerals as a function of time is shown in The effect of thiosulfate concentration on the residual gold(I) concentration and adsorption of gold on oxide/silicate minerals after bottle rolling for 4 h is shown in Since the sulfide minerals and carbon were found to be more preg-robbing than oxide/silicate ores in solutions free of background thiosulfate, these minerals and carbon might possess active sites for adsorption and/or reduction of gold(I)-thiosulfate ( Copper is commonly added as copper(II) to a non-ammoniacal thiosulfate leaching system as a catalyst to enhance the gold leach rate. However, in the absence of ammonia, copper(II) is readily reduced by thiosulfate to copper(I) to form copper(I) thiosulfate complexes and tetrathionate ( Naturally occurring gold ores commonly contain different levels of silver. The dissolved silver causes instability of gold particularly in the presence of polythionates due to precipitation ( The results for the adsorption tests of sliver(I) on the pyrite, chalcopyrite and carbon samples are presented in The adsorption of thiosulfate on pyrite and carbon in the absence of metal ions is shown in The adsorption isotherms of metal ions or polythionates are reported as the variation of ions adsorbed as a function of equilibrium concentration of ions in solution ( Adsorption data at equilibrium for carbon and pyrite ( The isotherm models for carbon and pyrite are presented in The Langmuir equilibrium constant (K The standard Gibbs free energy for the adsorption of gold(I) on activated carbon was calculated at 25 °C as −34.5 kJ mol  The adsorption isotherms for trithionate and tetrathionate from a thiosulfate synthetic solution onto pyrite and carbon were also investigated. In the presence of pyrite, there was no significant adsorption of trithionate. The tetrathionate concentration was found to increase with time as a result of catalysed degradation of thiosulfate adsorbed on the surface of pyrite ( The detrimental effect of copper due to the enhanced adsorption of gold(I) from ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions, where copper exists as both copper(II) ammine and copper(I) thiosulfate complexes, in the presence of kaolinite and goethite have been reported ( Contrary to the results for selected oxide/silicate minerals, the presence of copper(I) thiosulfate decreased the adsorption of gold(I) ions on pyrite and carbon. As shown in   Gold adsorption on carbon in the presence of trithionate The results for the adsorption of gold(I) on carbon from 0.05 M calcium thiosulfate solutions without and with 10 mM sodium trithionate are presented in Gold adsorption on carbon in the presence of tetrathionate  Gold adsorption on pyrite in the presence of trithionate The adsorption of gold on the pyrite mineral in the absence and presence of trithionate is illustrated in Gold adsorption on pyrite in the presence of tetrathionate It was observed that preg-robbing of gold on pyrite mineral increases significantly with time in the presence of tetrathionate ( The preg-robbing behaviour of minerals i.e. the adsorption of gold(I) ions from the pregnant liquor, depends mainly on the concentration of thiosulfate. In the absence of free thiosulfate, pyrite, chalcopyrite and carbon are highly preg-robbing with 100% gold being adsorbed within half an hour. The preg-robbing ability of the oxide minerals to adsorb gold(I) in the absence of free thiosulfate is less compared to that of sulfide minerals and follows the descending order: goethite > hematite > kaolinite > quartz. Adsorption of gold(I) onto the minerals is significantly lower in the presence of free thiosulfate. An initial thiosulfate concentration of 0.1 M completely eliminates the adsorption of gold by oxide minerals. In comparison, a higher free thiosulfate concentration of 0.2 M is required to lower the adsorption of gold by sulfide minerals and carbon to insignificant values. The preferential adsorption of gold(I) ions on minerals follows the descending order: carbon > pyrite > chalcopyrite. The adsorption of copper(I) ions on minerals follows a different sequence: pyrite > goethite > carbon. However, the decrease in total copper in solution may also be attributed to the formation of copper precipitates. Adsorption of gold(I)-thiosulfate on carbon obeys both Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm, whilst that of gold(I)-thiosulfate on pyrite follows only the Freundlich isotherm. Copper(I) adsorption on carbon and pyrite decreases the gold adsorption by these adsorbents, whilst the presence of copper(I) increases the adsorption of gold by hematite and kaolinite. Silver(I) has a similar effect as copper(I) in the presence of pyrite, hematite and kaolinite. Carbon catalyses the degradation of tetrathionate to form trithionate and thiosulfate; the latter stabilises gold in solution and compete with gold(I)-thiosulfate for adsorption sites. Tetrathionate leads to significant loss of gold in the presence of pyrite. Trithionate is relatively stable in aqueous alkaline solutions and has no significant effect on the adsorption of gold by pyrite and carbon.