Environmental sustainability is one of the top concerns for the mining industry of the 21st century. Mine soils comprise numerous threats to surrounding ecosystems and human health, and thus their reclamation is fundamental. In this study, two waste-derived amendments, technosol and compost, were used on copper mine tailings in order to assess their potential to promote the growth of Indian mustard, a high biomass crop species successfully employed on phytoremediation and phytomining. Three mine soil treatments comprising 25% and 50% of technosol and 30% of compost were utilized, and two harvesting periods at 45 and 90days were set for plant analysis. Unlike the untreated mine tailings that caused prompt plant decay and death, the three treatments allowed the growth and development of the Indian mustard plants throughout the 90days. Yet, significant differences were found among the three treatments, with the plants developed in the compost treatment displaying superior growth, more effective anti-oxidative response against metal toxicity, and greater harvestable amounts of Cu and Zn. High correlations were registered between the amount of organic matter and nutrients, and several ecophysiological parameters of the plants including root and shoot biomass, shoot length, leaf area, lipid peroxidation, and the content of chlorophyll, hydrogen peroxide, ascorbic acid, and proteins. These correlations explained the advantage of compost in comparison with the technosol treatments, as well as the differences between the latter. In addition, the treatments lifted the extremely acidic pH to a range tolerable by the Indian mustard. In the light of these results, the use of technosol and compost, or other waste-derived amendments that may reproduce similar changes of the soil properties, enables the growth of Indian mustard in mine tailings for phytoremediation or phytomining purposes.The application of sustainable environmental measures remains one of the major concerns for the mining industry today ( Waste-derived amendments such as technosol and compost, represent a practical and environmentally sustainable solution to waste that otherwise would be treated with no further purpose than being disposed in landfills at high cost ( Phytoremediation is an inexpensive method to alleviate the deleterious effects of high concentrations of metals in soils, and represents a valid alternative to more costly and often unworkable mechanical techniques ( Considering the unambiguous capability of the Indian mustard for phytoremediation and phytomining, the aim of this study is to assess the potential of two waste-derived amendments (technosol and compost) to promote the growth of this plant species in copper mine tailings. Polluted soil (PS) was collected from a depleted copper mine located in Touro (Galicia, NW Spain) (42°52′34″N, 8°20′40″W) and amended with technosol (TE) supplied by Tratamientos Ecológicos del Noroeste S.L. (Santiago de Compostela, A Coruña, Spain), and compost (CO) provided by Biocompost (Biocompost de Lugo, S.L., Cospeito, Lugo, Spain). The technosol was prepared with mussel shells, sewage sludge, wood residue and ashes in different proportions. Diverse organic wastes from the agriculture and food industries composed the compost. The PS was manually mixed and homogenized with technosol and compost at proportions of ( Polluted soil and the treatments were analyzed for pH ( In addition, metal contents (Co, Cu, Pb, V and Zn) in PS, TE25, TE50 and CO30, were also measured by acid digestion using a mixture of HNO At each harvesting period, roots and shoots were divided, and carefully washed with deionized water in order to remove any dust deposits and surface soil. Fresh biomass was weighted immediately (FW) and the dry weight (DW) was assessed after oven drying for 48 Chlorophyll content (Chl) was determined as described by Fresh leaves were randomly chosen from each plant and their photochemical efficiency was measured with a pulse-modulated fluorimeter (Hansatech Fluorescence Monitoring System, Hansatech Instruments Ltd., Norfolk, England). The levels of H The level of lipid peroxidation was assessed by a modification of 100 Ascorbic acid (AsA) content was determined by titration using 2,6-dichlorophenol-indophenol according to the The concentration of proteins was determined spectrophotometrically at 595 The Kolmogorov–Smirnov and Levene tests were used to ensure the normality assumption and the homogeneity of variances, respectively. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey test was applied for post hoc comparisons between groups ( The Indian mustard plants in the PS pots died shortly after transplantation, therefore the reported results focus solely on TE25, TE50 and CO30. The pH was remarkably raised in comparison with PS, registering significant differences ( The root DW assessment after 45 At 45 Total chlorophyll content was maximal in the Indian mustard plants grown in the compost treatment ( The harvestable amount of Cu and Zn was significantly higher for Indian mustard plants grown in the compost treatment in both harvesting periods ( Mine soils encompass a large number of limiting factors for plant growth, such as extremely acidic pH, elevated concentrations of metals, and low amount of nutrients and organic matter ( Organic matter is one of the most valuable indicators of soil quality, as it affects a large variety of properties such as nutrient supply, metals adsorption, cation exchange capacity, soil structure, and the penetration and retention of water ( Waste-derived amendments often add metals to the soils in which they are applied, due to the origin of the refuse material that composes these amendments. However, when properly conceived, these amendments do not raise soil metal concentrations above reference levels, and contribute with high amounts of organic matter that immobilizes metals, supply nutrients that are essential for plant growth, and promote microbial life, making the trade-off balance clearly positive ( A close look at the results revealed the superior growth and more effective ecophysiological and anti-oxidative response of the Indian mustard plants grown in CO30, which may be ascribed to the soil physicochemical properties of this treatment as verified in the correlations of The harvestable amount results denoted the suitability of compost to enhance phytoextraction and phytomining of Cu and Zn, due to the effect of this amendment on biomass yield, as discussed above. Oppositely, the harvestable amount of metals measured in plants grown in TE25 and TE50, evoked greater aptness of technosol for phytostabilization processes. The results demonstrated the ability of technosol and compost to alter the physicochemical properties of the mine tailings, allowing the growth and development of the Indian mustard plants. However, striking differences were found among the three treatments, with the plants developed in CO30 standing out for their superior growth, anti-oxidative response against metal toxicity, and greater accumulation of Cu and Zn in the aboveground parts. The high correlations registered between the amount of organic matter and nutrients, and numerous growth and biochemical parameters of the plants, explained the advantage of compost in comparison with the technosol treatments, as well as the differences between the latter. Moreover, CO30 and TE50 achieved soil pH values within the preferred range of the Indian mustard. In conclusion, the use of technosol and compost, or other waste-derived amendments that may reproduce similar changes of the soil characteristics, enables the growth of Indian mustard in mine tailings for phytoremediation or phytomining purposes.