The present study describes a novel and scalable process for preparation of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids in solid form. The process involves multiple steps consisting of combining the oil with a metal base in alcohol to form a solution, followed by addition of reaction mixture to acetonitrile (anti-solvent) to form a slurry and further separating the solid through filtration. This process results in formation of a flowable solid with yield of 44–76% depending on the procedure employed. The fatty acid profile of the calcium and magnesium salts was stable after one year of storage in ambient conditions. The type of solvent and anti-solvent employed in such process has tremendous effect on the resulting solid texture, which could range from complete gum to a workable, filterable solid. It was also demonstrated that increasing the concentration of base in alcohol reduces the amount of residual acetonitrile in the solid.Polyunsaturated fatty acid oils (PUFAs), including omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids, which are primarily found in natural sources such as fish oil, flaxseed oil and krill oil, have been shown to have a range of health benefits including reducing the risk of cardiovascular disease, inflammatory disease, blood pressure and cancer ( Currently, PUFAs are primarily obtained from oceanic fish oil ( Fish oil is typically sold in the form of liquid in gelatine capsules to avoid the fishy smell and odour ( There have been prior attempts to produce fatty acid oils in solid form. Barrow and Kralovec ( The objective of this study was to produce solid form of fatty acids via a scalable and economically sound process. In the novel process described here, fatty acid oil reacts with metal base in the presence of alcohol as solvent. The reaction mixture is then combined with acetonitrile to form a filterable, flowable off-white powder. The major novel aspect of the process is the use of anhydrous acetonitrile as anti-solvent. A large number of solvents (e.g., methanol, ethanol, Various oils were used for synthesis of fatty acid salts. Flax/fish/borage oil comprising 30.4 2 2 2 8 2 5 Samples were analyzed using an Agilent 7890 GC with PTV injector and FID detector equipped with a 60 After addition of an internal standard, total lipids were extracted using the method of Bligh & Dyer. Lipids were methylated and quantified using the internal standard method ( 0.1 Average molecular weight of different oils was calculated based on the fatty acid profile through GC/FID analysis. The molecular weight of Fish/Flax/Borage, Salmon oil and omega 3 concentrate were 281, 292 and 309, respectively. The density of Fish/Flax/Borage, Salmon oil and omega-3 concentrate were 0.89, 0.89 and 0.90. Molecular weights were used to determine the amount of metal base required to carry out the salt formation reaction according to the reaction stoichiometry. To evaluate the effect of solvent on various salts, ten different solvents with wide range of properties were selected (outlined in Section Residual solvent was monitored with proton NMR. NMR was done using a Bruker Avance 300 Design Expert Software (Stat-Ease, Minneapolis, MN) was used for statistical data analysis to determine the effects of potassium hydroxide concentration and addition time of reaction mixture on residual acetonitrile present in fatty acid salts. In the novel process described here the fish oil is dissolved in an alcohol and combined with a metal base, selected from potassium, calcium or magnesium. The resulting reaction mixture is then added to an organic solvent such as acetonitrile, methanol, ethanol, MtBE, isopropanol, acetone, ethyl acetate, or THF, while stirring to precipitate the solid. This slurry is then filtered and the resulting cake is dried under vacuum to remove solvent. All solvents used in the screening experiments, with the exception of acetonitrile, resulted in the formation of sticky, coloured solid as shown in Several types of oil including fish/flax/borage, salmon, and omega-3 concentrate were used as starting fatty acids for the formation of the corresponding potassium salts. Fatty acids in all of the above oils were present in the form of ethyl esters, which were hydrolyzed in the presence of the base and converted to the corresponding salt. As seen in The fatty acid profile of fish/flax/borage oil and its corresponding salt (e.g., calcium, potassium, and magnesium) is shown in The process of formation of potassium salt was studied further to evaluate factors that can potentially impact residual solvent, which is an important consideration for products intended for human consumption. In a two-factorial design of experiments approach, the effect of concentration of metal base in alcohol and addition time (length of time in which the reaction mixture is added to acetonitrile) on residual acetonitrile content at two levels of high and low were investigated. More specifically, the effect of concentration of potassium hydroxide in ethanol at the lower level of 13 wt.% and higher level of 26 wt.% and addition time of reaction mixture to acetonitrile at lower level of 45 Minimizing the residual acetonitrile through factorial design of experiment was performed in those cases that ethanol was used to dissolve potassium hydroxide. In the cases that methanol was used instead of ethanol, residual acetonitrile was not detected by NMR. The results of NMR are presented in Yield of the salt formation processes was calculated based on the mass of fatty acids recovered in the form of salt and the mass of fatty acids present in the stating oil. Potassium salts of fatty acids from fish/flax/borage, salmon, and omega-3 concentrate oil produced off-white solids with yields of 58%, 60%, and 70%, respectively. A calcium salt of fatty acids prepared from flax/fish/borage oil produced an off-white solid with 76% yield. Magnesium salts of fatty acids prepared from flax/fish/borage oil produced an off-white solid with 44% yield. The calcium salt formation process gave higher yield than the magnesium and potassium salt processes as shown in Production of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids in solid salt form has drawn the attention of researchers due to avoiding the use of animal-based gelatin capsules, increased stability compared to liquid form, ease of swallowing, improved bioavailability due to higher solubility, and potential lower manufacturing cost ( The challenges associated with the above methods are unreacted calcium oxide and subsequent high pH and presence of glycerin, resulting in undesirable product quality intended for human consumption (  The novel process described here involves dissolving the oil in an alcohol and combining with a base, followed by the addition of the reaction mixture to acetonitrile, resulting in a flowable, filterable, off-white solid with minimal fish odour. The process results in the metal salt of a fish oil, (e.g. calcium, magnesium salt), which provides other essential mineral nutrients in addition to omega-3. Astonishingly, Acetonitrile was showing a completely different behavior compared with other solvents. When acetonitrile was used as solvent, the solid was a flowable, non-sticky and filterable solid while other solvents resulted in either gum or sticky solid. It was also observed that whenever water is present, the fatty acid solid becomes gummy. Fatty acid profile of potassium salt that was produced using various types of oils, namely fish/flax/borage, salmon oil Additionally, a bioavailability study, conducted by Kralovec et al., 2009 ( The main innovative aspect of the process outlined in this study is the use of acetonitrile as anti-solvent, leading to formation of a powder ( Another novel aspect of the present method is the inverse addition of the reaction mixture to the anti-solvent (acetonitrile), whereby the reaction mixture is added into acetonitrile. Direct addition, whereby acetonitrile is added into the reaction mixture, results in formation of a gummy, sticky solid. The reason is that in the case of inverse addition the concentration of the undesired solvent (e.g. ethanol, methanol) is minimal at the onset of nucleation, while in the case of direct addition, the concentration of the undesired solvent is at its maximum at the onset of nucleation. To the best of our knowledge acetonitrile was not used as anti-solvent (neither inverse mode nor direct mode), in any of the previously reported processes. Residual organic solvent content is an important consideration in the process of fatty acid salt formation since the product is intended for human consumption, therefore, presence of residual acetonitrile was further monitored in the final product. The International Conference on Harmonization (ICH) guidelines for residual solvents (Q3C) classifies acetonitrile as a Class 2 solvent. The amount of acetonitrile present in a drug product must be limited to 410 The significance of the novel process developed in this study is that all steps of the process are scalable. Since the main driver of cost in this process is acetonitrile, it can easily be recycled by adding a distillation step, which is a fairly routine operation in a manufacturing setting. Process optimization to increase yield at larger scale can also positively impact cost. Other aspects of this new process that favour scalability are the moderate yield, incorporation of essential minerals such as calcium and potential for minimizing the residual acetonitrile ( A novel process that relies on reacting the omega-3 and omega-6 containing oil with a base-containing alcohol and recovery of a flowable solid using acetonitrile as anti-solvent is reported. It was demonstrated that process optimization is possible with respect to minimizing the amount of acetonitrile. The novel aspects of this process include use of acetonitrile as anti-solvent and inverse addition of reaction mixture to acetonitrile, leading to formation of flowable solid that does not require energy intensive lyophilization to remove water prior to filtration. It was demonstrated that the nature of the solvent and concentration of metal base in alcohol significantly influence the amount of residual acetonitrile in solid. These results highlight the potential for process optimization at larger scale. There is no conflict of interest. This research was supported by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 