A simple carbonization method was developed to synthesize rod-like aragonite in CaCl2-NH4Cl solution prepared from dolomite. Scanning electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction were used to characterize the morphology and crystal structure of the aragonite produced. The influences of carbonization time and temperature and aging time on the morphology and polymorph of the precipitated CaCO3 particles were investigated. The aragonite was obtained at room temperature by carbonization for 0.5h without any additives and aging for 12h. Aragonite rods with a length of 2.5–3μm, a width of 0.3–0.4μm, and an aspect ratio of 6–10 can be synthesized. The mechanism of the phase transformation from calcite to aragonite is also discussed.Calcium carbonate (CaCO Many approaches have been studied to control the phases and morphologies of CaCO In this paper, calcium is extracted simply from dolomite after preparation of magnesium oxide. Rod-like aragonite CaCO The raw ore used in this work was collected from Luonan county of Shaanxi province, China. The mineral phase content of the raw ore was calculated to be 30.1% talc, 62.1% dolomite, 3.9% quartz, and 3.9% other minerals ( The procedure used to prepare CaCO After leaching and filtering, the second step was amination, which was performed by adding 18 In this article, the preparation of CaCO A calcium-rich solution was obtained after filtration of the ammoniated mixture. CO The chemical compositions of the prepared samples were determined by wet chemical analysis. The solid products were identified by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), which was performed on a Rigaku D/Max-2500 diffractometer equipped with Cu Kα radiation. Diffraction data were collected over the 2 CO When the carbonization time was 0.5 h, calcite (PDF05-0586) and vaterite (PDF33-0268) were obtained. However, the calcite phase transformed into aragonite (PDF41-1475) and vaterite (PDF33-0268) when the carbonization time was extended to 1–1.5 Based on the characteristic diffraction peaks of each polymorph in the XRD spectra, the content of each polymorph was calculated. The formulas are as follows ( If only calcite and aragonite are present: If only vaterite and calcite are present: If calcite, aragonite, and vaterite are present:  The aragonite content gradually increased, the vaterite content first increased and then decreased, and the calcite content decreased with increasing carbonization time. When the carbonization time reached 4 h, the aragonite content was 81.35%, calcite was 4.56%, and vaterite was 14.09%. Extending the carbonization time aids the formation of aragonite. To understand clearly how the morphologies of CaCO When the carbonation time is 0.5 The Ca In these experiments, CO   The content of aragonite increased as the aging time lengthened. Meanwhile, the content of vaterite first increased and then decreased, while that of calcite decreased significantly. When the aging time is 4 SEM images of the calcium carbonates generated as the aging time increased from 1 When the aging time is 1 The effect of carbonization temperature on the CaCO At 25  The aragonite content decreased, the vaterite content increased slightly, and the calcite content increased then decreased as the carbonization temperature was increased. When the carbonization temperature was 25 SEM images of the CaCO Rod-like aragonite structures were observed when the carbonization temperature was 25 Aragonite is a thermodynamically metastable crystalline phase. It can easily transform into the stable calcite crystal phase in aqueous solution. However, the current experimental results show that reaction at room temperature is not conducive to the formation of aragonite crystals. However, the reaction temperature is not the overall determining factor for the existence of aragonite. If the aging time is extended, initially formed aragonite crystals will grow. Aragonite and calcite possess different crystal structures and crystal growth patterns; calcite is hexagonal, and aragonite is orthorhombic. The symmetry of the former is higher than that of the latter. Considered from the crystal structure the formation of calcite nuclei is more difficult than that of aragonite nuclei. From the coordination number, Ca Because aragonite is metastable, a certain number of dislocations (including the screw dislocation) can be produced during the crystal growth process, which is able to reduce the force field and reduce the free energy of the system ( Our work has shown that the experimental conditions to prepare rod-like aragonite involve carbonization with 40% CO Generally, crystallization accelerators are not added in industrial production of CaCO In our paper, aragonite was successfully prepared without any additives at room temperature. Our procedure provides a pathway for industrial production of aragonite from dolomite. The infrared spectra of aragonite product (aragonite-01) is shown in Due to the different crystal structures of calcite, aragonite, and vaterite, the wave number of functional group in the infrared spectra also vary. It can be seen from Rod-like aragonite was synthesized from CaCl The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the