Clean diamonds are naturally hydrophobic, which makes it possible to recover large diamonds using greased tables (or belts). It is also possible to recover diamonds smaller than approximately 2mm by flotation using hydrocarbon oils as collectors. However, flotation of such large particles is a challenge in view of the fact that mineral flotation is usually effective in a narrow range of particle sizes, i.e., 0.01–0.25mm. It is also well known that the hydrophobicity of diamonds becomes seriously compromised, when they are exposed to the water that has been in contact with kimberlite ore slurries. This phenomenon, known as secondary hydrophilization, is caused by the deposition of the species derived from the gangue minerals. Some investigators attempted to overcome the detrimental effect using thiol-type collectors, while others used mild acids to remove the hydrophilic surface coatings. The present communication describes a two-step hydrophobization process, in which diamonds are rendered hydrophobic first by overcoming the secondary hydrophilization effect or using a thiol-type collector and subsequently by using a strong hydrophobicity-enhancing reagent. It has been found also that the harmful effect of the secondary hydrophilization mechanism can be overcome using sodium silicate and a hydrophobicity-enhancing reagent. Based on the successful laboratory test results, a set of continuous flotation tests was conducted using a Hydrofloat column cell to achieve high recoveries of small diamonds.Processing of diamond ores begins with crushing. Typically, an ore is crushed initially to below 250 In most cases, the materials smaller than 2 It has been shown that some diamonds in a given kimberlite ore are hydrophobic while others are not ( The secondary hydrophilization originates from the nature of the gangue minerals, One approach to overcoming the harmful effect created by the secondary hydrophilization mechanism would be to use hydrophobicity-enhancing reagents such as fuel oil, fatty acid, and thiol ( In the present work, novel methods of overcoming the secondary hydrophilization effect have been developed ( Naturally-occurring small diamond crystals of −2 Sodium silicates with SiO Some of the larger pieces of diamond crystals were removed from the sample vials using a pair of forceps and subjected to contact angle measurements using the sessile drop technique. The contact angle measurements were conducted in pure water and in water that had been in contact with kimberlite ore to study the effect of secondary hydrophilization on diamond flotation. A series of micro-flotation were conducted to develop appropriate reagents than can overcome the secondary hydrophilization effect. In each experiment, approximately 18–20 The small diamonds that have become hydrophilic due to the secondary hydrophilization effect were then removed from the slurry and placed in another vial containing tap water. After adding appropriate reagents, the vial was agitated by hand for 3  Also shown in In the next series of tests, 2–5 pieces of diamonds were added to ∼20 The diamonds that had become non-floatable after contacting with the kimberlite slurry were removed from the slurry by means of a pair of forceps, they were subjected to micro-flotation tests using a combination of thiol-type collector and a hydrophobic polymer which is referred to as PX in this communication. As shown in   Diamonds are naturally hydrophobic; therefore, one should be able to float them using a simple hydrocarbon collector such as kerosene. However, the particle size of the small diamonds (−2 In the present work, two-step hydrophobization methods have been developed to overcoming the secondary hydrophilization effect. In the first step, a diamond ore is treated by adding a thiol-type collector or sodium silicate to the ore slurry to render the mineral selectively hydrophobic to some extent. In the second step, the hydrophobicity is further increased by using a strong hydrophobicity-enhancing reagent, so that the contact angle becomes higher than the minimum required. In this communication, the results obtained using hydrophobic polymer as hydrophobicity-enhancing agent have been presented. Although not shown here, many other hydrophobicity-enhancing reagents have been developed for small diamond flotation. Based on the promising laboratory test work, a series of continuous flotation tests was conducted using a 4-in. diameter Hydrofloat flotation column. The results showed near 100% recoveries. At this point, the roles of the thiol-type collectors and sodium silicates in overcoming the secondary hydrophilization effect are fully understood. It has also been found that the dosage requirement for the hydrophobicity-enhancing reagents can be substantially reduced by using them as water-based emulsions. The authors would like to acknowledge EKATI Diamond Mine for providing the kimberlite ore and the small diamond samples used for the laboratory flotation experiments. They are also grateful for Jaisen Kohmuench of Eriez Manufacturing Company conducting the Hydrofloat flotation tests.