This study aims to investigate the effect of rock anisotropy, associated with the bedding planes of the rock in strength of the rock, on the efficiency of diamond wire cutting machines, and also on the vibration of the cutting machine. While investigating the cutting efficiency, the unit wear on the diamond bead, cutting rate and specific energy have been taken into consideration. Hoop rotation (1100rpm) and tensioning amperage (29A) were used as constant cutting parameters for different cutting angles (from 0° to 90°) depending on the bedding planes for two different rock types. During the cutting operations, the unit wear on beads was measured and the average cutting rate and vibration values that occurred with the diamond wire cutting machine were recorded. In addition, the strengths of the rocks were determined for the core samples prepared from the anisotropic two rock samples (Bucak Travertine and Kaman Pearl) considering different angle values from parallel to and perpendicular to the bedding plane of the rock. Then, the relationships between the angles of the bedding planes (ABP) and various variables such as the strength of the rock, unit wear, cutting rate, specific energy and vibration were investigated. Finally, the cutting efficiency of diamond wire cutting is found to be sensitive to the rock anisotropy and it is revealed that the cutting operations should be performed parallel to the bedding planes as much as possible in terms of economy.Hardness Strength Water content Degree of alteration Discontinuities Mineralogical properties and textural characteristics Machine power Machine position on either vertical or horizontal cutting Number of beads per meter Wire speed Cutting angle between wire and horizontal level Amount of cutting area with respect to angle variation Bead structure Dimensions of block Diameter of pulley Machine vibration Technical personnel Diamond wire cutting machines are indispensible machines used in several stages ranging from marble block production in natural stone quarries to the final product. Today these machines are widely used in natural stone quarries and have evolved continuously in line with the consumers’ demands so far and have opened a new era in natural stone mining There are several parameters affecting the diamond wire cutting operation. These parameters are given in Many studies have been carried out that aim to investigate the effect of these parameters, given in However, the strength characteristics of intact rock may change depending on the anisotropy, which is defined as the changes observed in the physical and mechanical properties of rocks based on direction. The strong anisotropic characteristics are observed generally on the metamorphosed and sedimentary rocks because of the existence of cleavage, foliation, schistosity, joints, bedding planes, lamination and micro cracks. These features directly control the rock behavior in different directions. It is generally easier to break the rock along these weakness planes. For this reason some studies have been carried out in order to identify the mineral structure of rocks, particularly mineral direction and the relationships between anisotropic characteristics The classification based on the anisotropy ratio ( As can be seen from the literature review, there are many studies looking at rock anisotropy and diamond wire cutting separately. However, so far, no study has been carried out regarding the effect of rock anisotropy associated with the bedding planes of the rock on diamond wire cutting efficiency and the vibration of the cutting machine. Because of this, this study focused on the investigation of the effect of rock anisotropy on the strength of the rock, on diamond wire cutting efficiency and also on the vibration of the cutting machine. For this purpose, two different rocks named Bucak Travertine (T) and Kaman Pearl (KP) were selected as samples having anisotropy due to the bedding. Cutting tests were performed on them so that the angles were different from the bedding direction with the purpose of revealing the effects of the bedding angles on cutting efficiency and the UCS. Cutting operations were performed by using the fully automatic diamond wire cutting machine (DWCM) designed in the Hacettepe University Department of Mining Engineering. This study consists of two main experimental studies performed in the field and the laboratory. The cutting tests on travertine were performed in a quarry using the fully automatic DWCM for eight different cutting angle values (0°, 15°, 25°, 37°, 55°, 65°, 80° and 90°) from parallel to and perpendicular to the bedding plane in Burdur Bucak. Additionally, another cutting test in the field was performed on anisotropic rock commercially named as Kaman Pearl to compare the results from travertine by using the DWCM for five different cutting angle values (0°, 25°, 45°, 65° and 90°) in Kirsehir–Kaman ( The model DWCM, designed by Ozcelik et al. This machine was formed by making various modifications to the quarry-type DWCM. These modifications were made by joining suitable sensors on the machine in order to receive all the data about the machine. Apart from the modifications, the machine is the same as the machine used in marble quarries. The body of the DWCM includes a 22-kW electric motor. In the cutting operations performed, the hoop diameter of the DWCM is 60 The sensors were established on the machine in order to determine the data needed for the identification of the optimum working conditions in the process of cutting with diamond wire. The movement speed sensor, vibration sensor, flow rate meter and angle gauge differentiate this machine from others The movement speed sensor transmits data to the automation program by means of a belt connected via terminals to the geared flywheel. Various other effective parameters are calculated using the data gained through the movement speed sensor, which gives it a greater importance than the other sensors used. Vibration sensors are installed on the rear part of the machine to measure the vibration on the The flow rate sensor shows the water used both with the analog indicator (m The angle gauge sends the data to the automation program just like the flow rate sensor measures angle changes caused by the vibration of the wire. The angle gauge is connected to the handle following the motion of a pivot and wire. The rubber pulley on the handle is in constant contact with the wire owing to the weight attached underneath. The computer program was developed in the Visual Basic programming language designed for storing and analyzing the data coming from the sensors. Instantaneous numeric values of parameters are recorded in at certain time intervals (two or three seconds) and the changes in the values can be observed graphically. Moreover, the data can be transferred to other programs such as MS Excel, SPSS, etc. Statistical analysis can be carried out and the relationship between the parameters and the stored data can be easily determined. Five beads between two crimps on the wire were used in the cutting operations. The variation in the angle values was maintained by rotating the main pulley of the diamond wire cutting machine and these angles were taken as cutting angles. The CR values (m The formula given below was used for calculating the SE in the study: During the cutting operations, there are oscillations on the diamond wire as a result of vibration. High vibrations cause high wear on diamond beads, sometimes rupturing the diamond wire. Vibration values are obtained from the vibration sensors placed at the nearest point to the hoop. The measurement directions of vibration in The bead diameter was measured before and after cutting in order to determine the amount of wear on the diamond beads. This wear was recorded as the difference in diameter measurements using a three-digit, digital micrometer. Wearing measurements were carried out by containing at least one quarter of the wire length used and by taking at least four measurements from the different sides of the beads. Then, the UW values of the beads were identified as μm/m The results obtained from the studies in the field were assessed by graphically examining the relationships not only between cutting efficiency parameters and the angles of the bedding planes (ABP) but also between vibration and the ABP. Bucak Travertine and Kaman Pearl rock samples were also used to investigate the effect of the ABP on the strength of the rock in the laboratory studies. Angled cores are taken in the laboratory in order to identify the effect of the ABP on the strength of the travertine. The angle between the horizontal and bedding planes is taken as the ABP for the rock mechanics test ( Travertine used in this study ( The Kaman Pearl rock sample is white and a light green. It contains calc-silicate minerals and quartz. Petrographically, the rock is called calc-silicate carbonate rock or calc-silicate marble. The different shapes and sizes of calc-silicate minerals (diopside and wollastonite) and quartz and their content is about 30%. The thickness of the wollastonite band was 1–3 Some of the physical and mechanical properties of the Bucak Travertine and Kaman Pearl rock samples determined according to ISRM The results obtained from the laboratory tests were assessed graphically and the relationships between the ABPs ( It is clear from Because of this, UCS was selected for the investigation into the effect of rock strength depending on the rock anisotropy on the cutting efficiency including UW, CR and SE, and on machine vibration. The relationships between the cutting efficiency including UW, CR and SE and the variation on the ABP ( The relationship between the average vibration values obtained during the cutting processes and the ABP is given in At the same time, variations in the vibration in the The relationships between cutting efficiency including UW, CR, SE and UCS of the travertine and Kaman Pearl rock samples depending on the ABPs are given in When the relationship between the UW and UCS is examined, it is seen that there is a linear relationship between the UCS and UW ( In this study, two types of rock samples (Travertine and Kaman Pearl) were used for cutting operations. The degrees of anisotropy for the Travertine and Kaman Pearl rock samples were determined using the anisotropy ratio ( Additionally, the normalized values of the cutting efficiency parameters and vibration for both rock samples were also considered in this study to be used for predicting not only in the strongest but also the weakest direction ( It can be seen from Natural stones which are cut in the quarry and used in buildings generally show a massive structure. They should not be separated from the bedding planes when they are cut. For this reason it is thought that the natural stones usually show low anisotropy and the curves in The effects of rock anisotropy associated with the bedding planes of the rock in the strength of the rock (UCS), on diamond wire cutting efficiency, and also on the vibration of the cutting machine were determined in this study. Cutting efficiency parameters are selected as unit wear (UW), cutting rate (CR) and specific energy (SE). The main conclusions drawn from the study are given below. The anisotropic ratio of the most of the metamorphic and sedimentary rocks used as natural building stone in Turkey is found to be in the low anisotropy class. The minimum UCS is obtained for a 25° ABP while the maximum UCS (perpendicular to the loading direction) is obtained for a 90° ABP. There is a high positive linear relationship between the cutting angle and UW ( There is a high inverse proportional relationship between the cutting angle and the CR ( There is a high positive linear relationship between the cutting angle and the SE ( The maximum vibration values are obtained for a 55° cutting angle in both the The lowest amplitude and level of the vibrations are obtained for a 0° cutting angle whereas the highest amplitude and level of the vibrations are obtained for a 90° cutting angle. There are linear relationships between the UCS and UW ( There are positive polynomial relationships between the UCS, UW, SE and the ABP ( As a result of this study, it is found that the UCS of the rock, cutting efficiency and vibration of the machine during the cutting operation are directly related to rock anisotropy. Because of this, this subject must be taken into consideration before the cutting operation if the rock has anisotropy. Rocks cut in different directions are widely used as floor and wall covering materials or for different purposes in the construction and building sector due to their desirability and economical value if they have anisotropy. There is much anisotropic rock in the marble industry. It is advised that the cutting operations of these types of rocks (natural stones) should be parallel to the bedding planes as much as possible. Then, while the final product is produced according to the market demand for obtaining different esthetic appearances, cutting operations can be performed at different angles to the bedding plane in terms of economic and conscious production. Conscious cutting of these rocks depending on the direction satisfy increments in their economic value. Therefore, this study will serve as a background to the conscious production of this type of rock with the diamond wire cutting machine. The authors wish to thank Harun Sonmez of Hacettepe University for his valuable comments and suggestions in preparing the manuscript.