The effect of power input, solid content and ionic strength of liquid on the kinetics of de-agglomeration of acicular goethite nano-particles in ultrasonic comminution device has been investigated. It has been found that the pattern of de-agglomeration is independent of power input. Initially large aggregates are broken by fragmentation and as the process progresses the primary particles are gradually eroded from the surface of those large aggregates. The breakage of large aggregates was described by size-energy model and the model describing the generation of primary particles was developed. The increase of solid concentrations in the suspension (up to 20 wt.%) leads to an increase of the efficiency of both breakage of large aggregates and formation of fine particles. The ionic strength and solid concentration have practically no effect on mechanism of de-agglomeration but they affect the morphology and rheology of the suspensions of goethite nano-powder.Goethite (hydrous ferric oxide α-FeOOH) powder of acicular nano-particles morphology is commonly used in pigments, catalysts, coatings and flocculants There are three interconnected properties of nano-particles/liquid suspensions strongly affecting the quality of products: structure, stability and rheology. All those properties are usually determined when nano-powder is dispersed in the liquid and are strongly affected by both the pH and the concentration of the nano-powder. Recently Blakey and James Whilst there is some information in open literature on the rheology of suspensions of goethite nano-particles In many industrial applications, de-agglomeration of nano-powders in different suspensions is often carried out by ultrasonication. In this method the aggregates are broken by the action of local, high velocity liquid jets (up to 100 m/s) and pressure gradients up to 20 GPa/cm Dry goethite nano-powder of bulk density of 4000 kg m Experimental rig shown in In all experiments the same procedure was followed. Required mass of goethite powder was dispersed in water in a stirred vessel at impeller speeds ranging from 650 to 1050 rpm depending on concentrations of dry nano-powder. pH was adjusted to one of the following values 3, 5, 6, 7, 10 or 12 using hydrogen chloride and sodium hydroxide and at each pH zeta potential was measured using As the total volume of the dispersion in the experimental rig was 350 ml and the volume of the flow cell where the powder was exposed to the ultrasound was 80 ml, the specific energy input was calculated from: The total ultrasonic energy input was controlled by adjusting ultrasound power input between 28 and 60 W and by varying processing time between 2 and 80 min what corresponds to the variation of the mean residence time in the cell between 27 s and 18 min. The kinetics of de-aggregation and the stability of a suspension of nano-particles is strongly affected by the charge on the particles surface which is usually quantified by zeta potential. The zeta potential at different pH and salt concentration was measured using ZetaMaster and the results are shown in The measured values of zeta potential indicate iso-electric point at pH In general, at zeta potential higher than |30 mV| the majority of solid/liquid suspensions Typical transient volume distribution functions of the aggregates in the suspension at specific power input of 500 kW m The transient aggregates' volume distributions shown in The bimodal transient size distributions cannot be analysed in terms of the mean sizes, therefore the analysis of both modes was carried out separately. The second mode was analysed in terms of transient median diameters of the large aggregates and the first mode was analysed in terms of cumulative volume fraction of primary particles. The experimental median diameters of large aggregates (corresponding to the second mode of volume distributions in This model has been used to describe different types of breakage processes ranging from grinding of solid particles The first mode of transient volume distributions was analysed in terms of cumulative volume fractions of primary particles (or aggregates smaller than 350 nm) and the results are summarised in  Eq. These results were incorporated into the theoretical model by assuming that the fine particles appear after a certain delay time Eq. For all values of the specific power input the proposed model fits experimental data very well up to the volume fraction of fine particles of the order of 0.8. As the specific power input increases the delay time is reduced and the erosion constant The effect of the solid concentration on de-agglomeration kinetics has been investigated at the specific power input of 500 kW/m At all investigated solid concentrations the transient distributions ( The effect of solid content on de-agglomeration kinetics has also been analysed in terms of the reduction of median diameter of the second mode using size-energy model and in terms of the cumulative volume fraction of primary particles in the first mode. The results are summarised in The transient median diameters of the large aggregates can be related to processing time via size-energy model: Experimental constants The exponent in the size-energy model increases as the solid concentration increases indicating that the breakage rate (understood here as a time gradient of median diameter) also increases. Also the delay time increases with the solid concentration and the erosion efficiency is highest at the highest solid load. These results can be explained by more efficient utilisation of ultrasound energy in more concentrated suspension as shown in  It is also possible that as the solid content increases the size and the number of large aggregates present in the suspension after premixing also increases and initially those large aggregates might be broken also by fracture (very fast reduction of median diameter) and to lesser extent by erosion. Only after the size of large aggregates falls in the range 0.5–5 μm does erosion becomes the dominant mechanism. This can be seen from Kusters et al. The ionic strength of the suspension was modified by the addition of salt at two different concentrations: 0.01 M and 0.1 M. The addition of salt did not affect zeta potential as discussed in The identical values of the constants characterising erosion and breakage in the presence and in the absence of salt (at different ionic strength) are in agreement with the identical values of zeta potential discussed in The flow curves at different concentration of solid were measured using a controlled stress rheometer AR 1000 (TA Instruments, UK) and the results are summarised in At all concentrations of solid the suspensions were non-Newtonian and the apparent viscosity was increasing with solid concentration. The viscosity of the suspensions at medium to high solid concentrations can be calculated from the Kreiger–Dougherty (K–D) equation It has been reported that Eq. At 0.01 M salt the suspension was very weakly non-Newtonian with average apparent viscosity 3 times higher than viscosity of salt free suspension. At this salt concentration the flocculation of nano-particles was not observed. As the salt concentration was increased to 0.1 M the suspension became non-Newtonian and strongly shear thinning. This change of rheology can be explained by the change of morphology and flocculated structures observed under optical microscope are shown in The analysis of several images taken at the same magnification indicate presence of a single spherical aggregates of the order of 2 μm (see The above analysis carried out within DLVO model does not take into account structural forces between surfaces This study has revealed that the mechanism of breakage of goethite aggregates built from acicular nano-particles of 100 nm length is similar to the mechanism of breakage of silica aggregates built from nearly spherical particles The increase of solid concentration from 1% to 20 wt.% leads to the reduction of energy input per unit mass of solid necessary for complete de-agglomeration, or in other words as the solid load increases the de-agglomeration energy efficiency increases. In the investigated range of parameters (pH, temperature) the suspensions of goethite nano-powder were Newtonian and the apparent viscosity was well correlated with goethite concentration up to 10 wt.% of solid by MPKQ equation Increase of ionic strength caused by addition of salt lead to the increase of the viscosity of suspensions but did not affect the kinetics of de-agglomeration. At 0.1 M salt and 0.01 volume fraction of goethite nano-powder the suspension becomes non-Newtonian and shear thinning. These results indicate that the addition of salt leads to partial agglomeration and formation of irregular structures what would suggest the reduction of repulsive forces in the presence of salt. However, the zeta potential was not affected by the presence of salt, what indicates that electrostatic repulsive forces were not affected by the presence of salt. It is possible that non-DLVO forces are affected by presence of salt and this hypothesis is currently investigated. This work is a part of PROFORM (“Transforming Nano-particles into Sustainable Consumer Products Through Advanced Product and Process Formulation” EC Reference NMP4-CT-2004-505645) project which is partially funded by the 6th Framework Programme of EC. The contents of this paper reflect only the authors' view. The authors gratefully acknowledge the useful discussions held with other partners of the Consortium: Bayer Technology Services GmbH; BHR Group Limited; Centre for Computational Continuum Mechanics (C3M); Karlsruhe University, Inst. of Food Process Eng; Loughborough University, Department of Chemical Eng; Poznan University of Technology, Inst. of Chemical Technology and Eng; Rockfield Software Limited; Unilever UK Port Sunlight, Warsaw University of Technology, Department of Chemical and Process Eng.