In the present work, polypropylene-based composites reinforced with three types of randomly distributed short lignocellulosic fibers, namely mechanical pulp (MP), deinked pulp (DIP), and jute strands, were prepared and analyzed. Addition of 6% (wt/wt) of MAPP resulted in a significant enhancement in the tensile strength in line with the improvement of the fiber–matrix interfacial adhesion making more effective the transfer of stress from the matrix to the rigid reinforcement. The mechanical properties of these composites were analyzed in terms of Bowyer–Bader and Hirsch models to fit the obtained experimental data. From the stress/strain curves and the fiber length distributions, it was possible to access to the orientation factor, the interfacial shear strength, the intrinsic tensile strength and the modulus of the fibers.modulus of composite modulus of fibers modulus of matrix volume fraction of fibers stress in the composite intrinsic tensile strength of the fibers strain in composite shear strength of the fiber matrix bond critical fiber length at a composite strain critical fiber length at composite failure fiber diameter orientation factor The breakthrough for natural fiber as a reinforcement or filler become incontestable in the field of composites materials, and emerge from being a niche market to move to a mass production scale, namely in the automobile and packaging industries Natural fibers are subdivided based on their origins, coming from plants, animals or minerals. Plant fibers include bast or stem fibers (such as jute, flax, hemp, and ramie), leaf or hard fibers (sisal, henequen, abaca, and pineapple), seed (cotton and coir), fruit, cereal straw fibers (rice, wheat, and corn straws), grass fibers (bamboo or sugar cane), and wood fibers. The properties of natural fibers are strongly influenced by several factors that include the chemical composition, internal fiber structure, the microfibrillar spiral angle, cell dimensions. All these characteristics are different from a plant to another leading to significant differences in the mechanical properties of the lignocellulosic fibers according to their origin In the group of strands from annual plants, jute presents an intrinsic strength ranging from 300 to 700 In the present work, PP based composites reinforced with three types of randomly distributed short lignocellulosic fibers, namely mechanical pulp (MP), deinked pulp (DIP), and jute strands are prepared and analyzed. The mechanical properties of the resulted composites were analyzed in terms of Bowyer and Bader and Hirsch models to fit the obtained experimental data. The main emphasis of this study is to show that it is possible to infer the intrinsic mechanical properties of the fiber from the experimental tensile properties of the composite. Mechanical pulp used as wood fiber reinforcement of polypropylene composites was supplied by Zubialde (Aizarnazabal, Guipúzcoa, Spain). Old newspaper provided by Rotimpres (Girona, Spain) with an ash content of 15% (TAPPI T211 om-93) was submitted to a deinking process to obtain deinked pulp. Chemicals used in the deinking process were sodium hydroxide from Merck KGaA (Darmstadt, Germany) and the anionic surfactant Sulfopon®101 provided by Henkel Ibérica S.A. (Barcelona, Spain). Jute strands supplied by Celulosa de Levante SA (Tortosa, Spain) were used as received. Polypropylene homopolymer ISPLEN PP 090 G2M from Repsol-YPF was used as thermoplastic matrix. The PP was a fluid injection-molding grade with a melt flow index of 30 Deinking process by means of disintegration followed by flotation operation was carried out in a Pulcell cell of 50 Polypropylene composites with different filler content were obtained by means of an internal mixer (Brabender plastograph). Maleated polypropylene (MAH-PP) Epolene G-3015 was incorporated as coupling agent to improve the fiber–matrix compatibility. For the composite blend preparation, polypropylene was melt at 190 Tensile test specimens were placed in a conditioning chamber at (23 To determine the experimental value of the fiber orientation factor ( Injection molded composites were submitted to a soxhlet extraction at 180 The fracture area of the specimens from tensile tests, were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Zeiss DMS 960) operating at 25 In the present work, three types of natural reinforcements were used for the preparation of PP composites, namely mechanical pulp (MP) from softwood, deinked fibers (DIPs) from newspaper (consisted of hardwood), and jute strands (JSs) from jute stalks. The aspect ratio (fiber length/diameter) of the reinforcement is an important parameter affecting the final properties of composite materials. During the flow and processing, fibers undergo severe damage owing to the strong shear stress acting in viscous molten polymer and to fiber attrition In The fiber morphology after processing (composite blending and injection molding) was evaluated after the thorough extraction of the PP matrix from the composite. The fiber length distributions for mechanical pulp, deinked newspaper and jute strands inside the composite are shown in For the three types of fibers, the drop in the aspect ratio is more pronounced in presence of MAPP ( The fiber orientation factor ( For the determination of the orientation coefficient, optical microphotographs were taken at different deepness of the injection molded specimens and the cos The tensile strength, tensile modulus versus fibers content of the composites filled with MP, DINP and jute fibers (for jute only two fibers content) are shown in The data for the composite tensile modulus in It can be seen from The large difference in the fibers modulus between jute, DINP and MP is likely the result of (i) the lower microfibril angle for jute ( Calling on the Bowyer and Bader methodology The basis of Bowyer–Bader argument As the composite reaches the stress at failure, the maximum stress in the fiber attained the ultimate strength of fibers and The analysis method of Bowyer and Bader is based on the Kelly–Tyson model for the prediction of the strength of a polymer composite reinforced with discrete fibers The first term in the square brackets in Eq. The Eq. According to Bowyer–Bader method, it is possible to fit experimental strength data to this model making possible to solve Eq. For each fibers loading, the fiber length distribution after composite processing was determined. Two stress value ( The Young’s modulus of the fiber An assumed value of the interfacial shear strength ( The ratio R of the fiber load bearing contribution at the two strains  The value of interfacial shear strength ( Then the value of Once interfacial shear stress was determined, the intrinsic tensile strength of the fibers The enhancement in the tensile strength of composites based on polyolefin matrix and natural fibers processed in presence of MAPP is a well-established consensus for which most of the reported studies agree It is worth noting to mention that, for non-coupled composites, higher tensile strength was found for deinked newspaper than for mechanical pulp composite in spite of the higher intrinsic tensile strength of mechanical pulp fibers. The higher interfacial shear stress along with the lower critical fiber length found in deinked newspaper composite for the non-coupled composite may account for this result. Moreover, the higher amount of fine elements with length lower than critical fiber length, found in mechanical pulp, contributed to the fall down in the reinforcing potential of the fibers. Jute strands also provided quite high composite tensile strength which is likely the consequence of the intrinsic tensile strength, larger fiber length and good interfacial shear strength. In the following, the Bowyer–Bader approach was adopted to provide more accurate quantification regarding the contribution of each phase, namely sub-critical fiber, super-critical fiber and the matrix, to the composite strength. The data collected from this analysis is collected in For non-coupled mechanical pulp composite (0% MAPP), the main contribution to composite tensile strength arouse mainly from the sub-critical fiber and from the matrix. As pointed previously, the low reinforcing efficiency of MP is the result of the long critical fiber length found for non-coupled mechanical pulp composites. On the opposite, in non-coupled DINP composites and jute based composites, the contribution of super-critical fiber length was higher than that of MP. However, in all instance, given the low contribution of the super-critical fiber length to the composite strength, we may expect for the uncoupled composite that the majority of fibers will pull out of the matrix rather than fracture when the sample fails. The fibers with length lower than The addition of 6% (wt/wt) of MAPP bring about an improvement in the interfacial shear strength ( The enhanced interfacial adhesion is supported by SEM observation taken from the fracture surface of specimens after the tensile test, as shown in From the analysis of the composite mechanical strength and the data collected from the model approach we can conclude that for short randomly composite based on natural fibers, the intrinsic mechanical property of the reinforcement will be the most decisive parameter in composite tensile strength provided a good interfacial adhesion is ensured. Otherwise, the fiber length will be crucial to bring on a reinforcing effect. In the present work, three types of natural reinforcements were used for the preparation of PP composites. Mechanical pulp (MP) was obtained from softwood, deinked newspaper fibers (DINPs) were obtained from newspaper (consisted of hardwood) after deinking, and jute strands (JSs) from jute stalks after harvesting. The tensile modulus of the composite attained the highest value with jute fibers followed by DINP and MP, and the mechanical strength in presence of coupling MAPP was the most higher with jute followed by MP and DINP. From the Hirsch model the intrinsic fibers modulus was estimated adopting a value of the efficiency stress transfer factor The authors are thankful to the Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation and Tunisian Government for funding the research Program