The distillation of essential oil from comminuted ripe berries of Juniperus communis L. (juniper oil) was studied at different hydrodistillation rates. The distillation of juniper consisted of an initial, fast oil distillation followed by a slow oil distillation. Based on this mechanism, the kinetics of juniper oil distillation were described using a two-parameter model of unsteady-state diffusion through the plant material. The hydrodistillation rate and berries-to-water ratio were shown to affect the distillation rate, process duration, yield, composition and physical properties of the juniper oil. Both the fast distillation rate and the yield of juniper oil increased with increasing hydrodistillation rate. The fast oil distillation rate increased and the oil yield decreased somewhat with increasing berries-to-water ratio. The amount of alpha-pinene decreased and the amount of myrcene increased with increasing hydrodistillation rate.constant, Eq. fast distillation coefficient (= effective diffusion coefficient (m hydrodistillation rate (ml/min) slow distillation coefficient (min mass of juniper oil collected in the separator (g) mass of plant materials in a batch (g) essential oil yield at any moment of hydrodistillation (g/g) essential oil content initially present in the berries (initial average concentration of essential oil in the plant particles) (g/g) average concentration of essential oil in the plant particles at any moment of hydrodistillation (= concentration of essential oil at the free surface of the plant particles at any moment of hydrodistillation (g/g) essential oil yield at time (min) time delay (min) distance along the direction of diffusion (m) volume fraction of juniper oil in the vapour phase near the free surface of the boiling suspension, 1 Juniper berries, the fruit of Juniper oil is usually present in berries at relatively low concentrations and recovery techniques of high performance are required to achieve high oil yields. Various techniques have been used for juniper oil extraction such as hydrodistillation There are numerous papers dealing with the yield and composition of essential oil obtained from juniper berries grown all over the world by means of different recovery techniques. Based on these studies, one may conclude that both the yield and composition of juniper oil depend on many factors, such as: the soil and climate in which the plants are grown The distillation of essential oil from comminuted ripe, non-fermented berries of Dry ripe, non-fermented berry cones of The berries were milled into a mash prior to hydrodistillation. The berries-to-water ratios were 1:3 and 1:10 (w/w). The former ratio is frequently applied in the industrial production of essential oil from juniper berries, while the latter ratio is recommended by official pharmacopoeias for determining essential oils in aromatic drugs The isolated juniper oil was dried over anhydrous Na GC analysis was carried out on a Hewlett Packard Ser. II 5890 apparatus equipped with a Carbowax 20 The physical properties (relative density, refractive index and optical rotation) of the juniper oils were analyzed at 20 The flow scheme for the Clevenger-type hydrodistillation apparatus, consisting of a flask (still), a condenser and an essential oil separator, is shown in To model the kinetics of the essential oil hydrodistillation process, the juniper oil mass balances for both plant particles in the boiling suspension and the hydrodistillation apparatus are considered. The mass transport of essential oil through plant particles during hydrodistillation occurs as unsteady-state diffusion. This process is basically the same as the diffusion of extractive substances through plant particles during solvent extraction (leaching). For batch hydrodistillation and no chemical reaction, it can be described by Fick's second law of one-dimensional unsteady-state diffusion: the plant particles are isotropic, equal in size, shape and initial oil content and do not change their size and shape during the hydrodistillation; the essential oil is considered as a pseudo-component; a part of the essential oil is located at the external surfaces of the broken juniper berries and the rest is uniformly distributed in the plant particles; the effective diffusion coefficient is constant; the concentration of essential oil on the external surfaces of the plant particles at any moment during the hydrodistillation is zero because of its instantaneous “washing” from the surfaces; and there is no resistance to the mass transport of essential oil from the external surfaces of the plant particles. Eq. Further development of the mathematical model describing the kinetics of essential oil isolation from comminuted juniper berries by hydrodistillation was based on a mechanism similar to that of the solvent extraction of extractive substances from plant materials The following assumptions are made to consider the juniper oil mass balance for the hydrodistillation apparatus ( the pressure and temperature are constant in the apparatus; the vapour condensation occurs only in the condenser; the aromatic water is saturated by the hydrosoluble compounds of the juniper oil; the mass of water vapour in the flask, the connecting tube and the condenser and the mass of water in the condenser, the connected tube and the separator are much smaller than the mass of water in the flask; the suspension in the flask is perfectly mixed; and the flow of the vapour phase through the flask, the connecting tube and the condenser as well as the flow of the water condensate through the condenser, the separator and the connecting tube are plug flow. The mass of the juniper oil in the vapour phase rising from the free surface of the boiling suspension between By integration of Eq. The proposed model, defined by Eq. The time-course of the change of the juniper oil yield during the hydrodistillation process at different rates from 0.13 to 11.7 To check the proposed mathematical model, the dependence of ln[( Generally, both kinetic parameters increased with increasing hydrodistillation rate. For a berries-to-water ratio of 1:3 (w/w), the relationships of the kinetic parameters on the hydrodistillation rate were exponential as follows: Both kinetic parameters also increased with increasing the berries-to-water ratio from 1:3 to 1:10 (w/w) at a hydrodistillation rate of 10.0 When the berries-to-water ratio was changed from 1:3 to 1:10 (w/w), the initial juniper oil distillation rate increased and the final oil yield was somewhat reduced. The oil distillation rate increased at the lower berries-to-water ratio, probably due to the reduced mass transfer resistance and the better contact between the plant particles and water, making the oil more accessible for distillation. The small decrease in the oil yield at the berries-to-water ratio of 1:10 (w/w) might be attributed to the dissolution and/or hydrolytic transformation of the oil constituents into the increased quantity of water. With increase of the hydrodistillation rate at the berries-to-water ratio of 1:3 (w/w), the fast oil distillation was favoured, increasing both the initial rate of oil distillation and the final juniper oil yield. The final juniper oil yield was affected by the hydrodistillation rate only at lower rates (approximately less than 5 The following experiment was carried out in order to determine the cause of the reduction of the juniper oil yield at the lowest hydrodistillation rate, compared to those obtained at higher hydrodistillation rates. The hydrodistillation was carried out at the lowest rate of 0.13 A number of components are generally present in juniper oils. In a preliminary study, eight major components were identified in the juniper oil obtained by the standard hydrodistillation method The first three major components in all juniper oils obtained under different hydrodistillation conditions were alpha-pinene, limonene and myrcene, their total amount varying between 70 and 80% ( The relative density, refractive index and optical rotation of the juniper oils obtained at different hydodistillation rates and berries-to-water ratios are given in The mechanism of oil distillation from comminuted ripe juniper berries can be considered to consist of two parts: first, the fast distillation of the volatile oil components on or near the particle surface and second, the slow distillation or diffusion through the plant particles followed by oil distillation from their external surfaces. Based on this mechanism, oil distillation during hydrodistillation can successfully be described mathematically using the model of unsteady-state diffusion through the plant material. External heat improves the diffusion of oil constituents through the plant particles more than the fast oil distillation. The hydrodistillation rate and the berries-to-water ratio are decisive factors affecting the initial distillation rate, process duration and oil yield. Both the initial distillation rate and the yield of juniper oil increase exponentially with increasing hydrodistillation rate. The fast oil distillation rate increases and the oil yield decreases somewhat with increasing berries-to-water ratio. Thus, the optimum hydrodistillation rate and berries-to-water ratio for a certain hydrodistillation unit should be determined by a techno-economic analysis. The hydrodistillation rate also affects the juniper oil composition. The amount of alpha-pinene decreases and the amount of myrcene increases with increasing hydrodistillation rate, probably due to the transformation of myrcene into pinenes during prolonged heating. No differences in the chemical composition of the juniper oils obtained at different berries-to-water ratios at the same hydrodistillation rate are to be expected. This investigation was supported by the Ministry of Science and Environmental Protection of the Republic of Serbia project no. TD 7049B.