Introduction
                  We present a modified tension band technique combined with cable cerclage using Cable Grip System for the treatment of displaced inferior patellar pole fractures and report the knee functional outcome.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  The patients who had had operative treatment of a displaced inferior patellar pole fracture (AO/OTA 34-A1) between December 2013 and December 2015 were studied retrospectively. Eleven consecutive patients had had open reduction and internal fixation with the modified technique using Cable Grip System, of whom, five males and six females with an average age of 60.9 years (range, 29–81 years). All fractures occurred from direct fall onto the knee. The average time from injury to surgery was 6.1days (range, 2–12days). The range of motion (ROM) was measured in degrees by goniometry at postoperative intervals of 1, 2, 4, 12, and 48 weeks; Knee function was evaluated using the Rasmussen scores at final follow-up.
               
                  Results
                  No patients had nonunion, loss of reduction, migration of wire, irritation from the implant and fixation breakage during the follow-up period. Recovery of ROM was achieved at 12 weeks, with the average ROM at 1 week was 72° (range, 65°–78°), 86.4° (range, 78°–92°) at 2 weeks, 115.5° (range, 103°–122°) at 4 weeks, 129.6° (range, 122°–133°) at 12 weeks, 134.5° (range, 129°–139°) at 48 weeks after the operation. Concerning the knee function outcome assessment, all patients showed excellent results at final follow-up. The average Rasmussen scores was 27.9 out of 30 (range, 27–29).
               
                  Conclusions
                  The modified tension band technique combined with cable cerclage using Cable Grip System for displaced inferior patellar pole fractures can provide stable fixation with excellent results in knee function, allows for immediate mobilization and early weight-bearing, which is a simple and valuable technique in routine clinical practice.Inferior pole fractures of the patella account for approximately 5% of all the patellar fractures However, among the various surgical techniques, modified tension band wiring is still the most commonly used. The conventional method does not usually provide sufficient stability if the fracture is comminuted and may be associate with possible loss of reduction and soft tissue irritation due to breakage of wire and migration of Kirschner wire (K-wire) We have developed a modified tension band technique using the Zimmer Cable Grip System (Zimmer, Warsaw, Indiana, US) combined with Ti-6Al-4V alloy cable (Tivanium The study was approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee in the hospital. We retrospectively identified consecutive patients with displaced inferior patellar pole fractures (AO/OTA 34-A1) ( There were 13 patients treated with the present technique. Among them, two patients were excluded because of multiple fractures from motor vehicle accidents. There were five males and six females with an average age of 60.9 years (range, 29–81 years). Four left sides, seven right sides. All fractures occurred from direct fall onto the knee. The average time from injury to surgery was 6.1 After anesthesia, the patient was placed in a supine position, a cushion was used under the ipsilateral hip to avoid external rotation of the leg, injured knee flexion of 30–40° was achieved by a cushion below. A pneumatic tourniquet was routinely applied. A parapatellar approach was performed from 1 Two 2.0 A second titanium cable was inserted deeply and closely to the contours of the patella ( A standard wound closure was performed in layers with use of #2 Vicryl No immobilization was necessary after the operation. Functional exercises were initiated 24 All patients underwent regular follow-up at 1, 2, 4, 12, and 48 weeks after the surgery. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs were obtained at 1 ROM in degrees by goniometry was assessed at each time-point of the follow-up, while knee function was evaluated at final follow-up. The Rasmussen scores was used, which address fractures around the knee specifically No intraoperative complications were observed. During the 48 weeks follow-up, no patients had loss of fracture reduction, evidence of implant migration, or material failure. No patient reported soft tissue irritation as manifested by pain around the patella. Eight patients had removed the fixation without complain of irritation from the implant, just because of personnel psychological reasons. Recovery of ROM was achieved at 12 weeks in our study, with the average ROM was 129.6° (range, 122°–133°). Concerning the knee functional outcome assessment, all patients showed excellent results at one year after the surgery. The average Rasmussen score was 27.9 out of 30 (range, 27–29). Displaced inferior patellar pole fractures are difficult to fix and maintain firm reduction to allow early movement of the knee because of small fragments and comminution Currently, the ideal treatment for displaced inferior patellar pole fractures has not yet been identified. According to current best practice, the modified tension band wiring fixation considered to be the gold standard for optimal recovery of knee function Titanium implants provide an effective alternative to reduce the risk for their strength and fatigue resistance No K-wire migration was observed in our study during 48 weeks follow-up, but it has been reported in other clinical studies using modified tension band wiring However, no complications were observed in our series, which may be related to the small sample size. In case of hypothetic complications, like material failure, infection and delayed or non-union, the histocompatibility of the titanium is good enough to minimize the scar tissue caused by the internal implants. Thus, removal of the implant or a revision surgery is easy should the need arise due to prominence. Several researchers have developed other internal fixation devices and stabilization methods for the inferior patellar pole fractures The limitation of our study must be acknowledged in the interpretation of results. First, we see good indications for our method in three or four parts fractures if the fragments are large enough to be passed through by the K-wire. However, it is not suitable for all displaced inferior patellar pole fractures. For example, the fracture consists of a severely comminuted lower pole of the patella. Second, the sample size was relatively small, and there is no control group in our study. Third, we used a retrospective approach. A prospective, randomized controlled trial will be needed to better evaluate our technique. The modified tension band technique combined with cable cerclage using Cable Grip System in the treatment of displaced fractures of the inferior patellar pole is a simple operative technique producing a stable osteosynthesis. The method we used allows a rigid fixation and minimal injury to the tendon, which provide an efficient approach to promote earlier recovery of knee function. There is no conflict of interest issue related to this work.