Adsorption of silver from synthetic photographic and spent fix solutions on granulated activated carbon in a batch process has been investigated. The synthetic solutions prepared had similar properties to medical X-ray and photographic process effluents. Sodium and ammonium thiosulfates are the major lixiviants used in the dissolution of silver halides present in photographic and medical X-ray films. The resultant solutions contain substantial amounts of recoverable silver complexes in the form of thiosulfates. The as received carbons were alkaline in nature when contacted with deionised water. These carbons showed very low silver recoveries. However, when these carbons were pre-treated with 0.5mol/dm3 sulphuric and nitric acids at 25°C, it had resulted in significant silver recoveries of 98.5% and 95% from sodium and ammonium thiosulfate solutions, respectively. These results were achieved in a narrow range of pH between 3 and 4. Batch atmospheric stripping of adsorbed silver by 2.0mol/dm3 HNO3 at 85°C was also investigated.Reade discovered dissolution of silver halides in photographic fixing process using ammonium thiosulfate (ATS) and sodium thiosulfate solutions (STS) as fixing baths in 1837 ( ATS and STS are commonly used in fixing baths that contain a number of other chemicals like acids, preservatives, hardeners and buffers, which perform various functions in the photographic fixing process. This results in spent fix solutions having a complex silver composition and thus this preliminary test work was performed on synthetic solutions. AgCl and AgBr were dissolved in ATS and STS to produce synthetic spent fix solutions (SFS) as effluents with similar silver concentrations. These synthetic solutions were used in the initial experiments. The use of carbon to selectively adsorb silver is based on the gold–silver cyanide complex adsorption principles as in carbon in pulp and leach circuits in mining operations. Carbon adsorptions for Au/Ag complexes were observed in the order of high to low affinity as; Au halide Commercially available carbons (GoldCarb 207C and 208C), obtained from the Sutcliffe Speakman Carbons UK Ltd. were employed for batch silver adsorption experiments. The carbons were initially alkaline in nature and showed a pH of between 9 and 11 when 10 Batch adsorption experiments were done by adding 10 Other solutions used were 0.2 Elution of silver from the 50 Initial adsorption tests were carried out in adsorbing silver from the as received solutions of photographic and medical X-ray process effluents. The particle size range and dose rate of carbon were altered to investigate the effects on silver recovery. The pH was increased from its initial value of 6.5 to 8–10. There were no indications of significant silver recoveries under alkaline conditions. Meanwhile there were improved silver recoveries observed when the pH was lowered from the as received pH 6.5 to 3–4. This indicated that improved silver recoveries could be achieved under acidic conditions. The results showed that adsorptions under alkaline conditions have shown very low silver recoveries; hence synthetic tests were done for similar silver concentrations under acidic conditions. The as received SFS and synthetic solutions were observed to have a relatively neutral pH, respectively. The experiments were done to see if pre-treated carbons could enhance silver recovery from synthetic thiosulfate solutions. The 0.5  This seemed to agree with earlier work by Such an electro-kinetic phenomenon is known as electrophoresis, which in essence involves the interrelation between the mechanical and electrical effects of a moving interface, which are expressed in terms of zeta potential. This behaviour is contrary to that observed in the case of carbon treatment using K The pre-treatment of carbon using synthetic solutions in aqueous H The adsorption of Cu The three types of acids employed for further tests were acetic acid (CH The H Thiocyanates are also used as alternative lixiviants for silver halides dissolution in photographic and medical X-ray film processing. It also produces substantial amount of recoverable silver as in thiosulfate fixation process, hence it is therefore investigated for its effects on silver recovery on carbon. The silver recovery in aqueous sodium thiocyanate was 56% as shown in This adsorption phenomenon can be best explained using The oxidation of thiocyanate in The overall proposed existence of silver thiocyanate complex species at these Eh–pH conditions can be seen in The stripping of silver from carbon was done to recover silver in eluate that was initially recovered on carbon. The silver recovery via elution showed the silver recoveries in eluate with 60.4% and 27% that initially adsorbed from STS and ATS, respectively. The 60.4% recovery from STS solution suggests an ion exchange effect during stripping. This corresponds to similar effects observed in aqueous Au/Ag systems as reported by The resultant AgNO The presence of the The excess The result shows that presence of Na The presence of The use of synthetic spent fixing solutions have highlighted the potential of recovering silver from the medical X-ray and photographic process effluents using activated carbon under acidic conditions. High silver adsorptions and recoveries in thiosulfate solutions were observed when carbon was pre-treated using the 2 HNO The silver concentration in eluate was increased by threefold from 500 to 3250 I would like to greatly thank the Institute of Materials, Minerals and Mining (IOM