Bulk solids are exposed to time-dependent mechanical stressing due to particle–particle and particle-apparatus contact interactions during various manufacturing processes and transportation steps. These interactions can be described by discrete element method (DEM) based on the contact models of particles. Usually in DEM simulations the particles are assumed to be spheres and as a consequence shape effects are neglected. However, most bulk solids processed in industry consist of irregular shaped particles. Therefore, in order to improve accuracy of numerical simulation the real shapes of particles must be considered in DEM. In this work, amorphous irregular shaped micrometer-sized titanium dioxide agglomerates were investigated. The force–displacement curves at compression were obtained with the help of a self-designed experimental setup. Based on the experimental data, several material parameters were determined and implemented in viscoelastic and elastic–plastic contact models. To consider the shape effect in the estimation of contact parameters the DEM simulation of studied agglomerates was performed by multi-sphere approach and bonded-particle model. The shape and position of the agglomerates on the loading pin were obtained by X-ray computer tomography and used in DEM simulations. From the obtained results it was pointed out that the bonded-particle model based on Maxwell viscoelastic model gives the best agreement with experimental data from compression tests with titania agglomerates.case 1: elastic behaviour case 2: elastic behaviour with bond breakage case 3: elastic–plastic behaviour case 4: Maxwell viscoelastic behaviour The dynamic behaviour of bulk solids during the various manufacturing processes and transportation steps is quite complicated due to time-dependent particle–particle, particle-apparatus and particle-gas/liquid interactions. In order to simulate the particle ensemble on the microscale, the discrete element method (DEM) is widely used. The DEM firstly introduced by Cundall and Strack In the earliest DEM simulations two-dimensional circular elements were used Nowadays, the multi-sphere method is widely used in the DEM community Alternatively to the multi-sphere approach the bonded-particle model (BPM) can be employed to describe agglomerated structures and irregular shaped particles. By the BPM the investigated agglomerate is represented as clusters consisting of non-overlapping (primary) solid spheres, which are bonded together through solid bridges Since the shape representation as well as inner structure of the agglomerate affects the contact behaviour and breakage mechanisms in DEM simulations, the shape of agglomerates used in simulations of industrial processes must coincide with real agglomerates. For this purpose, the irregular shape of the agglomerates can be obtained by X-ray microtomography (XRMT). The XRMT is a non-destructive imaging technique that permits to obtain a 3D image of a scanned object (single particles, agglomerates or a particle bed) from a series of X-ray slices The aim of the present study is to numerically reproduce the compression test with irregular shaped titania agglomerates by means of discrete element method and to find the models and their parameters, which give the best agreement with the experimental results. For this purpose, the real size and shape of the particle were obtained from XRMT measurement and the compression test was carried out. Afterwards, the DEM simulation of the compression test was performed, where the agglomerate positioning on a loading pin was corresponded to the real experiment. For the irregular particle shape representation in numerical simulations, the multi-sphere approach and bonded-particle model were used and compared. Titania TiO Titania was analysed by combined differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) (NETZSCH DSC 204 F1 Phoenix), and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) (Q500, TA Instruments), which detect the heat flow and the mass loss as a function of temperature changes. The measurements showed a weight loss of approximately 17.74 In order to investigate titania agglomerates, an experimental micro setup was employed ( In order to define basic mechanical properties of titania agglomerates, single particle uniaxial compression tests up to breakage were carried out with the help of the setup described above. Before compression the equivalent sizes of the titania agglomerates were estimated. The available images of particles taken from above and from the side before testing were analysed with the help of the free image processing software ImageJ. The maximum vertical distance between two loading pins at first contact was assumed to be the particle equivalent size The mean value with a standard deviation of the breakage force Furthermore, the breakage probability was described using a three-parameter Weibull distribution function (Eq. Additionally, compression tests with agglomerates under cyclic loading–unloading at two different levels of maximum force in a cycle were carried out. The results of cyclic tests showed that the agglomerates demonstrated plastic shakedown response at cyclic loading since the value of residual plastic displacement decreased with the number of cycle. A typical force–displacement curve for a single titania agglomerate can be seen in By means of numerical integration of obtained force–displacement curves (see hatched areas in The obtained mean values of restitution coefficient as a function of the number of cycles for the tested agglomerates are shown in In order to determine the agglomerate density, measurements with the helium pycnometer were conducted. For the studied agglomerates, the density was found to be 2.45 Since an irregular shape of agglomerates hinders a direct characterization of material properties in contacts from experimentally obtained force–displacement curves due to the multi-contact phenomena and unknown curvature at contact points, the determination of a real agglomerate shape was done in order to use a real agglomerate volume for further numerical simulations in DEM codes. The X-ray microtomography (XRMT) can be used as a helpful tool ( After scanning, the pin with the agglomerate was mounted into the setup and the compression test was performed ( The main purpose of this part is to simulate the fulfilled uniaxial compression test with the irregular shaped agglomerate with DEM and to find the models and their parameters, which give the best agreement with the experimental results. For this purpose two methods for shape representation (multi-sphere approach, bonded-particle model) and different contact models as well as solid bond models have been employed and compared. The obtained STL surface of the tested agglomerate was processed with the help of MATLAB code to create clusters of overlapping spheres needed in DEM for representing the particle with irregular shape according to multi-sphere approach Then the obtained cluster was imported in the commercial code EDEM 2.5 (DEM Solutions), and the simulation of the compression test with the multi-sphere particle was done. The loading rate was set to be equal to the value used in the fulfilled compression test, i.e. at 50 The contacts models of Tsuji Non-linear viscoelastic model of Tsuji consists of an elastic part and a viscous part representing the energy dissipation during contact In the linear hysteretic spring model of Walton & Braun the contact normal force can be expressed as follows The experimentally measured values of density, equivalent restitution coefficient and coefficient of friction were used as material parameters of the multi-sphere particle for contact models for forces in normal and tangential direction. For instance, the damping coefficient The value of 0.28 for Poisson’s ratio  A more detailed representation of the agglomerate with DEM was performed by generation of its microstructure with non-overlapping spheres connected by solid bonds. The structure creation and DEM simulation of the agglomerate under compression were realised by means of the component-based system MUSEN Main components, which are used during uniaxial compression tests, are: algorithms for packing and bonds generation to place primary particles in specified volume and to create heterogeneous bond networks between them; contact models to calculate interparticle forces; advanced models to perform simulations of elastic and elastic–plastic bonds; databases of agglomerates, materials and indenters to study influences of structural, material and process parameters, accordingly. To simulate the compression test in the MUSEN system, the non-spherical agglomerate consisted of 2280 non-overlapping primary particles with a diameter of 10 After that, DEM simulations of compression test in the MUSEN system were performed on conditions similarly to the conducted experiment. The loading pins were represented by two non deformable STL surfaces by setting of a high value of Young’s modulus for wall material. The upper surface moved down at 50 Similar to the performed simulations with EDEM software, the material density, equivalent restitution coefficient and frictions coefficients determined experimentally were used in contact models. The other contact and bond model parameters were estimated, so that the last point of the force–displacement curve in the simulation approximately coincides with experimental ones. The description of the bonded-particle models used in MUSEN simulations is given in detail below. In the MUSEN system primary particles can be connected with a solid bond with unique geometry and material parameters. During DEM simulations a particle movement occurs, which leads to the deformation of the bond. In The radius of the solid bond The deformation of the bond The value of In the case of the pure elastic behaviour the recovery length The values of forces and moments in the bond in current time step at the time point ( The breakage of bond material of agglomerates was simulated with DEM. The bond is destroyed during loading and removed from the model when the stresses reach or exceed some predefined limits. If one assumes that the bond material is brittle when the breakage criteria for brittle fracture due to bending/tension or shearing/torsion can be written as To consider the plastic deformation, the model described above has been extended with two additional parameters. Here, the recovery length of the bond The first model parameter Additionally, the simulations of the compression test with the agglomerate consisting of two primary particles with diameter of 1 Additionally, the basic viscoelastic model of Maxwell was implemented into the system MUSEN to simulate the compression of the agglomerate. The Maxwell model consists of a viscous damper and an elastic spring, which connected in series. The damper has the parameter of viscosity In order to validate the implemented Maxwell viscoelastic model for bond deformation, the compression tests with the agglomerate consisting of two primary particles with diameter of 1 With help of the MUSEN system the simulation of compression test was conducted by four different models of solid bond deformations: elastic model without bond breakage (case 1); elastic model including bond breakage (case 2); elastic–plastic model (case 3) and Maxwell viscoelastic model (case 4). The estimated values of the contact model parameters for all case studies are summarized in In case 1, the simulated force–displacement curve exhibits a power-law dependency ( The simulation results for the elastic–plastic deformation model of solid bonds (case 3) of the agglomerate are shown in The results of the implemented Maxwell model for solid bonds are presented in The DEM simulation with multi-sphere approach does not consider contact plastic deformation. In other words, the radius of curvature in a contact before and after impact is the same, the agglomerate shape does not change. In contrast to the multi sphere approach, the combination of bonded-particle model with elastic–plastic as well as viscoelastic model for solid bonds allows for local plastic deformations after complete unloading of the agglomerate. It follows from this that the changes in the agglomerate shape will be taken into account during next contact events in DEM simulation. In order to simulate bulk solids consisting of many granules with complex shape by DEM, the parameters of contact models for a single agglomerate must be known. As a rule, a basic compression test can be used for determination of contact material parameters. Nevertheless, the irregular shape of the tested titania agglomerates hinders the direct determination of contact properties from experimental curves. To overcome this problem, the determination of contact models parameters in numerical simulations by using the experimental curve at compression was done. For that purpose, the real shape of the titania agglomerate was obtained by X-ray computer tomography and used for the DEM simulations. Minor disadvantages of the proposed experimental procedure include dependency of the surface quality on tomographic resolution, geometry loss during scanning and minor influence of glued volume on whole material response since the bottom of the particle is fixed. In the numerical DEM simulations the multi-sphere approach and bonded-particle model with different deformation behaviours of solid bonds were utilized in order to represent an irregular shape of tested titania agglomerate. By comparison of simulation outputs and experimental data of the compression tests, the contact model parameters were estimated so that the maximum normal load at maximum normal displacement coincides with experimental ones. It should be noted that the estimated parameters cannot be treated as real material properties in the materials science sense. Here they play the role of model parameters, which influence the stiffness during contact interactions in DEM simulations. It was found that the simulations with the multi-sphere approach representation cannot show the linear behaviour of the experimental force–displacement curve although the linear plastic contact model of Walton & Braun was used. For the investigated titania agglomerates the DEM representation with the MUSEN system as an agglomerate consisting of primary particles and solid bonds is more preferred since it mimics the real agglomerate structure. By using the new proposed elastic–plastic model and Maxwell viscoelastic model for solid bonds, the DEM code reproduces the inelastic deformations in titania more accurately. From the obtained results one can conclude that bonded-particle model, where bonds deform according to the Maxwell viscoelastic material law, gives the best agreement with the experimental data. Based on the obtained simulation results, both the elastic–plastic model and the Maxwell viscoelastic solid bond model will be used in the simulations of titania agglomerates. The authors gratefully acknowledge the