When a coal sample is constrained either by displacements or by a confining stress, additional force and resulting stress develop within the coal. A simple “free expansion+push back” approach is developed in this work to determine the magnitude of this stress and its effect on permeability evolution. In this approach, the coal is allowed to expand freely due to gas sorption, and then it is pushed back by the applied effective stress to the original constrained conditions. The total “push-back” strains are used to calculate the change in coal permeability. This free expansion plus push back approach is applied to examine the variety of permeability responses observed in the laboratory and the veracity of their representation by theoretical models linking this behavior to gas sorption-induced swelling/shrinkage. These cases include (1) coal swelling tests under the uniaxial strain condition; (2) coal swelling tests under the displacement controlled condition; (3) coal swelling tests under the stress controlled condition. These responses are verified against other coal permeability models available in the literature and against experimental data and field data where few analytical solutions are currently available. In particular, this approach has led to a new coal permeability model that can be used to explain stress-controlled experimental observations. Stress-controlled swelling tests are normally conducted in the laboratory to characterize the evolution of coal permeability under the influence of gas sorption. Typically reductions in permeability are observed from gas-sorption-induced swelling even where effective stresses remain constant. This behavior remains enigmatic as the permeability of the porous coal is determined by the effective stress only. Our model is capable of replicating this apparently anomalous behavior.Coal swells with gas adsorption and shrinks with desorption, which changes the coal cleat apertures and thus the permeability under reservoir conditions. Therefore, understanding how gas sorption-induced changes in effective stresses affect the permeability of coal is crucially important not only to operations involving the production of natural gas from coalbeds, but also to the design and operation of projects to sequester greenhouse gases in coalbeds The potential impacts of coal swelling on the evolution of coal permeability have been investigated through experimental and analytical studies. Measurements of the effects of coal shrinkage have been completed for the injection of different gases and the implications for the change in cleat permeability have been evaluated using model representing a matchstick geometry Changes in permeability of coal cores confined under isotropic stresses show that desorption of an adsorbing gas, e.g. methane, is accompanied by matrix shrinkage Other laboratory experiments have measured the change of coal permeability as a function of pore pressure and injected-gas composition at constant effective stress Based on experimental observations, a variety of models have been formulated to quantify the evolution of permeability during coal swelling/shrinkage. Gray When experimental results from these tests were interpreted, a matchstick or cubic coal model was assumed. Under this assumption, matrix swelling would not affect coal permeability because of the complete separation between matrix blocks caused by through-going fractures. In this case, for a given fracture pore pressure, the swelling will result in an increase of fracture spacing, rather than a change in fracture aperture In this study, a more general approach is developed to characterize the evolution of coal permeability under a full spectrum of mechanical conditions from stress-controlled to displacement-controlled swelling/shrinkage conditions. When a coal sample is constrained either by displacements or by a confining stress, additional force and resulting stresses develop within the coal. A simple “free expansion plus push back” approach is developed to determine the amount of stress. In this approach, the coal is allowed to expand freely due to the gas sorption, and then it is pushed back by the applied effective stress to the original constrained conditions. The total “push-back” strains are used to calculate the coal permeability. This free expansion plus push back approach is applied to a series of cases commonly used in the laboratory tests and theoretical analysis to generate typical response curves of coal permeability to gas sorption-induced swelling/shrinkage. After this, it is assumed that both fracture and matrix systems contribute to the coal resultant permeability, and then a new permeability model is formulated through elastic modulus reduction ratio, The following two assumptions are considered in this study: (1) the coal is a homogeneous, isotropic and elastic continuum, and the system is isothermal; (2) strains are infinitesimal. The gas sorption-induced strain  From Eq. Considering a porous medium containing solid volume We assume that the sorption-induced strain for the coal is the same as for the pore space. Without the gas sorption effect, the volumetric variation of the porous medium satisfies the Betti–Maxwell reciprocal theorem, Using the definition of porosity, the following expressions can be deduced as Solving Eqs. Substituting Eq. Rearranging Eq. Because generally Using the cubic relation between permeability and porosity Eqs. Eq. If we assume that Comparing Eqs. Applying Hooke’s law yields Then the effective stress can be expressed as This example illustrates a simple and straightforward way to determine the relation between free expansion strain and the push-back strain and how to determine the amount of stress that develops in the coal. In the following sections, this free expansion plus push-back approach is applied to a series of cases commonly used in the laboratory tests and theoretical analysis to generate typical response curves. These tests include:    When a coal sample is partially constrained by displacements and partially controlled by a confining stress as shown in The total effective strain is defined as In this paper, we define the vertical direction as the Solving Eqs. Substituting Eq. Eqs. For a single gas system the sorption-induced volumetric strain Substituting Eq. It has been well accepted that Applying the Hooke’s law to Solving Eqs. Similarly, applying the Hooke’s law to Solving Eqs. These derivations prove that both Following the above ideas, two comparisons are presented here to illustrate the validity of this proposed porosity and permeability models under uniaxial conditions. The first one is to compare our model with the Advanced Resources International (ARI) permeability model for CO  When a coal sample is completely constrained as shown in Solving Eq. Typical response curves for CH  When the response is controlled completely by stress alone, as shown in Substituting Eq. In order to investigate the influence of effective stress on permeability change under stress-controlled condition, three cases are tested as shown in  In this study, it is assumed that coal matrix blocks are connected to each other by coal-matrix bridges, as illustrated in The change in fracture opening due to the swelling of a coal-matrix bridge may be neglected because the fracture width (the coal bridge height) is too small compared with fracture spacing. Therefore, the net change in fracture opening due to free expansion would be negative. When the coal swelling is constrained by coal bridges and external confining conditions, the overall permeability change will be determined by the change in total effective stress. Because swelling strain does not impact the coal matrix permeability as shown in For fracture system, the permeability change is related to two factors: (1) change in mechanical effective stress; and (2) sorption-induced strain. The ‘free expansion Permeability values for the coal matrix are typically several orders of magnitude smaller than fracture permeability values The evolution of the fracture permeability change is related to both change in mechanical effective stress; and sorption-induced strain. Using the ‘free expansion Simplifying the above equation yields Then the fracture permeability can be expressed as In the lab tests, the effective stress could be kept as invariable. In this case, Eq. In order to explain the interaction between matrix and the connected bridges, the schematic diagram regarding the fracture aperture change and the effective stress alteration is shown in For fracture system, the aperture closure induced by the effective stress change can be calculated by Simplifying this equation, gives If assuming Because Similarly, the porosity change for the matrix system can be expressed as Therefore, the permeability expressions of Eqs. In this study, we assume that fracture and matrix deformation are both linear and fully recoverable, and deformations in normal closure or opening are the predominant permeability alteration mode. Combining the effect from both systems, the resultant change in coal permeability is resultant outcome of the reduction in fracture opening due to coal matrix swelling and effective stress change, as defined in Eq. Substituting Eqs. The impact of Based on this proposed permeability model, one example is conducted to match the experimental data monitored under stress controlled conditions where few models are successful in matching response One more match with experimental data was conducted. In this experiment, the injection gas is CO A simple “free expansion Successful application of this approach has generated a series of coal permeability models. For the uniaxial strain condition, our approach has resulted in a coal permeability model consistent with the ARI model, PM model, SD model and CB model. The same approach is then applied to displacement-controlled and stress-controlled sorption conditions. Stress-controlled sorption tests are normally conducted in the laboratory to characterize the evolution of coal permeability under the influence of gas sorption. Typically reductions in permeability are observed from gas-sorption-induced swelling even where effective stresses remain constant. This behavior remains enigmatic as the permeability of the porous coal is determined by the effective stress only. Our new proposed permeability model is capable of replicating this apparently anomalous behavior. This work was supported by the Western Australia CSIRO-University Postgraduate Research Scholarship, National Research Flagship Energy Transformed Top-up Scholarship, by NIOSH under contract 200-2008-25702, and by State Key Laboratory for Geomechanics and Underground Geomechanics, China University of Mining and Technology. These various sources of support are gratefully acknowledged.