This paper pertains to the kinetics study of atmospheric dissolution of enargite in chloride media with and without the addition of two different catalysts: (1) granular coconut shell based activated carbon (AC), and (2) a novel carbon-based catalyst with the commercial name of AF 5 Lanxess Lewatit® (AF 5). Unlike AC or other catalysts, AF 5 is capable of collecting solid sulphur particles on its surface during the atmospheric leaching process, leaving behind insignificant elemental sulphur in the oxidative leaching residues.
                  The addition of both AC and AF 5 considerably enhance the leaching efficiency. Only 70% of copper was recovered in 96 h at 90 °C without the catalyst addition. The copper recovery was increased to 92% and 96% in the presence of AC and AF 5 respectively, in the concentrate to catalyst weight ratio of 1:1. The Cu2+ ions are found to be the main oxidant in the enargite leaching procedure. It was shown that the diffusion of Cu2+ ions through the product layer on the partially-leached enargite particles is the controlling step of the leach process, and the addition of the AC and AF 5 catalysts did not change the process controlling mechanism. The shrinking core model (SCM) has been used as the general kinetic model to study the enargite leaching kinetics at different temperatures. Scanning electron microscopy images of the partially-leached minerals confirmed that no impermeable elemental sulphur layer was formed on the enargite surface.stoichiometric coefficient effective diffusivity of kinetic parameter for diffusion through the solid layer control ( kinetic parameter for film diffusion control mass transfer coefficient of the liquid film ( kinetic parameter for chemical reaction control ( chemical rate constant particle radius (cm) time of reaction (min) reacted fraction concentration of density of Hydrometallurgy is considered a promising alternative for the enargite (Cu Limited studies have investigated the effect of carbon-based catalysts on the enargite leaching kinetics and efficiency. AC catalyzed atmospheric leaching of enargite has been shown to be a promising method with suitable leaching kinetics ( Enargite concentrate containing 24.4% copper, 39.0% sulphur, 20.1% iron, and 8.5% arsenic was used in the study. The head assay of the enargite sample is shown in Elemental assays of the concentrate were performed by an Agilent 4200 microwave plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (MP-AES). The atmospheric leaching tests were carried out in a 2 L glass reactor surrounded by a jacketed heater. The reactor was fitted with an overhead mechanical stirrer, allowing suitable mixing of the slurry at 800 rpm and with a reflux condenser to avoid the excessive evaporation when increasing the test temperature. The reactor was also equipped with a temperature control probe and oxygen sparger. Oxygen sparging rate was maintained at 0.1 L/min/L At high pulp density experiments 15 mL samples were drawn from the solution using a syringe at 1, 3, 6, 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, 72, 84 and 96 h, and for the low pulp density tests the kinetics samples were taken at 0.5, 1, 2, 3 and 4 h. The enargite concentrates, with the particle size range of 40–53 μm, was utilized for high and low pulp density leaching experiments. The solution loss was compensated by the addition of 15 mL of solution (0.5 M HCl and the average concentration of ferric chloride and cupric chloride). The samples were then centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 10 min and filtered using 0.45 µm syringe filters to separate the insoluble particles from the liquid phases. The pregnant leach solution (PLS) was pressure filtered and the residue was washed twice using 1 L of 10% HCl solution. Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) surface area and Barrett-Joyner-Halenda (BJH) pore size analyses were conducted by Tristar 3000 surface area and pore size analyzer respectively. Degasification process was performed for 2 h at 300 °C under nitrogen, and the nitrogen adsorption for surface area measurement was performed at 77.35 K for 55 points. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analyses were conducted by NOVA NANOSEM 450 on the leaching residues and catalysts for characterization purposes. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis was conducted by a ThermoFisher Scientific K-Alpha XPS spectrometer with a monochromated Al Kα X-ray source excitation (1486.6 eV). Two types of carbon-based catalysts were used in the experiments: (1) a granular coconut shell based AC (AC), and (2) Lanxess Lewatit® AF 5 (AF 5), a new microporous carbon-based material in the form of small spherical, which has superior mechanical properties compared to the conventional AC. The attrition rate of AF 5 has consistently been 10 folds less than that of AC, producing less carbon loss to tailings ( Generally, the higher the surface area on the carbon-based catalyst, the greater are its effectiveness in the catalyzed reaction rate ( The qualitative adsorption behavior of the two catalysts was studied by the adsorption isotherm graphs ( The XPS analysis of the two catalysts supported the presence of 3 main groups of carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen on the surfaces of AC and AF 5. The XPS method is often used to identify the functionalities on the surfaces of the carbon-based catalysts ( The oxygen O1s analysis of The equation for the oxidative atmospheric leaching of enargite in acidic ferric sulphate solutions can be written as the combination of the following two half-cell reactions: The standard free energy values for Eq. Unlike sulphate media, copper in chloride media can exist as both cuprous (Cu Phreeqc 3.3.7.11094 software was used to calculate the dominant species of the starting leach solution of the present study, which contained 5 g/L ferric, 5 g/L cupric, 0.5 M HCl, and 1.5 M of total Cl The standard free energy value for this reaction is −226.7 kJ/mol, which shows that reaction This section presents the kinetic models of the enargite leaching processes with and without the catalysts. The shrinking core model (SCM) was used to fit the test data ( The effect of temperature on the copper dissolution at 60, 70, 80, and 90 °C without the application of catalysts is shown in  Similar leaching experiments were performed with 10 g enargite concentrate at four different temperatures of 60, 70, 80, and 90 °C without a catalyst, with AC and with AF 5. The leaching results are shown in In order to examine the chosen kinetics model and study the effect of enargite particle size on the leaching rate, low pulp density leaching experiments were performed in the presence of AF 5 at 90 °C with 5 g/L initial cupric and ferric with concentrate particle size in three range of 53–75 μm, 44–53 μm, and 37–44 μm. As it is shown in The model constant for diffusion through the product layer or K SEM and EDS analyses were performed to study the morphology of the post leaching residues and the catalyst surfaces. Cross sections of a fresh and a post-leaching AC are shown in Cross sections of a fresh and a post-leaching AF 5 are presented in Using SEM and EDS analyses, Along with the sulphur adsorption, the presence of oxygen functional groups and mechanical properties in both AC and AF 5 are other key factors that help improve the kinetics of the leaching reaction. Although the cost of AF 5 can be higher than AC, AF 5 experiences negligible loss by attrition because of its better mechanical properties ( As shown in the leaching experiments, the temperature is an important parameter controlling the enargite leaching kinetics. Assuming that the nature of the passive layer on the mineral surface is a metal deficient layer, and the leaching is controlled via the diffusion of Cu AC and AF 5 catalyze leaching of enargite in chloride media was studied with the addition of cupric and ferric ions as the oxidant. Based on the leaching experiments, the enargite leaching is a very slow process when no catalyst is used. The highest copper extraction value achieved in the tests without the catalyst addition was approximately 70% after 96 h at 90 °C. The leaching process was greatly enhanced in the presence of AC and AF 5 where 92% and 96% copper extraction were achieved at 90 °C, respectively. The cupric ions were found to be the main oxidant of enargite in the leach process. The SCM presented a good fit to the experimental leaching data, suggesting that the leaching control mechanism was diffusion through a solid product layer, which is believed to be a metal deficient sulphide layer. Low pulp density experiments were carried out to confirm that the diffusion through the metal deficient layer is the controlling step of the leach process. Diffusion of the The authors acknowledge the financial support of the (see: