Comminution plays an important role in industrial processing of various materials especially in the field of recycling. However, there is scanty knowledge about comminution of non-brittle materials in contrast to brittle materials. Apart from few research works, they are based on empirical studies and improvements of the comminution machines. Therefore, the target of DFG Project “Comminution of non-brittle materials” is to specify the occurring cutting and shearing processes.
                  At the chair of construction in mechanical engineering and appliance at the University of Kaiserslautern, the single-cut process of polypropylene and aluminium between the rotor and stator cutter of model cutting mill was analysed. In particular, cutting energy, cutting forces and mechanisms were investigated. Examinations were carried out by a systematic variation of the machine parameters like rotor cutter wedge angle β
                     R, cutting clearance s, cutting edge radius r and circumferential speed v, as well as the parameters width b, thickness d and the segment length of the cutting material l.The starting point of these investigations is a tool with a regular geometry, because it is used for standard cutting mills. Geometrical conditions are more accurately described in   The clearance angle of the rotor cutter was determined at 10° for these investigations and the wedge angle on the rotor cutter was set at 55° for the basic adjustment. The cutting edge radius was set at The results for the dynamic cutting were obtained with two different set-ups (cf. set-up specification During the investigations, a substantial influence of the rate of load application on the cutting force-way diagram was noticed in case of both examined materials. The following diagram shows the curves for the quasi-static cut ( Evaluating the “cutting force-way diagram” for polypropylene with a thickness of 5 mm for Viewing the corresponding cutting surfaces, it is noticeable that a light embrittlement effect occurs for the first time at a cutting speed of 1 m/s (  Regarding the cutting energy as a function of the speed of load applied for different wedge angles, it becomes clear that the selection of the wedge angle of the rotor cutter has a significant influence on the necessary cutting energy. In the case of polypropylene, an energetic minimum is reached for all wedge angles with The situation for the aluminium tests is different. In the case of polypropylene, the cutting energy shows a curve for all edge radii which starts at a relative high level for the quasi-static test and then decreases to a minimum for higher speeds of load applications (  Considering the dependence of the cutting energy on the cutting clearance for polypropylene in During the aluminium tests, no consistent picture can be observed in the speed range up to 4 m/s. In contrast to polypropylene, here the smallest cutting clearance of 0.1 mm is the most favourable in terms of energy. Whereas the large cutting clearance re-enforces the embrittlement effect of polypropylene, a larger cutting clearance increases the deformation of aluminium. This result can also be seen by examining the samples (cf. The tests with polypropylene have shown that the rotor knife wedge angle has an essential influence on the breaking behaviour. An energy-efficient cut can be observed at small wedge angles. This results from a cleavage fracture induced by the tensile stress of the wedge effect. The fracture occurs even though the rotor knife has only penetrated a short distance into the cutting material. At large wedge angles, an essentially higher energy level is reached, which can be derived from a higher cutting force level and a longer cutting way until the fracture. Here a sudden gliding fracture is shown caused by the predominant shearing load. Upon examination of the cutting surfaces of the polypropylene samples, it becomes clear that these can be separated in two areas, independent of the mechanism of separation. The first result arises from the ductile penetration of the rotor knife into the cutting material and thus should be called “first cut area” hereafter. Next to this first cut area, there is an area of sudden fracture which occurs at The cut with As already seen for polypropylene, the fracture surfaces of the aluminium samples can be divided into two areas. The first area again results from the ductile penetration of the rotor knife into the cutting material and corresponds to the first cut area. Next to this area, an area of sudden fracture follows. The crushing processes in cutting mills are relatively complex because of the occurring dynamic loads. The wedge angle of the rotor cutter has a huge influence on the fracture behaviour of both examined materials. Polypropylene can be cut efficiently in terms of energy at small wedge angles, which results from a cleavage fracture induced by the tensile stress of the wedge effect. Aluminium cuts with a small gap and a small edge radius in the lower speed range should be preferred. Polypropylene behaves differently in terms of the cutting clearance. A larger cutting clearance has a positive influence on the cutting energy, since large cutting clearances strengthen the effect of embrittlement caused by tensile stress. The tests with both materials showed that the cutting energy is proportional to the first cut area, which applies to the same wedge angles independent of the speed of load application in the investigated range. Thus, the following conclusion (for practical use) can be made. By choosing the right parameters of the cutter geometry, the first cut area can be reduced and so the energy consumption decreases. Further research work should clarify the influence of material ductility and material firmness on the cutting of aluminium. For this purpose, further scanning electron microscope investigations are planned in order to evaluate the breaking mechanism more precisely.