An outstanding challenge in the production of titanium components by Additive Manufacturing (AM) is to promote the Columnar to Equiaxed Transition (CET) of the primary β-phase. This paper investigates the potential for quasi-stable elemental particles (Mo, Nb, W) to act as potent heterogeneous nucleant substrates for the Ti β-phase during arc melting and wire arc additive manufacturing. It is found that Mo, Nb and W-based particles act as potent nucleants during solidification and can facilitate the formation of refined equiaxed grains. A new mechanism for the efficacy of these particles is proposed, which is based on particle dissolution and its effects on supercooling and crystal growth. A new way of predicting potent quasi-stable nucleant particles is also presented.Mechanical properties of titanium components are principally determined by their underlying microstructures, for example, the alpha phase morphology and distribution (which is shaped by the prior-β phase morphology and distribution) in the case of commercial purity titanium (CP-Ti) [ In general, nuclei identification involves categorising of known compounds by unfavourable and favourable characteristics, for the purpose of narrowing down possible substrate candidates. While little is specifically known about nuclei in the titanium system, a large body of knowledge exists regarding the general characteristics of any substrate which is likely to catalyse solidification. One characteristic that has proven useful in identifying heterogeneous substrates is lattice matching. Specifically, selecting compounds that share the same crystallographic structure as the phase of interest, where a minimised lattice disregistry generally corresponds to an increased substrate potency [ Some evidence of transient particles acting as heterogeneous substrates for Ti exists in the literature. One study found that additions of 10 wt% Mo powder to a Ti-6Al-14V alloy (produced by SLM) yielded a homogeneous dispersion of Mo-rich particles throughout the microstructure, which were believed to be unmelted Mo powder particles [ Although these initial results are encouraging, further investigation is required to establish whether these elements are acting as heterogeneous substrates during solidification. If these elemental particles can in fact act as heterogeneous nuclei, then identifying the characteristics that make them suitable substrates for titanium crystal growth is of particular interest. This work investigates whether W, Mo and Nb particles can act as potent heterogeneous substrates for primary β-phase crystal growth and presents a novel framework to interpret their efficacy. It is theorised that the efficacy of W, Mo, Nb and Ta to act as heterogeneous substrates for titanium can be derived from their underlying similarities and differences in atomic properties. As the type of binary phase diagram formed between two elements depends on their shared properties, so too is the geometric form (particularly the topology) of a binary phase diagram indicative of certain underlying relationships between atomic properties of the respective elements. Because of this, it is proposed that certain binary phase diagram features can be used to predict effective heterogeneous substrates for use in modern solidification processes. These requirements are illustrated in Despite the simplicity of these requirements, it is theorised that these candidate elements ( It is well known that phenomena of heterogeneous nucleation can be understood in terms of two key components: 1) the driving force for crystal growth and 2) the barrier to nucleation. As these elements in their pure form have minimal lattice mismatch with β-Ti (among other advantageous properties), it is reasonable to assume that the barrier to nucleation associated with them will be small. These elements would therefore be expected to be at-least moderately effective substrates for β-Ti crystal growth; assuming they survive the melting process. However, as will be shown, through their partial dissolution, their potency is expected to be greatly enhanced; exceeding what a conventional evaluation of potency may predict. Powder Compact Melting (PCM) was used to explore the efficacy of W, Mo and Nb powders to act as quasi-stable heterogeneous substrates for Ti. Cylindrical powder compacts (ø≈6 mm, average weight of 0.575 g) were formed in a stainless-steel die at a pressure of ∼100Mpa using a manually actuated hydraulic press. Prior to compaction, the powders were homogeneously mixed using a Turbula For each of the compositions tested, a subset of the powder compacts were remelted multiple times to evaluate the effect of increased arc exposure time on the development of undercooling prior to solidification. For context, while melting at the top of the beads was observed almost instantly with the initiation of the arc, the pyrometer (which measured surface temperatures approximately midway down each bead, see In addition to the PCM process, the effectiveness of the isomorph particles on promoting crystal nucleation was also studied during Wire Arc Additive Manufacturing (WAAM). Details of the WAAM equipment are available elsewhere [ Standard metallurgical sectioning, mounting, polishing and etching procedures were used to prepare the samples. Samples were observed using optical and electron microscope techniques. EDS analysis was conducted using a TM3030 SEM and a Jeol 6610 SEM. Particle-matrix orientation relationships were explored using electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) analysis technique on a Jeol 6610 SEM equipped with a HKL Channel 5 system. HKL Channel 5 Tango and Mambo were used to process the EBSD data. Quantifying the specific potency of the inoculant powders (to reduce grain sizes and promote a columnar-to-equiaxed transition) is beyond the scope of this study. However, the influence the inoculant powders had on the general grain sizes and morphologies is relevant to interpreting their mechanism of action. Their microstructural influence will therefore be briefly discussed. At short specific arc durations ( For these short specific arc durations, both sample groups (those with inoculants and those without) yielded predominantly equiaxed grain morphologies with a minority of columnar grains. For intermediate arc durations ( Dendritic segregation was faintly visible in W and Mo-containing PCM samples, while not visible in Nb-containing PCM samples. In the cases where dendritic segregation and undissolved particles were visible, the particles were exclusively located in the centre of dendrites. Inoculant-containing compacts which had an unmelted section at their base revealed the following features. In the area which had not completely melted (evident by the highly irregular pores, see The undercooling measured prior to recalescence for the samples produced by PCM are summarised in Regarding the samples produced by WAAM, sections exposed to injected inoculant powder particles were frequently dendritic ( Within an Nb-containing sample produced by WAAM, a closely packed group of Nb particles with apparent dendritic growth upon the particles provided an ideal opportunity to establish possible particle-matrix orientation relationships. EBSD analysis ( For particles to act as heterogeneous substrates during solidification necessitates that they exist as solids at the onset of crystal growth. Discerning whether the introduced inoculant particles acted as heterogeneous nuclei therefore first requires establishing whether the particles survived the applied solidification processes. Particles analysed by EDS yielded internal compositions well above those predicted by available equilibrium phase diagrams [ The irregular geometry of many of the particles, their size similarity with the original powders and their disappearance with further arc exposure also supports the hypothesis that the observed particles are retained powder particles. Furthermore, the solute profiles generated around these particles are characteristic of incomplete particle dissolution (see Regarding the samples produced by the PCM process, to evaluate the impact of the isomorph powder particles on crystal growth first requires discussing the solidification conditions in their absence. Steep anisotropic thermal gradients favour epitaxial growth modes, however, columnar to equiaxed transitions can be realised under these conditions; provided numerous nuclei of sufficient potency are present at the onset of solidification. If it is assumed that the grain morphologies seen in the PCM samples (Ti samples, t Despite the intrinsically anisotropic thermal conditions applied to the beads during the PCM process, all powder compacts yielded predominantly equiaxed grain morphologies when exposed to short cumulative arc durations. To assess why this occurred requires accurately describing the nuclei populations and the thermal conditions in the melts. Regarding the nuclei populations, it is plausible that during the melting process, Ti powder particles were liberated from the yet-to-be melted bases of the powder compacts and briefly circulated prior to melting. Based on the findings of a previous study [ The impact of the isomorph powders on the growth morphology of the powder compacts is evident when comparing the two sample groups at equal cumulative arc durations ( This conclusion is further supported by the presented thermal data. A characteristic of nuclei-rich melts is that they tend to yield reduced (recalescence) undercoolings [ The absence of any significant change in measured undercoolings in the inoculant-free Ti samples (when compared to the inoculant-containing samples) indicates that the potency of the native nuclei population did not strongly depend on cumulative arc durations. This may suggest that the unmelted Ti powder particles (or meta-stable contaminants within the particles) have roughly the same potency as the naturally occurring population in the metal. If this is the case, then it is likely that their existence alone would not be sufficient to promote a CET-given that the thermal conditions favour columnar growth modes. These findings therefore support the conclusion that the initially equiaxed microstructure seen in the Ti sample were likely due to the alteration of the thermal conditions; perhaps due to the circulation and melting of Ti powder particles. The location of inoculant particles in the centre of dendrites (from both solidification processes) provide further insights regarding their mechanism of action. In general, particles found within dendrites could be due to precipitation, overgrowth from existing crystals or engulfment after acting as a substrate for crystal growth. Regarding the isomorph particles, the first possibility can be ruled out as they could not have formed in situ; as previously established. If the particles were engulfed during solidification, then their locations inside the dendrites should be randomly distributed. Since the particles were only found at the centre of dendrites, it is evident that they were not randomly overgrown by existing crystal growth. Additionally, the sequence that leads to the particles being the initial source of crystal growth can be seen at different stages in the samples produced by the PCM process ( The presented data is, therefore, most consistent with the isomorph particles acting as sites for the initiation of crystal growth. Provided that the original crystallographic orientations developed at the onset of solidification remain unchanged down to room-temperature, each particle and interfacing dendrite would be expected to share the same crystallographic orientation. As seen in the EBSD map ( In summary, the presented microstructural, thermal, chemical and crystallographic data supports the conclusion that the isomorph-based particles provide preferential sites for crystal formation and growth in both the PCM and WAAM solidification processes. The following discussion will therefore explore why these particles appear to be effective substrates for Ti crystal growth. While particles present at the onset of solidification may provide potential substrates for crystal growth, for growth to initiate requires that sufficient undercooling (driving force) is present to overcome a given substrate's nucleation barrier: Since isomorph systems only occur when two elements share the same crystal structure (with similar lattice size) and also have similar electron valence and chemical affinities to enable complete miscibility and solubility, the interfacial term To evaluate the nucleation barrier of an isomorph powder particle therefore requires the determination of the lattice parameter at its surface (at the onset of solidification) and the lattice parameter of the crystal that is expected to form upon it. The difference between these two lattice parameters provides a measure of their coherence and therefore the barrier to nucleation. Since isomorph particles are thermodynamically quasi-stable, only particles that survive the melting process (undergo incomplete dissolution) can act as substrates for subsequent crystal growth. This process of dissolution alters the composition of the liquid in the immediate vicinity of the isomorph particles and may also change the surface composition of the particle. Consequently, the lattice parameters of the precipitating solid and the dissolving isomorph particle (specifically the surface of the particle) will depend on the state of dissolution and the temperature at which solidification initiates. To elucidate the dissolution process and discuss the lattice parameters at the onset of solidification, a simplified solidification scenario (which involves the heating, holding and rapid cooling of a pure Ti melt containing pure inoculant particles) will be explored using a generic equilibrium phase diagram. It is assumed that the high cooling rates and non-equilibrium conditions experienced during cooling will not drastically alter the general form of the phase diagram (the phase field remains a continuous and elevated isomorph system relative to Ti), however, the apparent solid/liquid solubility limits could be affected. Evidently, the accuracy of the equilibrium phase diagram-derived compositions should only be taken as approximations. In this scenario, the heating and cooling processes are considered sufficiently rapid to approximate as instant (dC/dt = 0 during heating and cooling) and the holding time t As seen in As cooling progresses, the solute profile around the particle will transition from undersaturated ( While both dissolutional supercooling and constitutional supercooling involve the segregation of alloy constituents across an S-L interface, it should be noted that they are distinct phenomena; and in some regards are the inverse of each other. For a constitutionally supercooled zone to form during crystal growth requires the enrichment (for Since the isomorph particle will be wet by the liquid (a prerequisite for dissolution [ Since the first layer that crystallises is of a different composition to the solid interface, the onset of growth could be considered heteroepitaxial. Once crystal growth has begun however, all future growth is homoepitaxial in nature. This includes the transition from the edge of the dissolution field to the remaining bulk of the melt ( The dissolution of isomorph-based particles and the corresponding increase in the bulk composition of samples produced by PCM may also have contributed to slower rates of latent heat production (and therefore larger undercoolings) seen with longer specific cumulative arc exposures. This is because growth-restricting effects due to partitioning will become pronounced once solidification of the bulk commences (when the temperature of the bulk initially falls below the bulk liquidus temperature Based on the presented framework, the maximum temperature ( In the case of the Ti-Mo compacts, the maximum temperatures recorded prior to cooling were in the range of ∼2000 °C ≤ Based on the presented framework, it is evident that higher temperatures have a positive influence on the maximum attainable potency of the particles. This is because higher temperatures during melting promote a richer solute boundary layer (and therefore maximises the potential dissolutional supercooling) and reduces the barrier to nucleation by minimising the lattice difference between the forming solid and the isomorph particle. There are, however, disadvantages to higher melt temperatures; which are most apparent when considering the variables that affect particle dissolution. Using the same mathematical approach as other previous works [ While these differences in phase field parameters may assist in selecting between potential While the efficacy of these particles will depend on their chemistry, it will also depend on their size at the onset of solidification. For a given wt% or volume fraction of inoculant powder, selecting a smaller powder size has the advantage of maximising the number of particles and therefore the number of potential nucleation events. In contrast, smaller particles typically require larger undercoolings to activate and also have shorter survival durations. If the particle size is sufficiently small, they will dissolve before the onset of solidification and will therefore not provide any additional sites for crystal growth. Consequently, for a given solidification process, wt%/volume fraction of inoculant addition and inoculant powder composition, there is an optimum initial particle size which will maximise the number of nucleation events during solidification. These findings have practical implications for the grain refinement of alloys formed by solidification-based processes, including casting and AM processes. For traditional casting methods strict control of the time above the liquidus would be required to prevent complete melting of the isomorph particles and a certain degree of convection is needed to disperse the particles. Due to the small turbulent melt pools and shorter times at high temperature typical of AM, control of particle dissolution would be feasible by tailoring process conditions such as energy input and deposition rate. One potential issue regarding control in AM is the partial remelting of previously deposited layers when a new layer is applied. This is because the dissolution of particles liberated from the previous layer could contribute to the solute content of the new layer. It is conceivable that this process could repeat and lead to a positive feedback loop in which each subsequent layer accumulates more solute. Competing factors, however, may counteract this phenomenon. A layer with a higher solute content will have a raised melting temperature which will reduce the fraction of remelting on the previous layer (for a set heat input). The total contribution of solute from the previous layer will therefore be reduced. A higher melting temperature will also reduce the amount of superheat in the melt pool and therefore shorten the time prior to solidification in which dissolution can occur. Additionally, since the rate of particle dissolution will decrease as the bulk solute content increases, both the newly injected particles and liberated particles will be slower to dissolve. These factors may counteract the tendency for solute accumulation within each subsequent layer, however, further investigation is required. Powder additions (Nb, Mo, W) were added to two solidification-based processes (powder compact melting and WAAM) to investigate their efficacy as quasi-stable nucleant particles. It was revealed that the particles were sufficiently stable to survive the melting processes and act as potent substrates for β-crystal growth, facilitating refined equiaxed grain formation. During the melting processes, the inoculant particles were found to undergo partial dissolution and enrich the surrounding liquid. It was proposed that the raised equilibrium liquidus temperature within these solute-rich boundary layers lead to preferential crystal growth upon the surface of the particles once cooling began; a phenomenon referred to as ‘dissolutional supercooling’. Based on the experimental findings, a novel phase diagram-based theory for identifying additional quasi-stable nucleant particles was also presented. The authors would like to acknowledge to support of the