Introduction
                  Humeral shaft nonunions can lead to morbidity from subsequent operations, complications and impaired function. Currently there is no evidenced-based consensus for treatment of humeral shaft nonunions.
               
                  Aim
                  We aimed to summarize and analyze union rates and complications after operative treatment for humeral shaft nonunion.
               
                  Methods
                  Studies investigating operative treatment strategies for humeral shaft nonunion were identified by searching: EMBASE, MEDLINE, Ovid SP, Web of Science, Cochrane Central, PubMed and Google Scolar up to October 24, 2014. Studies were eligible if: (1) outcome of operative treatment for humeral shaft nonunion was reported; (2) at least ten adult patients with humeral shaft nonunion included; (3) full text article available; (4) written in English, German or Dutch; and (5) nonunion was defined as no bone-bridging between the fracture ends after 6 months.
               
                  Results
                  Thirty-six studies were included. A union rate of 98% was found in patients (n
                     =672) who underwent plate fixation with autologous bone grafting (ABG), 95% in plate fixation without ABG (n
                     =19), 88% in intramedullary nailing with ABG (n
                     =164), 66% in intramedullary nailing without ABG (n
                     =78), 92% in bone strut fixation (n
                     =91) and 98% in external fixation (n
                     =152). A total complication rate of 12% was found in patients treated with plate fixation combined with ABG, 15% in intramedullary nail with ABG and 8% intramedullary nailing without ABG, 20% in bone strut fixation and 22% in external fixation.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Plate fixation with ABG was recommended for humeral shaft nonunion, since the union rate is highest and the complication rate is relatively low.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV.Fractures of the humeral shaft account for 3–5% of all fractures Operative treatment to achieve adequate fixation in nonunited fractures is often complicated by coexistence of suboptimal surgical conditions including infection, prior surgical attempts or significant bone loss The primary aim was to compare union rates among operative treatment strategies for all forms of humeral shaft nonunion. Additionally we summarized complications per treatment modality. Studies were eligible if: (1) report on the outcome of operative treatment for humeral shaft nonunion was available; (2) at least ten adult patients with humeral shaft nonunion included; (3) full text article available; (4) written in English, German or Dutch; and (5) a nonunion was defined as no radiographic evidence of bony bridging between the fracture ends after 6 months. A study was excluded if the article was not an original study. Animal studies were also excluded. Nonunion was defined as the nonappearance of bridging cortical bone across the fracture site on a radiograph as well as presence of pain or motion at fracture site after 6 months of fracture treatment Eligibility assessment was performed by two independent reviewers (RP and FC). Disagreements were solved in consensus. Data extraction was performed by the first author (RP) and checked and corrected by an independent second reviewer (FC). We extracted data including: author, year of publication, country of publication, study population (patient characteristics, population size, sex and age), design of study, fracture type, initial treatment, nonunion characteristics, operative treatment strategy, union rate, complications (infection, iatrogenic nerve injury, loss of fixation, re-fractures, or malalignment) and follow-up. The methodological quality of the included studies was evaluated by two independent reviewers (RP and FC). Disagreements were solved in consensus. We used a standardized set of criteria based on modiﬁed questions of existing quality assessment tools An initial electronic search yielded 1068 potentially relevant studies were identified. Seven-hundred-and-thirty articles were retrieved from EMBASE, 572 from MEDLINE, 444 from Web of Science, 200 from Google Scholar, 51 from Scopus, 8 from Cochrane Central, and 8 from PubMed publisher. One article was retrieved after checking the references of relevant articles. We excluded 1020 articles based on title and abstract. The remaining 49 papers were retrieved for detailed assessment of full text manuscript; four studies were excluded because they included less than ten patients, three articles did not describe the exact number of patients with nonunion and delayed union, two were excluded because there was no full text article available, two were excluded because there was no treatment for nonunion described, one article was excluded because it was published in another language than English, Dutch or German. Consequently, a total of 36 studies were included ( In accordance with quality criteria mentioned above, three studies (8.3%) were considered as high quality Thirty-three of 36 selected studies were retrospective case-series. One study had a prospective study design In 14 low-quality A total of 94 complications were described in the 17 studies investigating plate fixation combined with ABG (12%). The complications included: 43 transient radial nerve palsies, 26 superficial infections, three deep infections, three other neurological injuries and 19 other complications, such as reoperation, hardware failure, shortening or angulation of the humerus. Nineteen patients in two low-quality studies were treated with plate fixation without augmentation of bone graft Ten low-quality studies including 164 patients investigated intramedullary nailing combined with ABG as treatment for humeral shaft nonunion Three low-quality studies described intramedullary locked nailing in 71 patients Thirty-six complications (14.5%) were described in the ten included studies investigating intramedullary nailing combined with ABG. The described complications included: 11 transient radial nerve palsies, three deep infections, one superficial infection, one other neurologic injury, and 20 other complications were observed. One high-quality Bone struts are cortical strut grafts used in periprosthetic fractures and nonunions to provide solidity and promote intra-membranous bone formation In six low-quality studies including 152 patients the Ilizarov frame was used as treatment for humeral shaft nonunion Seven of 36 included studies reported an average of 5 cases – 20% (range 4.8–38%) – infected nonunions based on 1–6 intra-operative cultures. The majority of studies did not report any intra-operative cultures in their series. There is currently no consensus for optimal operative treatment for humeral shaft nonunion. In this systematic review of 36 articles we reviewed union rates and complications after several operative treatment modalities for nonunion of the humeral shaft. We classified three of the 36 relevant articles as being of high quality. Based on the systematic review of the currently available and relevant literature, we found that plate fixation with ABG achieves high union rates with relatively low complication rates in patients with humeral shaft non-union. This study should be interpreted in light of several limitations. Because of heterogeneity and low quality of several study aspects, no sound meta-analysis could be performed. Several baseline characteristics as the number of prior surgeries, type of nonunion, or infection and status of soft tissues were not taken into account in the analysis and our conclusions. Therefore, only the primary outcome measures of this systematic review: (1) union rate; and (2) number of complications were compared between different treatment strategies. As always in medicine the conclusion have to applied and modified to the individual patient. Another limitation is that most articles described the number of complications based on the total study population without dividing the number of complications per specific treatment group. Only three studies described the number of complications per group A union rate of 98% was found in patients ( A total complication rate of 12% was found in patients treated with plate fixation combined with ABG, 15% intramedullary nail with ABG and 8% intramedullary nailing without ABG, 20% bone strut fixation and 22% external fixation. A possible explanation for the high union rate in patients treated with plate fixation and ABG could be the combination of compression, correction of malalignment, and stimulation of osteogenesis Because of the small dissection there is less tissue trauma in patients treated with intramedullary nailing and if the anterolateral approach is used the risk of nerve damage is also low However, lower union rates in patients treated with intramedullary nailing compared to plate fixation were found. Intramedullary nailing provides less rotational control and axial stability resulting in less consolidation of a humeral shaft nonunion Other problems associated with use of a locked intramedullary nailing system in the humerus includes, migration of nail despite adequate locking in osteoporotic bone, creation of additional comminution at the fracture site, distraction at fracture site, subsequent surgery, and fracture below the locking humeral nail Exchange nailing has high failure rates External fixation is especially useful for open fractures or infected cases and particularly useful in handling complex angular deformities, bone loss, and length discrepancy Non-vascularized or vascularized strut grafting combined with internal fixation can achieve bone union in osteoporotic, atrophic humeral nonunion Chronic osteomyelitis and multiple operations can result in large defects for which standard techniques do not apply. When the vascular status of the soft tissue envelope is insufficient vascularized cortical bone struts can be used Chhabra et al. propose a segmental bone loss of >6 In conclusion, based on the results of this systematic review, plate fixation combined with autologous bone grafting appears to achieve the highest union rates combined with a relatively low complication rate. External fixation has also demonstrated high union rates. The high complication rates may be overshadowed by relatively minor pin tract infections. However, external fixation can be used in the presence of infection and the deformity. The use of bone struts have resulted in relatively high union rates in patients with humeral nonunion and large bony defects. Due to limited availability and expertise this technique should be reserved for very complex cases. Further studies on union rate and complications of operative treatment strategies for humeral shaft nonunion should ideally be prospective with large patient numbers. Authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. R.M. Peters, F.M.A.P Claessen, and M.P.J van den Bekerom contributed to the conception and design of the study and to interpretation of the data. Rinne Peters drafted the article. Femke Claessen, Job Doornberg, Gregory Kolovich, Ron Diercks and Michel van den Bekerom revised the article for important intellectual comment. All authors gave approval to submit the manuscript. The authors thank Mr. W. Bramer and Mr. I. van Raath, medical librarians of respectively the Erasmus Medical Centre in Erasmus MC and Onze Lieve Vrouwe Gasthuis (O.L.V.G) for assistance in performing the literature search. (’humerus fracture’/exp OR ‘humerus supracondylar fracture’/exp OR humerus/exp OR (humer*):ab,ti) AND (elbow/exp OR ‘elbow injury’/exp OR ‘elbow fracture’/exp OR elbow pain’/exp OR ‘elbow flexion’/exp OR ‘elbow sprain’/exp OR (distal* OR elbow* OR ((articulat* OR joint*) NEAR/3 cubit*)) :ab,ti) AND (’fracture nonunion’/exp OR (nonuni* OR ununi* OR maluni* OR ((non OR mal OR un) NEXT/1 (union* OR united))):ab,ti)