A promising method, ammonia modification, was developed for flotation separation of polycarbonate (PC) and polystyrene (PS) waste plastics. Ammonia modification has little effect on flotation behavior of PS, while it changes significantly that of PC. The PC recovery in the floated product drops from 100% to 3.17% when modification time is 13min and then rises to 100% after longer modification. The mechanism of ammonia modification was studied by contact angle, and Fourier transform infrared (FT–IR) and X–ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements. Contact angle of PC indicates the decline of PC recovery in the floated product is ascribed to an increase in surface wettability. FT–IR and XPS spectra suggest that ammonia modification causes chemical reactions occurred on PC surface. Flotation behavior of ammonia-modified PC and PS was investigated with respect to flotation time, frother concentration and particle sizes. Flotation separation of PC and PS waste plastics was conducted based on the flotation behavior of single plastic. PC and PS mixtures with different particle sizes are separated efficiently, implying that the technology possesses superior applicability to particle sizes of plastics. The purity of PS and PC is up to 99.53% and 98.21%, respectively, and the recovery of PS and PC is larger than 92.06%. A reliable, cheap and effective process is proposed for separation of PC and PS waste plastics.Plastic has been one of the most widely used materials due to the combined features of flexibility, light weight, low cost, and design adaptability. Plastic wastes generated from household products, automotive and electronic industries are constantly increasing owing to the rapid development of industries and the short life span of plastics ( As plastic wastes are potential resources that can be recovered and reprocessed, the emphasis on plastic management has changed into recycling. Different types of plastics should not be mixed together for recycling process because of chemical incompatibility, and thus efficient techniques for separation of plastic wastes are necessary. Flotation is a promising alternative for plastic recycling, which enables substituting virgin plastic and minimizing the environmental pollution. The advantages, such as cost-effective, high efficiency and practicality for separation plastics with similar density, enable flotation receive increasing attention all over the world ( Selective wetting is necessary for flotation separation of plastic mixtures owing to the natural hydrophobicity of most plastics. Surface treatments including plasma treatment, flame treatment and ozonation were proposed for this purpose. PS and PC are commonly found together in plastic products, such as electric appliances and automotive products. Moreover, various products mainly consisted of PS or PC plastic can be mixed in the waste streams when they are discarded. Therefore, a separation method is of significance for recycling PS and PC plastics. Generally, the component of plastics is dependent on the source of wastes. For example, there exists ABS plastic in addition to PS and PC in plastic wastes derived from electric appliances. In our previous study ( Samples of two different kinds of waste plastics, polycarbonate (bisphenol A (BPA) type) and polystyrene, were obtained from a waste plastics market (Miluo, Hunan Province, China). Each of the samples was crushed using a plastics cutting mill (SCP-180-2, Cixi Yinbao Plastics Machinery Co., Ltd.). The crushed particles were screened, rinsed and dried under room temperature. The sieve size fractions used in this work were 2.0–2.5 The samples of plastics were conditioned with ammonia in 100 The wettability of plastic samples was evaluated by contact angle measurements using a JJC-I contact angle measuring instrument (Changchun Optical Instrument Factory, China). The samples were rinsed carefully with distilled water and dried at room temperature. Drops (4 A Nicolet Avatar 360 FT–IR spectrometer (Nicolet Magua Corporation, USA) was used to obtain FT–IR spectra. FT–IR technique was used to analyze the chemical modifications produced to about 5–10 Chemical modifications on the outermost surface layer (about 5 The flotation experiments were conducted using a self-designed flotation column with a height of 170 Firstly, ammonia modification of PC or PS (15 In the case of plastic mixtures, plastics (20 Flotation behavior of PC and PS as a function of time is shown in Contact angle of PC and PS samples before and after ammonia treatment were determined at 23 The change in wettability of PC after ammonia treatment is similar to the case of plasma treatment ( FT–IR spectra of PC and PS before and after ammonia treatment are shown in The unmodified PC shows a typical molecular vibrations at 1190 When modification time is less than 13  As shown in  Particle size shows certain impacts on the flotation behavior of plastics ( Based on the above results, flotation separation of mixed plastics was conducted after ammonia modification. As shown in A process combining ammonia modification and flotation was proposed for separation of PC and PS waste plastics ( Ammonia treatment was investigated for aiding flotation separation PC and PS waste plastics. Ammonia treatment changes selectively the flotation behavior of PC, while PS is insensitive to ammonia. The mechanism of ammonia modification was investigated through contact angle, FT–IR and XPS determinations. The reduction of PC recovery in the floated product is ascribed to a decline of contact angle. FT–IR and XPS spectra confirm that chemical reactions occur on PC surface. Hydrophilic groups are introduced on PC surface by ammonia modification and increase the wettability of PC surface. Flotation behavior of ammonia-modified PC and PS was investigated with respect to flotation time, frother concentration and particle sizes. Based on flotation behavior of single plastic, flotation separation of PC and PS mixtures was achieved with high efficiency. The purity and recovery of PS in the overflowed product and PC in the submerged product is larger than 92.06%. Additionally, the purity of PC in the submerged product and PS in the overflowed product is up to 98.21% and 99.53%, respectively. Due to relatively low economic profit of plastic recycling, the development of cheap and efficient separation techniques is of great demand. Compared with other methods such as ozonation, plasma treatment and flame treatment, ammonia modification developed in this work is simpler, cheaper and more efficient for flotation separation waste plastics. A reliable, cheap and effective process is proposed for separation of PC and PS waste plastics, and this process holds great potential for industrial application.