We have undertaken a set of wind erosion experiments on a simple and well defined mineral, quartz. In these experiments wind action is simulated by end over end tumbling of quartz grains in a sealed quartz flask. The tumbling induces collisions among the quartz grains and the walls of the flask. This process simulates wind action impact speed of ∼1.2m/s. After several months of tumbling we observed the formation of a large number of spherical sand aggregates, which resemble small snowballs under optical microscopy. Upon mechanical load the aggregates are seen to be more elastic than quartz and their mechanical strength is comparable, though slightly lower than that of sintered silica aerogels. Aggregates of this kind have not been reported from field sites or from closed circulation systems. However, sparse occurrence might explain this, or in nature the concentration of the aggregate building particles is so low that they never meet and just appear as the most fine grained tail of the sediment particle size distribution.From investigations of stabilized dune sand areas, a few hundred years old, it is known that there is an increase in fine sand, silt and clay size materials towards the top of the sediment profile e.g., ( The tumbling rate is comparable to an impact speed of about ∼1.2 Commercially available quartz (Merck, 1.07536) was sieved to separate the fraction between 125 and 1000 It appears that our tumbling process results in production of spherical aggregates, typically 50–100 It appears that the sandballs are more elastic than the starting quartz material for which the corrected displacement was zero, until the quartz particle suddenly disintegrated. This is compared to several μm for the sandball particles. The bulk density of the sandballs was measured to be 1.1 (2) The sandballs produced in the erosion process have a much larger surface area than the un-eroded material. This suggests that the sandballs have an enhanced number of un-engaged electrons at the surface, which would result in increased chemical reactivity with a potential coupling to the humidity. In a dry desert climate or a climate similar to that on the surface of Mars these types of aggregates will probably have long life time and might be found there, whereas in a humid climate the aggregates might readily disintegrate. Particle comminution by aeolian and other natural weathering processes are known in soil science and is often seen as an increase in the number of fine particles towards the top of soil profiles ( The