The specific rate of breakage (S
                     i) in the widely accepted first-order expression of grinding rate is one of the important factors required to evaluate a grinding process, particularly for the initial grinding stage in various mill types.
                  In this study, the effects of ball diameter and feed size on the specific rate of breakage were investigated on limestone, trass and clinker samples at batch grinding conditions based on a kinetic model. Eight different monosize fractions were prepared between 1.7 and 0.106 mm, using a √2 sieve series. The specific rates of breakage (S
                     i) were determined from the size distributions at different grinding times, and the specific rates of breakage were compared for three different ball diameters (41, 25.4 and 9.5 mm).
                  The results indicated that the variation of the specific rate of breakage with feed size of cement materials could be expressed. For the specific rate of breakage of each material, empirical equations were developed to express it as a function of feed size and ball diameter.Comminution is extremely energy intensive, consuming 3–4% of the electricity generated worldwide and comprising up to 70% of all energy required in a typical mineral processing plant. Considering these factors, a small gain in comminution efficiency can have a large impact on the operating cost of a plant, while conserving resources as well During the last decade, there have been considerable improvements in comminution efficiency not only due to the development of machines with the ability to enhance energy utilisation, but also due to the optimal design of grinding systems and operating variables that enable more efficient use of existing machines The analysis of size reduction in tumbling ball mills using the concepts of specific rate of breakage and primary daughter fragment distributions has received considerable attention in years. Austin et al. Various laboratory studies, pilot plant works and full size plant observations showed that ball diameter, as an operating variables, can affect grinding efficiency at a given output fineness. Austin et al. show that typical variation of the specific rate of breakage vs. particle size for various ball diameters in a tumbling mill follows the trends shown in This paper presents the effects of ball diameter and feed size on the specific rate of breakage of clinker, trass and limestone determined under standard conditions in a small laboratory ball mill. When breakage is occurring in an efficient manner, the breakage of a given size fraction of material usually follows a first-order law Limestone, trass and clinker samples taken from Göltaş cement factory (Isparta/Turkey) were used as the experimental materials. The chemical properties of the limestone, trass and clinker samples are presented in Firstly, Standard Bond Work Index tests were made for limestone, trass and clinker samples. The Bond Work Index values of limestone, trass and clinker samples were determined as 13.52, 7.85 and 13.69 kW h/ton, respectively. The standard set of grinding conditions used is shown in The first-order plots for the various feed sizes of limestone, trass and clinker samples are given in Austin et al. used It was shown that the variation of the nondimensional specific rate of breakage with feed size of materials could be approximately expressed by This suggests that the basis of the size reduction in a ball mill results from the interactions between grinding balls and particles, and that the essence of this mechanism does not change even if feed materials are changed.  Substituting The experimental values and the calculated results obtained by In this study, batch grinding tests of cement materials (limestone, trass and clinker) with a ball mill were carried out. The effects of feed size and ball diameter on the specific rate of breakage (selection function) were investigated. The variation of the nondimensional specific rate of breakage with feed size was roughly analogous, and it was independent of ball diameters and kind of materials. It can be seen that there is a little divergence between the experimental and calculated values for the clinker, because clinker is formed as an artificial sample. The relationships between the optimum feed size and the ball diameter were deduced. The relationships between the maximum specific rate of breakage and the ball diameter for the materials were also determined.