Objective
                  To review the results of proximal humeral fracture in elderly patients receiving open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), and to investigate whether use of intramedullary strut allografts leads to better outcomes.
               
                  Methods
                  Retrospective review of radiographs, charts, and surgical records of 90 patients, age 65 years and older, followed up for a minimum of 12 months after buttress plate fixation of a proximal humeral fracture from January 2001 to March 2011. The fractures were reduced with or without insertion of an intramedullary strut allograft during the operation. We analyzed overall results, fracture union status, and varus collapse (by determining the change in the neck-shaft angle and humeral head height) by radiography at 5 different time points: immediately and 1, 3, 6, and, 12 months postoperative.
               
                  Results
                  The 90 patients enrolled in the study included 24 men and 66 women. An intramedullary strut allograft was applied in 55 patients (BG group), and not applied in the remaining 35 patients (non-BG group). Overall favorable union was achieved in 72.2 % (65 of 90) of patients, with malunion in 20% (18 of 90) and nonunion in 7.8% (7 of 90). There were no significant differences between patients with satisfactory and unsatisfactory outcomes in terms of age or gender. The percentage of satisfactory outcomes was clearly higher in the BG group (92.73% vs. 40%, p
                     <0.001). Ironically, better outcomes were obtained in the severe group (Neer 3-, and 4-part fractures) than the minor group (Neer 2-part fractures) (82.98% vs. 60.47% p
                     =0.017). The degrees of loss of reduction with the use or nonuse of intramedullary strut allografts in the favorable union and malunion groups were compared. The amount of loss of reduction in the neck-shaft angle was significantly lower in the BG group than the non-BG group (2.43° vs. 11.11°, p
                     <0.001). The amount of loss of reduction in humeral head collapse was significantly lower in the BG group than the non-BG group (2.05mm vs. 6.01mm, p
                     <0.001).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Complications after treating proximal humeral fracture in the elderly are frequently encountered because of poor bone quality. When fixing the fracture with plates, adjuvant use of intramedullary strut allograft can significantly enhance the result and reduce the incidence of malunion, nonunion and varus collapse.Proximal humeral fractures account for 5% to 8% of all fractures Surgical intervention for displaced fractures could result in better quality of life, avoiding the complications that frequently develop after conservative treatment One method to enhance the outcome is the use of an intramedullary strut allograft. Chao et al stated that the fixation strength of different methods for fracture fixation is affected significantly by alteration of cortical and trabecular bone structures and material properties The aim of the study was to review the results of proximal humeral fracture in elderly patients receiving ORIF, and to investigate if applying intramedullary strut allografts leads to better outcomes. We hypothesized that intramedullary strut allograft augmentation could provide stable fixation of fracture fragments and prevent humeral head varus collapse. From January 2001 to March 2011, 116 patients, age 65 years and older, were admitted to Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan because of displaced proximal humeral fracture and received ORIF. Their radiographs, charts and surgical records were reviewed. Patients were excluded if they had a Neer 2-part greater tuberosity fracture ( Under general anesthesia, all patients were placed in a beach-chair position and a standard deltopectoral approach was applied. After deep dissection, the fracture site was exposed and reduced for fixation with a buttress plate and screws. If used, an intramedullary strut allograft with an optimal diameter and length was selected. It was inserted into the intramedullary canal distal to fracture site and then driven back to the proximal humeral bone ( The strut allografts, being part of radial shaft, ulnar shaft, humeral shaft, tibial shaft, fibular shaft, and femoral shaft, were taken from cadaveric donors. These strut allografts were stored in the freezer, at temperatures between −60 The fracture type was defined as Neer 2-part, 3-part, or 4-part according to Neer classification on the preoperative radiography. Fracture union status was analyzed at 5 different time points: immediately and 1, 3, 6, and 12 months postoperative by checking shoulder internal and external rotation radiography ( During the healing process, variable degrees of loss of reduction can occur, which may result in malunion. While a favorable union was categorized into the satisfactory outcome, malunion was regarded as an unsatisfactory result as nonunion. The neck-shaft angle and humeral head height were measured on the radiography to evaluate these changes. The neck-shaft angle was determined at different time points in a shoulder external rotation view to determine changes in varus deformity. It was calculated by measuring the angle at which a line drawn on the central axis of the humeral shaft intersects with a line perpendicular to the orientation of the anatomic neck of the humerus in the shoulder external rotation view Data were expressed as either case numbers or mean A total 90 patients, including 24 men (26.7%) and 66 women (73.3%) were enrolled in our study. The average age was 74.2 years, and patients had follow-up for 18 months. There were 43 patients (47.8%) with a Neer 2-part fracture, 46 (51.1%) with a Neer 3-part fracture, and one (1.1%) with a Neer 4-part fracture. An intramedullary strut allograft was applied in 55 patients, the bone graft group (BG group), and the remaining patients constituted the nonbone graft group (non-BG group). The satisfactory (favorable union) rate was 72.2% (65/90) and unsatisfactory (including 7 nonunion and 18 malunion) rate was 27.8%. A comparison of satisfactory and unsatisfactory outcomes is presented in A comparison of follow-up data including neck-shaft angle and humeral head height between the BG group and non-BG group is presented in The use of intramedullary strut allograft augmentation can result in good outcomes. In our study, the overall favorable union rate was 72.2%, while the malunion and nonunion rate was 27.8%, similar to other studies Some authors mentioned that patients with complex fractures could achieve a better quality of life with operative treatment Intramedullary strut allograft augmentation of proximal humeral fractures in the elderly offers better outcomes in several ways. It assists with cortical bone for better resistance against screw pullout, provides medial support, and reaches volumetric reduction. Hence this mechanism adds mechanical stability, gains stronger holding power between bone and traditional screw-plate devices, diminishes humeral head varus collapse, and lowers the incidence of malunion. Varus collapse and deformity often develop after ORIF in proximal humeral fractures. In the current study, the mean loss of reduction in the neck-shaft angle was 5.85°, but that in the BG group was 2.43°, which was markedly lower than in the non-BG group (11.11°, The total satisfactory rate was 72.2% (65 out of 90). The satisfactory rate in the BG group was 92.7% (51 out of 55), notably higher than 40.0% (14 out of 35) in the non-BG group. In addition, the satisfactory rate in the severe group was 83.0% (39 out of 47), higher than 60.5% (26 out of 43) in the minor group, which could be associated with the use of intramedullary strut allograft. More operations (87.2%, 41 out of 47) in the severe group used strut allograft but only 32.6% (14 out of 43) in the minor group had this adjunct procedure. Thus, it can be concluded intramedullary strut allograft application could improve the satisfactory rate. The process of deciding how to deal with proximal humeral fractures is very complicated. There are several contributing factors, such as age, activity level, underlying disease, fracture type, bone quality, and implant characteristics. There is no absolute indication for surgery. The purpose of surgical intervention is to improve functional outcomes and daily activity, and reduce the risk of complications associated with conservative treatment, such as symptomatic nonunion or malunion. As a result, intramedullary strut allograft is strongly recommended if ORIF is indicated. Prior studies considered that the diaphyseal cortex in the elderly is thin in comminuted fractures, with a high complication rate if treated with traditional plates There are several limitations in the current study. First, this is a retrospective study that only evaluated radiological outcomes of surgery. The functional outcomes, such as the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score was not included. Second, relevant patient data on lifestyle such as smoking, alcohol, premorbid activity level, and comorbidities that may influence bone healing, were not collected. Third, there may have been an intrarate reliability error when measuring the radiologic neck-shaft angle and humeral head height, although the mean of 3 measurements was used for analysis to minimize this problem. Finally, there are no standard selection procedures for choosing allograft origins, lengths, and diameters correlated with the size of the humeral canal, which may add variability to the outcome assessment. Complications after treating proximal humeral fracture in the elderly are frequently encountered because of poor bone quality. When fixing the fracture with plates, adjuvant use of intramedullary strut allograft can significantly enhance the result and reduce the incidence of malunion, non-union, and varus collapse.