A comparative study of the solvent extraction of vanadium in sulphate media using primary amine PRIMENE 81R and tertiary amine ALAMINE 336 dissolved in kerosene has been carried out. pH conditions for both amines, mechanism proposal and extraction isotherms have been determined, yielding best results for primary amine. Equilibrium studies were used to assess the conditions of vanadium recovery in a continuous counter-current process using leaching solutions.Amines have been applied as extractants for vanadium(V) in order to recover this metal from several leach solutions. Vanadium(V) is a strong oxidant in dilute acid when it is present as [VO The purpose of the present work is to study the behavior of amines PRIMENE 81R and ALAMINE 336 in the same conditions for the extraction of vanadium(V) in sulphate media, in order to obtain a criterion for choosing the more versatile extraction reagent, since previous studies of amines do not offer the same criteria for the comparison of the reagents used. Vanadium aqueous solutions were made up by dissolving solid V Vanadium extractions were carried out by mechanical shaking of equal volumes of the organic and aqueous phases in separatory funnels at room temperature for the time necessary to achieve equilibrium. Equilibrium pH were adjusted by addition of 1 M H The percentage of vanadium extracted ( It can be seen that PRIMENE 81R allows a broad pH range for the extraction of V(V). However ALAMINE 336 is restricted to pH values below 4, which confirms previous literature references. Analytical expresions for the dependence of The graph of log At pH 2.5–6 V(V) exists in the form of protonated polyanions (decavanadates), so according to Equilibrium curves at room temperature for ALAMINE 336 and PRIMENE 81R at pH These graphs shows that the loading capacity for the primary amine is six times greater than for the tertiary amine. This fact is due to the real molar concentration of the amines used, since an organic phase with 10% PRIMENE 81R (as supplied) has a concentration of 0.56 M and an organic phase with 10% ALAMINE 336 (as supplied) has a concentration of 0.17 M. Analytical expressions of extraction isotherms were obtained using Marquardt–Levenberg algorithm for non-linear regression: The results obtained with the amines PRIMENE 81R and ALAMINE 336 dissolved in kerosene indicate that this reagent can be used to extract vanadium(V) from sulphate media at acid pH values. The presence of a modifier is necessary in order to avoid cruds or third phase formation. Experimental data obtained confirms that the extracted species for vanadium at pH 4.5 is (H The authors wish to thank to ROHM & HAAS and CYTEC for the free samples of amines used.