The Osteocyte, recognized as a major orchestrator of osteoblast and osteoclast activity, is the most important key player during bone remodeling processes. Imbalances occurring during bone remodeling, caused by hormone perturbations or by mechanical loading alterations, can induce bone pathologies such as osteoporosis. Recently, the active fraction of parathormone, PTH (1-34) or Teriparatide (TPTD), was chosen as election treatment for osteoporosis. The effect of such therapy is dependent on the temporal manner of administration. The molecular reasons why the type of administration regimen is so critical for the fate of bone remodeling are numerous and not yet well known. Our study attempts to analyze diverse signaling pathways directly activated in osteocytes upon TPTD treatment. By means of gene array analysis, we found many molecules upregulated or downregulated in osteocytes. Later, we paid attention to Wisp-2, a protein involved in the Wnt pathway, that is secreted by MLO-Y4 cells and increases upon TPTD treatment and that is able to positively influence the early phases of osteogenic differentiation. We also confirmed the pro osteogenic property of Wisp-2 during mesenchymal stem cell differentiation into the preliminary osteoblast phenotype. The same results were confirmed with an in vivo approach confirming a remarkable Wisp-2 expression in metaphyseal trabecular bone. These results highlighted the anabolic roles unrolled by osteocytes in controlling the action of neighboring cells, suggesting that the perturbation of certain signaling cascades, such as the Wnt pathway, is crucial for the positive regulation of bone formation.The bone tissue is a dynamic tissue that constantly undergoes modifications in response to physiological and pathological alterations ( Murine Long bone Osteocyte Y4 (MLO-Y4) were provided by Prof. Lynda Bonewald (IU School of Medicine - Indiana University, Indianapolis) and were cultured on collagen pre-coated (GIBCO) tissue culture plates and grown at 37 °C, 5% CO The murine IDG-SW3 osteoblast cell line was also obtained by Prof. Lynda Bonewald. Cells were plated at 1 × 10 Reverse transcription was performed with First-strand cDNA Synthesis kit (Origene) using aliquots of total RNA extracted for microarray analysis. The cDNA samples were diluted to 20 ng/μl and the amplifications were done using the Sens Mix SYBR Master Mix (Origene).  The total cellular RNA was isolated from the samples previously collected using RNeasy RNA isolation kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturer's recommendations. Disposable RNA chips (Agilent RNA 6000 Nano LabChip kit, Agilent Technology, Waldbronn, Germany) were used to determine the concentration and purity/integrity of RNA samples using Agilent 2100 bioanalyzer. cDNA synthesis, biotin-labeled target synthesis, GeneChip® Mouse Genome 430 2.0 arrays hybridization, were performed according to the standard protocol supplied by Affymetrix (Affymetrix, California, USA). The amount of transcript mRNA (signal) was determined by the MAS 5.0 absolute analysis algorithm. All expression values for the genes in the MAS 5.0 absolute analyses were determined by using the global scaling option. Alternatively, probe level data were converted to expression values using robust multi-array average (RMA) procedure. Perfect match values were background adjusted, normalized using invariant set normalization and log transformed. The RMA-generated data were uploaded onto GeneSpring software version 7.2 using the log 2 transformation procedure. Supervised analyses were performed using the analysis of variance (one-way ANOVA) test (Welch ANOVA at a confidence level of 0.05) with the Benjamini and Hochberg correction of the false discovery rate, and using dChip Compare Sample procedure. Cells were collected and diluted in Lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 2 mM EDTA, Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). Proteins extracted were quantified with Bradford assay. SDS-PAGE was performed according to Laemmli's procedure. Next, gels were blotted onto nitrocellulose membranes subsequently incubated overnight at 4 °C with the following primary antibodies (all from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, USA): anti-Pleiotropin (rabbit polyclonal, 1:250); anti-Connective Tissue Growth Factor/CTGF (rabbit polyclonal, 1:250); anti-Wisp-2 (rabbit monoclonal, 1:250); anti-Serpine1/PAI-1 (rabbit polyclonal, 1:250), anti-cathepsinK/CTSK (rabbit polyclonal, 1:250), anti-Actin (rabbit polyclonal,1:250), anti-active β-catenin (Merck-1:2000). Then, the membranes were incubated with a solution containing 1:2000 dilution of horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibody (DakoCytomation, Denmark). Target bands were visualized using a mix of peroxidase solution plus a luminol enhancer solution (WesternSure™ PREMIUM Chemiluminescent substrate). Result acquisition and band densitometric analysis (represented by arbitrary units, AU), were performed using the C-DiGit® Blot Scanner (LI-COR Biosciences, NE, USA) and the Image Studio Lite 5.0 software (LI-COR Biosciences, NE, USA). All values were compared to respective normalized control levels. Analysis of proteins secreted in conditioned medium was obtained by centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 1 h at 4 °C in Amicon® Centrifugal Filter Devices and run in SDS-PAGE in equal amount of volume. Wisp-2 Elisa assay was performed based on the manufacturer's instructions provided by mouse Wisp-2 Elisa kit (Fine Test). MLO-Y4 cells, grown on glass coverslips, were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4 °C for 20’, blocked in 4% BSA-PBS and incubated with primary antibody Wisp-2 overnight at 4 °C. Coverslips were next washed with PBS and incubated with fluorescence-labeled secondary antibodies (Thermo Scientific) for 1 h at room temperature. Slides were washed and mounted with DABCO 10% solution and observed with a Nikon E600 fluorescence microscope equipped with a digital camera. All the images shown in this paper are representative of at least 3 independent experiments carried out under the same conditions. Images from immunofluorescence studies were processed using Adobe Photoshop CS 8.0 software (Adobe Systems, San Jose, CA, USA). The IDG-SW3 cells were cultured in 6-well plates at 10 Three-month-old Sprague Dawley male rats (n = 9) were purchased from Charles River Laboratories (Calco, Lecco, Italy). At the time of arrival, all rats were housed individually in single cages, to better check food intake of each rat, and maintained under laboratory controlled conditions (22 ± 1 °C, 55–60% humidity, 12 h light:12 h dark). After seven days of acclimation to housing conditions, the rats were randomized into three groups of 3 animals each ( Immediately after euthanasia, the right femur of each animal was removed, deprived of soft tissues, fixed in sodium phosphate-buffered (PBS) 4% paraformaldehyde pH 7.4, and decalcified in 10% EDTA solution for 30 days. Bones were then washed with PBS, dehydrated in graded ethanol, and embedded in paraffin. Femur distal metaphyseal trabecular bones were longitudinally cut with a Leica SP 1600 diamond saw microtome cutting system (Leica SpA, Milan, Italy) to obtain 4 μm thick sections. For immunohistochemical analyses the 3 tissue sections from each sample were permeabilized with 0.3% Triton X-100, blocked for intrinsic peroxidase activity with 3% hydrogen peroxide for 10 min, and processed for heat-mediated antigen retrieval with Tris-EDTA (10 mM Tris Base, 1 mM EDTA Solution, 0.05% Tween 20, pH 9.0). Then, the slides were blocked in 10% normal serum with 1% BSA for two h at room temperature and incubated with primary antibody (AM31932PU-N WISP2 ACRIS) at 4 °C for 16 h. For detection of Wisp-2, the sections were incubated with secondary antibody anti-rabbit-HRP (Thermo Scientific) and the binding of peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies was detected with a DAB kit (Vector Lab, Peterborough, United Kingdom). For histomorphometrical analysis, after paraffin embedding, three sections (4 μm) were obtained from each sample and stained with Hematoxylin & Eosin (H&E). Slides were deparaffinized by means of two changes of xylene for 5 min each, hydrated through a graded series of alcohol (100%, 95%, 80% and 70%) for 5 min each and rinsed first in tap water and then, in deionized water 1 min each. After dehydratation procedure, the slides were stained in Carazzi hematoxylin solution (DiaPath C0203), rinsed in tap water, stained in alcoholic 0,5% eosin Y (DiaPath C0353) and rinsed in deionized water 1 min each. After dehydration through a graded series of alcohol (70%, 80%, 95% and 100%) for 5 min each and an incubation in xylene for 10 min, each slide has been mounted using DPX mounting solution (06522 Sigma Aldrich). Stained sections were evaluated with Axiophot (ZEISS) microscope equipped with a DS-Fi3 camera (Nikon) and processed with NIS-Elements D 5.11.00 software (Nikon). WISP-2-positive cells on the trabecular bone area were counted (N/area expressed in percentage value) as demonstrative of WISP-2 expression. The extent of the surface of prismatic osteoblast laminae was measured with respect to the metaphyseal trabecular surfaces (Ob.S/BS expressed in percentage value) as indicative of osteogenesis occurrence. Data are expressed as means of duplicate biological experiments. Within each group (control, 6, 9 and 12 h treatments), differences were tested using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), with a The osteocyte-like cell line (MLO-Y4) was selected for the study since it shows a good expression of most of the typical osteocyte differentiation markers. To explore a specific gene signature for TPTD treated cells, we conducted a gene array experiment. In order to select the concentration of TPTD that did not affect cell viability, MLO-Y4 were cultured for 24 h and treated for 6, 9 and 12 h with two different drug concentrations, 10 nM and 1 μM, respectively. At the end of the treatments, cell viability was monitored by MTT assay: the results showed good tolerance of MLO-Y4 cells to the drug at any concentration used; no differences in terms of proliferation were shown ( In order to confirm whether TPTD was been efficacious, a time course experiment was performed. MLO-Y4 cells were treated with TPTD at 10 nM for 6, 9 and 12 h and the mRNA of the well-known osteoclastogenesis inhibitory factor, Osteoprotegerin (OPG), was monitored by quantitative PCR. As expected, the OPG level was increased upon 6 h, then it dropped to the levels of untreated cells upon 9 and 12 h ( In parallel, the mRNA levels of RUNX2, a key transcription factor associated with osteogenic differentiation, were analyzed. The results turned out to be in line with the detected OPG levels, indicating a great induction of RUNX2 upon TPTD 6h treatment, with a decreasing transcription upon 9 and 12 h ( The comparison between treated samples (T6 vs T9) showed a consistent differential gene expression of more than 4-fold (log ratio 2.0) for 40 genes shown in In order to validate the results of the gene array and to verify precisely the different expression of some genes, protein levels of CTGF, PTN, CTSK, PAI-1 and WISP-2 were evaluated by western blot. Intentionally, a further continuous time of 12 h of treatment was selected in order to ensure complete translation between mRNA and protein ( Considering the importance of Wisp-2 as a regulatory element during adipocyte differentiation processes and the quantitative differences between control samples and TPTD-treated samples, the attention was focused on Wisp-2 protein to analyze in detail its localization and signaling. To confirm the content of Wisp-2 upon TPTD treatment on osteocytes MLO-Y4 cells, we monitored the expression of Wisp-2 mRNA with specific primers. By means of quantitative qPCR we confirmed that Teriparatide was able to speed the level of Wisp-2 mRNA at 6 h; then it decreased consistently upon 9 h and 12. ( By means of immunofluorescence, we monitored Wisp-2 localization and we recorded an increase of fluorescence positive cells related to Wisp-2 inside the cytosol upon 6 h of TPTD treatment ( It is well known that TPTD is an active fraction of PTH hormone that, following the link with its receptor, induces β-catenin stabilization. β-catenin is an intermediate of WNT-pathway and upon stabilization in the cytoplasm, it translocates to the nucleus, interacts with TCF/LEF promoter and induces transcription of several genes involved in cell proliferation such as cyclin D1, c-myc, Axin and Wisp-1. Therefore, we asked whether also in our model TPTD was able to induce β-catenin nuclear translocation. By immunofluorescence analysis, we confirmed a clear staining of β-catenin in the nucleus and by western blot we monitored the increase of active non-phosphorylated β-catenin in nuclear extracts of cells treated with TPTD compared to untreated cells ( Since it is known that Wisp-2 is a glycosylated secreted protein, we tested the presence of Wisp-2 in MLO-Y4 medium. Upon TPTD treatment, we collected medium from MLO-Y4 cells treated/untreated with TPTD and we analyzed the presence of Wisp-2 in the medium. By means of western blot, we detected Wisp-2 protein, either in whole cell lysates either in media obtained by MLO-Y4 treated or not with the drug for 6 h. Next, we quantify Wisp-2 by Elisa Assay, confirming that Wisp-2 is secreted at higher level in media obtained by cells treated with TPTD ( To analyze if direct effect mediated by osteocyte-secreted-Wisp-2 occurs during the osteoblast to late osteocyte differentiation, we monitored by functional assays the differentiation of IDG-SW3 cells upon conditioning of their differentiation medium, firstly with medium obtained by MLO-Y4 osteocyte cells and secondly with Wisp-2 recombinant protein. As a first step, we analyzed the effect of MLO-Y4 cells medium (treated with TPTD for 0, 6, 9 and 12 h) during IDG-SW3 differentiation. Therefore, we maintained IDG-SW3 cells in osteogenic differentiation medium conditioned with medium from ML0-Y4 cells and we stopped the differentiation at 7 days (late osteoblast phenotype) at 14 days (early osteocyte phenotype) and at 21 days (late osteocyte phenotype). The results shown in panel ( Since we hypothesized that the positive role induced by osteocyte ML0-Y4 conditioned medium treated with TPTD was attributed to Wisp-2 secreted protein, we conditioned the IDG-SW3 osteogenic differentiation (only in the first step at 7 days) with Wisp-2 recombinant protein. Data obtained by Alizarin red and ALP functional assays were very similar and demonstrated a strong and concentration-dependent Wisp-2 effect in increasing the mineralization process during osteoblast differentiation ( In order to verify whether this effect was specific for Wisp-2, we repeated the experiments using Wisp-2 recombinant protein complexed with a neutralization antibody. As expected, the increase of mineralization induced by Wisp-2 was completely abrogated upon the addiction of the specific antibody ( To deeply analyze Wisp-2 ability to speed the osteogenesis process, we analyzed by real time PCR and Western blot the expression levels of some typical markers such as Sclerostin SOST, RUNX2 and DMP1, demonstrating an increment of these factors in cells conditioned by Wisp-2 ( ALP and Alizarin assays demonstrated that Wisp-2 increases the mineralization amount of interesting behavior in mesenchymal cells induced to osteogenic differentiation for 7 and 14 days, confirming its role in pushing the osteoblast differentiation process ( In order to translate The effect of TPTD on the osteogenesis as well as the involvement of osteocytes and their role in bone formation has been widely discussed, particularly in the last decade. It has already been demonstrated that intermittent administration of PTH (1-34) leads to bone deposition and bone growth, meanwhile continuous administration of PTH (1-34) exerts a catabolic effect characterized by an increase of osteoclast activation and bone resorption. Our study attempt to unreveal a new molecule acting as an anabolic factor involved in speeding the osteogenic process, observing fast and retard effects after 6, 9, and 12 h of TPTD treatment, by analyzing the expression of two typical bone turnover markers, osteoprotegerin and RUNX2, in MLO-Y4. As expected, osteoprotegerin and RUNX2 mRNA levels, increased upon 6 h of treatment, dropping upon 9 and 12 h at levels similar to the untreated condition. Through the gene microarray technology, we showed, in a model of osteocyte like cells MLO-Y4, a significant alteration or changes in gene expression, induced by TPTD treatment. To avoid any possible bias, only those genes that showed a fold change higher than four were selected; this selective restriction allowed to obtain just the panel of 40 genes that showed an “inversion of expression”. The comparison between control and treatment samples, although showing a different expression of selected genes, does not reach the statistical significance. Our working hypothesis was that among those genes could be included some genes related with the osteocyte cell signaling stimulated by TPTD. This particular “inversion of expression” may suggest that those genes could be some of the factors that may regulate the events occurring during TPTD treatment times mimicking anabolic to catabolic switch. A closer look at those 40 genes revealed that 13 of them were already well-known to exert biological/molecular function in bone. Among them, it was chosen to analyze by Western Blot the expression of proteins such as CTGF, PAI-1, WISP-2, CTSK and PTN. Among these proteins, the expression of Wisp-2 showed an interesting behavior. Wisp-2 is a member of the CCN family and a factor of the Wnt pathway that positively regulates the osteoblast differentiation; a marked increment of its expression level after 6 h of treatment was observed compared to control; also, after 9 and 12 h of treatment with TPTD, Wisp-2 expression level was comparable to the control level. Using our original model, we showed that the fast effect of TPTD leads to an increase in the production of the Wisp-2 protein, which can be one of the molecular regulators able to stimulate osteoblast differentiation. The levels of Wisp-2 protein decreased already after 9 h of treatment and reached levels comparable to control after 12 h. Wisp-2 is a canonical Wnt ligand that regulates cell proliferation, adhesion and differentiation, in particular secreted Wisp-2 promotes mesenchymal precursor cell proliferation and maintains the cells in undifferentiated state. In bone-forming osteoblasts, Wisp-2 promotes adhesion and inhibits osteocalcin production ( To substantiate the interesting data obtained In conclusion, the main original findings emerging from the present work are: Alberto Smargiassi and Jessika Bertacchini conceived and designed the experiments; Alberto Smargiassi, Marta Checchi, Francesco Potì, Giulia Grisendi, Elena Tenedini, Giuliana Montosi, Maria Sara Magarò, Marzia Ferretti and Francesco Cavani performed the experiments; Alberto Smargiassi, Jessika Bertacchini, Delphine B. Maurel and Carla Palumbo wrote the paper and Carla Palumbo recruited the funds.  The authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors wish to thank Professors Antonello Pietrangelo (Center for Hemochromatosis, UNIMORE) and Enrico Tagliafico (Center for Genome Research, UNIMORE) for making their laboratories available for the gene array and PCR-analysis. This study was supported by funds from the