Ionizing radiation has been proved as a promising method for the degradation of the herbicide 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D). The γ-radiolytic decomposition and chloride formation follows an apparent first order kinetic, k
                     de/k
                     Cl=3. For complete removal of 500μM 2,4-D, a dose of 4kGy is required. Phenolic intermediates (2,4-dichlorophenol, the isomers 2-chloro-4-hydroxy- and 4-chloro-2-hydroxy phenoxyacetic acid and three hydroxylation products of 2,4-D) are formed. Using oxygen saturation during irradiation, they are removed again with a dose of 4kGy. For the formation of the main organic product acetic acid a reaction mechanism is discussed. Oxygen concentration enhances strongly fragmentation and mineralization. A reduction of 36% TOC could be achieved.Among the numerous agrochemicals in use today, the herbicide 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2-4-D) has been widely applied to control broad-leaved weeds. After application, it can be easily transferred into natural waters due to its high solubility. In 1982, the World Health Organization considered 2,4-D as moderately toxic (class II) and recommended a maximum 2,4-D concentration of 100 The 2,4-D degradation has been mainly studied by photocatalysis and Fenton's reagent. TOC reductions from 50% Ionizing radiation is an efficient process for oxidative removal of water pollutants (e.g.,       Exposure of water or dilute aqueous solutions to Degradation and chloride formation is presented as a function of dose in Degradation as well as chloride formation follows an apparent first order kinetic. Their ratio, Several products are formed in low yields, Upon reaction of Four compounds could be determined by ion chromatography. At 0.75 In contrast to the major component acetate, the other acids are typical radiolytic fragmentation products of the benzene ring The low yield of phenolic intermediates compared to that of acetic acid may be attributed to the high rate constants of chlorophenols with During radiolysis, oxygen concentration is reduced. The oxygen uptake in 500 Whereas under aerated conditions, practically all phenolic derivatives of 2,4-D are still present at 4 The DOC reduction is enhanced from 15% in aerated solutions to 36% in oxygenated solutions, whereby air saturation yields practically the same value (34%). In the presence of oxygen, the carbon balance at 4 For practical applications, electron beam accelerators are used for water remediation. The operating costs for a 25 2,4-D is effectively decomposed by ionizing radiation. For complete removal of 110 The authors like to thank Mr. G. Reznicek for carrying out the LC–MS analysis. R.Z. thanks the Austrian Research Centers Seibersdorf for getting a scholarship.