Single-step displacement reaction has occurred during ball milling a mixture of haematite and magnesium powders at room temperature. During the early stage of milling (0–43 ks), the Fe2O3 particles are embedded into the soft matrix of Mg (reducing agent) particles to form coarse composite powders of the reactant materials. Increasing the milling time (86 ks) leads to the formation of fresh active surfaces of Mg which have high reducing potential and reacts with the Fe2O3 in a typical oxidation/reduction reaction. After 432 ks the Mg powders are completely oxidized to MgO, whereas the Fe2O3 is reduced successfully to metallic Fe. Increasing the milling time to 540 ks leads to the formation of ultrafine powders that have excellent morphological characteristics (spherical-like shape morphology) with an average diameter of 0.5 μm. The powders of these end-product contain very fine cells of MgO that are embedded into the metallic matrix of Fe.Since 1970 many materials scientists and metallurgists have been intrigued by the development of the mechanical alloying (MA) The possibility of solid-state mechanochemical reduction (displacement reaction) of metal oxides by ball-milling technique in the presence of strong metallic reducing agents has been demonstrated by Schaffer and McCormick The present study shows the possibility of reducing haematite (α-Fe In the present study, pure powders of α-Fe The XRD patterns of the ball-milled haematite and magnesium powders are displayed in TEM analyses were used as powerful tool to observe the local structural changes during the MSSR process. The bright field image (BFI) and the corresponding selected area diffraction pattern (SADP) for the milled powders for 22 ks of milling time are shown together in Increasing the milling time leads to increasing the shear and impact forces generated by the milling media and this causes mechanical deformation on the powder particles which translates into numerous faults and dislocations that appear clearly in the powders taken after 43 ks of milling time, as shown in  Increasing the ball-milling time (540 ks) leads to refinement of the MgO grains to a size of 10 nm in diameter, as shown in The SEM observations of the as-milled powders after selected ball-milling time are shown in Room temperature Mössbauer spectra (MS), shown in In the present work the kinetics of this solid-state reaction and the growth mechanism of new phases with nano-dimension crystals have been studied assuming the nucleation and crystal growth according to the Avrami equation The fraction The influence of the milling time on the rate of formation (d The order of the reaction Reduction of haematite by solid-state mechanochemical reaction using a room temperature ball-milling technique has attracted many researchers. The ultrafine metallic iron powders that are obtained by this process can find potential range of applications, including catalysis, magnetic recording, magnetic fluids and composite materials. In addition, this technique offers high yields of metallic carbon-free iron at relatively low coast as compared with other methods of preparation. Matteazzi and Le Caër In contrast to the above-mentioned reports, the results of the present work have shown the possibility for formation of ultrafine carbon-free metallic iron powders by milling haematite with Mg powders in a moderate-energy ball mill. The completion of this so-called mechanical solid-state reduction (MSSR) process takes 259–432 ks of milling time ( Principles of physics and of physical chemistry always lie at the root of every individual application of the ball-milling technique. Obviously, reaction  The previous stage of milling is followed by a second stage (86–360 ks) the vial temperature is dramatically increased to reach a maximum value of 462 K after 173 ks of the milling time, indicting the progress of the MSSR. Thus, the volume fraction of product phases of metallic Fe ( During the third stage of milling (360–432 ks) a complete MSSR took place to yield a single phase of bcc-Fe coexisted with small mole fraction of unreacted Fe From the calculated value of Reactant materials of α-Fe The authors would like to express their deep thanks to Professor H.A. Sallam, for her serious and fruitful discussions.