Coal–water slurry (CWS) holds promise to offer a long-term alternative to fuel oil, and also it is being conceived as an attractive fuel for power generation industry in India. The essential requirements of the CWS technology, viz., the additive package, concentration of additives, particle size distribution (PSD) of coal, solids loading, methodology for CWS formulation and its rheological properties, have been discussed and reported here. The effect of the two newly developed anionic additives in the formulation of CWS has been studied. The basic parameters were established taking beneficiated Ledo coal samples with 9.7% ash content. Ball milling of the coal samples in a wet grinding process could produce particle size distributions most suited for highly loaded CWS. Coal loadings to the extent of 70% in the CWS have been achieved using a concentration of 0.8 wt.% (on coal charge) of the naphthalene-based additive referred to as ‘P’. Using 0.9 wt.% of the naphthalene-toluene-based additive denoted as ‘R’, a coal loading of 69% has been achieved. The viscosities of the slurries were found to be below 1000 mPa s. The shelf lives of slurries were found to be 22 and 20 days with the use of additives P and R, respectively, in the CWS formulation. The two additives functioned well in CWS formulation with Sirka coal having relatively higher ash content (14.4%). Using the specified concentration of the additives P and R, the solid loadings of 67% and 65%, respectively, could be obtained under the established parameters. The lower values of solids loading from Sirka coal than that from Ledo coal in CWS formulation may be attributed to the higher percentages of oxygen-containing functional groups (OOH and OCOOH), ash content and higher O/C ratio of Sirka coal.Coal is by far the largest indigenous fossil fuel resource which currently meets about 60% commercial energy requirements of India. Approximately 86% of the total reserves of Indian coals is noncoking suitable primarily for use in power generation. The power sector consumes about 70% of coal produced in the country CWS preparation processes have been developed and commercialised with large-scale production plants in China, Russia, Japan and Italy. CWS technology has been successfully demonstrated in Canada, France, UK, Germany and other countries also. Research and development activities are in progress on various aspects of the CWS technology The uses of CWS fuels in modified diesel engines have been found to be the most economically promising alternative In India, the CWS technology holds promise to offer a long-term alternative to fuel oil, and also it has been conceived to improve the efficiency and economics of power generation industry in the country. Considerable work on different aspects of the CWS technology has been carried out at Regional Research Laboratory, Bhubaneswar The Ledo coal of Makum field in Assam and Sirka coal of North Karanpura field, Jharkhand, were selected for study. The coals were beneficiated employing controlled crushing and deshaling to obtain cleans. The cleans were first crushed in a jaw crusher and then in a double roll crusher to obtain a below 10-mm product. The crushed coals were comminuted in the ball mill to obtain products of different particle size distributions by controlling the grinding time. The ball mill products constituted the feed for solids loading in CWS formulation. The characteristics of the coals are given in Two new additives, one naphthalene-based Deionised water was used for the preparation of CWS in all the experiments to exclude any possible interference caused by dissolved salts present in water. The pulverised coal was mixed slowly in a pot containing known quantity of additive and deionised water. The contents were continuously stirred by means of a mixer during addition of coal, and then the stirring of the slurry was continued for further 25–30 min to ensure homogenization of CWS. The slurry so prepared was left as such to release entrapped air and then transferred to an airtight container for the study of its characteristics. The rheological properties of CWS were measured by a Haake RV-12 Rotoviscometer using MVIP profiled sensor system and M500 measuring head. The shear rate was varied from 0 to 512 s Thus, measuring the direct scale readings for The PSD characteristics of the pulverised coal used in the CWS formulation were determined by Fritsch Particle Size Analysette 22. The measuring unit of “Analysette 22” contains a helium–neon laser below 5 mW. The automatic particle size analysis can be obtained in the measuring range 0.1–1250 μm in suspension. The results are calculated on the basis of the Fraunhofer theory. The data recording/result presentations are obtained by MS Windows programme. In order to evaluate the performance of the newly developed additives towards the coal loading of the CWS and their effect on the viscosity, the studies were carried out with each of the two additives, P and R. The additive concentration was held constant at 1.0 wt.% in each case. The coal loading (ball mill dry product of Ledo coal) was varied from a minimum of 56 wt.% to a maximum of 70 wt.% and the viscosity data were recorded. In case of additive P, the optimum solid loading was found to be 70 wt.% on dry coal basis, and the apparent viscosity of the CWS measured was 1263 mPa s at 128 s The performance of the additive R is almost comparable to that of ‘P’. With additive R, the maximum coal loading was to the extent of 69 wt.% with the apparent viscosity of 1331 mPa s at the shear rate of 128 s In order to determine the effect of concentration of additive on apparent viscosity of CWS, the additive concentration was varied from 0.2 to 1.6 wt.% (dry Ledo coal basis). The coal loading was held constant at 60 wt.%. The two newly developed additives, P and R, were used for preparing the slurries, and the viscosities of CWS so prepared were determined. It has been observed that high coal loadings of 70 and 69 wt.% can be achieved by the use of additives P and R, respectively, in the CWS formulation. However, the viscosities of CWS so obtained were very high (≈1260 mPa s at 128 s The coal loading was varied from 65 to 70 wt.% using 0.8 wt.% of additive P in each formulation, and corresponding viscosities were recorded. In case of additive R, the coal concentration was varied from 65 to 69 wt.%, and the additive concentration was held constant at 0.9 wt.% (dry coal basis) and the viscosities determined. The results of CWS formulations by dry grinding and wet grinding processes are shown in It is thus established that a single-stage wet grinding process has a distinct advantage over dry grinding in respect of slurry viscosity which is reduced by 25–28%. A significant decrease in viscosity of the slurry prepared by wet grinding process may be attributed to the following factors: Grinding at a high solids content (65–70 wt.%) produces an optimum particle size distribution as particle–particle attrition is believed to be accelerated which has the net effect of generating additional fine particles. In wet grinding, the new surfaces created during comminution are immediately wetted by the additive before they get exposed to atmosphere. This ensures better particle-additive interaction resulting in low slurry viscosity. These observations are supported by other workers also Slurries prepared by dry grinding and wet grinding methods using additives, P (0.8 wt.%, on coal charge) and R (0.9 wt.%, on coal charge), were stored in sealed containers for several days to determine their shelf lives. Afterwards, the slurries were decanted and the sediments that settled at the bottom were collected for evaluating their settling characteristics.  It is seen from the foregoing discussions that the slurries prepared by wet grinding method not only have acceptable range of viscosity (<1000 mPa s), but they also have good stability. These properties are incorporated in the system due to physicochemical interaction between the coal particles and additives used in the slurry formulation. Thus, developed additives are capable of incorporating high coal loading in CWS formulation with acceptable rheological properties besides providing good stability to the slurry fuel. The performance efficiency of the additives having been established with the Ledo coal of Assam in formulation of slurries, the additives P and R, can be employed with other noncoking coals for preparing the slurries. However, the coal loadings vary depending on the properties of coal. As a test case, Sirka coal of North Karanpura coalfields was taken for CWS preparation which is discussed below. With a view to evaluate the performance of the developed additives towards formulation of CWS using noncoking coals with relatively higher content of ash, Sirka coal of North Karanpura coalfield was taken for the study. The CWS was prepared by wet grinding method described earlier incorporating 0.8 wt.% of additive P and 0.9 wt.% additive R (on dry coal basis) in the slurry formulation. The viscosities of the resulting slurries were determined as usual. It can be seen from It is known that the following factors related to physical–chemical properties of coal dominantly influence the slurryability and stability of CWS: the moisture and ash contents of coal; the organic factors: oxygen/carbon ratio (O/C) and oxygen-containing functional groups: hydroxyl oxygen (O In order to evaluate the effects of these factors of coal on the characteristics of CWS, the O At about the same range of viscosities (<1000 mPa s) of CWS, the maximum coal loadings in a wet grinding process for the two coals are given in The difference in coal loading under similar conditions of slurry preparation may be attributed to the properties of the two coals. The Ledo coal having relatively lower percentages of moisture, ash, O The coal containing relatively more ash may lead to form strong aggregation and gel state at high coal loadings resulting in increase in the viscosity of CWS as observed in the case of Sirka coal at 70% coal loading. The contents of moisture, O One of the key technologies required to obtain a highly loaded, low-viscosity CWS is the particle size distribution (PSD) of coal. The PSD curves of coal fines (Ledo and Sirka) used in CWS formulations are shown in The two newly developed anionic additives, one naphthalene-based and the other naphthalene-toluene-based, function excellently in the formulation of CWS using beneficiated Ledo coal and Sirka coal. Slurries with high coal concentration (65–70%) having acceptable viscosities (<1000 mPa s) can be formulated using the additive concentration of 0.8 and 0.9 wt.% (on coal charge), respectively. Ball milling of coal samples by wet grinding process can produce particle size distributions ( The authors wish to thank the Central Mine Planning and Design Institute, Ranchi, Ministry of Coal, Government of India for financial support for the work. They also express their gratitude to Dr. Kalyan Sen, Director, CFRI for permission to publish the paper.