In this work, the flotation recovery of sphalerite and pyrite from an old high zinc grade tailing was studied. In particular, the effect of different flotation reagents such as collector, auxiliary collector, depressant, activators, and frother on the flotation performance were investigated. The synergic effect of the collector blends, as well as frother blends were also studied. In addition, the effect of the pre-conditioning of flotation pulp with scrubbing or ultrasonic on the selective separation of sphalerite and pyrite minerals were studied. More than 73% of the sphalerite was recovered from the accumulated tailings in the rougher stage. The pulp viscosity was considerably increased by increasing the pH from 5.5 to 10.5. As a result, sphalerite recovery and Zn selective separation were both considerably dropped. It was also found that frothers (MIBC and A65) have a synergic effect, and their mixture showed better metallurgical results than when each frother were solely used. The pre-conditioning with scrubbing or ultrasonic resulted in a major increase in the sphalerite floatability.The deposits of lead-zinc formed in the black-shales are one of the most important sources of lead and zinc. Examples of these deposits are Red-Dog (USA), Sullivan (Canada), Mount Isa (Australia), Hilton (Australia), and Kooshk (Iran). The presence of organic matter and carbonaceous type of pyrite in these deposits influences the selectivity between galena (PbS), sphalerite (ZnS) and pyrite (FeS Kooshk lead-zinc mine is one of the most important sulfide mines in Iran and it has been in operation for more than 40 years. Kooshk lead-zinc deposit is located in the black-shale. Therefore, the carbonaceous matter needs to be removed in the first stages of flotation by adding diesel oil and frother ( Pyrite can be depressed by different techniques such as raising pH, addition of organic or inorganic chemical depressants or applying more selective collector. Cyanide is the most commonly used reagents for enhancing the separation efficiency of base metal sulfide minerals by flotation, particularly when the depression of iron is desired. In other word, in fact, cyanide has a key role in the selective separation of sulfide minerals ( Xanthates are widely used in base metal sulfide flotation ( Some auxiliary collectors used in the sphalerite flotation are: Sodium Aerofloat (DTP), Aerofloat 211 (DTP), Aero 3477 (DTP), Florrea 2214 (DTP), Florrea 2255 (DTP), Aerophine 3418A (DTPI) and Aero 4037 (DTC) ( In this study, selective separation of sphalerite from the high-pyrite containing tailing (deposited in the Kooshk tailing dam) was kinetically investigated with an evaluation of collector mixtures, the different dosage of auxiliary collectors, and activator, pH, type of frother and pre-conditioning with scrubbing and ultrasonic. In addition, the flotation kinetic constants of sphalerite and pyrite were also studied. It should be highlighted that the authors were not able to find any published data about processing high pyrite tailings without using cyanide. Therefore, this paper explains a less hazardous and envoroiromentally friendly way to recovery valuable minerals from such tailings. A representative sample was obtained from the Kooshk lead-zinc tailing dam. In the samples, it was found that the particles were clung together and turned into lumps. Therefore, a jaw crusher was used to separate the particles in the first step, followed by a roller crusher. A 10-mesh sieve (1651 μm) was applied to control the particle size. Then, a representative sample was subject to wet sieve as well as sedimentation technique ( A part of the sample was ground by ball mill to reach less than 75 μm to conduct X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry (SpectrAA-200 model) analysis. According to the results of qualitative XRD analysis, pyrite, sphalerite, and gypsum were the main phases in the tailing sample, and quartz, galena, calcite, dolomite, muscovite, and illite were detected as the trace phases ( The flotation experiments were conducted in a 5 L cell using a Denver Flotation Machine at 1450 rpm and 30% solid. To remove carbon from the sample, pre-flotation was carried out with the addition of MIBC (Methyl Isobutyl Carbonyl) and diesel oil. Some preliminary experiments were conducted to obtain appropriate types of reagent and its dosage ( In flotation, frothers may be added alone or in combination. One reason for blending frothers is to handle a wide particle size range. It has been reported that a single frother generally cannot float the broad particle size distribution which is typical in flotation feeds; in general, alcoholic frothers suit fine particles while polyglycols are used for coarser particles ( The flotation was carried out during 14 min after the pre-flotation step. The kinetic diagrams were plotted as cumulative sphalerite recovery, cumulative pyrite recovery, and the separation efficiency of zinc recovery. The separation efficiency was calculated using Eq. In all experiments, to determine the flotation kinetic constants, the first-order kinetic flotation model (R = 1-e The pH of the tailing samples was found to be 5.5 (at 30% solid). Lime was added to adjust the flotation pulp pH when needed. To adjust pH from 5.5 to 6.0, 8.5 and 10.5, lime was used at 4 kg/t, 27 kg/t and 50 kg/t, respectively. A ZnN-D6 rotary viscometer (China) was employed to measure the pulp viscosity at different pH’s. This device determines the pulp viscosity by measuring the required momentum to rotate a foreign object within the pulp. It should be notes that when viscosity is measured for non-Newtonian fluids, such as mineral slurries, it should be referred as “apparent viscosity” rather than the absolute values ( In order to de-sliming from the sphalerite surface, the pulp was pre-conditioned with scrubbing as well as ultrasonic waves. Scrubbing was carried out at 60% solid, rotating speed of 2000 rpm and scrubbing time of 30 min. A UW 3200 ultrasonic device (BANDELIN, Germany) was applied for detaching the particles attached to the surface of coarse particles (Frequency = 20 KHz, Pulse = 1 s, Power = 75 w and Time = 2 min). Collectors were added in three levels of 25 g/t, 35 g/t and 45 g/t at the natural pulp pH of 5.5.    When a mixture of PAX:Aero 4037 was used, the flotation constant were found as -0.028 min   Sphalerite floatability reduction at a higher pH may be due to the pulp rheology. The mobility of bubbles, particles and mineralized bubbles in the pulp phase can be affected when viscosity changes. Some researchers have been reported the negative effect of higher viscosity on the floatability of the minerals. Higher viscosity can hinder the appropriate bubbles dispersion as well as particle attachment to bubbles in the flotation system (  It is concluded that the addition of copper sulfate slightly improves the sphalerite recovery. In addition, no significant difference was observed in sphalerite recoveries when 600 g/t, 800 g/t or 1000 g/t of copper sulfate was used. The minor activation effect of copper ions in different dosages of copper sulfate might be referred to the preliminary activation effect of Pb The lowest pyrite flotation kinetic constant (-0.044 min In this section, the effect of 46 g/t alcoholic and polyglycol frothers (MIBC and A65, respectively) on sphalerite and pyrite recoveries were investigated alone, and in combination. A higher sphalerite recovery was achieved when A65 was used. However, a considerable amount of unwanted pyrite was also floated when A65 was used compared to MIBC (  A sample of old tailing contained 12.7% Zn was prepared from the Kooshk deposited tailing dam and the effect of different parameters on the flotation of sphalerite and pyrite was kineticallyinvestigated. The best metallurgical efficiency was obtained when a mixture of PAX and Florrea 2255 (as collector), and A65 and MIBC (as frother) was used at acidic pH. In the best test condition, more than 73% of Zn was recovered from the tailing by flotation process and a zinc concentrate with 28.61% Zn grade was obtained at the rougher stage. Increasing the pulp pH enhanced the flotation pulp viscosity. As a result, sphalerite recovery and selective separation of sphalerite against pyrite were significantly decreased. Further processing of the prepared concentrate using different cleaning stages can result in producing an economically acceptable Zn grade. This will unlock a sustainable amount of zinc with significant value from old tailings. The authors are grateful to