The effect of temperature on the oxychlorination of Cr2O3 and MgO using Cl2+O2 was evaluated using non-isothermal conditions. A mathematical treatment of the experimental data was performed. Results were compared with those obtained using isothermal conditions.
                  The oxychlorination of Cr2O3 up to 650°C was characterized by an apparent activation energy ‘E
                     a’ of ca. 83kJ/mol. Beyond 650°C, the reaction proceeded with an E
                     a of ca. 51kJ/mol. Between 850 and 1025°C, the reaction of MgO with Cl2+O2 was strongly dependent on temperature and its E
                     a was equal to ca. 215kJ/mol.
                  The values of the apparent activation energies, found for the oxychlorination of both oxides using non-isothermal conditions, were comparable to those obtained during isothermal treatment.The activation energy of a specific reaction is an important engineering data. It will condition the reactor size and the optimum temperature for any industrial application of this specific reaction. Generally, the effects of temperature on the gas–solid reactions are determined using isothermal conditions. Thus, solids are first heated at a predetermined temperature under an inert atmosphere and when a steady state is reached the reactive gases are introduced to react with the solid isothermally. The dependency of the reactions on the temperature is evaluated by Arrhenius plot. This method was recently used by Djona et al. The literature survey revealed that some research works were devoted earlier to the determination of the temperature effect on the gas–solid reactions using one single non-isothermal experiment. Chaubal and Sohn The advantage of using one single non-isothermal test, to determine the temperature effect on gas–solid reactions, is time and material saving. However, if the gas reactivity towards the solid is high and the heating rate of furnace is low, the temperature effect will be defined only in a small temperature range. On the other hand, higher furnace heating rates will lead to a large difference of temperature between the sample and the bulk of reactive gas mixture. To avoid such disadvantage in determining the value of the apparent activation energy, at least two non-isothermal tests using different furnace heating rates are required. The determination of the temperature effect by the non-isothermal technique will be especially appreciated when the solids undergo various thermal phenomena such as: decomposition; sublimation; volatilization; dehydration, etc. This paper is focused on the determination of temperature effect of the oxychlorination rate of Cr The following paragraphs describe the theoretical approach The reaction rate of a process can be expressed as follow: The effects of partial pressure of the reactive gases, reaction extent and particle size on the reaction rate are described by Arrhenius law gives the temperature effect on the reaction rate: The conversion function If the temperature is raised linearly with respect to time the temperature evolution may be given by Substituting In the above equation, The samples of chromium (III) oxide and magnesium oxide used for this study were of pure analytical grade. Results of physico-chemical analysis of these two samples were given earlier The thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of oxychlorination was investigated using 40 An oxychlorinating gas mixture of Cl   Data of The kinetics data concerning the isothermal oxychlorination of Cr Non-isothermal data of Cr Isothermal oxychlorination of MgO with Cl To determine the effect of temperature on the oxychlorination rate of MgO one single non-isothermal test under Cl The main kinetics data obtained during the isothermal treatment of MgO in Cl Using The non-isothermal technique was found to be suitable for studying the effect of temperature on the oxychlorination of chromium and magnesium oxide. Results were in good agreement with those obtained during isothermal treatment. Oxychlorination of chromium (III) oxide was characterized by an apparent activation energy values of ca. 83 and 51 The oxychlorination of magnesium oxide between 850 to 1025°C was strongly depended on the temperature with an apparent activation energy of ca. 215 This work was performed in the frame of contract No. BRE2-CT92-0173 thanks to the financial support of the European Union (DG-XII). The authors thank Dr. H.L. Schmidt for discussion, suggestion and help. They also would like to thank Drs. J.C. Mugica, R. Solozabal (INASMET, San Sebastian, Spain) and M. Coelho (INETI, Lisbon, Portugal) for technical discussions. Authors are indebted to Drs. A. Bonazébi, M. Djona, S. Ivanaj, N. Menad, N. Mirghaffari for discussions and help on different topics and to Mrs. C. Richard for technical and administrative support.