Particle shape has a significant effect on the flotation process of fine mineral and fine coal particles. In this paper, the effects of particle shape on the flotation kinetics and behavior of fine coking coal of different size fractions were investigated. The coal particles with different shape properties were gained from the grinding and crushing products of the rod mill and jaw crusher, respectively. The shape parameter of the coal particle was measured by Image J software by analyzing the photos of coal particles taken by the microscope. The flotation tests of fine coking coal were done in a 0.5 L XFD flotation cell without any usage of flotation collector in order to study the natural floatability of coal particle. Six flotation models were used to assess how the particle shape affects the flotation behavior of fine coking coal of different size fractions. The results showed that the coal particle with a larger elongation ratio had a higher flotation recovery. The first-order model with rectangular distribution of floatability was found to be well consistent to the experimental data, and the modified flotation rate constant of the flotation process increased with the increase of elongation ratio.Flotation is a widely applied physiochemical separation technology for fine mineral and coal particles, which is based on the difference in the surface hydrophobicity and floatability between minerals and gangue particles. In the flotation separation process, the particle shape characteristic plays a significant role in the attachment and detachment processes of particle-bubble. The flotation recovery of quartz particles with larger elongation ratio (ER) was found to be higher than that of round particles ( Prior to flotation, the crushing and grinding processes are important for the liberation of the valuable mineral particles from gangue particles. During the crushing and grinding processes, the particle shape of mineral particles is governed by the used type of crushing and grinding equipments. For example, quartz particles ground by rod mill usually had a higher flatness and elongation ratio than that ground by ball and autogenous mills ( As is known, the flotation process is theoretically considered as a time In this paper, six models (see in Low density coking coal particles, from the products of dense medium separator in Chaili Coal Preparation Plant of Shangdong Province of China were used as raw coal samples. Low density coking coal particles has natural floatability and the similar surface property, which could minimize the effect of particle density on the floatability and be conducive to the study of the influence of shape on floatability. The particle size fraction of the raw coal samples was −3+1 mm. In order to obtain coal particles with different shapes for flotation tests, the different size reduction equipment were selected because of the their different mechanisms of size reduction. The raw samples were crushed in a laboratory-scale jaw crusher and a rod mill, respectively. A closed circuit crushing process was applied to ensure the coal particles pass 0.71 mm screening. The diameter and the length of rod mill were 132 mm and 150 mm, respectively. The grinding time of coal samples in the rod mill was 5 min with 200 g coal particles. After crushing or grinding, the samples were wet screened into four narrow size fractions: −0.71 + 0.5, −0.5 + 0.25, −0.25 + 0.125, and −0.125 + 0.074 mm, respectively. The ash contents of the four narrow size fractions were given in The photos of coal particles of narrow size fractions after crushing or grinding processes were taken using a binocular microscope of 50×magnification. The shape factor analysis of coal particles was established by Image Analysis technique. Image J software was selected to analyze the shape factor of coal particles. Then, the length ( Flotation tests of the narrow size fraction samples were carried out in a standard laboratory 0.5-L XFD flotation cell without the usage of collector. The frother was 2-octanol (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co.,Ltd, AR). The 30 g coal samples and 0.4 L water were conditioned for 2 min at an impeller rotation speed of 2100 rpm in 0.5 L flotation cell, after which the frother (280 mg/kg) was added, and the slurry was conditioned for another 1 min. After the conditioning process, another 0.1 L water was added to increase the whole volume of pulp to 0.5 L, and the air was introduced into the cell at a flow rate of 0.12 m Where The particle shape of the narrow size fractions of rod-mill and jaw-crusher products are given in  The cumulative recovery of coal particles of rod mill is lower than that of jaw crusher for the −0.71 + 0.5 and −0.5 + 0.25 mm size fractions. On the contrary, the cumulative recovery of coal particles of rod mill is higher than that of jaw crusher for the −0.25 + 0.125 and −0.125 + 0.074 mm size fractions. The jaw-crusher particle have a higher value of It can be concluded that the coal particle with a larger value of The coal particle with a higher value of Six models of flotation kinetics were used to assess the floatability of coal particles. They are applied to fit the flotation results of coal particles of rod mill and jaw crusher, respectively. The parameters of six models using a nonlinear regression by MatLab software are given in Determination coefficient (  Coal particles with different shape are gained from the products of rod mill and jaw crusher. The difference in the flotation rates of different size fractions of coal particles are studied. Six flotation kinetic models are applied to well fit the flotation data. The shape properties of coal particles are affected by the type crushing and grinding equipments and hence the shape properties of coal particles do have a significant affect in the floatability of coal particles. The flotation recovery of coal particles with a larger elongation ratio is higher than that of coal particles with a lower elongation ratio. Compared to other five flotation kinetic models, the first-order model with rectangular distribution of floatability is the most reasonable model to describe the flotation processes of coal particles of different size fractions. The value of This work was supported by the