It is widely considered that arc magmas are highly oxidized, and can thus dissolve a large amount of sulfur, thereby preventing significant sulfide saturation prior to fluid saturation. Therefore, chalcophile metals (e.g., Cu and Au) are retained in the magma and finally extracted by exsolved hydrothermal fluids. To test this hypothesis, we analyzed the abundances of platinum-group elements (PGEs) in a suite of arc volcanic rocks, which are the extrusive counterparts of magmas associated with the world-class Zijinshan porphyry–epithermal Cu–Au ore district in SE China. All of these volcanic rocks are depleted in PGEs (e.g., Pd = 0.02–0.40 ppb) in comparison with fertile arc magmas, and the PGE contents decrease with decreasing MgO from basalt to dacite. The results show that the parental magmas for these rocks reached sulfide saturation before they evolved to 7 wt.% MgO, which is earlier than the onset of magnetite crystallization. Sulfide liquid and monosulfide solid solution (MSS) were removed from the magma before it evolved into a dacitic composition. This process extracted most of the Au and Cu from the magma. Modeling results indicate that Au concentrations would not exceed 7–10 times the Pd concentrations in the residual silicate magma, irrespective of the partition coefficients between the sulfide and silicate melt. Given the low Pd contents in dacitic arc magmas worldwide, depletion of Au and Cu might be a common feature of highly evolved arc magmas. Thus, the hydrothermal ore fluids separated from such evolved arc magmas would not contain enough metals to form the giant Zijinshan porphyry–epithermal Cu–Au ore district. We propose a model in which the magmas parental to the arc volcanic rocks achieved S saturation, and thus large amounts of sulfides accumulated in the underlying magma chamber before the magmas were extruded from depth to the surface. During solidification of the magma chamber, these deposits formed from exsolved magmatic hydrothermal fluids that dissolved abundant pre-existing magmatic Cu–Au-rich sulfide assemblages. Release of large amounts of Au, Cu and S to the ore-forming aqueous fluids by dissolution of sulfides can account for the metal and S budgets of giant porphyry–epithermal Cu–Au deposits.Porphyry–epithermal Cu–Au deposits are one of the world’s most important resources of Cu and Au, and are genetically associated with subduction-related arc magmas at convergent margins ( Copper contents of global arc igneous rocks decrease from >100 ppm in basalts to <30 ppm in highly evolved dacites ( A suite of mafic–intermediate–felsic arc volcanic rocks is widely distributed in SE China. These volcanic rocks are spatially and temporally linked to the giant Zijinshan epithermal Au–Cu deposit, Luoboling porphyry Cu–Mo deposit and other hydrothermal Cu–Au–Mo deposits ( The widely distributed Yanshanian magmatism in SE China was the product of Paleo-Pacific Plate subduction ( Numerous 105–102 Ma hydrothermal Cu–Au–Mo deposits are spatially and temporally associated with the volcanic basins in SE China ( The chemical compositions of clinopyroxene and plagioclase were determined by wavelength-dispersive X–ray analysis using a JXA8530F-plus electron microprobe at the State Key Laboratory of Ore Deposit Geochemistry, Institute of Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. These analyses for major elements used a 25 knA beam current, a 15 kV acceleration voltage, 1 μm beam size and peak counting time of 10 s. Both natural and synthetic standards were used for calibration, and the analytical precision for major and minor elements is ±2% (RSD). Whole-rock major element concentrations of 37 samples were analyzed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometry at the ALS Laboratory Group, Guangzhou, China. Mixtures of powdered samples (0.7 g) and Li PGEs were measured by isotope dilution (ID)–ICP–MS using an improved digestion technique ( The samples in this study have compositions ranging from basalt to dacite, with SiO PGE and Au contents of the volcanic rocks are listed in Compositions of clinopyroxene and plagioclase phenocrysts from the basalts are listed in Supplementary Table 2. The sulfide-inclusion-bearing clinopyroxene phenocrysts from the least-evolved basalt (sample YT1731) have relatively constant Mg# values of 78–80. (Fe/Mg) The calculated liquid temperatures, pressures, and water contents of the volcanic rocks are listed in Supplementary Table 2. The liquid thermometer of High initial water contents in arc magmas facilitate water saturation and exsolution of magmatic aqueous fluids rich in chalcophile elements ( Previous studies have suggested that Au and PGE contents are of the same order of magnitude in fertile primary basaltic arc magmas (e.g., The partition coefficients of Pt for vapor/melt and brine/melt, at typical conditions for the formation of porphyry magmatic–hydrothermal fluids, are 2.9 ± 1.0 and 67 ± 27 at 1.4 kbar and 1.0 ± 0.2 and 6.8 ± 2.4 at 1.0 kbar, respectively ( The onset of the decrease in Cu contents in arc magmas depends on the thickness of the crust and generally starts at 5–10 wt.% MgO in thicker arcs and 4–-6 wt.% MgO in thinner arcs ( The mantle wedge is expected to be significantly enriched in S (up to 500 ppm; A model of S saturation in a typical arc magma at depth during differentiation is shown in It has been suggested that magnetite fractionation causes a decrease in oxygen fugacity and Fe contents in arc magmas, which further promotes sulfide saturation ( The estimated S content of a magma with the composition of dacite (e.g., equivalent to the mineralized porphyry) would increase to ∼5000 ppm, if no sulfur was released from the melt ( The final concentration of a chalcophile element (C Concentrations of 20 ppb Pd and 7 ppb Au in the initial silicate melt before sulfide saturation ( These modeling results may vary slightly with the selected partition coefficients. However, although the partition coefficients for Pd and Au between sulfide and silicate melt change by an order of magnitude, the ratio of D The Au/Pd ratio in residual melts increases with increasing partition coefficients and amount of sulfide segregation from the melt ( The attainment of sulfide saturation in the intermediate-felsic magma compositions with decreasing liquidus temperatures resulted in the crystallization of MSS rather than the separation of sulfide liquid ( In general, our modeling indicates that Au contents in the residual melt after sulfide liquid segregation and MSS crystallization would not exceed 7–10 times the Pd concentration. The Shibaoshan Group volcanic rocks contain 0.03–0.06 ppb Pd in highly evolved dacitic rocks, indicating that Au contents in these rocks should be <0.6 ppb, if the rocks did not experience any overprinting due to hydrothermal alteration. The scattered Cu and Au contents of the Shimaoshan Group volcanic rocks are due to hydrothermal alteration. However, the low Au and Cu contents in most samples are in agreement with the above modeling, whereby most of the Au and Cu was sequestered in a sulfide liquid or minerals that separated/crystallized from a sulfide-saturated magma ( The above modeling indicates that >90% of the Au and >70% of the Cu originally in the parental magma of the Shimaoshan Group volcanic rocks were scavenged by the sulfide phase that separated/crystallized from a sulfide-saturated magma during differentiation from basaltic to dacitic compositions, resulting in significant depletion of these metals and S in the residual magma ( A giant porphyry–epithermal Cu–Au deposit represents an approximately 1000-fold enrichment of metals and S in comparison with the amounts of these elements in arc magmas, suggesting that the metals and S were extracted from a large volume of magma. Giant porphyry Au–Cu deposits are commonly characterized by large amounts of metals and high metal concentrations in fluids. For example, intermediate-density fluid inclusions from the Bingham Cu–Au porphyry deposits (28.5 Mt of Cu) contain about 0.1–10 ppm Au and 100,000 ppm Cu ( Experimentally determined partition coefficients for Au between volatiles and silicate melt vary from 10 to 200 ( Recent studies have suggested that large volumes of magmas (>1000 km Magmatic sulfides sequester most of the chalcophile elements and S in a magma. As a result, release of Au, Cu, and S to ore-forming aqueous fluids by dissolution of early formed sulfides is a plausible mechanism for the generation of a giant deposit ( The Shimaoshan Group arc volcanic rocks are the extrusive counterparts of the magmas associated with porphyry–epithermal ore deposits in the Zijinshan ore district, SE China. Magmas parental to these rocks reached sulfide saturation at an early stage of magmatic differentiation (>7 wt.% MgO). PGE contents of the most evolved dacites are about three orders of magnitude lower than those in typical sulfide-undersaturated magmas, which is consistent with the removal of 0.25% sulfide from the magma. Such a degree of sulfide saturation results in >90 % of the Au and >70 % of the Cu being incorporated into the sulfides. Modeling results indicate that Au contents in the residual melt after sulfide liquid segregation and MSS crystallization do not exceed 7–10 times the Pd concentration. Low Pt and Pd contents have been identified in other dacitic arc magmas worldwide, suggesting that depletion of Au and Cu might be common in highly evolved arc magmas. Thus, the hydrothermal fluids separated from such an evolved arc magma would not contain enough metals to form giant porphyry–epithermal Cu–Au deposits. Release of Au, Cu, and S to ore-forming aqueous fluids by dissolution of early formed sulfides is a more plausible mechanism for the generation of a giant porphyry-epithermal Cu–Au deposit. The arc volcanic rocks co-magmatic with the porphyry–epithermal deposits became saturated and segregated large amounts of sulfides before the magmas were erupted. These sulfides were accumulated and concentrated in a high- level magma chambers at mid- to upper-crustal levels. Exsolved aqueous fluids that formed during solidification of the magma would acquire high concentrations of Au, Cu and S after destabilization and dissolution of the sulfides, ultimately leading to the formation of form the arc-related, giant porphyry–epithermal Au-Cu deposits. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was financially supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:  