Woody crops such as orchards and olive groves require annual pruning operations, which leave abundant residues on the ground. These must be removed both for disease control and for facilitating the following tending activities. The resulting biomass can be managed as a waste or a by-product, in both cases incurring in a cost for farmers. A harvester prototype for collecting and comminuting apple pruning residues was tested and compared to a traditional mulcher. In particular, the study aimed at: 1) quantifying productivity and costs of the two systems, 2) evaluating the possible influence of apple variety, tree age and machine type on the productivity per hectare, and 3) estimating and comparing the energy balance of the two working options.
                  The mulcher achieved a productivity of 0.41 ha SMH−1 against an average 0.27 ha SMH−1 of the harvester. Age of trees significantly influenced the productivity of both machines, with operative speed 42% higher in younger plantations. The cost of the operation added up to 137.5 € ha−1 and 275.2 € ha−1, respectively for the mulcher and the harvester. But the latter also produced 0.77 t dry matter ha−1 of biomass fuel suitable for in-farm use, whose value can cover most or the total of harvest costs.
                  Accordingly, the energetic inputs amounted to 0.59 GJ ha−1 and 1.06 GJ ha−1 respectively for the mulcher and the harvester, while the recovered biomass provided an output of 6.30 GJ ha−1 for the latter system, resulting in a positive energy ratio (5:1).The replacement of fossil energy carriers by means of renewable energy sources (RES) Most woody crops require annual pruning operations, which lead to the production of a relevant amount of woody biomass per hectare For the treatment of woody residues, many models of harvesters are available on the market differing in size, power and price. Machines are mostly designed for collecting vineyard pruning residues Finally, considering the area covered, apple orchards can be regarded as a very important source of biomass, mostly still unused. According to the statistics collected by the Food and Agriculture Organization In order to achieve a real change in the common management of apple orchards, it is important to develop an effective supply chain. This shall be based on machines capable of comminuting the harder apple wood, providing high quality biomass if a local use is envisaged. In fact, the best way to motivate farmers to change their common practices is to propose an alternative system competitive with the mulching disposal both from the economic and environmental point of view. The potential of harvesting apple residues for energy was verified by the Authors testing a harvester prototype designed for collecting and comminuting apple pruning residues. This work system, which includes a shuttle unit for transporting the biomass to the boiler located at the farm center, was compared with the common practice of leaving the biomass triturated onto the soil using a mulcher attachment, whose performance was also evaluated. Indeed, despite mulching is the most common option chosen by farmers to dispose of pruning residues, in literature there are no studies about costs and productivity of this activity. In particular, the study aimed at: 1) quantifying productivity and costs of the two systems, 2) evaluating the possible influence of apple variety, tree age and machine type on the productivity per hectare, and 3) estimating and comparing the energy balance of residues recovery vs mulching in the field. Tests were conducted on apple orchard stands in the Autonomous Province of Bozen-Bolzano (Italy) in the land-tenure of Laimburg Research Center for Agriculture and Forestry (46° 22′ 59″N, 11° 17′ 18″E) in March 2014. This Province hosts the largest continuous apple orchards area of Europe, spread on about 18,000 ha Trial area was measured with a navigational hand-held GPS device. Row spacing was measured with a tape, whereas the apple variety and the length of each row were acquired by the Laimburg maps. The latter figure was also randomly checked using a hip-chain. Time of establishment was retrieved from the owner's records in order to assess the potential effect of tree age on pruning-biomass production. Since generally the apple production cycle lasts for about 20 years, two different age classes were considered: above and below 10 years old respectively ( Pruning recovery was carried out by the prototype CP CR140 made by Da Ros firm ( Apple orchards require a very careful control of diseases, accomplished both with agrochemicals application and with removal of debris that represent possible inoculum (with particular stress on the leaves). For this reason, both tractors installed frontally a single sweeper ( The two studied machines were used for side-by-side comparative tests, operating in parallel on the same fields on alternated contiguous rows. Such solution was used to minimize the influence of factors internal to each plot/field (such as fertility gradients, slope variations, etc.). Data collection for both harvester and mulcher consisted of a set of detailed time and motion records conducted at the cycle level, where the single row was considered as a complete cycle. Age class and apple variety of each row was noted for the following analysis of influential factors. Time record was split into time elements regarded as typical of the functional process analyzed. All time elements and the related time–motion data were recorded with a stopwatch. Machines operations were divided in elemental operations. Some of these were just related to the harvester, such as transporting and unloading, while turning at the hedgerow and treating residues on the row were common for both machines, and thus suitable for comparison. The latter was chosen as dependent variable for the assessments of the factors affecting productivity. In the following analysis it has been expressed as Productive Machine Hour per linear meter (PMH m For both systems, fuel and lubricant consumption was measured by starting the study with a full tank and refilling the tank at the end of each field. The mass of pruning comminuted by the harvester was determined by weighing the filled trailers at a certified weighbridge. Percent losses were calculated contrasting this figure with the mass of residues left on the field. On this purpose, three to five plots with an average area of 19 m The collected residues were sealed in plastic bags and transported to a laboratory for quality analysis. Moisture content was determined following the method indicated in the European standard UNI-EN 14774–2:2010 on two up to six samples per plot, depending on the size of each field. Every sample consisted of approximately 500 g of material, which was put in individual bags, labeled and brought to the laboratory. Particle size distribution was assessed on 19 samples of 300 g randomly collected on all the harvested orchards. For the analysis a certified screening device, with six sieves was used in order to separate the seven following particle length classes: >100 mm, 100–63 mm, 63–45 mm, 45–16 mm, 16–8 mm, 8–3.15 mm, <3.15 mm (UNI EN 15149–1:2011). Each screened fraction was then weighed with a precision scale and values were merged according to the commercial classes described by UNI EN 14961–1:2010. Since the target users were small-sized boilers, the class P16B was chosen as reference and the following classes were elaborated: Main fraction (3.15 < P < 16 mm); Fines fraction (<3.15 mm); Coarse fraction (>45 mm). The operational cost of the two systems was calculated according to Energy analysis concerns the discrepancy between the change in thermodynamic potential in a specific process and the “embodied energy” requirements calculated by the accounting procedure Energetic values for lubricant and diesel The boundaries of this study exclude soil dynamics because in apple orchards the residue removal, either by mulching or harvesting, is not meant for enhancing soil fertility. On the contrary, farmers consider that the inclusion of woody residues calls for a higher nitrogen input if the fruit production must be maintained. This empirical observation matches with the results of Tonon Data were statistically analyzed to determine the mean time consumption and its variability according to the independent variables considered: tree age, apple variety and machine type. For this analysis, just the time related to comparable operations was considered (harvest/mulch, turn, planning and delays), while the operations related to the biomass logistics, such as unloading of bins and the delays related to the interaction with the shuttle unit were excluded by statistical analysis (but considered in cost and energy balance). The statistical significance of the possible differences among treatments (variables) and their interaction was verified with multifactor ANOVA techniques. Differences were tested according to Scheffe's test regarded as a very robust one when sample size is unbalanced and/or heteroscedastic. Overall, 5 study fields were harvested. The harvester completed 221 cycles (rows) for a total area of 5.29 ha, yielding 7.58 tonnes of fresh matter (t The biomass yield ( The conventional mulcher completed 253 cycles, covering 5.85 ha. The difference of surface worked by the two machines is due to the breakdown occurred to the harvester on the last field, for a damage in the vertical pick-up. Total study time amounted to more than 17 h and delays totaled almost 2 h. Following the procedure previously described the productive time was inflated by a factor 1.11 and used to calculate productivity per SMH, inclusive of all delays. For both machines the most important time element is moving on the row orchard row while mulching/harvesting. This action represents 61% and 67% of total time for harvester and mulcher respectively ( The productivity of the harvester per unit of surface was on average 0.27 ha SMH The results of the ANOVA analysis ( Age Class is the only parameter significantly influencing the time consumption of the machines while working within the rows. The time requested to harvest/mulch a linear meter of orchard row in younger plantations is almost 42% lower than in older plantations decreasing from 3.6 to 2.1 PMH m  For the sole shredding, the direct energy input participates for 0.53 GJ ha Stock of biomass is relatively low in comparison with other studies on apple orchards The quality of biomass for energetic use is satisfactory, contrary to what found with olive tree residues Moisture content was quite high but comparable with other apple orchards (44% of m. C. as reported in 2013 by Refs. The productivity of recovering is in line with other crops such as olive stands, where Productivity expressed as unit of surface over time is lower than that reported in other studies concerning the continuous harvesting of vineyard, as for example by Ref. The lower productivity returns higher recovering costs compared to other woody crops, such as olive stands, with a cost ranging between 34 € t Harvesting losses in this study are similar to that reported by Ref. Among the factors considered, Age Class appears to be the only parameter affecting productivity of the harvesting/mulching operations. This is due to the different development of the trees on the row: trees older than 10 years, in spite of the annual pruning, have a wider crown, which complicates the harvest operations. In fact, in order to operate the front brush to the base of the trees the driver must get very close to the row where the protruding branches limit the visibility and force to reduce the speed. Trees younger than 10 years have a very simple crown architecture, which does not interfere with this operation. It is interesting to notice that Machine Type did not return a significant difference in operative speed (PMH m Direct and indirect consumption of fossil energy is just one aspect of the environmental impact of the activities affecting biomass recovery, and its use as the main evaluation parameter may appear to be restrictive. Nevertheless, the deployment of fossil energy remains a good indicator of a system's sustainability In the sight of a need for renewable energies, the self-consumption of wood agricultural residues deserves attention, both for managing a potential waste for farmers, and for increasing the rate of energetic independence from fossil fuels. The tested harvester proved to be suitable for recovering wood biomass from apple orchards, producing a solid biofuel of high quality, suitable for energy generation in non-industrial farm boilers. Biomass recovery provides a net gain in both the economic and energetic balance if compared to mulching, the current practice for treatment of pruning residues. Nevertheless, a careful operational planning is needed to keep recovery costs within acceptable thresholds. Authors would like to thank the Autonomous Province of