This study investigated the effects of cooling rate, heat treatment as well as additions of Mn and Sr on hardness and hardening characteristics in Al–11Si–2.5Cu–Mg alloys. The results of scanning electron microscopy reveal that the age-hardening behaviour is related to the precipitation sequence of alloy. An energy dispersive spectroscopy analysis was used to identify the precipitated phases. The results also show that the hardness of the solution heat-treated samples is higher in air-cooled alloys than in furnace-cooled ones. Furthermore, the hardness observed in solution heat-treated samples is higher than in as-cast samples for air-cooled alloys, with the highest hardness level in the non-modified alloys. The highest hardness levels among the artificially aged samples were observed in the non-modified, air-cooled alloys. These levels occur after aging for longer times at lower temperatures (e.g. 30h at 155°C). The alloys studied did not display any softening after 44h at 155°C, whereas at 180°C, softening was noted to occur after 10–15h. At short aging times of 5–10h, high hardness values may be obtained by aging at 180°C. At aging temperatures of 200°C, 220°C and 240°C, softening began after 2h had elapsed. The cooling rate during solidification does not appear to have any significant effect on the precipitation characteristics and hardness of the Sr-modified alloys at certain aging temperatures. On the other hand, the effects of cooling rate may be clearly observed in the non-modified alloys. Manganese has a minimal effect on the hardness of the aged samples as it diminishes the potential action of age-hardening, while strontium lessens the hardness of the artificially aged samples. The effect of strontium, however, is more pronounced in the air-cooled alloys than in the furnace-cooled alloys. Strontium also has a noticeable effect on the reduction of hardness in aged Mg-containing Al–Si–Cu alloys, in that it affects the precipitates containing Cu and Mg.Aluminum–silicon alloys are extensively used in the automotive industry to reduce vehicle weight as well as to improve fuel economy. The commercial importance of these alloys is based on their high fluidity and low shrinkage properties in casting, brazing and welding applications. Furthermore, a high specific strength and good corrosion resistance renders these alloys suitable for manufacturing purposes; the hardness of Si particles imparts wear resistance to these alloys. The eutectic Al–Si group of alloys is ideally suited to manufacturing pistons and other major vehicle parts because of their capacity for exceptional castability, wear resistance and low expansion. Thus, the structure and mechanical properties of Al–Si alloys and, ultimately, their service performance, are primarily dependent upon composition, manufacturing process and heat treatment. The mechanical properties of heat-treatable alloys are determined by the temperature and duration of both the solution heat treatment and aging processes The present alloys contain Cu and Mg, and therefore, a combination of precipitates should be present in the microstructure. The ratios of Cu-to-Mg in these alloys are greater than 6.6:1 and less than 8:1. According to Mondolfo Reif et al. The purpose of the present research was to investigate the effects of Sr modification, Mn additions, cooling rate during solidification and aging treatments on the hardness and precipitation during the heat treatment of Al–11Si–2.5Cu–Mg alloys. The authors reported on the changes in the microstructure due to these variables. Optical microscopy was used to produce a complete assessment of the microstructural changes and intermetallic phase precipitation which occur during solidification. Image analysis was used for quantification purposes. The results showed that the volume fractions of intermetallic phases are generally much lower in the furnace-cooled samples than in the air-cooled ones due to the dissolution of the β-AlFeSi and Al The Al–11Si–2.5Cu–Mg alloys were melted in a 7-kg capacity Si–C crucible using an electrical resistance furnace with the melting temperature maintained at 720 Specimens (1 A field emission gun scanning electron microscope (Hitachi S-4700 FEG-SEM) was used with a mixed detection system using lower and upper detectors. The upper detector was used for its high resolution and high signal to noise ratio ability for secondary electron imaging. The system can be adjusted, with the voltage bias, to give images consisting of pure secondary electrons to pure backscattered electrons, and anywhere in between. This provides a great flexibility in overcoming charging and in optimizing imaging contrast. Samples for analysis by FEG-SEM were sectioned off of each mold casting and mounted. Subsequently, these samples were ground and polished using standard procedures. An X-ray microanalysis using energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), allows the FEG-SEM to qualitatively analyze the elements present in a selected area of backscattered electron image. The following sections and subsections will present and discuss the hardness values of the Al–11Si–2.5Cu–Mg alloys, as affected by cooling rate during solidification, alloying additions, solution heat treatment, aging time and temperature. The features of alloy microstructure, including the type and surface fraction of the intermetallic phases as well as Si particle characteristics, have all been published elsewhere  In the case of furnace-cooled alloys, known as the ‘H’ alloys, the hardness behaviour cannot be described by one simple trend ( Closset and Gruzleski Hardness values of aged-hardened alloys depend mainly on the morphologies of eutectic Si, intermetallic phases, and precipitation hardening phases   A significant drop in hardness occurs In Al–9Si–3.5Cu–(0.5Mg) alloys at aging times of ∼200 It is worth noting that aging at 180 Moustafa et al.  A different and less pronounced effect of Sr was observed in the furnace-cooled alloys. The Sr-modified alloys show greater hardness than the non-modified alloys after aging. An example of this is given in The addition of Mn affects the range of hardness values obtained after aging, as shown in To characterize the fine precipitates in the alloys studied, a field emission gun scanning electron microscope (FEG-SEM) was used to analyze small particles in the E4 and E6 alloys. However, the analysis in ‘bulk’ samples must be carried out at low voltage to preserve volume resolution, resulting in very weak signals. In the age-hardening of Al–Si–Cu–Mg alloy, GP zones and metastable phases can effectively strengthen alloys and lead to the aging peak. The GP zones are replaced by the coherent metastable precipitates, The SEM micrograph in  It is evident from the results shown that the alloys studied produce a greater response to aging treatments than do binary Al–Cu alloys, since at lower temperatures such as 155 The effects of cooling rate, heat treatment and Mn and Sr additions on the hardness and age-hardening characteristics of Al–11Si–2.5Cu–Mg alloys were investigated for the purposes of this study. Based on the results obtained, the following conclusions may be drawn: The cooling rate during solidification does not appear to have a significant effect on the precipitation characteristics and the hardness of Sr-modified alloys at certain aging temperatures, nor does it appear to have any great effect at other temperatures. The effects of the cooling rate may also be observed in the non-modified alloys. Manganese has only a minimal effect on the hardness of the aged samples. This is in view of the fact that it reduces the potential for age-hardening. However, strontium reduces the hardness of the artificially aged samples. This effect is more pronounced in the air-cooled alloys than it is in the furnace-cooled alloys. The hardness of the solution heat-treated samples is higher in the alloys cooled in air (DAS The alloys studied did not exhibit softening after 44 The addition of Sr counteracts the intensification and acceleration of age-hardening acquired by the addition of Mg to the alloys studied. Financial support received from the Natural Scientific and Engineering Council of Canada and General Motors Powertrain Group is gratefully acknowledged.