Mechanical size reduction processes in the mineral processing industry are energy intensive. In this study, a novel High Voltage Electric Pulses Crusher (HVEPC) was designed and developed to pre-weaken and crush a phosphate ore. To compare the effectiveness of the new HVEPC in crushing with the conventional crushers, several rock samples of a phosphate ore were used and the effect of the capacitor, the voltage level and voltage rise time on the phosphate ore breakage was investigated. Comparing the particle size distribution of the crushed samples using both the HVEPC and the conventional crushers revealed the difference between their breakage mechanisms. The final results showed that applying the high voltage pulses at specific energy of 3–5kWh/t could significantly increase and extend the cracks and microcrakcs inside the rocks and consequently lead to decline in the Bond crushability and Abrasion indices of the crushed samples by 10.6% and 28.1%, respectively.Comminution, particularly in finer sizes to achieve the required degree of liberation or specific surface, is a critical unit operation in terms of energy consumption and process optimization. Several research have shown that the specific energy consumption in comminution varies from a few kWh/t for crushing to 10–60 In this study, one of the novel comminution methods based on particle disintegration using high voltage electric pulses was investigated. The history of research in this field is mainly related to the works done by Andres The most comprehensive activity carried out on electrical comminution in the past four years with the aim of energy consumption optimization was in JKMRC (Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Center) Dodbiba et al. In this paper, the effect of high voltage electrical pulses on phosphate ore comminution is presented. Phosphate ore was chosen because its comminution inherently produces a high level of slime which disrupts the downstream processes and reduces the quality of the final product. In this study, a high voltage electrical pulses unit was designed, developed and tested to investigate the effect of the instrumental parameters on failure and comminution of phosphate ore and compare the results with the mechanical comminution (crushing and grinding). The sample used in this study was obtained from the Esfordi phosphate mining complex located in Bafgh, Iran. About 400 tons of a representative sample from different zones of the mine were collected and crushed in the crushing plant. The samples were then further homogenized in the blending room and approximately 100 tons were sent to IMPRC for the laboratory and pilot scale tests. The particle size distribution of this sample showed that 80% of particles were smaller than 9.6 Mineralogical studies were done on the thin-smooth polished sections prepared from the main sample and analyzed using a polarizing optical Zeiss Axioplan 2 microscope with light reflection and transmission. These studies showed that the major minerals present in the sample are apatite, hematite and quartz. Hematite is mostly inter-locked by contact and in some cases as 0.1–0.01 Particles of broken phosphate rock passing a 75 The Bond Abrasion test determines the Abrasion index, which is used to determine steel media and liner wear in crushers, rod mills and ball mills The pulse generator as a standard electrical device which was capable of generating high voltage pulses and comparable with that of natural lightning came into the existence at the end of 19th century Several research studies have used the SELFRAG lab machine to investigate the effect of high voltage electrical pulses on comminution circuits A schematic of the HVEPC developed in this study is shown in The second part of the HVEPC, indicated as EPC in The third part was related to the safety accessories. Considering the safety issues in all cases of using high voltage power supplies was a crucial part of this study to design and install the necessary safety equipment. The energy of discharged electrical pulse was calculated by Eq. The value of  The tests were done by changing the particle size fraction, the voltage and the capacitance each of which in at least three levels. Based on the characteristics of the Esfordi phosphate ore, the three levels of the particle size fractions were −19  In each particle size fraction, increase in voltage and capacitance resulted in improvement in crushing. This was due to discharge energy of each pulse, which is proportionate to Eq. Comparing the crushing mechanism of the particle size fractions showed that the breakage was improved in smaller size fractions. In other words, however the total energy consumption was identical in each test, the size-specific energy (defined as energy divided by particle mass) for the smaller particles was larger due to the smaller mass of each particle. It was found that the voltage had a more significant effect on the crushing than the capacitance which might be related to the amount of energy consumption per pulse. The effect of the specific energy of pulse in J/cm on breakage for different size fractions is shown in Two points should be considered in this regard; To compare the size distribution of the final crushed products of the conventional crushers, regardless of energy consumption, part of the main sample was crushed using a jaw crusher. Due to higher energy consumption in the electrical comminution, such method could be used for As can be seen on As depicted in To compare the abrasion index of the phosphate ore sample in both the mechanical and electrical treatments, primary particles of the size 12.5–19 A new High Voltage Electric Pulses Crusher (HVEPC) was constructed and developed in this study. The HVEPC consisted of three main parts including the H.V. generator, the crushing chamber and the safety accessories. The H.V. generator creates impulses based on the Marx type generators using some capacitors and resistors. To optimize the process variables, three parameters including particle size, voltage and capacitance were investigated at three different levels. The results of the crushing tests conducted on the phosphate ore sample using both the HVEPC and the conventional crushing methods revealed that: The discharge pulse energy was the main process variable related to the capacitor and voltage in the electrical crushing. To change the electro-hydraulic disintegration to the electric disintegration, the minimum level of discharge pulses energy was required. It was found that there was a logarithmic relation between the discharge pulse energy and the particle size in the phosphate ore crushing. The choice of capacitor was more important than voltage in creating of the proper discharge pulse energy. It was observed that the larger was the capacitor the higher was the effective range of discharge energy. Comparing the diagrams of cumulative passing percentage exhibited that the distribution diagram of the electrical method was very close to a linear curve. In addition, comparing the distribution curves of the retained percentage on sieve indicated that particle size distribution in the electrical comminution was closer to a normal distribution. The standard Bond crushability tests showed that the pre-weakening of the phosphate ore sample using the HVEPC with energy consumption of 3 and 5 The relative reduction of standard Bond abrasion tests in the mechanical crushing and the high voltage electrical crushing was 28.1% for the phosphate ore sample. The authors are grateful to the Iranian Mines and Mining Industries Development and Renovation Organization (IMIDRO) for funding this PhD research and Iran Mineral Processing Research Center (IMPRC) and Esfordi phosphate complex for their cooperation and substantial input into the research essential for this paper.