Objective
                  The aim of this study was to evaluate the pH, calcium release, setting time, and solubility of two commercially available mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) cements (white MTA Angelus and MTA Bio), and of three experimental cements (light-cured MTA, Portland cement with 20% bismuth oxide and 5% calcium sulfate, and an epoxy resin–based cement).
               
                  Study design
                  For evaluation of pH and calcium ion release, polyethylene tubes with 1.0 mm internal diameter and 10.0 mm length were filled with the cements and immediately immersed in flasks containing 10 mL deionized water. After 3, 24, 72, and 168 hours, the tubes were removed and the water from the previous container was measured for its pH and calcium content with a pH meter and an atomic absorption spectrophotometer. For analysis of the setting time, Gilmore needles weighing 100 g and 456.5 g were used, in accordance with the American Society for Testing and Materials specification no. C266-03. Solubility of each cement was also tested.
               
                  Results
                  All the cements were alkaline and released calcium ions, with a declining trend over time. After 3 hours, Portland cement + bismuth oxide and MTA Bio had the highest pH and light-cured MTA the lowest. After 1 week, MTA Bio had the highest pH and light-cured MTA and epoxy resin–based cement the lowest. Regarding calcium ion release, after 3 hours, Portland cement + bismuth oxide showed the highest release. After 1 week, MTA Bio had the highest. Epoxy resin–based cement and light-cured MTA had the lowest calcium release in all evaluation periods. Regarding setting times, white MTA Angelus and MTA Bio had the shortest, Portland cement + bismuth oxide had an intermediate setting time, and the epoxy resin–based cement had the longest. The materials that showed the lowest solubility values were the epoxy resin–based cement, Portland cement + bismuth oxide, and light-cured MTA. The highest solubility values were presented in white MTA Angelus and MTA Bio.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The white MTA Angelus and MTA Bio had the shortest setting times, higher pH and calcium ion release, and the highest solubility. In contrast, the epoxy resin–based cement and light-cured MTA showed lower values of solubility, pH, and calcium ion release.The desirable features for a root-end filling materials are dimensional stability, insolubility, radiopacity, easy of manipulation and insertion, adequate setting time, antimicrobial activity, biocompatibility, and the ability to stimulate tissue repair. In addition to the desirable biologic properties, the ideal root-end material should present certain physical characteristics, such as an adequate working time, allowing its manipulation and also a quickly setting after insertion, and low solubility (under 3% of its mass, according to the International Standards Organization specification no. 6876. Since its introduction in dentistry, MTA has been the focus of several studies aiming to describe its components and properties. MTA Angelus (Angelus; Londrina, PR, Brazil) is produced by adding bismuth oxide to white Portland cement clinker to improve its radiopacity. Also, the material does not contain calcium sulfate in its composition to improve the setting time. This cement shows properties, such as alkaline pH and calcium ion release, similar to those found in ProRoot MTA (Dentsply Tulsa Dental, Tulsa, OK). The aim of the present study was to evaluate setting time and solubility of 5 root-end filling materials (white MTA Angelus, MTA Bio, light-cured MTA, an epoxy resin–based cement, and Portland cement associated with bismuth oxide). For analysis of the setting time, a Gilmore needle weighing 456.5 g was used, in accordance to the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) specification no. C266-03. We examined two commercially-available MTA-based cements (white MTA Angelus and MTA Bio) and three experimental materials: a light-cured MTA-based cement (Bisco), Portland cement (Clinker Sucre Fancesa, Sucre, Bolivia) with 20% bismuth oxide (Chengdu Shudu Nano-Science Co., Sichuan, China). The Portland cement was composed of 80% clinker that was sieved under laboratory conditions to a particle size of 0.062 mm (Bronzinox, SP, Brazil); 5% calcium sulfate was added to the cement. An epoxy resin–based cement with calcium hydroxide in its composition All of the materials were weighed in an analytical balance to precisely follow with the manufacturer's recommended mixing of 3:1. The light-cured MTA required no mixing; it was light-cured for 60 seconds using a light-cure unit (Ultralux-DabiAtlante, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil), by increments of 1 mm. Polyethylene tubes were used (internal diameter of 1 mm and length of 10 mm) and one open end. The mixed dental materials were packed in the tubes using Paiva hand pluggers. Five specimens were prepared from each material. Then, the specimens were immersed in flasks containing 10 mL deionized water, covered, and kept in an oven at 37°C; glassware was rinsed with nitric acid before use. Evaluations were carried out after 3, 24, 72, and 168 hours (7 days). After each reading, the specimens were removed from the flasks and placed in a new container with the same volume of deionized water. The pH was determined using an analog pH meter (Model 371; Micronal, São Paulo, Brazil) calibrated with solutions of known pH (4, 7, and 14). After removal of each specimen, the flask was agitated for 5 seconds, and the liquid was poured into a beaker. The control procedure included measuring the pH of the water in which no samples were immersed. After pH measurements, the solution in the beaker was agitated again and transfered to 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes. These tubes were refrigerated until all experimental periods were completed (168 hours). The calcium ion analyses were carried out by atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Model GBC 904; CG Corp., Melbourne, Australia) equipped with a calcium ion specific hollow cathode lamp.The spectrophotometer was used according to manufacturer's recommendations: 422.70 nm wavelength, 0.2 nm slot, 10 mA current, and slightly reducing stoichiometry, maintained by an acetylene-air flux of 2 L/min. All of the specimens, from all groups and from all periods, were analyzed on the same day. To prevent potential interference between phosphates and the alkaline materials, the samples and standards were diluted in 10% EDTA. A 10 mg% standard stock solution was serially diluted in 10% EDTA, resulting in the following concentrations: 0.025 mg%, 0.05 mg%, 0.1 mg%, 0.2 mg%, and 0.5 mg%. A 10% EDTA solution was used as a blank solution for calibration. Calcium ion calculations were based on a standard calibration curve performed at the same time points in which pH measurements were carried out. The setting time of the cements tested was determined according to the International Standards Organization (ISO) 6876 specification The setting time measurement were carried out under controlled temperature and humidity: 37 ± 1°C and 95 ± 5% relative humidity. The weight cements were mixed and inserted in metallic ring molds (10 mm in diameter and 2 mm thickness). Three specimens were fabricated for each cement. At 180 seconds, each specimen was indented with the 113.5 g Gilmore needle until the initial setting time was determined. After the initial setting time, a 456.5 g Gilmore needle was used to determine the final setting time. The setting times were determined as the time elapsed from the beginning of mixing to the time at which no indentation was detected on the surface of the specimens. The light-cured MTA was not subjected to this test, due to its inherent feature of setting immediately after being exposed to a curing light. To determine the solubility, a modified ISO 6876 specification was used. The cement specimens were molded in accordance to the ISO specification using Teflon ring molds 20 mm in diameter and 1.5 mm high. Three specimens were fabricated for each material. A nylon thread was inserted into the cement before setting, allowing the sample to be hung and immersed in distilled water throughout the experimental period. The rings were kept on a cellophane-lined glass plate, and another cellophane-wrapped glass plate was placed on the top of the filled rings. The assembly was kept in an oven at 37°C for 24 hours. After setting, the specimens were removed from the molds and any loose material particles were removed from the surface, using a soft brush. Samples were weighed in an analytical balance with 0.001 g precision and then placed in closed flasks with 50 mL of distilled water for 7 days (168 h) to compare if the solubility values had some relationship with the pH and calcium ion release. Special care was taken to keep the specimens hung in the water, not touching the walls. The samples were then removed from the flasks, gently washed with distilled water, dried with filter paper, placed in a dehumidifier for 24 hours, and then weighed again. Solubility was determined by calculating the weight that was lost during immersion. All of the values obtained were statistically compared by the Kruskal-Wallis test for global comparison, and the individual comparisons were carried out by the Miller test. All of the cements were alkaline and released calcium ions ( Regarding the calcium ion values, Portland cement + bismuth oxide showed statistical differences compared with light-cured MTA at 3 h and with epoxy resin–based sealer at 24 h. Also, MTA Bio had higher calcium values compared with light-cured MTA and the epoxy resin–based cement at 24, 72, and 168 hours ( Regarding setting times (  All of the cements evaluated in this study increased the pH values (7.8 at 12.5) by the release of hydroxyl ions. Torabinejad et al. Our results showed a tendency of reduction in the ability to raise the pH of most materials between 24 and 72 hours. For the pH measurements, all cements were immersed in water immediately after manipulation. Thus, the superficial layers were exposed to the water before the materials were completely set. The described phenomenon was not observed for the light-cured MTA. In this case, pH increase was observed only after 24 hours, probably because the cement was already set since the first immersion in water. This study showed a gradual decrease in calcium ion release, similarly to the results found by other authors. The method used in the present study for pH and calcium release consisted in immersion of the cements in deionized water immediately after mixing and measurement of pH with a pH meter at various times. After each reading, the deionized water was changed to ensure that the pH readings would reflect the real increase over each period, instead of a sum of values. Regarding the setting time property, similar methodology has been used recently to test the setting time of different MTA cements. Regarding the solubility test, the MTA-based Angelus cements (white MTA and Bio) had the highest solubility. Because MTA Bio is fully synthesized in a laboratory, a lower interaction between its components could make the material more soluble and degradable. We found higher solubility (0.33%) for white MTA Angelus than that reported by Bortoluzzi et al. Epoxy resin–based cement, light-cured MTA, and Portland cement + bismuth oxide had solubility values that were <3%. The light-cured MTA cement showed low solubility values (0.10%), probably owing to its immediate setting. Its low solubility can explain the small release of calcium ions and pH observed in this material, which were considerably lower than the other cements studied. Interestingly, Gomes Filho et al. The present study has shown that some physicochemical properties interrelate with all of the others. One of the problems with calcium hydroxide–containing cements stated by the literature is that for a material such as calcium hydroxide to be able to exert a biologic effect, it must, to some extent, solubilize and dissociate. This is at odds with the desired characteristics of a root-filling material, which should theoretically provide a hermetic seal to the canal or retrograde cavity. However, the literature has shown that a material can dissociate or has reasonable solubility values, Current research has shown that there exists an effort to improve the poor handling characteristics of MTA cements. In summary, the materials with components such as calcium hydroxide or calcium oxide should present a degree of solubility to improve the mineralization process and in balance with sealing ability; pH and calcium release is necessary. Portland cement with bismuth oxide showed appropriated values of solubility, setting time, pH, and calcium ion release. MTA Bio and MTA Angelus exceeded the values of solubility but had higher pH and calcium release. Light-cured MTA and the epoxy resin–based cement has good values of setting time and solubility but showed lower pH and calcium ion release. Further studies must be carried out to verify the biocompatibility of these new experimental materials, including the biomineralization ability of resin cements with calcium hidroxyde and light-cured MTA based materials.