Over the past 50years the quality of Jamaica’s mined bauxites has gradually changed from gibbsite/hematite dominated ores to ones that contain more boehmite and goethite and have higher concentrations of many minor and trace components. This presents evolving challenges to the Bayer process industry which must still meet the aluminum smelting industry’s alumina quality requirements. The extraction of unwanted elements from bauxite into the caustic liquors depends on their host minerals but routine X-ray diffraction methods used by the industry are often unable to identify minerals for minor and trace elements and therefore do not give indications of potential Bayer liquor contamination by such elements. We sought to combine elemental concentrations and qualitative X-ray diffraction information with factor and cluster analyses to identify the probable associations of minor and trace elements with major elements and so predict their likely dissolution properties. Bauxites (178) were selected from catchment (32; gibbsite/hematite) and hillside (146; gibbsite/boehmite/goethite) deposits based on exploration data and reanalyzed using a variety of analytical techniques. The quality of the data was assessed and then the data were transformed to centered lognormal ratios to allow for their compositional nature. The elemental data used in the factor analyses were limited to Al, Fe, Ti, Si, Ca, P, V, Cr, Mn and Zn (plus Mg and Zr for the catchment bauxite set) because of missing data for some bauxites. For both bauxite types 80% of the variability was accounted for within three factors. The hillside bauxites’ factors associated Al with Fe, Ti, V and possibly Cr, Mn with Zn and Ca with P while Si showed no associations. The catchment bauxites’ factors were similar except for the Ca–P link being weak and Ca possibly having a linkage with Si; Zr joined the Al–Fe–V–Ti–Cr group and Mg linked weakly with Ca. The cluster analyses included the above elements plus Sr, Ga, Pb, As, Sc, Co, Cu, Cd, Hf, La, Ce, Nd, Sm, Yb, Th and U and used Pearson correlation coefficients as distance measures to allow for the missing values. The identified clusters separated Al from Fe, particularly for the hillside bauxites, confirmed the isolation of Si, suggested minimal associations for Cr, confirmed the Mn–Zn associations, particularly within the catchment bauxites, and indicated that P was not associated with Ca in the catchment bauxites and only weakly associated in the hillside ores. These identified associations allow for predictions about the dissolution processes and potential Bayer liquor contamination. Our future work will seek to confirm these predictions and refine the models.After mining and processing bauxites for over 50 Most of the world’s alumina is produced using the Bayer process ( Bauxites in Jamaica occur in either catchment or hillside deposits ( When assessing bauxite reserves mining companies routinely determine elemental concentrations, with a focus on Al, Fe, Si and Ca, major minerals and processing factors such as hematite-to-goethite ratios, available alumina and reactive silica. Additional information can be obtained from other techniques such as FTIR ( In this component of our larger study we sought to characterize the Jamaican hillside and catchment bauxites and to identify the mineral associations of trace elements by applying multivariate factor and cluster analyses techniques. Using available exploration data we selected 178 bauxites from the catchment (32) and hillside (146) deposits and then analysed them using Wavelength Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence (WDXRF) procedures (pressed pellets or fused beads and calibrated for major and some minor and trace components). We also analysed some of the samples using XRF software calibrated specifically for quantifying a variety of trace elements and, as part of our quality assurance, by Energy Dispersive XRF (EDXRF) and Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis (INAA) at an independent laboratory. Powder X-ray Diffraction scans were collected for 33 hillside and 14 catchment bauxites. Consequently the data available varied across the samples with respect to both analytical techniques and elements determined. In applying the factor analysis technique we considered initially a small set of elements for which we had data for most of the samples and then a sub-set of those samples for which we had data for additional elements to see if the trace elements could be associated with underlying structures within the bauxites. We allowed for the compositional nature of the data by transforming them to centered lognormal ratios ( During the original explorations of the bauxite deposits the mining company sampled at regular intervals on a 30 Approximately 80% of the bauxites were selected so that the concentrations of Al, Ca, Fe and Si were within normal processing ranges and the concentrations of the elements of particular concern from a potential processing liquor contamination viewpoint, Zn, Cr and P, were representative of the exploration data. For WDXRF analyses the bauxite samples were prepared as either pressed disks (finely ground bauxites dried at 110 We analysed a subset of the bauxites (94 of the 178) for up to 40 trace elements using the same WDXRF instrument after calibrating with 14 synthetic standards obtained from the British Geological Survey, Nottingham, England. The standards were pressed in Al rings (37 Complementary data were determined by personnel at the International Centre for Environmental and Nuclear Sciences (ICENS) on The University of the West Indies Mona campus using a Kevex WINXRF EDXRF instrument (Rh primary target, Zr, Ti and Ag secondary targets), calibrated for Cu using 10 previously analysed Jamaican soils and NIST’s SRMs 2709 (San Joaquin soil) and 2711 (Montana soil) and for P using NIST’s SRMs 697 (a Dominican bauxite) and 698 (a Jamaican bauxite) and 14 previously analysed Alcoa reference bauxites ( ICENS’ personnel also used their SLOWPOKE-II standard operating conditions ( A total of 47 X-ray powder diffractograms were collected using a Siemens/Bruker SMART D5000 powder diffractometer with an energy dispersive detector at the Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden (Cu Kα radiation, 45 We analysed many bauxites by more than one methodology (WDXRF – fused disks (91 samples) and pressed disks (99 samples for majors; 94 for traces), INAA and EDXRF (60 samples)) which allowed for the detection of up to 55 elements, although not all bauxites were analysed for all elements. Certified reference materials selected from SRMs 697, 698 and 2709 and an Alcoa Standard Reference bauxite (SRC 44) were analysed within each analytical run as accuracy tests while duplicate (within and between analytical runs) analyses of selected bauxites and replicate INAA analyses of a Jamalco in-house standard bauxite sample (IHRM01) allowed for estimates of precision ( Where comparisons with certified values are possible (15 of the 28 elements; The precisions calculated from paired duplicates ( The generally good agreement with reference materials and the low precisions suggest that the data are of such quality as to adequately define the characteristics of the bauxites. Given that not all samples were analysed by all techniques and that some bauxites were analysed by more than one technique it was necessary to combine the data from the several techniques in order to maximize available elemental concentrations for each bauxite. For the major components (Al, Fe, Ti, Si, Ca and P) the pressed disk WDXRF data were used in preference since their precisions were generally better than those for the fused disks. For the trace elements ( X-ray diffractograms were recorded for 23% of the hillside and 44% of the catchment bauxites, with minimal differences being observed within each set. All hillside bauxites had relatively intense peaks for gibbsite and goethite and weak peaks for anatase, most had weak peaks for boehmite and hematite (samples 60 and 102 had strong hematite peaks) and in all except bauxite 102 (P concentration 2400 In all catchment bauxites the major minerals were gibbsite and hematite while anatase was readily detected and weak goethite peaks always observable. Boehmite was not detected except for bauxites 154 and 156 for which the peaks were relatively strong. Crandallite was only identified in bauxite 162 (P concentration 4150 Silica minerals were not clearly identified in either set of bauxites, possibly because the 100 line for quartz (26.7°) was hidden by a weak gibbsite peak. Bauxites 31 (hillside) and 172 (catchment) had sharp but weak peaks at 18.6°, possibly the 100 line for lithiophorite ((Al,Li)MnO We used SPSS-17© for the factorial analyses after dividing the data into hillside (bauxites 1–146) and catchment (bauxites 147–178) subsets. We further divided each subset into two, one containing the bauxites for which selected elemental data ( We considered box plots of the elements retained in the larger sample sets to identify outliers and omitted those bauxites ( For a few bauxites Ga (3 bauxites) and Nd (5 bauxites) were not detected and so concentrations were set at the reported detection limits (30 and 150 The obvious differences in elemental concentrations between the two types of bauxites ( To allow for their compositional nature, all data were transformed to centered lognormal ratios using a geometric mean ( The factorial analyses on the larger sample sets were conducted by extracting principal components from the correlation matrices and then applying Varimax rotations. We tested the suitability of the data for factorial analyses by noting the existence of correlations within the elemental concentrations and within the transformed variables ( For the data to be suitable for multivariate analyses the Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin (KMO) parameter should be at least 0.5 ( The numbers of bauxites in the smaller sample subsets (most-elements but minimal bauxites) were too small to allow for factorial analyses. Therefore we did hierarchical cluster analyses on the full data sets for the hillside (122) and catchment (32) bauxites using the between-group average linkages method and Pearson correlation coefficients as the distance measure. Pearson correlation coefficients were used rather than the raw centered lognormal data to avoid the effect of the many missing values in the latter data sets. Other SPSS-17© methods for linkages gave slightly different results (linkages different at low agglomeration coefficients (average distances between linking clusters) became equivalent while agglomeration coefficients remained small or linkages were outside our cluster cut-off levels). Dendrograms for the two data sets are shown in For both types of bauxites the first components ( Components 1 and 2 show that Si behaves uniquely within the hillside bauxites and is possibly weakly associated with Ca (and Mg) within the catchment bauxites. This may suggest that Si is present in both quartz and clay minerals although predominantly quartz in the hillside bauxites. Our X-ray diffractograms were unable to unambiguously detect Si minerals. Mn and Zn form another distinct group in both bauxites (components 3). Mn, a common minor element in bauxites, is reportedly present as lithiophorite ((Al,Li)MnO Ca and P form a distinct pair in the hillside bauxites but not in the catchment bauxites; P concentrations are much higher in the former. The different grouping of these elements within the two models may be due to differences in the Ca mineralogy; mainly crandallite (CaAl The cluster analyses on the full data sets enhance the observations from the factorial analyses in the following ways (using an agglomeration coefficient of 4 as a cut off in the first instance): For the hillside bauxites Si and Mg show no associations while a weak Si link is suggested with Ca and Mg for the catchment bauxites supporting the suggestion that Si is present in both quartz and clay minerals with quartz predominating in the hillside bauxites. The Ca–P linkage while not strong for the hillside is non-existent for the catchment bauxites, again consistent with the factorial analyses observations. The weak linkage with Sr and even weaker linkages with Cd and Zn suggest that the origin of the phosphates in the hillside bauxites is not dominated by the reworking of phosphorite (high Cd and Zn but low Sr concentrations) deposits known to underlie some of the hillside bauxites ( The Mn–Zn association is strong for the catchment bauxites where it is associated with Co, Cu and several rare earth elements and possibly Sc and Pb. For the hillside bauxites however the linkage is weaker and does not include the rare earths, possibly a result of the more extensive weathering of the hillside bauxites and therefore the greater dispersion of the relatively mobile Zn. The linkage of Fe, Al, V, Ti and possibly Cr identified by the factorial analyses is confirmed by the cluster analysis for the catchment bauxites (Th, Zr, Ga and Hf join the group); only at the earlier stages of the associations are Al, Th and V separated from Fe, Zr and Ga. However for the hillside bauxites Al (with Th, Ga, Pb, Zr, Nd, La, Ce, Sc and V) is clearly separated from Fe (with Ti, and Hf), presumably due to the more extensive weathering of these bauxites. The linkage of Ga with Fe in the catchment bauxites is consistent with reports of Ga’s incorporation into iron minerals ( The observation that Cr only becomes associated with the Al/Fe clusters at a later stage supports the suggestion from the factor analysis that Cr may be behaving independently of these elements and is possibly present as a resistate primary mineral such as chromite (FeCr When considering the bauxites initially selected for study but not included in the statistical sets because of extreme values ( Of the eight bauxites omitted because of high Si (>15,000 The 13 bauxites with high Ca (>14,000 Of the seven bauxites with high Mn (>9000 Thus 24 of the 27 outlier bauxites fit the models leaving only three (123 and 172 with high Mn and 163 with low Zn) as true anomalies. Our analyses show that if minor and trace element data are available for bauxites then factorial and cluster analysis techniques can suggest probable mineral associations and therefore their possible caustic liquor dissolution processes. The inclusion of minor and trace element data strengthens the conclusions from factor analyses using only major and selected trace elements as illustrated by the separation of Cr from the resistate oxides factor, the separation of Fe and Al at the initial stages of the clustering and the absence of trace associations with the Ca–P crandallite cluster. It is probable that larger data sets with fewer missing values would give stronger statistical results and it is suggested that the routine analyses of bauxites during exploration and prior to processing should include as many minor and trace elements as possible to allow for good separation of components/clusters during the statistical processes. These additional elements could include some rare earths to distinguish between the Fe and Al factors. Analysts should also seek to include elements known to be associated with the elements of particular interest (Ca, Mg and K for clay minerals; Mg, Ca, As, Cd, Pb, Sr and Zn for P minerals and Cu, Pb, As, V and Mn for Zn minerals, for example ( The authors wish to thank Alcoa World Alumina for providing funding for this project, for allowing access to archived data, providing samples of selected bauxites and for permission to publish this paper. Alcoa World Alumina was not involved in the preparation of this paper and so the views expressed within the paper are not necessarily theirs. The authors also wish to thank Ms. Jheanell James and Ms. Nijole Young for recording the XRD patterns and Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden and Dr. Vratislav Langer in particular for allowing access to their Xray diffractometer. We are also grateful to the Linneus-Palme Foundation for funding our visits to Chalmers University of Technology and the University of Gothenburg. We also acknowledge the staff of ICENS and Jamalco for assistance with analyses.