Quinones are a class of compounds of substantial toxicological and pharmacological interest. An ultrasensitive and highly selective chemiluminescence (CL) method was newly developed for the determination of quinones based on the utility of photochemically initiated luminol CL. The method involved ultraviolet (UV) irradiation of quinones to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) through the unique photosensitization reaction accompanied with the photolytical generation of 3,6-dihydroxyphthalic acid (DHPA) from quinones. The photoproducts were detected by luminol CL reaction. Interestingly, it was noticed that DHPA had enhancement effect for the luminol CL. The generation of the enhancer (DHPA) in association with the oxidant (ROS) in the photochemical reaction greatly increases the sensitivity and selectivity of the proposed luminol CL method. In order to elucidate the type of ROS produced by the photosensitizaion reaction in relation to the proposed CL reaction, we investigated the quenching effect of selective ROS scavengers in the luminol CL. Although several ROS were generated, superoxide anion was the most effective ROS for the generated CL. Moreover, the enhancement mechanism of DHPA for luminol CL was confirmed. The enhancement was found to be through the formation of stabilized semiquinone anion radical that provided long-lived CL. The generation of the semiquinone radical was confirmed by electron spin resonance technique. Furthermore, we developed an HPLC method with on-line photochemical reaction followed by the proposed CL detection for the determination of four quinones. A luminol analogue, L-012, was used for its high sensitivity. The detection limits for quinones obtained with the proposed method (S/N=3) were in the range 1.5–24fmol that were 10–1000 times more sensitive compared with the previous methods. Finally, the developed HPLC-CL system was successfully applied for the determination of quinones in airborne particulate samples collected at Nagasaki city.It is well known that quinones play important roles in photosynthesis and photobiology, and apparently the interest in their biological function has stimulated basic chemical research in many scientific fields Quantitative analytical methods for quinones have been developed using several techniques including high-performance liquid chromatographic (HPLC) with ultraviolet (UV) Luminol is so far the most frequently used CL reagent. The CL emission of luminol is based on its oxidation in alkaline medium. The relevance of the luminol as analytical CL reagent does not rely on emission efficiency but on possibilities that many different species can influence the mechanism and the kinetics of the CL reaction. The analyte can act as enhancer, inhibitor or catalyst whose concentration may influence the intensity or amount of emitted light Previously, we reported the determination of quinones by HPLC with peroxyoxalate chemiluminescence (PO-CL) detection combined with on-line photochemical reaction In the course of this work, we have exploited the photochemically initiated luminol CL for the determination of quinones. Quinones were subjected to UV irradiation to generate ROS accompanied with the photolytic generation of DHPA from quinones. The photoproducts can initiate luminol CL reaction. It was noticed that DHPA had enhancement effect for luminol CL. The coexistence of oxidant and enhancer could significantly increase the light output and duration kinetics of luminol CL. Hence, this will allow the development of more sensitive and selective analytical methodology for the determination of quinones. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time to use luminol or its analogues as a single post column CL reagent without addition of oxidant or any catalyst. Till now, luminol is always delivered in association with oxidant and/or catalyst. Furthermore, we elucidated type of the generated ROS in relation to proposed CL reaction, by investigating the quenching effect of selective ROS scavengers in the luminol CL. Also, the enhancement mechanism of DHPA for the luminol CL was confirmed by electron spin resonance (ESR) technique. Then we tried to get further insights on DHPA as a novel enhancer for luminol CL. Hereby, we developed an HPLC method with on-line photochemical reaction followed by luminol CL detection for the determination of quinones. In this paper, four quinones namely; 1,2-naphthoquinone (1,2-NQ), 1,4-naphthoquinone (1,4-NQ), 9,10-phenanthrenequinone (PQ) and 9,10-anthraquinone (AQ) were determined by the proposed CL method. 8-Amino-5-chloro-7-phenylpyrido[3,4- 1,4-Naphthoquinone, 9,10-anthraquinone and luminol were obtained from Nacalai Tesque (Kyoto, Japan). 1,2-Naphthoquinone, 9,10-phenanthrenequinone, isoluminol and To confirm type of the generated ROS in relation to the proposed CL reaction, we investigated the quenching effect of selective ROS scavengers for the CL produced by the photoproducts with L-012. A 10 The working solution of standard DHPA was freshly prepared in a mixture of imidazole-TFA (pH 9.0) and acetonitrile (1:1). In order to confirm the role of DHPA in CL, 100 The ESR spectra of all samples were measured using JES-TE 200 ESR spectrometer (JEOL, Tokyo, Japan). Typical ESR parameters were as follows: power, 1.26 The theoretical calculations of spin density of semiquinone anion radical of DHPA were performed by WinMOPAC (version 3.0) program using PM3 as a semiempirical hamiltonian method. The chromatographic analysis was performed at ambient temperature (25 Sampling of airborne particulates was carried out at the main avenue of Nagasaki City. Airborne particulates were collected on Q-R100 silica-fiber filters (Advantec Toyo, Tokyo, Japan) at a flow rate of 1200 Quinones are known for their unique photosensitizing properties Herein, we tried to get further insights on the photogenerated ROS and their role in the proposed CL reaction. The photogenerated O We have studied the effect of DHPA standard solution on the kinetics and profile of the CL reaction ( The generated semiquinone radical anion might act as an enhancer for luminol CL via its ability to react with luminol monoanion (LH Moreover, the photochemical reaction involved the generation of O The formation of semiquinone anion radical from standard DHPA at alkaline pH was evidenced by ESR technique ( We further investigated the photogeneration of semiquinone radical of DHPA after photolysis of anthraquinone ( The suggested mechanism for the photochemically initiated luminol CL of quinones is shown in It is thought that the photochemical reaction plays an important role in the CL reaction of quinones through the generation of highly reactive photoproducts. The reaction photoproducts are highly dependent on residence time in the photoreactor, temperature of photochemical reactor, pH and composition of the mobile phase Since the temperature of photochemical reaction strongly affects the generation efficiency and stability of photogenerated oxygen species and DHPA, the effect of photoreactor temperature from 20–50 The mobile phase compositions play an important role in the photochemical reaction kinetics and reaction pathways The factors influencing the CL intensity such as type of luminol analogues, pH of the solutions, concentration of luminol analogue and NaOH, and flow rate of CL reagent were studied in order to obtain maximal detection sensitivity. So far, several luminol analogues were reported The influence of the L-012 concentration on CL intensity and S/N ratio was also examined ( It is well known that luminol CL reaction takes place in alkaline medium and the degree of alkalinity has great influence on CL intensity. The activity of a chemical enhancer, which is the most attractive mode for increasing the sensitivity, is strongly dependant upon pH of the CL reaction system Under the optimum experimental conditions, linear relationship was observed by plotting relative chemiluminescence intensity (RCI) against quinone concentration (nM). Calibration curve, retention time, calibration range, correlation coefficient and detection limit were recorded for each quinone ( The intra- and inter-day precision of the proposed method were examined using standard quinones solutions at three different concentration levels: low (10 In order to test the usefulness of the proposed HPLC-CL method for the monitoring of quinones in real samples, the method was applied for the determination of quinones in airborne particulates samples collected at Nagasaki city. To choose the extraction solvent, the extraction by ultrasonication was examined with methanol, acetonitrile, dichloromethane, chloroform, ether,  Herein, we reported an ultrasensitive and highly selective HPLC method with a photochemically initiated luminol CL detection for simultaneous determination of quinones. The proposed method involved the generation of ROS based on the unique photosensitization reaction of quinones while quinones were simultaneously converted into DHPA through photolytical reaction. The photogeneration of the enhancer (DHPA) in association with the oxidant (ROS) in that photochemical reaction greatly increases the light output and duration kinetics of luminol CL. This phenomenon allowed the development of a highly sensitive and selective analytical methodology for the determination of quinones. The proposed HPLC-CL method was 10–1000 times more sensitive compared with the reported methods