The interfacial properties of aramid fibres (AFs) affect their mechanical behaviours. In this work, polyamide acid (PAA) was grafted onto the surface of aramid fibres (AF@PAA) to reinforce epoxy resin (EP E44) by improving the interfacial properties. The AF@PAA contained many active groups and improved the roughness of aramid fibres on the surface, which improved the interfacial performance and mechanical properties of AF-reinforced E44 composites. FTIR and XPS showed the introduction of C–O and –COO–, which confirmed the existence of chemical reactions among groups between the aramid fibres and polyamide acid. A micro-droplet test proved that the benzene ring of the AF could be oxidized under high temperature, and the oxygen-containing groups generated during the oxidation process were important for the grafting process of polyamide acid. The interfacial shear strength (IFSS) increased by 40.7% after treatment with 5 wt% polyamide acid. This study provides a feasible method for interfacial modification in AF-reinforced epoxy resin composites and may be applicable to rubber composite systems.As an important high-performance fibre, aramid fibre (AF) possesses many advantages, such as low specific density, electrical conductivity and high tensile strength, which have attracted considerable interest from researchers [ Many studies have shown that the hydrogen bond on the surface of AF is destroyed at a certain temperature [ The polyamide acid (PAA, the polyimide precursor) molecule contains a large number of carboxyl, paramine and primary amine groups, which can react with the corresponding functional groups of AF under certain conditions [ To date, studies on the modification of AF by interfacial reaction between PAA and polar groups produced during high temperature have not been reported. In our work, PAA was synthesized from anhydride and amine and then coated on the surface of the AF, then self-assembled and reacted with the oxygen-containing groups produced in the course of heat processing, thus achieving grafting. This method can implement the PAA grafting reaction on the fibre surface through the control of heat treatment temperature to form a layer of controllable modulus transition layer, which is extremely important to the improvement of the interfacial adhesion of AF-reinforced composites. Acetone, AR, was supplied by the Chongqing Chuan Dong Chemical Co., Ltd. China. Pyromellitic Dianhydride (PMDA), AR, was obtained from the Alfa Chemistry Co., Ltd., China. Aramid fibre (AF-1000, 1500D) was produced by the South Alkex Company, Korea. m-phenylene diamine (m-PDA), AR, and The aramid fibre (AF-1000, 1500D; Korea) used in this study was produced by South Alkex Company with 0–0.3 wt% surface sizing, as stated by the manufacturer. The sizing on the surface of the AF is used to make the fibres antistatic to aid with processing and handling. To eliminate the effect of the sizing agent on the grafting reaction, all samples were washed with acetone, rinsed with ethanol and dried in a vacuum for 8 h before surface treatment. The reactive chemicals used in the synthesis of polyamide acid (PAA) were PMDA and m-PDA in powder form. The molar ratio of the monomer in the synthesis of the PAA process is PMDA/m-PDA = 1.02:1. First, the m-PDA was added into a 50 ml vial with a moderate amount of NMP and continuous magnetic stirring under an argon atmosphere. Then, the stoichiometric amount of PMDA was added into the vial. The solution was mixed by magnetic stirring for 10 h under ice bath conditions to prepare a PAA solution. The solid content of the polyamide acid solution was approximately 15 wt%, and the intrinsic viscosity was 2.78 dl/g. NMP acts as a dilution solvent for PAA in the surface treatment process. The synthesis process and structural formula of PAA are shown in All samples were dried after being washed by NMP and then washed repeatedly with deionized water. The AF was uniformly mixed with PAA solution with different mass fractions (2.5 wt%, 5 wt%, 7.5 wt%, and 10 wt%) in a beaker at 50 °C for 10 min and dried in an oven at 250 °C for 1 h. The treatment process of each sample is shown in It was observed that an excessive amount of PAA adhered a large number of fibres together. The AF bundles were overturned and scattered before the heat treatment process to prevent the fibres from forming bundles. After the grafting processing, the samples were removed from the container and then rinsed with NMP to remove the unreacted PAA on the fibre surface. A scheme of the modification process is shown in The surface chemical structure of the modified AF was studied using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) (Nicolet 8700, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), which provided information about various chemical bonds. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed on a Q50 Thermogravimetric Analyzer (TA, Q50, USA) in nitrogen at a ramp rate of 10 °C/min. The samples were analysed in a range of 80–800 °C. XRD analyses were performed using an X Pert PRO diffractometer from Panalytical, Netherlands. Test conditions were set as follows: Cu-Ka radiation, tube voltage of 40 KV, and tube current of 40 mA. The scan range was from 10° to 40°, with a scan rate of 2°/min. In addition, the XPS tests were conducted by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (Thermo Fisher Scientific, K-Alpha To obtain the effect of the PAA grafting process on the crystal structure and crystallinity, the XRD diagram was fitted. The single-fibre pull-out test was selected to characterize the interfacial properties of the fibre/epoxy composites on an XQ-1 single filament testing device (Shanghai New Fibre Instrument Co. Ltd., China) [  After being cleaned with NMP (AF1, AF2), the hydrogen bond between the surface molecular chains of the AF is weakened. The peaks derived from the hydrogen bond decrease and widen. At high temperature, the hydrogen bond on the surface of the fibre is destroyed, and the hydrogen bond is formed between the PAA chain and AF chain at the same time. Essentially, the self-assembly and grafting reaction of PAA will occur simultaneously, but the rapid heating process will inhibit the imidization rate and degree of PAA. The grafting reaction is the main reaction in the range of the test temperature (250 °C). This reaction can reduce the hydrogen bond energy of the AF chain [ The change in the chemical structure of the specimens induced by the surface modification can be observed by analysing the XPS spectra. The wide scan and C1s core-level spectra of AF before and after modification are represented in The grafting and self-assembly of PAA further affect the surface roughness of the AF. To further explore the effect of the PAA grafting reaction on the structure of the AF, XRD measurements were carried out, and the X-ray diffractograms in the 2θ range from 10° to 40° are shown in The grafting and self-assembly of PAA will affect the movement of molecular chains on the surface of the AF and, consequently, the thermal properties of the fibre. It is reasonable to take the TG curves of AF3 (2.5 wt% PAA) and AF4 (5 wt% PAA) as examples because of the similar chemical reaction between AF and PAA with different PAA contents. The AF before and after modification showed no obvious weight losses before 500 °C. The thermal degradation of AF mainly occurs in the range of 550 °C–600 °C by the random decomposition of AF molecular chains [ Furthermore, the initial decomposition temperature of AF0 is 526.3 °C, and the decomposition rate reaches its maximum at 560.2 °C. The temperatures corresponding to the maximum degradation rates of AF1 and AF2 are 547.8 °C and 548.7 °C, respectively. This phenomenon indicates that the hydrogen bond of the molecular chain on the surface of the AF can be damaged to some extent, whether washed with NMP or treated at high temperature. The temperatures corresponding to the maximum degradation rates of AF3 and AF4 increased significantly, reaching 582.4 °C and 583.7 °C, respectively. On the one hand, partial PAA self-assembled to form polyimide, and polyimide itself has a higher degree of crystallinity and heat resistance. On the other hand, the oxygen-containing groups on the surface of AF are increased during heat processing; thus, chemical reactions will occur between the PAA chain and AF during the thermal imidization of PAA. The breakage of these chemical bonds needs to absorb more heat, thus delaying the degradation of AF to some extent. The mechanical properties of the fibres before and after modification were characterized by the tensile strength of the monofilament. As shown in To verify the quality of interface adhesion between the modified AF and epoxy composites, AF0 and the contrast fibres (AF2 and AF4) were prepared as droplet specimens. The data in To further study the reasons for the IFSS increase of AF4/EP, SEM photos of AF4/EP droplets after testing are shown in In this study, a novel solution dipping method was applied to modify AF using PAA as a modifier, and the AF/EP micro-droplet test was adopted to directly turn out the interfacial adhesion. During the heat treatment process, PAA can undergo an interfacial grafting reaction with AF, and the graft reaction was accompanied by the imide of PAA. The grafting process does not affect the AF crystal types, but the interplanar spacing increases. The graft product can obviously improve the thermal stability and surface roughness of the fibre but has little effect on the tensile strength of the filament. The micro-droplet test has proven that the benzene ring of the AF can be oxidized under high temperature, and the oxygen-containing trait generated during the oxidation process is important for the grafting process of PAA. The IFSS increased by 40.7% after treatment with 5 wt% PAA. The authors declare no conflict of interest. This work was financially supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at