We focus on fly ashes of different sizes and their alkali-activation on ceramic products. Backscattered electron imaging-energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy was used to classify coal fly ash particles according to particle size and to study the pre-activation of particles with different sizes. Secondary electron imaging-energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy was used to study the role of coal fly ash particles of different sizes in ceramic bodies before and after alkali-activation. Ash particles can be divided into three classes based on size: clay-, quartz- and feldspar-like particles, which act as clay, quartz and feldspar, respectively, in ceramic bodies. The pre-activation process contributes to the plasticity of ash particles, the crystal skeleton role of clay-like particles and the fluxing agent role of feldspar-like particles, so preprocessing can improve the performance of ash-based ceramic tiles significantly. This research provides a new pretreatment method for coal fly ash in ceramic fields.Coal fly ash (CFA) is a type of solid waste that is produced from coal-fired power plants. CFA emissions have increased annually with developments in the power industry Urbanization has led to the recent rapid development of China’s building ceramic industry in recent years, and ceramic tile production has ranked first in recent years Much work has been conducted to use CFA as ceramic-production raw material. Lin et al. To date, most research has considered the macroscopic properties of CFA. In recent years, studies of microscopic particle properties of CFA have increased gradually. Dai et al. The hydrothermal alkaline reaction is used commonly to treat CFA in alumina extraction, cement manufacture and zeolite synthesis. For example, Ding et al. The objective of this work was to study the particle-size and pre-activation effects on the properties of CFA particles and the roles of CFA particles in ceramic tiles, respectively. The aim of doing so is to understand the mechanism of utilization of CFA as a type of ceramic raw material and to guide the efficient utilization of CFA. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)-backscattered electron imaging, which can identify different phases in a specimen CFA was sampled from a thermoelectric power plant in Inner Mongolia, China. Its X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns, as shown in Sodium hydroxide was of reagent grade (Xilong Chemical Co., Ltd.) and was used as received without further purification. CFA was sieved using several standard test sieves with different pore diameters on an electric mechanical sieve shaker (GS-86 type, Beijing Ever Light Medical Equipment Company Ltd., China) to obtain two size fractions of 50–150 CFA pre-activation was performed in a 1-L stirred high-temperature reactor with external heating and internal cooling. An automatic proportional–integral–derivative control system was used to control the heating rate, agitation and temperature in the reactor. CFAs of each particle size range and sodium hydroxide solution (100 The production of ceramic tiles from CFA consists of two stages: green-body production and sintering. Prior to making the green body, the dried original ashes or pre-activated ashes (∼50 Samples were subjected XRD (X’Pert Pro MPD, Panalytical Company; 40 For backscattered electron imaging, samples were impregnated with epoxy resin in a plastic ring tube; dried at room temperature for 24 Bulk density, water absorption and open porosity of the ceramic tiles were determined by the Archimedes method according to ASTM C373. The strength of green body, rupture modulus and breaking strength were tested by using an electronic universal tester (Model CMT5105). The thermal shock behavior of the materials was assessed by a rapid quenching method. The test fired samples were heated to 1200 Since the green compacts are expected to shrink when exposed heat treatment, diameters of specimens were measured before and after sintering to characterize the linear shrinkage rate dimensionally using the following equation. And the weight of specimens was expected to decrease when sintered. Weight of specimens were measured before and after sintering to characterize the ignition loss of green compacts determined by the following equation. All the testing parameters were averaged from three sets of data. To understand the effect of particle size on the chemical composition of the CFA particles, CFA 1# and CFA 2# were studied by ICP-OES (see Many glass particles exist in CFA, and particles with different size behave differently with chemical composition and morphology  In summary, in terms of the chemical composition and morphology, CFA particles can be divided into three types: (I) irregular particles with a high acidic oxide content and a particle-size of 50–150 To elucidate the reaction performance of CFA particles of different sizes during pre-activation, CFA 3# and CFA 4# were studied by ICP-OES, XRD, SEM and EDX. The chemical compositions of CFA 3# and CFA 4# are listed in The XRD patterns of CAF 3# and CAF 4# were compared (see SEM images can reflect the pre-activation process visually. SEM-backscattered electron images and EDX analysis can better explain the elemental difference between the surface and interior of these particles Desilication results for class-I and −II particles during the alkali-activation process; whereas hydroxysodalite and P zeolite are generated and coated on the surfaces of class-III particles during pre-activation. The ceramic tile prepared from original CFA is labeled CRE 1#. To understand the roles of class-I,-II and −III particles in ceramic tiles, CRE 1# was studied by XRD, SEM-secondary electron imaging and EDX. The XRD patterns of CRE 1# ( The SEM-secondary electron images and EDX analysis of CRE 1# are shown in Methods of comparison will now be used to illustrate the beneficial effects of pre-activation on ceramic tiles. The ceramic tile that is prepared by pre-activated CFA is labeled CRE 2#. From a macroperspective, the strength of green bodies and the performances of sintered samples were studied and compared. From a microperspective, CFA 1–4# were investigated via ATR −IR to study the plasticity source of green compacts; and CRE 2# and CRE 1# were investigated via XRD, SEM-secondary electron imaging, and EDX to study the performance mechanism of sintered samples. Various apparent performances of CRE 2# and CRE 1# are compared. Comparisons were carried out at a microscopic level afterwards. As for the green compacts, ATR-IR spectra were obtained from CFA 1–4#, as shown in As for the sintered samples, comparison of XRD patterns of CRE 1# and CRE 2#, as shown in In general, pre-activation contributes to the crystal skeleton role of class-I particles and the fluxing agent role of class-III particles. It may be more accurate to illustrate this point by SEM-secondary electron images. A comparison of SEM images is shown in More persuasively, these three classes of particles can be termed clay-, quartz- and feldspar-like particles after alkali-activation. For class-I particles, their chemical compositions and sintering performances are more like clay particles, as well as the emergence of good plasticity; for classes-III particles, they are also more like feldspar particles in the aspects of chemical compositions and sintering performances. The effects of particle size and pre-activation on CFA particles were investigated by ICP-OES, XRD, SEM-backscattered electron imaging and EDX. CFA particles can be divided into three types according to their chemical composition: (I) large particles with a high acidic oxide content, (II) large quartz particles and (III) small particles with a high alkaline oxide content. These three classes of particles are chemically similar to clay, quartz and feldspar, respectively. During pre-activation, they undergo different processes: for class-I and class-II particles, alkali-activation is a desilication reaction and class-III particles are coated by freshly generated hydroxysodalite and P zeolite phases. ATR-IR, XRD, SEM-secondary electron imaging and EDX were used to study the green compacts and the sintered ceramic samples. The three classes of particles act like clay, quartz and feldspar, respectively, in sintered ceramic bodies. Hydroxyls are grafted onto CFA particle surfaces during the alkali activation reaction, which makes hydrogen bonding interaction exist between CFA particles and greatly improves the green strength; pre-activation also improves the crystal skeleton role of class-I particles and the fluxing agent role of class-III particles, leading to a performance enhancement of ceramic tile products. These three classes of particles can be termed clay-, quartz- and feldspar-like particles, respectively. The analogy can well reflect the role they played in the ceramic production process. Moreover, this study provides a new pretreatment method for coal fly ash in ceramic fields. The alkali-activated fly ash, when used as ceramic raw material, can not merely heighten the ratio of fly ash in the ceramic tile but also improve the quality of the ceramic tile, showing good economical efficiency and application prospect. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the