Drainage of foam films with different radii (50–150μm), stabilized by hexathylene glycol dodecyl ether C12E6 and in a presence of 0.024M NaCl, were analyzed in the light of a recent dynamic fractal classification of [1]. The latter accounts for the effect of film surface corrugations developed during the film drainage. For simplicity, the film surface mobility is neglected since the presence of surfactants reduces dramatically the film surface velocity [2]. The magnitude of surface non-homogeneities, caused by the film drainage, is accounted via a dynamic fractal dimension parameter α being spanned between zero and two. Depending on the α-value the film drains by different kinetic laws. For example, if the thin film is planar α
                     =2 and it drains according to the Reynolds law [3]; if α
                     =1 the film contains an axisymmetric dimple causing faster drainage; if α
                     =1/2 the film exhibits number of asymmetric dimples [4] and the film drains even faster; finally if α
                     =0 the film contains spatially uncorrelated domains causing the fastest possible drainage. The present analysis of experimental data suggests that the parameter α is inversely proportional to the film radius R and it is independent of the type and concentration of surfactants. A semi-empirical model for α is proposed, thus completing the generic dynamic fractal classification.Thin liquid films (TLFs) take place in heterogeneous dispersions, which are widespread in the Nature. They are important entities in physics, biophysics, chemistry and engineering. Hence, a precise knowledge on their behavior has broad application in medicine, pharmacology, cosmetics, food industry, mineral processing, power and chemical engineering, fire fighting industry, household industry, etc TLFs between droplets or bubbles were intensively studied in the last decades There are two analytical models in the literature about the kinetics of drainage of non-planar films containing multiple domains. The semi-empirical model proposed by Sharma and Ruckenstein A brief review of the recent generic model proposed by Tsekov and Evstatieva One can see that the dimensionless wave number of the film surface domains is proportional to the film radius and the rate of film drainage. A relation between the driving pressure variations in the film and the wave number can be expressed by introducing a dynamic fractal dimension Such a power-law relationship between the spatial spectral density of the pressure fluctuations and Eq. The nature of the parameter Knowing the total disjoining pressure The kinetic data of thinning of foam films containing hexathyleneglycol monododecyl ether (C Eq. All the The best fit of the results from The scattering of the points suggests, however, a slight dependence of The present work evaluates a recent dynamic fractal classification model S. Karakashev thanks the EC/‘Marie Curie Actions’ for the financial support of the work through the DEFFED – Project No. 230626/2009. The authors are grateful to the Referee for the valuable comments and suggesting the form of Eq.