The photocatalytic performance of a thermally exfoliated carbon nitride material was investigated in aqueous solution and employing visible-light emitting diodes (LEDs) as radiation source (λ
                     max = 417 nm). The operating conditions were studied using phenol as model compound. The increase on the surface area of the catalyst with the exfoliation treatment promotes faster degradation and mineralization rates and an easier reduction of O2 into H2O2. The H2O2 production takes place only in the presence of both phenol and dissolved oxygen. The study was followed by assessing the photocatalytic degradation of ten organic compounds (individually or in a mixture) commonly found in agro-industrial wastewaters (phenol, catechol, resorcinol, hydroquinone, benzoic acid, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, protocatechuic acid, gallic acid, 4-methoxyphenol and tyrosol). These compounds were selected to study the position, order and nature of substitution on the aromatic ring as well as the possible influence of the pK
                     a. Generally, more reactive compounds yield higher amounts of H2O2 formed, whereas the pK
                     a does not affect photocatalysis owing to the amphoteric properties of the catalyst. Thus, the successful oxidation of the organic compounds achieved in situ generation of H2O2 with relatively high productivities using a metal-free carbon nitride material stable in consecutive runs.The development of efficient and inexpensive technologies for wastewater treatment is important in the field of environmental protection. Aromatic compounds are present in many industrial and agro-industrial wastewaters, such as those from olive mills containing a high amount of organic matter and phenolic molecules. The development of an efficient and environmentally-safe treatment process remains a demanding issue. Several reports have been published in the field of advanced oxidation processes (AOPs), particularly in visible light-driven photocatalysis, for the degradation of these pollutants [ Carbon nitride, composed by layered polymeric triazine or tri- Nevertheless, the pristine gCN material, i.e. the as synthesized product, has a small surface area, commonly resulting in more limited photocatalytic activity. Thus, several strategies have been pursued to design efficient gCN based photocatalysts, such as soft templating, exfoliation, elemental doping or heterojunction formation [ In the field of the photocatalytic degradation of aromatic molecules by using metal-free gCN materials, it has been noted that the respective mechanism is substantially different from that of the traditional P25 photocatalyst, hydrogen peroxide (H In gCN photocatalysis, H Some mechanisms (Eqs. The main objective of the present study is to better understand the mechanisms involved in the abatement and mineralization of different aromatic compounds, with the simultaneous production of H Dicyandiamide (C The synthesis of bulk carbon nitride (hereafter referred as gCN) was performed by thermal decomposition of dicyandiamide, as reported elsewhere [ The morphology of the catalysts was studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a FEI Quanta 400FEG ESEM/EDAX Genesis X4 M instrument. As previously reported [ A glass reactor with a maximum capacity of 80 mL was employed in the photocatalytic experiments. The photocatalytic reactions were performed under visible light irradiation using 10 W LEDs with a maximum emission line peak at 417 nm, located symmetrically from the outside at 4.0 cm from the reactor wall. The average irradiance (reaching the reactor wall) for each LED was ca. 400–500 W m Samples periodically withdrawn from the photocatalytic reactor were analysed by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using a Hitachi Elite LaChrom instrument (Hitachi, Ibaraki, Japan) equipped with a diode array detector (L-2450), a Purospher Star RP-18 column (250 mm × 4.6 mm, 5 μm particles), and a solvent delivery pump (L-2130) at a fixed flow rate of 1 mL min The colorimetric method was used for the determination of the amount of H The total organic carbon (TOC) content was determined using a Shimadzu TOC-5000 A apparatus. The samples were withdrawn from the reactor, centrifuged, filtered and mixed with an excess of sodium sulphite (± 2 mg) in order to decompose some remained H The morphology of gCN and gCN-T samples was analysed by SEM ( The gCN-T material was previously characterized [ A pH The band gap energy of gCN-T, determined from the corresponding Tauc plot (Fig. SI1), is 2.73 eV, which is higher than the gCN material (2.68 eV). The valence (VB) and conduction (CB) band potentials were calculated for gCN-T using the Eqs. (10) and (11) [ The photocatalytic reactions were firstly investigated using phenol as model aromatic compound. Results showed a negligible photochemical degradation of phenol under visible light ( The reaction rate ( In order to avoid an excess of catalysts and to ensure an efficient absorption of photons reachingthe target molecule, the influence of the catalyst load in the efficiency of the process was studied. The photocatalyst load was varied between 0.10 and 1.50 g L In terms of mineralization, remarkable TOC removals are achieved in 180 min for catalyst loads higher than 0.25 g L Finally, the performance of gCN and gCN-T materials was compared ( As described before, a maximum H To study the H To investigate the H In another experiment, performed in the presence of all components (H Finally, it is interesting to refer that a significantly higher Thus, these results indicate that the formation of H The influence of dissolved O The pH and TOC content were also determined in these experiments at the end of the photocatalytic reaction. Results showed that the TOC removal, Another important aspect to be taken into consideration is the general correlation existing between the four evaluated parameters ( Ten aromatic compounds were chosen to study the photocatalytic degradation mechanism using gCN-T. These compounds are commonly found in olive mill wastewaters [ Catechol (CT), resorcinol (RC) and hydroquinone (HQ) were selected for this study as they have two Benzoic acid (BA), 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (HBA), protocatechuic acid (PCA) and gallic acid (GA), with none, one, two and three Different As previously explained, some compounds tend to be more easily attacked than others, as demonstrated by the The rates of H Finally, the possible influence of the p Considering the efficiency of gCN-T for the degradation of the different aromatic compounds, the photocatalytic treatment of a mixture containing ten compounds was performed. During this study, two mixtures were prepared: Mix A where the concentration of each compound was set at 0.640 mmol L Regarding Mix A ( Simultaneously, H As explained in Section Since gallic acid (GA) generated one of the highest amounts of H The studied metal-free carbon nitride material is highly active in the photocatalytic degradation of the tested aromatic compounds under visible light. The simultaneous in situ generation of H This work was financially supported by project NORTE-01-0145-FEDER-031049 (InSpeCt) funded by Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: