In the present study, the extraction kinetics of cobalt with Cyanex 272 in a flat membrane microcontactor is studied. Pseudo-first order and non-first order models are proposed to describe the extraction kinetics with acidic Cyanex 272 and saponified Cyanex 272. The impact of the acetate buffer concentration, the Cyanex 272 concentration, the feed concentration, the channel depth and saponification of Cyanex 272 on the extraction kinetics was experimentally measured. From this, it was shown that for acidic Cyanex 272 pseudo-first order reaction kinetics could be assumed under at least following conditions: (1) when the feed was buffered; (2) the Cyanex 272 concentration was 4.4 times higher than the cobalt concentration; and (3) the cobalt concentration remained below 17mmol/L. In that case a linear model could be derived that could be solved analytically. At higher cobalt concentrations, saturation of the interface had to be taken into account, resulting in a non-linear model that had to be solved numerically. When Cyanex 272 was saponified, the extraction kinetics dropped significantly indicating that pseudo-first order kinetics does not apply any longer. Consequently, faster extraction kinetics in membrane contactors with acidic Cyanex 272 is obtained by buffering the feed phase compared to the saponification approach of Cyanex 272.reaction rate [mol/(m reaction rate constant [m reaction rate constant independent of the interfacial area [m concentration [mol/L] flux [mol/(m local mass transfer coefficient [m/s] global mass transfer coefficient [m/s] Sherwood number [/] diffusion coefficient [m flow rate [m diameter [m] radius [m] coil radius [m] channel depth [m] velocity [m/s] axial position inside the MMC [m] distance [m] time [s] length of the MMC [m] spatial step size [m] equilibrium constant [/] adsorption constant (ratio of the adsorption rate over desorption rate) [/] first central time moment [s] second central time moment [s dynamic Viscosity [Pa density [kg/m porosity of the membrane [\] tortuosity of the membrane [\] thickness of the membrane [m] cobalt ion saponified didecylphosphinic acid cobalt-Cyanex 272 complex acidic Cyanex 272 proton saponified Cyanex 272 raffinate extract capillary transition membrane effective bulk axial position inside the MMC interface equilibrium inlet linear driving force model adsorption free sites Cobalt and nickel are among the most important non-ferrous metals and consequently their separation is a key process in hydrometallurgy Two different operating modes exist for membrane contactors: batch mode The membrane used in a flow configuration can either be of a flat sheet With current microfabrication technology A special application of membrane contactors is supported liquid membrane extraction (SLM). In SLM the pores of the membrane are filled with organic extractant, such that at both sides of the membrane the aqueous feed and stripping phase can be used, requiring only one membrane unit for extraction and stripping The reactive extraction of cobalt with Cyanex 272 in a membrane contactor (e.g. hollow fiber) has already been studied by some authors In this work, the extraction of cobalt with Cyanex 272 is studied. The selectivity, influence of buffer, Cyanex 272 and feed concentration, channel depth and saponification of Cyanex 272 on the overall extraction kinetics are studied and a model is proposed to describe the observed results. Cyanex 272 (45 The MMC ( The feed was freshly prepared to avoid salting out by dissolving cobalt(II)sulfate heptahydrate and nickel(II)sulfate hexahydrate in water. In case an acetate buffer was used, acetic acid was added and the pH was adjusted to the desired value using 10 Every sample was visually controlled for phase homogeneity to ensure a breakthrough-free operation. Before starting a new extraction campaign, a start-up procedure was performed to avoid the presence of air bubbles. The start-up procedure consisted of flushing the MMC set-up with isopropanol for 5 Batch tests were performed to determine the equilibrium. 5 The bulk diffusion coefficient ( This allowed calculating D All experiments were performed on a Perkin Elmer 275 UHPLC system (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a binary high-pressure gradient pump, a cooled auto-sampler and a variable wavelength detector with a flow cell of 2.6 The extraction of cobalt with Cyanex 272 is an equilibrium reaction in which protons are exchanged for cobalt ions. Hence, control of the pH is crucial to shift the equilibrium and two different methods can be used for this purpose. In the first method, the pH of the aqueous feed phase is regulated (e.g. by buffering or continuously adding NaOH) and proceeds by following overall reaction (Eq. In the second method Cyanex 272 is partially saponified (Eq. Next to the two Cyanex 272 dimer complexes an additional sapponified Cyanex 272 molecule takes part in the reaction. Consequently, the model with acidic Cyanex 272 and the partially saponified Cyanex 272 will be inherently different. See the appendix (§A.2) for the derivation of the different models. Due to the difference in the equilibrium constant (Eqs. When the concentration Cyanex 272 can no longer be assumed constant no longer pseudo-first order kinetics can be assumed and the non-first order models apply. Looking at This slower extraction rate for saponified Cyanex 272 was not expected, since the extraction with saponified Cyanex 272 is reported to occur faster than with acidic Cyanex 272 To check the validity of all these proposed models they are compared against experimental results in the following section. This allows to identify which of the made assumptions were correct. As the pH strongly influences the amount extracted and the selectivity, it was kept constant during extraction by adding an acetate buffer. The acetate buffer was assumed not to take part in the complex formation process as this was also reported for similar extractants (D At pH 7 99.4% of the cobalt was extracted. Consequently, all the following MMC experiments were conducted at pH 7. At higher pH values more nickel was co-extracted and cobalt precipitated. By choosing a pH of 7, there was a certain margin for the pH to drop, as at pH 6 still 98.6% of the cobalt was extracted. In To derive the models it was assumed that the concentration of H In order to evaluate the acidic Cyanex 272 pseudo-first order and the non-first order model, the diffusion coefficients of CoSO From Because the concentration of acidic Cyanex 272 can indeed be assumed constant, the model remains linear and analytically solvable. With 63, 126 and 252 To derive the proposed models above, it was also assumed that the interfacial surface was not saturated. When the cobalt concentration in the feed was increased, the flux should also increase linearly ( By the sum of least squared errors, this adapted model was fitted to the experimental data points to determine the concentration of free sites, Doing so the function describing From Therefore, a decrease in channel depth has a positive impact on throughput, despite a decrease of the internal volume and residence time ( When Cyanex 272 was saponified, the extraction preceded much slower ( This difference in extraction kinetics was not caused by the lack of buffer with the saponified Cyanex 272 experiment, as when buffer was added the amount of cobalt that was extracted remained the same. This also justified the assumption of constant proton concentration that was made to derive the models for saponified Cyanex 272. The slower extraction with saponified Cyanex 272 in the MMC could more likely be explained by the fact that pseudo-first order kinetics could not be assumed for saponified Cyanex 272. Consequently, also diffusion of the Cyanex 272 should be taken into account as it indeed slowed down the extraction kinetics ( One could also try to explain these observed results by the fact that the viscosity of the organic phase increases with the amount of saponified Cyanex 272 To describe the extraction kinetics for cobalt with Cyanex 272 in a flat sheet membrane microcontactor, it was demonstrated that it was valid to assume pseudo-first order kinetics under at least the following studied conditions: (1) when the aqueous feed was buffered with an acetate buffer with a concentration in the range of When Cyanex 272 was saponified, a large decrease in extraction kinetics was observed in comparison with acidic Cyanex 272. This was not due to the reaction kinetics, since it was not observed in the experiments with acidic Cyanex 272. It was more likely that pseudo-first order kinetics could not be assumed with saponified Cyanex 272. With the non-first order model for saponified Cyanex 272, a difference in extraction kinetics was observed and a small decrease in diffusion coefficient in the organic solvent due to an increase of viscosity could explain the slower extraction kinetics. Consequently, to maximize extraction kinetics of cobalt with Cyanex 272 in membrane contactors, buffering the feed is a superior approach over saponification of Cyanex 272. W. De Malsche greatly acknowledges the Flemish Fund for Scientific Research (FWO) for support through a Post-Doctoral grant (81409). J. Hereijgers (111140) and T. Vandermeersch (110539) are supported through a specialization grant from the Instituut voor Wetenschap en Technologie (IWT) from the Flanders region. The authors have declared no conflict of interest. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 