To study the shear behavior of the ultrafine magnetite tailings subjected to freeze-thaw cycles, unconsolidated-undrained shear tests were conducted on ultrafine-grained tailings that were subjected to 1–11 cycles of freeze-thaw and defined as a type of clayey silt under confining pressures of 100, 200, and 300 kPa. Taking the number of freeze-thaw cycles, cooling temperature, initial dry density, and moisture content as the four main influencing factors of shear behavior of the tailings samples, the shear stress-strain curve, compression modulus, failure strength, cohesion, and internal friction angle were measured. The results show that the freeze-thaw cycle has an obvious weakening effect on the shear behavior of the tailings material, and the shear mechanical parameters are affected by a combination of confining pressure, freeze-thaw cycle condition, and initial physical-mechanical properties of the tailings samples. Through the microstructural analysis of the tailings samples subjected to freeze-thaw cycles, it shows that the freeze-thaw cycle mainly affects the porosity, bound water, and arrangement of the tailings particles. Subsequently, the macroscopic changes in shear strength indexes emerge, and then the stability of the tailings dam will decrease.Permafrost regions occupy 1/4 of the total land area on earth, and cold regions have an even wider distribution on a global scale. China has a surface area of 2.15 × 10 In cold regions, the freeze and thaw phenomenon in surface and subsurface soil mass persists, and this process is defined as a freeze-thaw cycle. When the temperature rises above zero and the duration is long enough, the rime frost at the surface of the soil mass will thaw into free water, and then the free water permeates through the pores to the interior of the soil mass. When the temperature reduces to a sub-zero level, the internal water of the soil mass freezes into ice and leads to the volume expansion phenomenon. If the expansion stress is large enough, new cracks and fractures will develop internally and then weaken the strength of the soil mass. As with the seasonal frozen soil, the tailings, which are utilized to stack tailings dams and sub dams, also suffer from the seasonal freeze-thaw cycle action Many underground mines are using tailings as the main aggregate of backfill Tailings are a kind of artificial soil produced by human mineral engineering activities. This soil has the most similar physical-chemical properties and mechanical characteristics compared with natural soil In this study, there are four groups of shear behavior tests, which are divided according to four different influencing factors on the shear behavior, namely the number of freeze-thaw cycles, cooling temperature, dry density, and moisture content. According to the in-situ engineering investigation data of the tailings dam in the mine, the natural density of the tailings filled in the dam increases with the burial depth increasing, changing from 1.49 to 1.76 g/cm The freeze-thaw cycle conditions are provided by the TDS-300 freeze-thaw chamber, which is shown in The triaxial shear test is a common method to measure the shear mechanical characteristics of the soil. In this study, the unconsolidated-undrained shear (UUS) test was conducted on the UMT samples, in which the loads are applied quickly, and the UMT samples were not allowed to consolidate during the test. The triaxial shear test machine is shown in Through carrying out the UUS test, the effects of moisture content and dry density on the UMT samples subjected to freeze-thaw cycles can be studied. The UMT samples were compressed at a constant rate (strain-controlled), of which the value is 1%/min, with three different confining pressures of 100, 200, and 300 kPa being applied. After the UUS tests, the shear behavior of the UMT samples subjected to freeze-thaw cycles was observed and the parameters of the shear mechanical properties were measured. The triaxial shear stress-strain curves and the failure strength were obtained directly, and the compression modulus were calculated by Eq. The two index factors of the shear strength of the UMT samples subjected to freeze-thaw cycles were calculated through the Mohr’s circle analysis method. After the calculations, the curves of cohesion and internal friction angles were presented in figures The UUS stress-strain curves of the UMT samples with the same moisture content (18%) and dry density (1.66 g/m It can be seen from  From It can be seen from The UUS stress-strain curves of the UMT samples frozen at different cooling temperatures and curves of relationship between cooling temperatures and shear index factors are not shown in this paper, due to the fact that changing the cooling temperature does not affect the type of the UUS strain curves of the UMT samples subjected to freeze-thaw cycles, and the failure strength, compression modulus, cohesion, and internal friction angle do not show evident changes in values and trend. Whether under low (100 kPa) or high (200, 300 kPa) confining pressure, the types of the UUS stress-strain curves of the UMT samples frozen at different cooling temperatures (−10, −15, −20 °C) subjected to 7 numbers of freeze-thaw cycle are all strain hardening. And with the decrease in cooling temperature, the failure strength of the corresponding UMT samples under 100, 200, and 300 kPa keeps stable at values of 224.53, 409.12, and 593.41 kPa, respectively, compared with the corresponding UMT samples curing under ordinary conditions. Of the two index factors of shear behavior, cohesion and internal friction of the corresponding UMT samples frozen at different cooling temperatures, neither have evident changes when cooling temperature decreases, of which the values are 9.89 kPa and 29.09°, respectively, and these values are obviously lower than those of the corresponding UMT samples curing under ordinary conditions. The UUS stress-strain curves of the UMT samples with the same dry density (1.66 g/cm From  It can be seen from It can be found from    As is illustrated in  From Previous study shows that the freeze-thaw cycle process is a process through which the soil in an unstable state develops into a dynamic stable state, and repeated freeze-thaw cycles will change the soil’s microstructure towards a new dynamic stable balanced state  Freeze-thaw cycle number has an evident weakening effect on shear behavior of the UMT samples subjected to freeze-thaw cycles. Under low confining pressure, with the numbers of freeze-thaw cycle increasing, the type of UUS shear stress-strain curve of the UMT samples transforms from weak strain softening to strain hardening, while under high confining pressure, the type of UUS shear stress-strain curve of the UMT samples is strain hardening and does not change. Under the same confining pressure, with the numbers of freeze-thaw cycle increasing, the failure strength of the UMT samples evidently decreases, and the first 5 numbers of freeze-thaw cycle have the most evident weakening effect on the failure strength of the UMT samples. However, after the 7th time of freeze-thaw cycle, the failure strength of the UMT samples remains stable. Under the same confining pressure, with the numbers of freeze-thaw cycle increasing, the compression modulus of the UMT samples decreases gently and when confining pressure gets higher, the decrement in compression modulus gets lower. The cohesion and internal friction angle of the UMT samples both decrease with the numbers of freeze-thaw cycle increasing, and the first 5 numbers of freeze-thaw cycle have the most evident weakening effect on these two index factors. After the 7th time of freeze-thaw cycle, both of them remain stable. Cooling temperature has a very slight influence on shear behavior of the UMT samples subjected to freeze-thaw cycles. Changing the cooling temperature does not change the type of UUS shear stress-strain curve of the UMT samples, which is always strain hardening whether under low or high confining pressure. Under the same confining pressure, with cooling temperature getting lower, the failure strength and compression modulus of the UMT samples show very slight decreases. Meanwhile, the cohesion and internal friction angle of the UMT samples show no evident changes. Moisture content has an evident weakening effect on shear behavior of the UMT samples subjected to freeze-thaw cycles. However, changing the moisture content does not influence the type of UUS shear stress-strain curve of the UMT samples, which is always strain hardening whether under low or high confining pressure. Under the same confining pressure, with the moisture content increasing, the failure strength and compression modulus of the UMT samples evidently decrease, and when confining pressure gets higher, the decrement in compression modulus gets lower. The cohesion and internal friction angle of the UMT samples both evidently decrease with the moisture content increasing. Dry density has an evident strengthening effect on shear behavior of the UMT samples subjected to freeze-thaw cycles. Under low confining pressure, with the dry density increasing, the type of UUS stress-strain curve of the UMT samples transforms from weak strain softening to strain hardening, while under high confining pressure, the type of UUS stress-strain curve of the UMT samples is strain hardening and does not change. Under the same confining pressure, with the dry density increasing, the failure strength and the compression modulus of the UMT samples evidently increases. Dry density has a significant consolidation effect on the UMT samples subjected to freeze-thaw cycles, and when confining pressure gets higher, the increment rate in compression modulus gets lower. The cohesion and internal friction angle of the UMT samples both evidently increase with the dry density increasing.