Fractures to the proximal ulna account for only 1% of all fractures. However, appreciation of the pathoanatomy of the different fracture patterns is essential for the treating surgeon. This review discusses the classification, injury patterns, treatment and outcome of fractures to the olecranon, coronoid process and adult Monteggia fracture dislocations.The treatment of proximal ulna fractures can pose a challenge, even to the most experienced surgeon. Injuries range from simple transverse fractures of the olecranon to complex fracture dislocations of the entire elbow complex. Fractures are commonly associated with injuries to the surrounding soft tissue envelope and to the proximal radius. This review focuses on fractures involving the olecranon, the coronoid process of the ulna and combined fracture dislocations. Olecranon fractures are common, representing 20% of all proximal forearm fractures. Several classification systems have been described and, as is often the case, none of these are able to completely satisfy the remit of any classification system, which is to aid communication, determine treatment and predict outcome. The Mayo group classified fractures based on displacement, comminution and elbow joint stability. The goal of treatment of olecranon fractures is to restore function by anatomical reconstruction of the articular surface combined with early rehabilitation. This needs to take account of the patient's medical condition and functional demands, as non-operative treatment, even for displaced fractures, can be utilized when necessary.    A 1 mm or 1.2 mm wire is passed through a drill hole placed distally in the ulna. The hole should be positioned at the same distance distal to the fracture as the distance between the olecranon and the fracture. The wire is passed in a figure of eight pattern and tunnelled deep to the triceps tendon. This can be facilitated by using a peripheral venous catheter or a wire passer. Two tension loops should be placed on the wire as this provides greater construct rigidity compared with one loop,     Outcomes of plating techniques are most often reported in patients with comminuted fractures. Despite the more severe injury patterns, outcomes remain satisfactory with a good or excellent outcome in 92% and low metalwork removal rates (20%). There has only been one study that has randomized patients to tension band wiring versus plate fixation for displaced olecranon fractures. Fracture of the coronoid process, although rare, affects elbow stability. It is important to recognize the fracture and appreciate elbow injuries which commonly produce distinct coronoid fracture patterns. This will enable timely management of these difficult injuries. The goal of coronoid fracture treatment is to restore both the bony and soft tissue constraints that it contributes to elbow stability, as well as treating other associated injuries. Fractures of the coronoid process account for 14% of all proximal ulna fractures. Identifying the morphology of the coronoid fracture is often helpful in planning treatment. Conversely, recognizing the coronoid fracture patterns associated with certain elbow injuries can be useful in planning operative approaches and strategies. Two main classifications are used. The Regan–Morrey system divides fractures into three groups: Type 1 – avulsion from the tip; Type 2 – single or comminuted fragment involving 50% of the process or less; and Type 3 – a single or comminuted fragment involving more than 50% of the process. This is suffixed with either an A or a B respectively with regard to absence or presence of an associated elbow dislocation. O'Driscoll proposed a more clinically relevant system based on the anatomical location of the fracture (see The main distinction between these two systems is recognition of the involvement of the anteromedial facet. This not only causes joint incongruency, but also destabilizes the insertion of the medial collateral ligament and, in more severe types (Type 3), which extend over to the sublime tubercle, the insertion of the lateral collateral ligament can also be affected. It is this classification system that can enable prediction of fracture morphology based on associated injuries, as each type often occurs with a particular injury. Tip fractures occur with terrible triad injuries. Varus posteromedial injuries are associated with Type 2 fractures and olecranon fracture dislocations are associated with basal (Type 3) fractures. Operative treatment and the surgical approach used will often depend on the fracture type and the associated injuries.  The surgical approach depends on the associated injuries to be treated. In the event of an associated radial head fracture, the coronoid can be approached through the radial head fracture laterally. In this approach it is advisable to insert the sutures around the coronoid and through the ulna but not secure them until the radial head replacement has been trialled and inserted. This prevents pull out of the sutures whilst attempting to replace the radial head. In isolated Type 1 fractures, a medial approach is preferred. The coronoid is approached through the bed of the ulnar nerve. By splitting the flexor carpi ulnaris and elevating the anterior portion of the muscle, the coronoid is exposed without damaging the anterior band of the medial ulna collateral ligament.   Originally described by Monteggia in 1814, though the term ‘Monteggia fracture dislocation’ was coined in Bado's paper of 1967. These complex injuries are defined as a fracture of the ulna with a dislocation of the radio-humero-ulnar joint. Monteggia fracture dislocations are rare, accounting for 1–2% of all forearm fractures. Bado classified these lesions based on the mechanism of injury, treatment and outcome (see Plain radiographs of the elbow, forearm and wrist can reduce the risk of mistakenly diagnosing an isolated ulna fracture. CT scans can further delineate the fracture pattern and the anatomy of the radiocapitellar joint, in particular using 3D reconstructions. Plain radiographs of the normal contralateral limb may help in restoring ulna and radial length in comminuted Type IV fractures. The non-operative management of adult Monteggia fractures is not indicated. The principles of all surgical strategies are to reconstruct the ulna anatomically, after which the radial head will reduce spontaneously. Associated fractures of the radial head or coronoid process are fixed or replaced as necessary.  Many reports concerning Monteggia fracture dislocations include mixed patient groups (adults and children) and therefore need to be interpreted carefully. Although reports up until the latter part of the last century described poor outcomes, Complications are common due often to the severity of the injury. Radial nerve palsy ranges between 3 and 30% in two studies, Proximal ulna fractures are a severe group of injuries about the elbow affecting the olecranon and the coronoid process as well as adult Monteggia fracture dislocations. Frequently these injuries co-exist and may well involve other injuries e.g. radial head fracture. Failure to recognize these uncommon fractures can result in considerable loss of function with associated disability. Attention to the mechanism of injury and optimal pre-operative imaging can enable the surgeon to anticipate the common anatomical patterns of these fractures. The principles of treatment of these intraarticular fractures remain with reconstruction of the joint, restoring elbow stability and allowing early mobilization. The elbow never takes kindly to prolonged periods of immobilization.