The extraction of tin through smelting of cassiterite (SnO2) has generated considerable amounts of slag in the main production areas of South-East Asia, Africa, and South America. Tantalum and niobium naturally occur in cassiterite deposits and are concentrated in the slag during the smelting process. Tin slags have often been disposed as industrial waste despite contents of tantalum and niobium ranging from 2 to 25%. Conventional hydrometallurgical processes for the concentration of tantalum and niobium oxides utilizing high concentration of strong acids such as HF or H2SO4 are environmentally and economically challenging. This paper describes an original and greener approach for the selective dissolution of the slag amorphous matrix, and the concentration of tantalum and niobium oxides in a solid residue. Starting from a slag containing about 15% (Ta,Nb)2O5, sequential alkaline and acid leaching stages resulted in the production of a 63% (Ta + Nb) oxides concentrate, which is comparable to commercial grade of mineral concentrates.Tantalum and niobium are two refractory metals in group 5 of the periodic table. These metals have fairly similar chemical properties and frequently occur in the same minerals. However, their respective abundance in the earth crust is 2 ppm for tantalum and 20 ppm for niobium ( Brazil is by far the leading supplier of niobium, accounting for about 90% of the world production ( Tantalum and niobium compounds have a growing importance in aerospace, military, and clean energy developments, placing these two metals in the category of strategic materials. The European Union consumption of these metals almost totally relies on importation, and both metals are part of the so-called EU 27 critical materials group as defined in 2017. As shown in One may mention that the different minerals of tantalum and niobium occur in their own distinct deposits but they are also frequently present as inclusions in cassiterite (SnO This paper summarizes the results of a greener approach for the selective dissolution of the slag amorphous matrix resulting in a (Ta,Nb) The average composition (mass %) of tin slags from six different locations was determined by electron microprobe (EMP) analysis and the results are displayed in The composition and microstructure of this slag strongly suggest that the hydrometallurgical process used to treat this slag will require a selective dissolution of the matrix phase to concentrate the tantalum and niobium oxides mostly contained in the dendritic phase ( The initial lots of slag consisted of homogeneous batches of 80–100 kg issued from tin slag factories. After successive crushing, grinding, and screening to a size ≤80 µm, a subset of 10 kg of slag was quartered using a riffle quartering tool, and subdivided in adequate samples of 100 g each, used for the leaching experiments. The tin slags leaching experiments were carried out in the jacketed glass reactor illustrated in The typical experimental procedure for the leaching of the tin slags is shown in the flow chart During acid leaching, the effect of various parameters (HCl and HF concentrations, initial solid concentrations, leaching time and temperature,… etc.) on dissolution extent of the sample was investigated. More detailed information on the variation of the parameter range is given in the next section.  In order to increase the tantalum and niobium oxides concentration, different slags were subjected to sequential acid and basic leaching stages. The higher mass loss of the basic leaching during the sequential acid-basic (AB) can be attributed to the dissolution of the chloride/fluoride compounds produced during the acid leach and soluble in alkaline condition. On the other hand, the higher mass loss of the acid leaching during the sequential basic-acid (BA) can be attributed to the production of insoluble hydroxide species during the basic leach, followed by the formation of soluble chlorides and fluorides during the acid leaching step ( Standard conditions of tin slags leaching experiments were as follows: initial solid concentration: 50 g/L; HCl concentration: 6 mol/L; HF concentration: 0.14 mol/L; temperature: 70 °C; time: 18 h. The effect of the HF concentration and the leaching time on the percent mass loss of tin slags is shown in   The mass balance and process flow of tin slag leaching are shown in  An original approach was tested for the concentration of tantalum and niobium oxides contained in tin slags through sequential acid and alkaline leaching steps. The main results obtained within this study can be summarized as follows: Sequential acid and alkaline leaching steps produced higher mass losses than single acid or basic steps. The mass losses observed during the basic or acid leaches are almost instantaneous and are attributed to a catalytic mechanism as attested by a calculated 8 kJ/mol activation energy. The sequential acid and alkaline leaching process selectively concentrated refractory metals such as tantalum and niobium in a solid residue while leaching lower value elements such as silicon, calcium, iron and aluminum into a liquid filtrate. The selection of the most favorable sequence of Acid-Basic-Acid leaching led to the production of a commercial grade concentrate containing about 63% weight (Ta + Nb) A significant amount of data used in this paper was part of the PhD Thesis of Dr. Eric Allain. Another part of this development work has been supported by the