This chapter discusses the key issues associated with the overall management of waste resulting from the processing of red (beef, sheep) and white (chicken, pig) meat. It also covers various aspects of best practice in the management of such waste, including its minimization, its disposal in an environmentally responsible manner, and approaches to value addition to the waste – including the manufacture of key co-products for application in the food, biotechnology, medical, and related industries. There are drivers and modern approaches for minimization of waste material and maximization of efficiencies in the processing of red and white meat. Enhancements in processing efficiency and minimization of waste can lead to a range of positive benefits for the meat processor, including: a reduction in manufacturing costs and resultant increase in profitability; cost savings on raw materials and energy; reduced environmental pollution; reduced waste disposal and treatment costs; improved worker's health and safety; diminished need for end-of-pipe solutions; and an enhanced image for the company and industry. While meat cuts represent the most significant primary product from an abattoir, by- and co-products such as hides, bone, blood, fat, and offal are also generated via the animal slaughtering process. The chapter also highlights the co-product component recovery, derived from both blood and non-blood sources, in meat waste processing.Dry cleaning prior to final wash/rinse with water. High-pressure/low-volume systems. Automatically operated equipment and shut-off valves. Dry dumping techniques. Reuse of ‘grey’ and cooling water for some non-critical cleaning operations (e.g. washing livestock). Segregate organic material from the slaughtering operation. Collect solid material (by-/co-products) for waste value addition. Install screens to eliminate solid material from drains. Limit fat in water effluent through use of low-pressure washing of carcass. Segregate high-BOD streams from others and manage them separately. Implement ‘switch-off’ programmes and install power-down/off equipment where appropriate. Enhance insulation on heating/cooling systems. Recover waste heat from various unit processing steps. Install more-energy-efficient equipment. Implement a preventative maintenance programme to ensure maximum efficiency of equipment at all times. Eliminate leak points for hot water and steam. Global meat production is approaching 2 × 10 This chapter addresses key issues associated with the overall management of waste resulting from the processing of red (beef, sheep) and white (chicken, pig) meat. The chapter covers various aspects of best practice in the management of such waste, including its minimization, its ‘disposal’ in an environmentally responsible manner and, perhaps of most importance, approaches to value addition to the waste – including the manufacture of key co-products for application in the food, biotechnology, medical and related industries. Most attention has been paid to this area of co-product recovery and application. This section highlights several key co-products, derived from blood and non-blood sources, that have been successfully isolated, characterized and commercialized. Key references have also been highlighted, together with sources for further information, notably via the internet. This section outlines the drivers and modern approaches to minimization of waste material and maximization of efficiencies in the processing of red and white meat. Process optimization and good housekeeping practice have been highlighted, and approaches to overall minimization of end waste material and effluent have also been addressed. Enhancements in processing efficiency and minimization of waste can lead to a range of positive benefits for the meat processor, including: a reduction in manufacturing costs and resultant increase in profitability; cost savings on raw materials and energy; reduced environmental pollution; reduced waste disposal and treatment costs; improved worker health and safety; diminished need for ‘end-of-pipe’ solutions; and an enhanced image for the company and industry. While meat cuts represent the most significant primary product from an abattoir, by- and co-products such as hides, bone, blood, fat and offal are also generated via the animal slaughtering process. The profitability of an abattoir can often depend on the extent to which these materials are minimized and/or utilized in a value-added manner. For example, edible co-products are further processed into saleable products, and inedible byproducts are converted into animal feeds or feed supplements, often through the rendering process. Utilization of, and value addition to, meat processing wastes are covered in later sections of this chapter. As with most food processing operations, the key waste and efficiency issues associated with abattoir operations include: (1) the high consumption of clean potable water; (2) the generation of high-strength/biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) effluent streams and by-/co-products; and (3) the consumption of energy. For some locations, odour and noise may also be problematic. Techniques for minimizing waste and maximizing operational efficiency include improved housekeeping practices by staff, process optimization, application of new technology and/or new product design. Indeed, through effective application of these techniques aimed at reducing inefficient use of resources and avoiding unnecessary generation of waste, the processor can benefit from reduced operating costs, reduced waste treatment/disposal costs and reduced liability. In the abattoir setting, large quantities of water are used for the watering and washing of livestock, washing of transport infrastructure (e.g. trucks), washing of carcasses and by-/co-products, and cleaning and sterilizing equipment and processing areas. Strategies for reducing water consumption can involve technical solutions or equipment upgrades. However, revision of operator practice and cleaning procedures can lead to some of the most Most water consumed at abattoirs ultimately becomes effluent. Abattoir effluent contains high levels of organic matter due to the presence of manure, blood, fat and other animal remains. The effluent can also contain high levels of sodium, phosphates and nitrates. The most significant contributors to the organic load include blood and fat-containing material, and blood represents the major contributor to the nitrogen content of the effluent stream. High contents of sodium and phosphorus can also be present in effluent, and these usually originate from manure and stomach contents. At those plants where rendering of animal remains occurs, the effluent typically represents the single most significant source of pollutant load from the abattoir. Usual strategies for reducing the pollutant load of abattoir effluent focus on excluding blood, fat, manure and animal remains from the In an abattoir, thermal energy is used to heat water for cleaning, scalding for hair removal, rendering, blood coagulation and blood drying. Approximately 80% of total energy consumed by abattoirs is provided by thermal energy from the combustion of fuels in on-site boilers, and the remaining 20% is usually provided by electricity – used for operating equipment in the slaughter and boning areas, for by-/co-product processing, for refrigeration and for compressed air. Typical ranges for energy consumption are 1200–4800 MJ/tonne of hot standard carcass weight. The consumption of energy is an area where considerable savings can be made almost immediately with no capital investment, through simple housekeeping approaches. Additional savings can be made through the use of more-energy-efficient equipment and heat recovery systems, although these require capital investment. Approaches to maximization of energy savings are summarized in In summary, waste can be minimized and processing efficiency maximized in a modern abattoir and meat processing operation through a number of worker and process/product improvements. These include (1) housekeeping improvements to work practices and proper equipment maintenance (typically low cost); (2) optimizing existing processes/equipment to reduce resource consumption (typically low/medium cost); (3) adapting and adopting new technologies to reduce resource consumption and minimize waste via enhanced operating efficiencies (typically capital intensive but often with short payback time); and (4) changing product design to reduce waste disposal/treatment, reduce energy consumption and enhance efficiency of production (typically long-term, but often with large paybacks). This section addresses the key modern issues in ‘disposal’ of meat processing waste, including environmental considerations and the issue of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) (e.g. bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE)), with regard to destruction of infectivity. A range of varied wastes are generated as a result of meat processing. All of these wastes require disposal in one form or another, as dictated by local All of these requirements (legislative, environmental, health and safety, market, etc.) are captured, cross-referenced and addressed in a single waste management plan for the operation. While the specifics for each jurisdiction may vary, some typical ‘key steps’ in developing a waste management plan ( Background: the relevant legislation that governs plant operation. Production processes: the activities that generate waste including the types and amounts of waste generated and procedures for dealing with accidents, spills and other incidents that affect waste management. Waste assessment: how the waste is disposed and current costings. Procedures for identifying and implementing opportunities to minimize the amount of waste generated. Evaluation and feasibility: technical and economic feasibility analyses for each waste minimization opportunity including the best available technology (BAT) and commonly available technology (CAT). Selected projects: list of waste minimization projects with expected costs and savings. Implementation: a timetable and funds for implementation. Review: indicators or other criteria on which the performance of waste management practices will be assessed, and how often performance is assessed. Details of staff training. The four broad categories of waste generated through meat processing are waste odours, wastewater, organic solid waste and specified risk material (SRM). Unless managed well, each of these categories has the potential to significantly undermine the operational viability of a meat processing plant. The major sources of odour from slaughterhouses emanate from manure, paunch content and rendering. Manure and paunch content odours can be effectively managed through routine collection and composting of these materials. The biodegradable nature of rendering raw materials has a direct impact on the generation of odours. Storing these raw materials for prolonged periods at ambient temperature, prior to their separation and stabilization via the rendering process, both increases the production of noxious odours and diminishes the value of the resultant protein meals and fat fraction. Rapid processing minimizes noxious odours and maximizes the quality of rendered products. In order to minimize odour emissions, modern plants Burning rendering gases in an existing boiler presents a simple and effective method for significantly reducing noxious odour emissions. Steam collected from rendering cookers, driers and evaporators is passed through a cyclone to separate solids, and a heat exchanger to dewater the moist air. The condensate is discharged to wastewater treatment and the remaining odour laden air is burned. This method is particularly applicable to the low-volume, high-concentration odours generally associated with rendering and has been described in the BREF (best available techniques (BAT) reference) document from the European Commission ( The consumption and discharge of water by food industries, in particular the meat processing industry, could be considerably minimized by means of water re-use ( Previously, meat processors have combined wastewater from all operations and directed them to a single treatment system. More recently, meat processors have seen the benefits of segregating various process water streams so that direct re-use is possible or water treatment can be optimized. An example of direct re-use is slaughter-floor knife and equipment sterilizer water being collected for stock and stockyard washing. Most sterilizer water is only lightly contaminated, and due to the high temperatures, is free from pathogenic bacteria. Other examples of optimized water treatment are re-use of chiller shower water from meat processing ( A significant number of practical suggestions and recommendations on how water utilization can be minimized and waste discharge reduced can be found in The treatment of wastewater involves the removal of foreign suspended and/or dissolved solids, organic compounds and inorganic salts. A hierarchy Constructed wetlands have found favour in the Czech Republic where over 100 operations have been established ( A recent publication on coagulation/flocculation of slaughterhouse wastewater reported improved performance through the use of anionic polyacrylamide as a coagulant aid, in combination with a range of commercially available coagulants ( The major options for the stabilization and re-use or disposal of organic solid waste from meat processing and rendering operations are composting (aerobic digestion) and vermicomposting, anaerobic digestion, disposal to landfill and incineration ( Incineration has recently been adopted by the meat industry as a viable option as it is considered among the most effective methods for destroying potentially infectious agents ( Composting is an aerobic biological process whereby organic materials are decomposed to form a product that has value as a soil conditioner or fertilizer. Composting is generally conducted in windrows (elongated mounds) or reactors, in order to achieve near-optimal conditions. Composting requires particular conditions with respect to temperature, moisture, aeration, pH and carbon/nitrogen (C/N) ratio to optimize biological activity at the various stages of the process (  Vermicomposting refers to the use of earthworms to augment or replace conventional composting. This process involves the physical breakdown (comminution) of organic matter by the worms and the action of intestinal microorganisms and the microorganisms that inhabit vermiculture substrates ( Some attention has been focused on the importance of microscopic fungi to the process of vermicomposting cattle manure ( Anaerobic digestion is a biological process where organic material is broken down under anaerobic conditions to yield methane, stabilized sludge and partially treated wastewater. Many variations of anaerobic digestion have been, and continue to be, evaluated in order to improve digester performance and maximize the systems' ability to cope with variation in abattoir solid waste output. Some advantages of this system are the production of methane as a by-product, and the ability to handle the high organic loads associated with abattoir waste. The process-limiting effects of ammonia have again been evaluated and these effects have been overcome in trials using a two-stage anaerobic digester ( The appearance of mad cow disease or bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) during the 1980s has had an enormous and far-reaching effect on the processing of meat industry co-product materials. The BSE epidemic, first recognized in the United Kingdom (UK), has now been detected in the livestock of many countries ( The subsequent appearance of variant Creutzfeldt–Jacob disease (vCJD) in humans is due to the same agent that caused BSE in cattle ( Initially, large numbers of cattle were culled in an attempt to limit the spread of BSE. As theories on the transmission of the infection were supported by scientific evidence, two primary lines of defence were suggested to curtail the bovine and human diseases. Firstly, the use of ruminant tissues in ruminant feeds must be prohibited to minimize further BSE infection. Secondly, all tissues that are likely to contain the infective agent (designated SRMs) must be excluded from any animal or human food chain. Uptake of these defensive measures into industry regulation was not rapid or uniform from one country to another. Over time, these two lines of defence have been extended. At times, the changes were driven by new scientific evidence, and at times they were driven by political influences. The original UK ban on feeding ruminant protein to ruminants has extended to a European Union ban on the use of all animal protein in livestock rations. The original UK ban on specified bovine offals (later SRMs) was altered and adopted by the European Union. This ban removes the tonsils, intestines (from duodenum to rectum) and mesentary from cattle of all ages. In cattle aged over 12 months old, the skull (including brains and eyes), spinal chord and vertebral column are also removed from any food chain ( These changes have had an enormous impact on rendering, which is an integral and vital part of the meat processing industry. Rendering operations have been forced by regulation to commission new plants and upgrade existing plants in order to cope with the fallout from the BSE epidemic, while at the same time, their traditional markets have disappeared. The future direction of BSE policy and the possible relaxation of the TSE Regulation in the European Union have been canvassed by the This section focuses on co-product component recovery in meat waste processing. Important co-products, derived from both blood and non-blood sources, have been highlighted, including protein hydrolysates, bone meal, blood plasma, blood cells, collagen and key biochemicals, noting successful approaches to their recovery, stabilization, characterization and application in the animal feed, biotechnology, nutraceutical/functional food, cosmetics, and medical/veterinary sectors. The principal components of meat are water, protein and fat, with a significant level of vitamins and minerals with a high bioavailability ( Blood proteins make up the largest part of the meat proteins market by volume. Blood products typically contain ~70% protein, and blood components such as plasma, haemoglobin, immunoglobin and globin are used in a number of food applications. Plasma is often used in sausages to help bind and emulsify meat, haemoglobin is used in pet food and to colour black pudding, immunoglobin can be used as an emulsifier in meat products, while globin is used in mincemeat and hamburgers, where it improves textural properties and to some extent helps bind ingredients together. Blood A meat product formulated with mechanically deboned poultry meat and bovine blood has been used as an iron supplement to evaluate its effect on the haematological parameters of school children with ferropenic anaemia. Children with subnormal haematological parameters with a diagnosis of ferropenic anaemia received the meat product over 30 days. The results indicated that the consumption of the meat product increased the haematological parameters in children with ferropenic anaemia, with the authors suggesting that the product could be used in social programmes for school children with this deficiency in order to prevent and recover from ferropenic states ( Cooked hams have been formulated with bovine plasma and/or red cells with the objective of evaluating the effect on yield, moisture, protein and palatability. The results indicated that products with plasma at 3.6% and 5.4% protein gave a higher yield. Addition of plasma, red cells or a mix of both at 1.8% protein did not affect yield. Final moisture and protein content were unaffected, but sensory evaluation indicated that only products with added red cells were unacceptable. The study concluded that plasma proteins are more suitable than red cell proteins for addition to these products and that it is necessary to add more than 1.8% of plasma proteins to increase yield ( The blood plasma of calves and cattle has been reported to be a good nutritional supplement to meat products due to the essential amino acids it contains ( Dehydrated blood plasma is also used as a protein ingredient for its gelation properties, especially in meat derivative products. Generally, blood is concentrated by either ultrafiltration or evaporation under reduced pressure. The resulting pH and ash concentration (mineral salts and sodium citrate) allow modification of the gelation properties of the products ( Bovine blood has been fractionated into blood plasma protein concentrate, red blood cell concentrate, globin isolate and a carboxymethylcellulose–heme-iron (CMC–heme) complex. The amino acid content in plasma protein concentrate has been shown to be well balanced and produced net protein utilization and a net protein ratio equivalent to 95% that of casein. Globin isolate (similar to 91% protein) is deficient in Globin is an edible protein that is obtained in large quantity from animal blood and can be used as an ingredient in a variety of meat products. However, globin has been reported to have a low solubility at neutral pH and little advantage compared with other proteins used in the food industry. However, globin's functional properties can be improved via hydrolysis with citric acid. These aggregates of globin hydrolysates were composed of the beta-chain, originating from the native globin and beta-1, originating from the beta-chain by cleavage between 99 (Asp) and 100 (Pro) of the beta-chain ( For the preparation of globin protein isolates, decolourization is one of the important steps. These protein isolates have excellent functional properties and nutritive value, which make them suitable for use in meat and bakery products. Furthermore, they can replace the use of chicken egg to some extent in food products without affecting acceptability ( Response surface methodology has been used to investigate the effects and interactions of blood plasma (0–2%), microbial transglutaminase (0–0.6%) and kappa-carrageenan (0–0.8%) on water binding, textural and colour characteristics of pork gels. An increased addition of both kappa-carrageenan and plasma protein favourably affected thermal stability of pork batters, but the effects were attenuated by increased blood plasma and kappa-carrageenan addition, respectively. The combination of kappa-carrageenan with blood plasma was unable to improve springiness or cohesiveness and led to the formation of less cohesive and more brittle gels. Microbial transglutaminase had little effect on colour and water binding properties although it was found that its addition improved cohesiveness and elastic properties of meat gels processed with blood plasma. Addition of blood plasma produced an increase in lightness and a decrease in redness of pork gels, while the presence of kappa-carrageenan resulted in lower chromametric values ( Animal blood is a by-product from meat processing and contains a variety of proteins that can be reclaimed. The efficiency of protein precipitation from blood by the use of hydroxyethyl cellulose (HEC) has been reported to be similar to that precipitated by the use of CMC with both methods being superior to precipitatation by trichloroacetic acid. The plasma protein–HEC complex was reported to contain a large amount of essential amino acids and electrophoretic separation of plasma protein resulted in complex albumin forming the major fraction (  When meat animals are processed, considerable quantities of trim are produced which is sorted according to the lean meat content and sold to sausage makers or ground for hamburger meat. Surplus fatty trimmings are rendered to recover the fat from beef and lard from pork as tallow ( Body condition score (BCS) of beef cows has been shown to have a significant effect on by-product yield and value. By-product weights – including blood, bone meal and a variety of organs – have been obtained during the slaughter process and by-product yields have been calculated as a percentage of the animal's live weight taken 24 h before slaughter. Total by-product value was quadratically related to BCS. The results from this study indicated that the BCS of cows at the time of slaughter had a profound influence on by-product yields and values of by-products that are credited back against the cost of production to the beef cattle producer ( Refined meat protein isolates are produced from non-blood sources such as pig rind, which is a source of collagen. Ultrasonic fragmentation of the myofibrils and subsequent solubilization in buffer have been used to isolate intramuscular collagen in high yield and purity, and maintains intact fibres ( Collagen is a natural constituent of bovine skin and can be converted by suitable procedures to a very thin collagen film which has food-grade Computer-assisted simulation has been used to study the effect of collagen content on the biological value of meat proteins. It has been shown that an increase in the collagen content from 2.5% to 15–20% of the total amount of proteins contained in minced meat tangibly enhanced protein utilization for tissue synthesis. The above collagen content in meat products heightens their nutritional and biological value and renders them more suited to human metabolism ( It has also been reported that collagen, in conjunction with soy protein and carrageenan, is able to increase the water holding capacity and improve the texture of deli rolls ( The effects of pork collagen in emulsified and whole muscle products has been evaluated. Eight frankfurter treatments (0–3.5% pork collagen) and four ham treatments (0–3% pork collagen) were formulated and frankfurters and hams were evaluated for cooked yields, purge, colour, texture and sensory characteristics. Incorporation of pork collagen at 1% and above, significantly increased cooked and chilled yields in frankfurters but did not have any effect in hams. Purge was significantly reduced in both frankfurters and hams after 4 weeks of storage, while sensory difference testing showed no significant difference up to a 2% usage level of pork collagen in both frankfurters and hams ( The quantity of collagen has also been used as an index of quality of raw materials employed in the preparation of meat products. It has been reported that a high content of collagen and, as a consequence, of connective tissue found in meat samples, was a fairly good index of poor quality of the raw materials employed in the preparation of meat products ( Freeze drying of collagenous material from chicken feet skins and tendons, has been shown to affect physical functionality by increasing solubility, gel strength, emulsion stability and water holding capacity at 60 °C. Such modifications to this co-product of chicken processing would suggest the potential use of these products as functional ingredients in meat products ( Gelatin is a protein product commercially made from pork skin, cattle bones, calf skin or fish skin. It is prepared by the thermal denaturation of collagen (the protein in connective tissue and bones) isolated from animal skin and bones with very dilute acid. Gelatin contains a large number of amino acids such as glycine, proline and 4-hydroxyproline residues (  Gelatin is also used in the photographic film, cosmetics, adhesives and printing industries; it can also be used in microencapsulation processes and as an additive in finishing products for the leather industry ( Gummy products have been in high demand among American consumers for over a decade and are continuing to drive market growth for gelatins. Gummy candies are popular because of the wide variety of shapes, colours and flavours available for these products. Gelatin gives gummy candies their chewy structure and is the primary gelling agent of American gummy candies ( Hydrolyzed gelatin has a protein content greater than 90% and is used as a dietary supplement in sports drinks and protein bars. It is rich in the amino acids glycine and proline, which are suited to support of collagen synthesis. Medical studies indicate that hydrolyzed gelatin may improve joint pain and enhance mobility in people with joint disease. Hydrolyzed gelatin also has direct applications in the treatment of joint pain in strength-training athletes. Studies have also indicated that hydrolyzed Prion diseases are a group of mammalian diseases that produce large vacuoles in the cortex and cerebellum of infected subjects. Prion diseases are caused by proteinaceous infectious particles called prions. Examples of prion diseases include BSE or ‘mad cow disease’, which affects cattle, and CJD, which affects humans. Outbreaks of BSE in the UK and deaths resulting from CJD have created worldwide scepticism about the safety of bovine-derived products originating from BSE-infected countries. Gelatin has been placed under scrutiny since it is produced in some instances from the bones and hides of cattle. There is presently no evidence that BSE can be transmitted to humans through gelatin products. However, uncertainty about the BSE infectivity of gelatin has raised questions about the safety of gelatin and has been a large contributing factor to the rise in popularity of gelatin replacers ( Industrial veal hydrolysate has been produced enzymatically for possible use as a gelatin-replacing ingredient for human consumption. Protein digestibility was determined by a pH-stat method and cell dialysis. Amino acid composition including 4-hydroxyproline, allowed determination of connective tissue, amino acid score and protein digestibility-corrected amino acid score. A high correlation was found between true digestibility and the pH-stat method. The meaty flavour and gelling properties of veal hydrolysate could make it useful for high-quality soups, sauces and gravies ( Dehydrated meats are primarily used as flavour enhancers in gravies, soups, stews and other food applications, but are also found in ready-to-eat military rations, survival rations, and outdoor sports and recreation rations. Beef, chicken and pork are the primary sources for dehydrated meats. Dehydrated meats are also referred to as bouillon in many food applications (e.g. beef bouillon, chicken bouillon). Dehydrated meats come in powder, granule, diced or jerky form and have protein contents ranging from 20% to 52% ( Meat proteins, in general, have good functionality – such as water binding and emulsification capabilities – and form strong elastic gels, they have good flavouring properties and a high nutritional value (related to the high essential amino acid content and minerals such as calcium, potassium, phosphorus and iron). The effects of time and temperature on the water binding ability of chicken skin connective tissue (CCT) and its ability to form model gels have been studied, and it has been shown that CCT gels can be used as water binders in reduced-fat bologna. Processing qualities, and textural and MBM is a high-protein agricultural commodity that currently has few applications other than as an animal feed. Unmodified MBM has poor functional properties, due to its low solubility. A recent study has demonstrated that MBM can be extrusion-processed along with sodium caseinate to produce a useful plastic material which has been developed for use as a dog chew toy. For this application, elastic modulus (stiffness) was a key characteristic. The influence of moisture content on the glass transition temperature and elastic modulus reflected the plasticization of this material by water. On the basis of a comparison with a commercially available dog chew, the range of stiffness achieved, 0.25–2.50 GPa, encompassed the values appropriate for a dog chew. The results showed that a particular desired stiffness can be maintained by applying an edible moisture barrier to the surface of the material ( MBM contains appreciable amounts of nitrogen (N), phosphorus and calcium, making it an interesting fertilizer for various crops. The effect of MBM as an N fertilizer has been evaluated in pot and field experiments. The soils used in the pot experiment were peat and a sand–peat mixture, both low in content of plant nutrients. The field experiment was carried out on a silt loam. In the pot experiment, increasing amounts of MBM gave significantly increased yields although there was, in part, N immobilization shortly after seeding the soil based on peat organic matter. In the field experiment there was no period of N immobilization and a good N effect was found for small amounts of MBM (total N, 50 kg/ha). At a total N content of 100 kg/ha there were no significant differences in grain yield of spring wheat between the treatments with MBM, mineral N fertilizer, and a combination of MBM and mineral N fertilizer (N 50 kg/ha from each). The results indicated that the relative N efficiency of MBM compared with mineral fertilizer was 80% or higher, if MBM was applied to cereals in spring ( De-fatted meat and bone meal protein concentrate (MBMPC) has also been reported to have significant adhesive properties. Adhesiveness increased linearly as the MBMPC concentration increased up to 20%. The highest adhesiveness was observed in the range of 70–90 °C with improved adhesiveness and water resistance being observed with 0.05% glutaraldehyde treatment (  Brine-incorporated meats have become major novelty food items in the present fresh meat retail market in the United States. Brines are used to ‘enhance’ products' moistness and juiciness; however, the physicochemical processes involved in water binding and entrapment in the meat protein matrix have not been completely elucidated. The results of a recent study have shown that the dynamics of brine penetration into muscle fibrils were specific to phosphate types, with pyrophosphate and tripolyphosphate having the highest efficacy. Both phosphate treatments produced a transverse expansion of the myofibrils with a simultaneous extraction of myosin from the ends of the A-band in the sarcomere. These structural/biochemical changes resulted in substantial swelling of muscle fibres, i.e. an enhanced water uptake and immobilization. Furthermore, depending on the type of proteases employed, soy protein hydrolysates or peptides interacted differently with myofibrillar proteins, producing an array of morphologies and rheologies of protein gels that played a major role in water immobilization in salted pork products ( A macromolecular meaty-flavour enhancer has been fractionated from a commercial beef extract. The macromolecular fraction was obtained by dialysis and separated by anion-exchange chromatography, copper-chelate chromatography and gel-filtration chromatography. Two fractions were isolated as active meaty-flavour enhancers. Determinations of the amino acid compositions and amino acid sequences of the isolated fragments showed that the two active fractions consisted of collagen and tropomyosin. The macromolecular material obtained from heated collagen and tropomyosin in the low-molecular-weight fraction of beef soup stock enhanced the meaty flavour. These results suggested that collagen and tropomyosin were Functional protein isolates have been separated from coarsely and finely ground mechanically deboned (MDB) turkey using a combined alkaline solubilization and isoelectric precipitation method. Although the two types of MDB turkey were quite different in original composition, the compositions of the resultant protein isolates were very similar. Almost all of the fat, collagen and calcium originally present in the MDB turkey were removed during the processing. Gels made from the resultant protein isolates showed good textural properties and water retention ability with a lighter colour than the original MDB turkey ( The enzymatic activities of a bovine spleen lysosomal-enriched extract have been characterized for their proteolytic potential. The extract showed a high activity of cathepsins, i.e. a considerable ability to degrade both myofibrillar proteins and collagen, as well as of exoprotease. Proteolytic activity was accompanied by acid lipase and esterase activities, and a minor peroxidase activity. The bovine spleen lysosomal-enriched extract may therefore be a useful tool for the tenderization and ripening of muscle foods such as meat, fish and their products ( Market growth for meat co-products has been curtailed somewhat due to the farming crisis (BSE, foot and mouth) and due to high production costs (in comparison to plant-derived proteins such as soy proteins). While some of the restrictions (related to the BSE crisis) on the use of animal proteins in the food industry have eased, restrictions in the European Union on the use of meat proteins in animal feed applications are expected to remain until 2007 and therefore, the recovery of such markets is expected to be slow ( Dietary proteins are known to possess a variety of nutritional, functional and biological properties. Nutritionally, the proteins are a source of energy and amino acids, which are essential for growth and maintenance. Functionally, the proteins contribute to the physicochemical and sensory properties of various protein-rich foods. Furthermore, many dietary proteins possess specific biological properties that make these components potential ingredients of functional or health-promoting foods. Many of these properties are attributed to physiologically active peptides encrypted in protein molecules. Particularly rich sources of such peptides are milk and eggs, but they are also found in meat and many plants. These peptides are inactive within the sequence of the parent protein but can be released during gastrointestinal digestion or food processing ( An angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitory peptide has been isolated and purified from the hydrolysates of irradiated bovine blood The physiological functions of enzymatic hydrolysates of collagen or keratin contained in livestock and fish waste have been studied and results demonstrated that the enzymatic hydrolysate of meat meal, a collagen waste, showed strong ACE inhibitory activity (IC Inhibitory activities against ACE of enzymatic hydrolysates of porcine skeletal muscle proteins have been investigated. Myosin B, myosin, actin, tropomyosin, troponin and water-soluble proteins extracted from pork loin were digested by proteases – including pepsin, alpha-chymotrypsin and trypsin. After digestion, hydrolysates produced from all proteins showed ACE inhibitory activities, and the peptic hydrolysate showed the strongest activity. In the case of myosin B, the molar concentration of peptic hydrolysate required to inhibit 50% of the activity increased gradually as digestion proceeded. The hydrolysates produced by sequential digestion with pepsin and cc-chymotrypsin, pepsin and trypsin, or pepsin and pancreatin showed weaker activities than those digested by pepsin alone, suggesting that ACE inhibitory peptides from peptic digestion might lose their active sequences after digestion by the second protease. However, the hydrolysates produced by sequential digestion showed stronger activities than those by chymotrypsin, trypsin or pancreatin alone. These results suggested that the hydrolysates of porcine meat were able to show ACE inhibitory activity, even if they were digested Carnosine is a natural antioxidant present in skeletal muscle. A number of patents describe the potential use of carnosine as a therapeutic agent in applications such as: wound healing; treatment of hypertension and trauma; treatment of cataracts and stomach and duodenal ulcers; and also as a bactericidal, anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory agent. A number of cosmetic applications for carnosine (e.g. with respect to skin aging) have also been described. Food applications for carnosine include use in food flavourings (beef/brothy) and as an additive to decrease deterioration in foods and discolouration rate of meat (reviewed by Recent research has revealed that the degradation products of dietary sphingolipids are biologically active and have the capacity to inhibit the The polyamines putrescine, spermidine and spermine occur in the cells of living organisms where they fulfil an array of physiological roles, including a role in human cell growth and proliferation which has been of great interest in studies on tumour growth. However, polyamines could be useful for post-operation patients, during wound healing, and for growth and development of the neonate digestive system. Both endogenous and dietary polyamines participate in such processes. Data on polyamine contents in foods are limited in the literature. While putrescine content increases as a result of bacterial activity during inappropriate storage and processing of foods of animal origin, spermidine and spermine originate mainly from raw materials. Higher contents of spermidine, compared with spermine, are typical for foods of plant origin, while an opposite relation is characteristic of foods of animal origin. Legumes, cauliflower and broccoli are foods with high spermidine content; while meat and meat products are high in spermine ( Immediately after slaughter, spermine and spermidine have been detected in red and white meats. Spermine was the prevalent amine, ~70% of total, while low levels of histamine were also detected in chicken thighs. During storage at 4 °C, there was a decrease in spermine, spermidine levels remained constant, and putrescine, cadaverine, histamine and tyramine were formed. At 15 days, higher levels of amines were found in breast compared with thigh. An index based on the ratio of the polyamines spermidine and spermine was considered appropriate for the evaluation of chicken meat quality. Chicken-based meat products (mortadella, frankfurters, sausage, meatballs, hamburger and nuggets) were analyzed for bioactive amines. Nuggets were the only products with amine profiles similar to fresh chicken meat. There was a prevalence of spermidine over spermine for most of the products, suggesting the incorporation of significant amounts of vegetable protein in the formulations ( Meat and meat products have effects on appetite and have shown highly satiating characteristics. If meat-based products could be designed to be have less energy (calorific) density, while remaining satiating and having sensory appeal, they could form the basis of functional foods to perhaps address the growing incidence of obesity ( During the last two decades, many food protein fragments have been demonstrated to elicit biological effects in various Bioactive peptides, biogenic peptides, opioid peptides, immuno-stimulating peptides, mineral-soluble peptides, antihypertensive peptides and antimicrobial peptides can therefore originate from food materials and enzymatic hydrolysis of proteins. These peptides – which are produced in the enzymatic hydrolysate of treated food materials such as milk, animal and fish meat, and also from other products – have been recently reviewed ( While meat ingredients have been added to a variety of foods, several functional (i.e. healthy) food ingredients have also been added to meat and meat products. For example, omega-3 fatty acids from fish oils, olive oil, soy proteins, antioxidants such as tea catechins, green tea extracts, phenolic compounds from rosemary, and dietary fibre (bran, oats, inulin) have all been added to meat products to enhance their nutritional profile ( The processing of red and white meat results in the generation of large volumes of waste material. This review has examined the various approaches that a modern meat processor should consider in ‘managing’ this waste material, including its minimization, responsible diposal and value-addition. All can play a part, either in isolation or in combination, in improving processing efficiency and effectiveness, addressing legislative requirements and enhancing the financial, social and environmental outcomes for a processor. In particular, this review has highlighted modern approaches to clean water and energy conservation, minimization of odours and high-BOD effluent streams (and their disposal), responsible management of high-risk waste materials and, perhaps of most importance, adding value to by- and co-products. It is this latter area that the authors believe could be the most lucrative for the processor, driven by the large and burgeoning  Meat processing      Canadian Food Inspection Agency – European Food Safety Authority – Food Standards Agency (FSA) (UK) – FSA BSE overview site – FSA BSE controls page – Food Standards Australia New Zealand – US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) – USFDA – USDA BSE page – USDA–FSA site on BSE – WHO Food Safety site – WHO BSE page – World Organization for Animal Health –  EU legislation – European Commission – summary of TSE law –   Leatherhead Food International (UK) – National Renderers Association (US) –  The British Medical Journal's variant Creutzfeldt Jakob Disease collection –