The characterisation and rheology of several nickel laterite smectite ores and pure minerals are compared to assess the effect of mineralogy and particle size on the viscosity of high pulp density slurries. A vane viscometer was used to determine the “optimum pulp density” (OPD) that gave a yield stress of 100Pa which is considered to be optimal for pumping slurries into autoclaves in the HPAL process. In general, slurries containing finer particles were more viscous and smectite slurries exhibited poor rheological behaviour as compared to slurries of goethite<kaolin<talc<hematite<maghemite<magnesite. Blending the smectite ores with a fraction of the pure minerals improved the rheological behaviour of the pulp and can increase the optimum pulp density of the smectite blend by over 5% w/w.
                  When the physical properties of the smectite ore and slurry were examined, a very good linear correlation was obtained between the optimum pulp density and the settling density which provides a simple measure of predicting rheological behaviour of slurries. The variation in the viscosity of the nickel laterite ores depends largely on their mineralogy and particle size distribution. The mean particle size and P
                     80 values of various smectite ores containing the same mineral phases were also found to have a reasonably good linear correlation with OPD in saline water, but the correlation of ore surface area with OPD was a poorer fit.The indirect beneficiation of nickel laterite ores by increasing pulp density has been recognised as a practical method to improve nickel production in High Pressure Acid Leach (HPAL) plants that are constrained by autoclave capacity and the solids density that can be pumped into the autoclave. By increasing the pulp density of the slurry, a higher nickel through-put from the autoclave is achieved. Slurries with a yield stress of 100 In general, nickel values within laterite ores are associated mainly with the hematite, goethite, serpentine or nontronite minerals – whilst other common minerals in the ores such as maghemite, magnetite, chromite, quartz, talc and dolomite contain very small amounts of nickel. However, since nickel-bearing minerals are finely disseminated throughout most laterite ores, it has been difficult to physically separate and upgrade the nickel content in ores economically, without substantial losses. There appears to be little prospect for physically upgrading the clay-like smectite ores by beneficiation based upon size distribution, magnetic separation, flotation, gravity, etc., because of the high nontronite content of the ore, their fine particle size and the suite of other nickel-bearing minerals present. However, it is possible to increase the pulp density of the feed to the autoclave by modifying the rheology and decreasing the viscosity and thereby increase nickel output. Unfortunately, the smectite clay minerals generally demonstrate viscous rheological characteristics. Typically, clay minerals exhibit swelling characteristics, a negative surface charge at neutral pH and the ability to absorb/exchange anions or cations ( Several studies have been carried out on various nickel laterite pulps to understand their wide range of viscosity and rheological properties ( The reason why particle size distribution affects the viscosity is attributed to the manner in which particles can settle and pack. It has been recognised that one of the key factors that affects viscosity is the maximum settled density ( The fundamental relationship between viscosity and settled density is the Krieger–Dougherty equation (Eq.  Thus, once the maximum settled concentration was known, the Bingham viscosity could be predicted for different solids concentrations. However, when this equation was used to model yield stress Unfortunately, the particle size distribution was not considered, so the equation does not account for changes in viscosity due to the bimodal distribution of particle size, since In this work, special attention has been paid to measuring yield stress with respect to pulp density, as it is the fundamental fluid property that determines pumping and pipeline design requirements for transporting viscous slurries. A vane viscometer was used for measuring the yield stress of high solid density pulps as recommended by A total of 19 samples were used in this investigation, of which 18 were ore samples of Western Australian origin and one was a precipitated sample. All the samples were divided into two sets based on the experiments performed for the required information. The first set was used for rheological studies which contained nine different samples that were divided into three groups for easier identification; laterite samples, iron oxide minerals and gangue minerals. The laterite samples were three different smectite ores A, B and C; the iron oxide minerals were relatively pure samples of goethite, maghemite and hematite; and the gangue minerals were talc, magnesite and kaolin. The term gangue is used for the talc, magnesite and kaolin as these minerals were found to occur in the laterite ore body. Smectites A, B and C are referred as Sm-A, Sm-B and Sm-C in the text, tables and figures for easier representation. Goethite and maghemite minerals were generated from a limonitic nickel laterite ore as explained in Section The second set of ore samples was comprised of 10 different, mostly smectite laterite ores. These were used for rheology and settling studies to examine the correlation of the rheology measurement with the settled pulp density and the particle size distribution of the samples. The laterite ores from the first set of nine samples were jaw crushed, roll-milled and wet screened to −53 Typically two laterite samples of −53 The second set of 10 laterite samples were ground and wet sieved in saline water to obtain a −500 All the 19 samples were analysed for chemical composition, particle size distribution and mineralogy. X-ray diffractograms (XRD) were taken to perform the mineralogical analysis of the samples using calcium fluoride as an internal standard. Exactly 10% w/w calcium fluoride was mixed with the sample and ball milled to homogenise the sample before taking XRD traces. A Phillips Automatic Powder Diffractometer model XPERT-ARD was used to acquire the XRD traces in the range of 3–120° at a scanning rate of 1° per minute using Co K The particle size distribution of the samples was measured in the Malvern Particle Size Analyser model 2000. A dispersant, sodium hexa-meta-phosphate was added to the sample before the measurement was taken without sonication. The specific surface area of the sample was also obtained from the particle size measurement using the software Mastersizer 2000 with the assumption that the particles are spherical in nature, without any account of micro-porosity and surface roughness. Rheology measurements were carried out using a HAAKE VT550 Visco-Tester instrument using Vane FL100 sensor. Yield stress data were obtained from the vane measurement using RheoWin Software. Typically, wet sample cake (∼50–70% w/w) was homogenised thoroughly using a glass rod and the container was tapped slowly to remove any air bubbles present inside the slurry. The vane was inserted inside the sample and a yield stress measurement was performed at a rotational speed of the vane of 0.3 Typically when a viscosity modifier was used in the rheological study, a required amount of freshly prepared solution of the viscosity modifier (VM) was added during yield stress measurement. This was done by adding the VM solution to the slurry in one aliquot when the yield stress of the slurry was approximately 500–600 Settling tests were performed with the second set of 10 laterite samples in saline water using one litre measuring cylinder to determine the settled solid density. After 24 The mineralogical analyses of all the samples were determined by quantitative Rietveld analysis of the XRD line spectra and the mineralogy of first set of nine samples are given in The goethite fraction obtained from limonitic laterite ore by WHIMS separation was almost pure whereas the maghemite fraction contained about 13% goethite. Both these fractions contained less than 5% unaccounted phases. The hematite sample was 92% hematite together with about 6% maghemite. The gangue minerals talc, magnesite and kaolin were obtained from high grade mineral deposits and were about 90% or greater purity. The mineralogy analysis in Eight out of 10 ores in the second set of laterite samples were mainly smectite ores with nontronite varying from 27% to 61%. Other minerals such as lizardite/antigorite, goethite, maghemite, hematite, quartz, clinochlore and magnesite were found in these samples in a proportions ranging from about 1% to 30%. Among these samples only one contained spinel (5%) and another contained chromite (2%). The remaining two ore samples in the second set contained ∼75% talc and ∼30% talc with 33% magnesite. Both samples also contained between 2% and 14% lizardite/antigorite, goethite and quartz but no nontronite was identified.  The particle size distribution for the first set of nine samples is given in  The particle size analysis of the second set of 10 samples is given in A scanning electron microscope (SEM) micrograph of a typical smectite ore is given in The rheological behaviour of the laterites, iron oxide mineral and gangue minerals are shown in Even though the Sm-A and Sm-B ores have similar particle size distribution and clay proportion, Sm-B shows better rheological characteristics due to the presence of goethite and quartz in the ore ( Since various factors such as shearing, surface charge, the presence of other minerals, particle size distribution and particle shape are known to affect rheological characteristics, some further studies were carried out with smectite ores Sm-A, Sm-B and Sm-C to assess which of these factors significantly affect their rheology. Some ores exhibit thinning behaviour when sheared whilst others exhibit thickening due to differences in particle shape and agglomeration. Viscosity modifiers are generally long chain organic carboxylates, amides or polyphosphates that adsorb on the mineral surface and alter the surface charge, contact angle and slippage of dense slurries. Blending of limonite ore is reported to have a significant effect in improving the rheology of the smectite ore slurry ( In this study, 10% goethite, maghemite and hematite samples were each blended separately and together with Sm-C ore and the yield stress was measured and compared. Thus, blending with iron oxides does not significantly increase the amount of smectite that can be utilised and pumped at the OPD. But particular iron oxide ores can be beneficial if these contain nickel and their own rheological behaviour is good based on its size, shape and surface charge. Goethite is known to have a lathe or elongated crystal shape and its pH of zero surface charge is about pH 6–7 ( Depending on the occurrence of laterite ore, it may be associated with number of gangue minerals which consume acid during processing in the autoclave. However, these minerals may produce an impact on the rheology of the ore slurry. In this study, particularly kaolin, talc and magnesite were chosen as they are commonly occurring minerals with laterite ores. The effect of these minerals was studied by adding 20% (w/w) to the Sm-B sample. Since particle size and proportion of fines appears to affect rheology significantly; the yield stress of Sm-A and Sm-B were compared using the wet screen fraction of −710 Clearly, there appears to be significant benefit in the rheological characteristics when screening the laterite ores to a coarser rather than finer screen size. However, some studies have shown that certain laterites have a significantly higher nickel grade when the screen size is reduced as nickel tends to reside in finer mineral particles ( This part of the study was performed with the second set of 10 laterite samples in saline water having composition of 6 It is generally found that smectite ores produce higher viscosity pulps due to stirring and shearing which often leads to the break up of agglomerates to produce more fines. By measuring the surface area of laterite ores and the size for passing 50% of particles ( However, in this study the rheology (OPD at 100 The specific surface areas of the eight smectite samples plotted against the optimum pulp density at 100 The variation in the rheology of the ores studied in this work can be attributed to differences in their mineralogy and particle size distribution. In general, the nontronite-rich smectite ores gave more viscous pulps whilst the finer ores were more viscous than the coarser ores. Coarse clay-like ores exhibit thickening behaviour upon shearing due the generation of fines and the break up of agglomerates. Minerals such as goethite, hematite, maghemite, kaolin, talc and magnesite, which are generally found to occur in the lateritic smectite ores, exhibit good rheological behaviour on their own. Blending of these minerals in the smectite ore gave a positive effect in reducing the rheology of the ore slurry and allowing the pulp density to increase. But there was little overall benefit to the nickel grade at the optimum pulp density due to dilution of the smectite ores, unless the blended minerals also contain some nickel. The rheology of the ore pulp is closely related to its maximum settling density in saline water. Clearly, particle size, particle shape and the packing of small particles between large particles similarly affect both the settling density and the rheology of pulps. In this work, a good linear correlation was obtained which allows a simple settling test measurement to predict the rheological performance of the similar ore slurry. The particle size distribution was found to have a linear correlation with rheology of the slurry and is valid with samples having similar mineral phases. The authors are thankful to Patrick Merrigan and Ron Pleysier for their efforts and support on WHIMS work. The authors also wish to thank Helen Watling and Laura Kuhar for useful comments on this manuscript. This work has been performed under the Minerals Down Under Flagship Research of CSIRO, Australia.