In the present work, tribological performances of duplex coatings (Ti/TiN PVD and WC-Co HVOF) on Ti6Al4V substrates were investigated by analytical modelling and experimental assessment of mechanical/tribological properties. An analytical study of the contact stress distribution under a spherical indenter was performed, considering changes in stress distribution after adoption of the WC-Co intermediate coating as a load support layer. Experimental activities consisted of micro- and nanoindentation testing, HRC adhesion test and ball-on-disc sliding wear test (Alumina counterpart) under dry atmosphere. Morphology of the worn surface and layer failure mechanisms (i.e. wear mechanisms, coating surface and sub-surface delamination, crack propagation modes, role of interfaces) were then analysed by FIB-SEM techniques. Results showed that the use of a WC-Co interlayer with intermediate hardness and stiffness provides a more effective distribution of contact strain, with a significant increase of load carrying capacity and wear resistance of samples. A correlation between results of simulations, H/E and H
                     3/E
                     2 ratios and wear resistance of coatings is finally proposed.Thin hard coatings are widely used to improve tribological performances of titanium based mechanical components, even if endurance and reliability problems do still exist when high contact stress with plastic deformation of the substrate or contact fatigue occur Plasma nitriding and PVD coating are commercial methods for improving properties of Ti-based components, in those applications which involve high contact stresses and severe sliding wear However, a very thin, hard layer on a titanium alloy substrate (even if hardened by plasma nitriding) cannot lead to a mechanically improved structure in terms of load bearing capacity: differences in both coating and substrate hardness and stiffness do not provide a good distribution of contact stresses In previously published papers Furthermore, they also proposed to modify this top-layer by using a Ti-TiN multilayer coating, consisting of a Ti interlayer between two TiN layers (and a Ti bond layer between the HVOF and the first TiN layers), with the aim of increasing adhesion and toughness Scratch test measurements confirmed simulations showing a significantly improved adhesion of the PVD layer (45% higher critical load compared to monolayer TiN), likely due to residual stress relaxation after the introduction of a Ti buffer layer However, several questions, intrinsically correlated to in service coating performances, still remain unsolved. In particular, the role of the WC-Co thick intermediate layer in supporting the applied load and re-arranging contact stresses during sliding contact condition and the consequent wear behaviour of multilayer Ti/TiN coatings is not clear and needs to be further investigated. In addition, a deeper analysis of actual wear and failure mechanisms under tribological loadings and their correlation to the multilayer structure is strictly necessary. The idea for the present work is to assess mechanical and tribological performances of coatings under different loading conditions, by the use of analytical assessment of contact stress distribution and high resolution morphological characterization of coatings failure modes, pointing out the influence of the WC-Co thick layer on the wear response of the PVD Ti/TiN top coating. A preliminary analytical modelling activity was performed, aimed at the evaluation of sub-surface stress distribution under Hertzian and sliding contact conditions reproducing the same contact pair and load distribution of the ball-on-disc sliding wear test, and the influence of the multilayered structure on contact stress distribution was evaluated. Wear resistance and mechanical properties were then evaluated by ball-on-disc test, HRC test, micro and nanoindentation techniques. Failure modes under different mechanical and tribological loadings have been finally analysed by means of focused ion beam (FIB, Duplex coatings under examination consist of a 300 μm thick WC-Co interlayer deposited by HVOF, followed by a Ti/TiN multilayer deposited by CAE-PVD, on Ti6Al4V substrate (see All details for coatings deposition are reported in Ref. The mechanical behaviour of the adopted multilayer structure was evaluated by analytical calculation of the elastic contact deformation fields under a spherical indenter, for the cases of Hertzian and sliding contact conditions. A recently developed commercial software package was adopted Data from literature were assumed for the elastic properties of the Ti layers, the Ti6Al4V substrate and for Poisson's ratio of all layers Mechanical properties of coatings were analysed by nanoindentation (MTS Nano Indenter G200) In case of the WC-Co HVOF layer, elastic modulus was experimentally determined by Knoop micro-indentation testing (Marshall model, all details reported in The wear and friction behaviour of the PVD coatings were evaluated using a ball-on-disc tribometer (normal load of 10 N, constant sliding speed of 0.05 m/s, controlled temperature of 25 °C and dry atmosphere without lubrication). The counterpart used was an Alumina ball with 4 mm diameter. The sliding distance and radius of the track were 200 m and 4 mm, respectively. The wear volume of the wear scars was calculated according to the ASTM G99 standard. All details of experimental activities and related standards are summarised in the Several studies have underlined that hardness is not necessarily the prime requirement for wear resistance and load bearing capacity. In particular, elastic strain to failure, which is related to For these reasons, results coming from nanoindentation testing have been analyzed also in terms of Morphological characterization of worn and damaged surfaces were performed by FIB-SEM techniques (FEI Helios NanoLab 600). In case of cross section analyses, a preliminary in-situ Platinum deposition was performed, to protect surface layers during ion milling; the sectioning process consisted of a preliminary high ion current milling (9 nA) followed by a cleaning step of the obtained section (0.9 nA). All modelling and experimental activities here described were performed on two different systems: PVD Ti/TiN coating directly deposited on Ti6Al4V substrate PVD Ti/TiN coating on WC-Co HVOF thick intermediate layer on Ti6Al4V substrate (Duplex System). Results of the analytical modelling of contact stress are presented in Results of analytical modelling activities are presented in terms of first principal stress component. Observing contact response of coatings under Hertzian (i.e. purely normal) contact conditions (left column, Observing the in-depth variation of first principal stress ( When considering sliding contact conditions (right column, It is noteworthy that the surface tensile contact peak is significantly lower after the adoption of a WC-Co thick interlayer (about 20% lower surface stress, compared to the same coating on Ti6Al4V). Also in this case, slightly higher compressive stress are observed within the PVD layer in case of adoption of a WC-Co interlayer. These observations suggest that an adopted WC-Co thick layer could give enhanced performances in terms of wear resistance, load bearing capacity and resistance to plastic deformation for an improved contact stress distribution especially in case of sliding contact conditions. Results of mechanical and tribological characterisation activities are summarised in The PVD TiN-based coating is characterised by high surface hardness and stiffness and low wear rate, if compared to both HVOF layer and Ti6Al4V substrate. In particular, wear rate of the Ti/TiN PVD coating (Archard law, As a confirmation of wear results, obtained values for Wear resistance and resistance to plastic deformation can therefore be significantly improved by an optimal gradient of  These results are likely due to poor adhesion of the Ti/TiN coating on Ti6Al4V substrate (which was already reported in a previous paper by the authors It is therefore likely that a redistribution of surface contact stresses and an improved adhesion It is also very important to notice that the changes in contact stress distribution are essentially due to the increase in the stiffness of the supporting layer. This suggests that in real contact conditions (i.e. radius of contact higher than 1 mm) the stiffness of the supporting layer can be as important as its hardness in order to guarantee wear resistance of the coating, meaning that a simple surface nitriding of the Ti6Al4V layer (which would increase hardness only FIB sections were finally realised for the duplex coating both at uniformly worn surfaces and local coating detachment ( This behaviour suggests that in the case of the duplex coating under examination (HVOF and PVD) wear is dominated by tensile stress generating inside the PVD layer (as predicted by simulations, An improvement in load bearing capacity given by the introduction of the WC-Co interlayer is also clearly visible from HRC indentation tests, as reported in Focused ion beam (FIB) sections of HRC indents ( It is noteworthy that delamination does not start at PVD/HVOF interface but very often at the inner TiN layer: this is an indirect validation of the simulated (FEM) residual stress profile reported in Ref. Furthermore, FIB images obtained by the ion probe also gave precious information on coating microstructure and growth mechanisms ( Tribological performances of duplex coatings (HVOF and PVD) on Ti6Al4V substrate were analysed by analytical modeling of contact stress distribution under Hertzian and sliding contact conditions. SEM analysis of the wear tracks confirmed results of simulations, showing that in real contact conditions (i.e. radius of contact higher than 1 mm) the stiffness of the supporting layer (WC-Co HVOF in this case) can be as important as its hardness to guarantee wear resistance. Nanoindentation tests showed that the duplex coating system (PVD FIB analyses have been carried out at the Interdepartmental Laboratory of Electron Microscopy (LIME), University of Rome ROMA TRE ( Authors would like to thank Fabrizio Casadei, Centro Sviluppo Materiali S.p.A., for coatings deposition, and SiO (Saxonian Institute of Surface Mechanics, Dr Norbert Schwarzer) for giving a free license of FilmDoctor to perform all analytical calculations.