In this paper the development and the application of a fuzzy expert system for the evaluation of the exploitable reserves of multiple-layer lignite deposits, mined by continuous surface methods, is presented. The exploitable reserves are determined decisively by the structure of these deposits, as well as by the limitations of the used mining systems. In practice, thin layers of lignite and interbedded waste layers are grouped under specified assumptions regarding thickness and ash content, to form the exploitable blocks. Moreover, the decision for excavating such a block is made under subjective constraints of different importance, or by using uncertain data. Advances in fuzzy inference systems (FIS) have provided a new approach to the evaluation of multiple-layer lignite deposits. FIS have the ability to handle imprecise, incomplete or linguistically ambiguous information and incorporate them into decision-making processes. In the developed FIS (Mamdani type) new linguistic variables, related to working conditions, operators’ experience and production were involved. The FIS was used for the estimation of the exploitable reserves of the Southern Field lignite deposit, located in the area of Ptolemais (Greece).Lignite, accounting about 30% of the primary energy consumption and about 56% of power generation, is the most important indigenous fuel of Greece. Greece, mining 65 For the exploitation of these deposits, the continuous surface mining method is used. Large-scale equipment (high capacity bucket-wheel excavators, conveyor belts and stackers) is selected to achieve high output rate with low cost of mined lignite per tone ( The extreme splitting of lignite seams, which are separated by non-lignite layers, called partings, makes the selective mining a necessity ( The lignite supplied by opencast mines must correspond to the quality requirements of nearby power stations shown in The observed quality fluctuations can be described as short-term, intermediate and long-term variations. While short-term and intermediate variations are usually compensated by means of homogenization, mixing techniques and appropriate short-term production scheduling, long-term variations can be compensated only by appropriate long-term mine planning. This planning ensures uniform quality throughout the entire operation cycle, which may last a few decades. The first step in a planning process is the determination of the exploitable lignite, using data obtained from boreholes within the potential mining area. The determination of exploitable lignite is a computer-aided iterative procedure, where thin layers of lignite and partings are grouped under specified assumptions regarding thickness and ash content, to form the exploitable blocks. A computer model of selected deposit attributes can thus be created, by dividing the deposit into small blocks and by assigning a number of attributes or properties to each block. The developed model is the basis for all consequent planning steps. The main criteria used for the formation of the exploitable lignite blocks are: Minimum thickness of lignite seam and partings (waste layers) that can be excavated by selective mining. These values are mainly depended on the technical data of the excavator, the bench geometry and the type of cutting. Maximum ash content of the mined lignite. This value is closely related to the specifications of the power station which is fed by the mined lignite. Dilution and mining loss. These parameters are used in order to take into account the unavoidable co-excavation of waste layers, during the extraction of the lignite blocks. The formation of an exploitable lignite block is shown schematically in However, in practice, the decision for excavating a block is made under subjective constraints of various importance or by using uncertain data. Factors concerning human potential, conditions in the workplace and demand for lignite are not taken into account. Selective mining of relative thin lignite layers requires experienced operator for the excavator and good working conditions (e.g. reduced dust emissions, intense lighting, enough space to perform the terrace cutting, etc.). In addition, the performance (excavated material per hour) of a bucket-wheel excavator drops significantly when the ratio The above mentioned factors are not easy to be quantified and incorporated to the existing methodology used for the determination of the exploitable lignite layers. Fuzzy expert systems, known as fuzzy inference systems (FIS), have provided a new approach in incorporating decision-making systems in the evaluation of multiple-layer lignite deposits. FIS have the ability to handle imprecise or incomplete or linguistically ambiguous information and to incorporate it into decision making process, by emulating part of the human reasoning capabilities based on the knowledge of an expert or a specialist. FIS have emerged from the field of “Artificial Intelligence”, in which expert systems, artificial neural networks, genetic algorithms, and agent-based software have also dominated. Fuzzy inference systems are computing frameworks, based on the concepts of fuzzy set theory. FIS can be considered as a process for mapping a given input data set to an output set, using fuzzy logic. The mineral industry sector has been particularly receptive to these methods, since many of the mining operations and processes are understood and controlled in empirical ways. In addition, there are few industries with the myriad of heuristics evident in mining. For example: Nature does not make uniform ore bodies or those that can be modeled simply. Unit operations tend to be batch or semi-continuous, which are more difficult to model and control. The traditional approach to problem-solving is empirical and such experiential knowledge can be captured directly into intelligent systems ( FIS have been applied with success in mining ( FIS uses fuzzy logic, instead of Boolean logic, to reason about data in the inference mechanism. Fuzzy logic, initiated in 1965, by Zadeh, is a multi-valued logic that allows intermediate values to be defined between conventional evaluations, like true/false, yes/no, high/low, etc. ( The basic structure of a general FIS, shown in The exploitable blocks of lignite, evaluated by the methodology described above and showed schematically in Definition and fuzzification of the input/output variables. Creation of the inference rules (application of the fuzzy operator (AND, OR) in the antecedent and implication from the antecedent to the consequent). Aggregation of the consequents across the rules. Defuzzification. During the first stage the initial structure and the parameters of the developed FIS were chosen. The final structure and the FIS and the optimal values of parameters were determined during training. During the training process typical selective mining cases representing different operational conditions were given to FIS as input data and the obtained results were compared to that evaluated by an expert (mining engineer). Furthermore the rules inference mechanism and the response surface plot were examined. Based on the results of this comparison FIS parameters were changed until satisfactory result was achieved ( Based on the description of mining operations and the experts’ opinion, the inputs selected for the developed FIS were considered the thickness of lignite layer, the ash content, the experience of the excavator’s operator, the working conditions in the bench and the required production rate. A single output was selected for the FIS, the exploitation index, representing the probability of a lignite layer to be mined selectively. The structure of the FIS, consisting of five inputs and one output, is shown in The thickness of the deposit lignite layers varies from a few centimeters to several meters. The minimum thickness of a lignite layer for selective excavation depends mainly on the radius of the used bucket-wheel. To maintain the excavator performance at least to 60% of its nominal capacity, the ratio The ash content of lignite is the most important quality characteristic for lignite used for power generation. The ash content of lignite layers, of the deposits in the area of WMLC, varies from 10% to 70% (in dry basis). The maximum allowable ash content of extracted lignite is determined by the specifications of the power station. For the power stations operated in the area of WMLC, the maximum allowable ash content is ∼50% (Table 1). Today conventional methodology for determination of the lignite reserves to “exploitable” and “non-exploitable” is based on the above limits for ash content and thickness of the lignite layers. In practice, the decision for excavating selectively a lignite layer is based on subjective and interrelated criteria (e.g. a thin lignite layer with low ash content is more favourable for selective mining, compared to one with the same thickness but with higher ash content) and is also affected by operational parameters, such as the experience of the personnel, the required output rate and the conditions in the workplace (bench). The later were quantified subjectively into 0.0–1.0 scale as below: The operator experience was rated from 0, for a novice, to 1, for a skilful operator. The required output rate of the excavating equipment was rated from 0, when the demand for lignite is low, to 1 when the demand is high. Working conditions were rated from 0, for difficult, to 1, for favourable conditions. Values between 0 and 1 indicate intermediate levels of the above factors, with the value of 0.5 to represent the factors’ level at normal conditions. The exploitation index, the output of the developed FIS, varies between 0 and 1 and indicates the degree that a given lignite layer is favorable for exploitation. The value of 0 is assessed to non-exploitable lignite layers, while the value of 1 is assessed to an exploitable one. Values of exploitation index between 0 and 1 indicate that lignite layers could be exploited occasionally, under specific conditions. A value closer to 1 indicates that the lignite layer is more favorable for selective excavation. Therefore, exploitation index determines the probability for selectively mining a lignite layer with a specific thickness and ash content, under certain operational conditions. The fuzzification of the FIS input/output variables converts them to linguistic variables, which are fuzzy sets that are used to add semantic sense to the analysis. The shape of the fuzzy variables is given by the fuzzy membership functions. A degree of membership to a linguistic variable is assigned to each value of the input variable. In this step, the degree For the input variable The degree of membership The membership functions of the fuzzy variable ‘thickness’ are shown in The other input variables were fuzzified in a similar way. For ash content, three linguistic fuzzy variables were used, while for the experience of the operator, the working conditions and the production rate, two fuzzy values were used. For the exploitation index (output of FIS) three fuzzy values were used. The parameters of the membership functions, which were determined during the training process, are shown in The rules of FIS are obtained from information gathered by mining engineers and operators’ experience and were optimized during the training of the FIS. Finally, the developed knowledge base of the FIS consists of 13 rules. The fuzzy operator AND was applied to all fuzzy antecedents. The structure of a typical rule, as shown in The input for the defuzzification process is the aggregate output fuzzy set and the output is a crisp number, the exploitation index. The most popular defuzzification method is the centroid, which calculates the centre of the area under the curve. Other available methods are: bisector, middle of maximum (the average of the maximum value of the output set), largest of maximum, and smallest of maximum. In the developed FIS the centroid method was used. The inference mechanism of the developed FIS, which consists of five inputs, 13 rules and a single output, is shown in Although the final structure of the developed FIS was determined during training, by examining the response surface and the fuzzy inference mechanism ( The input variables of the FIS (thickness, ash, operator’s experience, production rate and working conditions) were considered as the independent variables (process variables), while the output of the FIS (exploitation index) was considered as the dependent or response variable. This design includes 675 different combinations (five levels for thickness and ash and three levels for operator’s experience, production rate and working conditions). For each combination, the exploitation index was evaluated by the developed FIS. The levels of input variables are given in The effect of input parameters to the exploitation index was estimated by applying the Box–Hunter statistical method ( The Southern Field lignite mine is the largest of the four operational surface mines at the Lignite Center of Western Macedonia, covering an area of 24 The estimated values of the exploitation index are shown in the contours plots in In The determination of the exploitable reserves and quality of multiple-layer lignite deposits depends not only on their geometrical and quality characteristics, but also on parameters related to the operational conditions in the mine, which are difficult to be incorporated into conventional evaluation methodologies. These parameters were quantified and incorporated into a FIS, that emulates the reasoning capability of a mining engineer. The application of the developed FIS for the evaluation of the exploitable reserves in the Southern Field deposit resulted in the followings: Substantial differences were found between reserves estimated by conventional methodology and by FIS. These differences are greater for thin and medium thickness lignite layers (up to 60 The operational/working conditions affect the exploitable reserves. Changing these conditions from “ideal” to “difficult” results in a decrease of 17.8% in the exploitable reserves (for lignite layers with thickness <80 Taking into account that mines are dynamic workplaces, where working conditions change considerably, FIS enables mining engineers to estimate the uncertainty related to reserves and quality. These uncertainties are essential for the feasibility study of any mineral deposit.