Mo (VI)-imprinted chitosan (CTS)/triethanolamine (TEA) gel beads (Mo (VI)-ICTGBs) (ICTGBs=imprinted chitosan triethanolamine gel beads) were prepared by using ion-imprinted technology, in which TEA and molybdate solution were used in coagulation bath. The spectrum of FT-IR implies that bonding are formed between TEA and the primary hydroxyl of CTS, and ion gel reaction happen between CTS and molybdate; XRD patterns also prove the change among CTS, TEA and molybdate. SEM images and N2 adsorption show that the surface area increases obviously after eluting Mo (VI) ions. The adsorption isotherm of Mo (VI)-ICTGBs imply that the adsorption process is according with Freundlich model. Adsorption kinetics suggests that the pseudo-second order adsorption mechanism is predominant for this adsorbent system of Mo (VI)-ICTGBs. The Mo (VI)-ICTGBs show high adsorption capacity and good selectivity for Mo (VI) anions in the coexistence system at pH=6.0. The Mo (VI)-ICTGBs have a good application prospect, because it is with a simple and rapid technique and good durance.The recycling of Mo becomes very important due to the increasing demand for Mo in the industrial field. Many technologies have been applied in the recycling field of Mo at present, i.e. biological, chemical and physical treatments. Adsorption is a simple and facile technique used in molybdate treatment. Different adsorbents, such as pyrite, synthetic schwertmannite, kaolinite, organo-bentonite, goethite, natrolite, titania, iron oxide, and aluminum oxide, have been used for molybdate removal from aqueous solutions ( CTS is a well-known biopolymer, whose high nitrogen content confers not only remarkable ability for the sorption of metal ions from dilute effluents, but also the sorption of metal anions from dilute effluents ( The subject of this work is to prepare Mo (VI)-ICTGB by ion imprinted technique and ion gel reaction between CTS and molybdate, and utilizing the material for selective adsorption of Mo (VI). SEM and N All reagents used in this work were of analytic grade. Chitosan (CTS, ≥90% deacetylation) were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd. Ammonium molybdate were obtained from Shanghai ShenBo Chemical Co. Ltd. Triethanolamine (TEA) were obtained from Tianjin Tianli Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd. Other chemicals were purchased from Xi’an Chemical Reagent Factory. IR Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FT-IR, Shimadzu. co., Japan) was used to characterize and analyze the forming mechanism of the composite beads. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out by a PerkinElmer PHI-5400 diffract meter, employing Cu K The process of preparing Mo (VI)-ICTGBs has been described by The CTMoBs were soaked and stirred in 50 All the adsorption experiments were carried out at room-temperature. Adsorbent concentration was kept constant at 0.0400 Where The mixed solution (100.0 Where Selectivity coefficient ( Column flow adsorption experiments were performed in a glass column of about 1.2 Some parameters in the preparation of Mo (VI)-ICTGB, including CTS concentration, Mo(VI) concentration, solidification temperature and eluent, have been discussed by The shapes of most peaks in The major peaks in  Some parameters of Mo (VI)-ICTGBs and NICTGBs obtained by BET model and BJH formula were shown in Table S2 (Supporting Information). Compared with NICTGBs, Mo (VI)-ICTGBs increase obviously in specific surface area and total pore volume. The increase of pore volume in Mo (VI)-ICTGBs is due to the cavities resulted by eluting Mo (VI) ion from CTMoBs, which suggest that the increase of adsorption capacity in Mo (VI)-ICTGBs is owe to the increase of specific surface area. Two characteristic peaks of the raw CTS material at 2 pH value is one of the most important parameters governing the uptake of metal ions on CTS and the distribution of molybdate ion species ( Static equilibrium test was carried out to study the isothermal adsorption of Mo (VI)-ICTGB. In Where The kinetics of adsorption that describes the solute uptake rate governing the contact time of the sorption reaction is one of the important characteristics that define the efficiency of sorption. Mo (VI) solution (8.000 The data in The adsorption kinetic constants and linear regression values were summarized in Different adsorbents in adsorption for Mo (VI) ions reported in the literature were listed in Table S1 (Seen in Supporting Information). Compared with these adsorbents, Mo (VI)-ICTGBs show advantage in Q (Capacity) value for the adsorption of Mo (VI) ions besides crosslinking chitosan flakes. However, the crosslinking chitosan flakes is poor in reusability as adsorbent. Molybdate waste water contains a lot of nitrate ion. In addition, there are also some Fe Adsorption breakthrough curve for Mo (VI) ions on Mo (VI)-ICTGBs at 25 Ten cycle runs on adsorption/desorption were carried out for Mo (VI) on Mo (VI)-ICTGBs. Sodium hydroxide solution (8.0 The Mo (VI)-ICTGBs were prepared by ionic gel reaction between molybdate and CTS, and TEA was used as crosslinking agent. The process of preparing Mo (VI)-ICTGBs is simple and rapid. The pH value of the mixed coagulation bath is about 6.0, so main species of molybdate is MoO The authors are grateful to partial support from the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: