The tribo-electrostatic method was applied to beneficiate non-coking Indian thermal coal from Ramagundam coal mines containing nearly 45% ash content. The microscopic studies revealed that quartz and kaolinite are the dominant minerals whereas illite, goethite, siderite and pyrite are the minor inclusions in the coal. Contact electrification of ash-forming minerals and coal matter was carried out using different tribo-charger materials of Al, Cu, brass, perspex and teflon. The Cu tribo-charger was found to be optimum to acquire differential charge between ash-forming inorganics and coal matter. The temperature effect on the magnitude of contact charge acquisition was found to be significant. Tests on a laboratory in-house built tribo-electrostatic free-fall separator with minus 300 μm coal showed that the ash content was reduced from 45% to about 18%, and a clean coal product as judged by the washability studies can be obtained. The results illustrate that the non-coking coals can be beneficiated using the scientific knowledge on the response and behaviour of coal and non-coal matters to electric charges.Coal is India's most abundant fossil fuel, and the rapid increase in the country's future power generation to meet the growing demand of the domestic, industrial and agricultural sectors will be based on this fuel. In India, more than 75% of non-coking coal produced is used for power generation. At present, nearly 200 million tonnes/year of coal are used for power generation and the average ash in coals is invariably above 40%. The majority of non-coking coal reserves in India are inferior in quality because of drift origin. Most of the thick seams are banded in nature. The coal matter in these seams is higher in ash content leading to poorer quality because of these bands. The bands themselves are usually in carbonaceous nature and very rarely consist of pure sandstones. As a result the Indian coal seams have basically higher ash content. It was estimated that more than 65% of recoverable resources of non-coking coals are inferior in quality and contain about 40–45% ash. The higher ash percentage is obviously correlated with poor calorific value. However, the advantages of Indian coals are low sulphur, low chloride, low phosphorous, less toxic elements, high ash fusion temperature and refractory nature of ash. Wet beneficiation techniques are generally followed to produce high quality coal products with high recoveries. However, these techniques are not economical for high ash non-coking coal in fine size fractions of − Indian power plants mainly use pulverised coal instead of lump coal for greater efficiency of boilers. These coal-fired plants are among the most polluting sources as indicated by environmentalists and pollution control agencies. Recent environmental regulations prohibit using high ash coals in power plants due to the generation of huge quantities of fly ash, which affects the atmosphere and aesthetics of the nearby plant area. With this background, a project on “Electrostatic Beneficiation of Indian Thermal Coals” has been undertaken at Luleå University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden, in collaboration with Regional Research Laboratory, Bhubaneswar and National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida, financially supported by the Department for Research Cooperation of the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA). In this paper, the initial results achieved on coal with 45% ash content by tribo-electrostatic method are presented and the method's potential for the beneficiation of non-coking thermal coals are discussed. Tribo-electric separation involves charging of particles by contact or friction with other particles or with a third material, usually the walls of a container or pipe, followed by transport or free-fall through an electric field that deflects the particles according to the magnitude and sign of their charge. When two dissimilar particles are in contact or rub against each other, there is a transfer of electrons (charge) from the surface of one particle to the other until the energy of electrons in each material at the interface is equalised. The energy of electrons at the surface of the material is characterised in terms of the Fermi level, and a measure of relative affinity for electrons of the material is the work function, which is the energy to move an electron from the surface to infinity. The material with higher affinity for electrons gains electrons (i.e., lower Fermi level or higher work function) and charges negatively, while the material with lower affinity loses electrons (i.e., higher Fermi level or lower work function) and charges positively. Thus the particle that is positively charged after the particle–particle charging mechanism has a lower work function than the particle that charges negatively. In the case of wall-particle charging, the work function of the material of the wall should lie in between the work function values of the two types of particles involved for creating different polarity. The work function values for various materials such as C, Cu, Al When two metals of different work functions, The charge transfer From Eqs.   Ramgundam coal was ground, screened into different size fractions, and a representative sample from each size fraction was prepared by standard sampling procedure. The washability study was carried out for each size fraction by sink-and-float method by using a mixture of acetone and bromoform medium at different specific gravities ranging from 1.3 to 2.0. The sink-and-float products were washed thoroughly with acetone, dried and analysed for ash. The proximate analysis of sink-and-float products was carried out with Thermo Gravimetric Analyser (TGA-601). The TGA was operated under N The effect of tribo-charger material on charge acquisition by the independent mineral phases was studied using a cylindrical rotating drum of 0.095 m diameter and length where the inside lining can be replaced by copper, brass, steel, aluminium, teflon, perspex and PVC materials. A 5 g of mineral particles is tribo-charged for a fixed time interval and after contact charging, the particles charge polarity and magnitude are measured by a Keithley electrometer. The charge acquired by the particles collected in different bins after tribo-electric separation of coal was also determined. Initially the coal samples were dried in an oven at 100 °C. Then the coal was passed through the vibratory feeder fitted with a copper plate. On sliding through the copper plate, the maceral and mineral particles acquired charge based on their work functions due to frictional charging. The charge acquired by the samples collected at different bins after passing through the electric field was measured using the Keithley electrometer fitted with a Faraday cup. The tribo-electrostatic experimental set-up for the separation of coal macerals from ash forming minerals is presented in In the present tests, the top and bottom gaps of electrodes were maintained at 0.075 and 0.325 m respectively. The electrode A was connected to + Ramagundam coal of − The proximate analysis of bulk Ramagundam coal shows that the coal contain 5.8% moisture, 23.5% volatile matter, 43.2% ash, and 33.3% fixed carbon. Washability studies for two coal size fractions of − The microscopic studies revealed that all three maceral groups of vitrinite, liptinite (exinite) and inertinite were present in the coal. The collotelinite of vitrinite group was dominant in the coal. Vitrinite group of macerals includes very fine grains of mineral matter as shown in The charge acquisition of quartz, kaolinite and illite after contact electrification with different tribo-charging media was studied, because these were the major mineral phases present in the coal. The size distributions of quartz, kaolinite and illite are shown in Different researchers ( The effect of tribo-charger medium on coal separation is shown in The effect of applied voltage at three different temperatures on the charge acquired by the particles is presented in   The charge acquisition of particles collected at different bins after copper tribo-charging at 76 °C is shown in The influence of temperature on charge acquisition by the particles collected in bin 1 (close to positive electrode) and in bin 4 (close to negative electrode) at different voltages is shown in The results of electrostatic coal separation after contact electrification with the copper tribo-charger at 18, 63 and 76 °C are depicted in the same  Three groups of vitrinite, liptinite and inertinite macerals are found in Ramgundam coal where vitrinite and inertinite are predominant. The inorganic mineral matter in the coal contains quartz, illite, kaolinite, goethite, siderite and pyrite. Since the mineral particles, significantly quartz, were observed to be visibly free from coal matter, the Ramagundam coal is suitable for dry electrical beneficiation. The charge acquisition of quartz, kaolinite and illite after contact electrification with different tribo-charging media was studied, because quartz, kaolinite and illite are the major mineral phases in the coal. The results show that quartz is negatively charged with copper, brass, aluminium, steel, copper, PVC and teflon and perspex materials. Kaolinite and illite are also charged negatively with all tribo-charging media except teflon where kaolinite charged positively and charge acquisition by illite found to fluctuate between positive and negative. Based on the magnitude of charge acquisition and polarity, the relative work function of mineral and tribo-charging medium was predicted. Evidently the materials having the work function values in between the work functions of macerals and minerals are suitable to acquire different charge polarity for the coal and non-coal matter during contact electrification and copper was found to be optimum tribo-charger material for coal beneficiation. The temperature of the tribo-charging medium plays an important role in the net charge acquisition of coal particles. With increasing temperature, the charge acquired by the particles also increases. The electrons transfer from the material of lower work function to higher work function increases with increasing temperature, leading to more charge acquisition by the particles. However, the ash percentage of coal in the concentrate is adversely affected with an increase in tribo-charger temperature. Low ash coal was achieved at 18 °C tribo-charger temperature. The applied voltage to the electrode plates has significant influence on the separation of coal macerals from minerals. Although the charge measurement of collected particles at different bins shows that all the particles are negatively charged, particles collected at the positive electrode measured higher negative charge than particles collected at the negative electrode. With increasing voltage there was an increase in the charge of particles collected at both the electrodes at 18 °C but at higher temperatures the particle charge collected at the positive electrode decreased. The reverse occurred with the particles collected at negative electrode. The higher electric field strength caused redistribution of weakly/bipolar charged particles due to considerable deflection of the particles affecting the separation. Therefore, the effective applied voltage needs to be optimum for obtaining good separation. The results clearly indicate that particles collected at the negative electrode contain low ash percent whereas particles collected at the positive electrode comprise high ash percent. This shows that the mineral particles are charged negatively with copper tribo-charger while the macerals charged positively. The present studies showed that it is possible to reduce the 45% ash coal to 18% ash clean coal. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA/SAREC), Stockholm, Sweden. The authors thank Mr. P.S.R. Reddy, Dr. S.K. Biswal and Mr S.K. Misra of Regional Research Laboratory Bhubaneswar, Orissa, India for helpful discussions.