Damage structures in fault zones are well known to exhibit various scaling properties. Typically, previous studies have separated different structural descriptions of localised shear zones in order to extract their scaling properties. In this study, however, we examine simultaneously scaling properties of particles found in shear zones, described here by the particle size distribution power law exponent D, and scaling properties of fracture surface roughness in these same zones, described here by the Hurst exponent, H. We study thin sections of samples of Sidobre granite sheared in the laboratory but left unopened, thereby maintaining the original spatial context of the structures examined. Through spatial analysis we track increase of the particle power law exponent D with increasing local strain state. The Hurst exponent does not show a conclusive trend as a function of the strain state of the fractures for our data set. This article could lead to further work on direct spatial overlap of the two parameters directly along concentrated shear band edges.The knowledge of the damage structure within deformed rocks is of major concern for understanding the mechanical and hydraulic behaviour of the upper crust as it controls both the strength and the permeability of faults. In particular, the friction and the fluid flow during quasi-static or dynamic failure appear to be strongly influenced by the small scale structure ( Observations at small-scale of thin sections sampled within natural faults (e.g. The rupture surfaces in heterogeneous media are characterized by a complex morphology, i.e. roughness. Statistical properties of these surfaces reveal scaling properties that make the statistical proxies (e.g. variance, standard deviation, min–max, …) depend on the scale at which they are estimated ( λ is a scale coefficient and In zones of high damage in faults, both in the laboratory and in natural conditions, the observation of scale-invariance exhibited by the distribution of rock particle sizes is well-established. There appear to be limits on the applicable size ranges of the power law exponents of gouge particle size distributions. Due to observation methods used, the smallest particle sizes in initial investigations had radius measurements of the order of a few μm. More recent studies ( In all of the studies evoked in the above, the rupture surfaces produced by shearing and the particles produced in the damage process are studied separately. Significantly, in the case of rupture surfaces in both laboratory and in field observations, observations are made after denudation (either due to the opening and cleaning of a failed sample or due to the natural erosion removing the gouge). This does not allow an examination of the potential relationship between surface roughness and gouge structure. In this paper, thin sections of granite shear zones are analysed, simultaneously for the scaling properties of the rupture surfaces, and the gouge particle size distribution. This allows a re-assembly of the rupture surface and the gouge structure after their separate analyses, to add information to the existing picture of the mechanisms at work in shearing damage in rock. The thin sections used in the analysis are taken from a cylindrical 40 mm × 100 mm Sidobre granite sample (71% feldspar, 24,5% quartz, 4% mica, 0.5% chlorite) subject to a triaxial test at a confining pressure of 40 MPa. The complete testing apparatus is of stiffness 1 × 10 Images are made of the longitudinal thin section using Scanning Electron Microscopes (SEM), after carbon coating. A Hitachi S-2500 SEM with a W filament is used at two different diaphragm sizes. All images are Back-Scattered Electron images. A range of image magnifications are used; these are given in the Appendix and explained in the following results sections. The injected resin has a different atomic mass to all surrounding minerals and provides a clear distinction of fracture lines in the digital images produced by the SEMs. In order to relate the different fractures to the The following is a brief overview of the image treatment methods used. Complete details are given in the Supplementary Information (SI) section. A Multi-stage Recursive Median filter ( Fracture edges within the images are selected for analysis by approaching the image from one side and analysing fractures met in the path of this scanning direction. In the case of branched fractures, the principle of selection of fracture paths is to start from the edge of the image, or an area of intact rock within the image, and to move towards a fractured area. On encountering a fracture, its height profile is extracted by recording the relative locations of the pixels which represent the fracture front. A preference is given to the longest fractures in the images as this presents an advantage for statistical stability in the roughness analysis. Fractures which have natural high connectivity after the image treatment process are preferred. After the first fracture is encountered, several other possible fracture paths for the same fracture behaviour are also extracted. This leads to a non-deterministic analysis of the fractures in the images selected, in areas where a single macrofracture has not developed. It is found repetitively that different fracture paths at the same site yield insignificant variations in In the case of the gouge particles, after identification of individual particles within the gouge zones, the particle areas are calculated using Matlab functions. This measurement is retained in order to bypass the use of formulae which would assume spherical particles, which is clearly not the case in many of the shear zones analysed. The distributions are described using a power law exponent, relevant to the 2-D nature of the images under analysis, and referred to as Using the Hurst exponents of the retained methods (see Neglecting the variations in the set implies that all fractures can be grouped together in a scaling description but does not explain why this is the case. To look more closely at the structural differences in the set of profiles, they are then sorted into categories attempting to group together different stages in fracture development following In general a high Hurst exponent of 0.8–0.85 for fractures of Type 1. An apparent slight decrease in the Hurst exponent for fractures of Types 2 and 3, compared to Type 1. This trend becomes unclear for Types 4, 5 and 6. Referring to notable observation (1) as just defined, Mode 1 fractures have been found to produce fracture surfaces of We look now at scale invariance in particle size distributions in formed fault zones in the thin section. Initially, several different shear zones are examined within the longitudinal thin section; named A, B, C, D, and E. The SEM images, after segmentation and grain identification, and the cumulative particle size distributions for these five shear areas are shown in Considering now, for the five shear zones in this study, the values of We will now consider only the values of In general, the best correspondence to a power law distribution is found for those windows selected well within an apparently easily-distinguished gouge particle type. Windows overlapping or containing more than one particle type tend to exhibit far greater curvature of the power law (eg. We will now further develop considerations of the particle size distributions in the size range below the cross-over grain diameter Elongated particle shapes are particularly observed on images D and E from the initial series of images in Finally, we have also considered a power law relation between the particle maximum axis lengths and minimum axis lengths for the five shear zones A–E represented in In this study we examine scale invariance present in the structures of shear faults in thin sections of granite, immediately post fault formation, and in the case of unopened samples. Unopened samples allow us to examine different damage structures present in the fault zone, in an in-situ context, and subsequently to re-assemble these different observations of scale invariance for a fuller description of the scale-invariant processes at work. This is an initial article on the topic of scale-invariance in fault rocks involving the simultaneous analysis of two different descriptions of fault structures. The power law exponent of particle size distributions of fractured areas in the vicinity of faults undergoes a progressive increase in value as the particles are sampled in areas progressively approaching gouge zones of high comminution in developed shear zones. Additionally, the fracture surface roughness, described by the Hurst exponent, is looked at in fractures from a large range of locations within the thin section. No continuous general progression is found between the Hurst exponent and the strain state of each fracture as can be judged by its appearance but a slight trend is observed of reducing Hurst exponent for a change from Mode I to low concentrated strain. A better description of the Hurst exponents is found to be a mean value of 0.78 ± 0.07 with a rejection at 95% confidence of the variations in the set for this description. At this stage a direct relation between these two descriptive parameters, the particle size power law exponent and the Hurst exponent, is not definitive for the scales observed in this study. Further work could look more closely at quantifying the slip component on fractures directly at the shear zone edges, and simultaneously the particle size distributions in gouge areas directly adjacent to these specific shear zone edges, with a view to defining an empirical relation directly relating the scaling parameters of gouge particle sizes and fracture roughness in the case of fault zone damage processes. We are grateful, to Christophe Nevado (Geosciences Montpellier) for high quality polished thin sections, to Nathaniel Findling (ISTerre, Grenoble) and Frédéric Charlot (CMTC, Grenoble) for technical help and advice when using SEM, to Jean-Robert Grasso (ISTerre Grenoble) for helpful discussions, to an anonymous reviewer and to Stéphane Santucci for his careful review and suggestions that have contributed to widely enhance the manuscript. We also gratefully acknowledge contributions from TRIGS European programme.  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at