The milling behavior of poly(amide imide), which serves as a prototypical hydrophilic high-performance polymer with a high glass transition temperature, was investigated. Various milling conditions (milling times up to 7h, stirrer tip speeds of 3.4–4.9m/s, and mass concentrations of 5–20%) were tested, and particle sizes as low as d
                     50,3
                     ∼3μm were obtained. The milling was performed at 11°C in an attritor. Differential scanning calorimetry and thermogravimetric analysis were performed before and after milling to investigate the effect of milling on the glass transition temperature and on the decomposition behavior of the polymer. The suspension obtained after milling was observed to be stable without the addition of stabilizers or the adjustment of the pH value, and no negative effect of milling on the polymer properties was observed. The attritor technique proved to be an adequate and efficient milling tool for the production of micrometer-sized high-performance polymer suspensions.Polymer nanoparticles and nanocomposites are of great interest for the manufacturing of nano- and microstructured materials and have been studied extensively throughout the past several years. However, in contrast to ceramic particles, relatively little is known about the milling behavior of polymer particles in stirred media mills. In stirred media milling, mechanical stresses, which are generated by collision with milling balls, act on the milling media and cause them to break into smaller pieces. It is an important process for producing micrometer- and nanometer-sized powder particles, which can be used in various ways, for example, as fillers and pigments, or in shape-forming processes for component fabrication ( In this study, we investigated the milling behavior of poly(amide imide) (PAI). PAI is a thermoplast with generally very good mechanical and thermal properties. Due to high intermolecular interaction and high intramolecular chain stiffness, PAI is one of the strongest and stiffest of all polymers. In particular, unlike most other high-performance polymers, PAI exhibits very good adhesion to hydrophilic surfaces and is therefore very promising as, for example, a coating polymer for ceramics used in various applications. However, PAI is chemically rather resistant, and therefore, no solvents for the polymer with desirable properties (nontoxic, intermediate vapor pressure) exist. Stirred media milling of ceramic particles is well analyzed and described in the literature ( An important parameter that is often used to describe the milling process is the stress intensity Eq. Although many investigations have been carried out on inorganic materials, hardly any studies have focused on the wet-milling behavior of high-performance polymers, such as poly(ether sulfone), poly(ether ether ketone), or poly(amide imide). Because polymers exhibit higher ductility and lower strength than ceramics, the milling behaviors of polymers and ceramics are different, and it is not clear what final particle sizes are feasible. Recently, The seed powder used in this study was the poly(amide imide) powder Torlon The grinding balls were composed of yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ, The milling was carried out in an attritor (model PE 075, Netsch-Feinmahltechnik GmbH). The instrument consisted of a vertically arranged vessel with a volumetric capacity of 750 Particle size analysis was carried out via static light scattering (SLS) (Beckman Coulter LS13320, Beckman Coulter Inc.). Specimens for particle size analysis were prepared by pipetting a few mL of the suspensions at low attritor speeds. Mie theory was used to calculate the size distribution. The real part of the refractive index was taken from The zeta potential was measured with an electroacoustic spectrometer (DT-1202, Quantachrome) at a pH value of 4.5 (mass concentration 2%). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out with a Leo Gemini 1530 at 5 To gain insight into the particle shape and structure before and after milling, scanning electron microscopy was used. Before grinding, the particles appeared slightly agglomerated, but the primary particle size is clearly larger than that of the particles after milling, which indicates that the milling process was at least partially a true milling process and not a pure deagglomeration process. In Particle size measurements after 1, 7, and 30 In addition to the suspension stability, the thermal stability was analyzed by DSC and TGA ( According to Eq. A poly(amide imide) powder with an average particle size We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the