The effects of As(III) and Sb(III) over a concentration range of 0 to 1000mgdm−3 on the electrowinning of nickel from sulphate solutions have been studied. The cathodic current efficiency decreases whilst the energy consumption increases in the presence of arsenic as well as antimony. Both arsenic and antimony depolarise the cathode when added to the nickel sulphate solution resulting in the cathodic reduction of nickel at more positive potentials. X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies revealed that irrespective of the presence of As(III) or Sb(III) in the nickel sulphate bath up to 100mgdm−3, the (200) plane is the most preferred plane of crystal growth. However, at higher concentrations the (111) plane becomes the most preferred one. Scanning electron micrographs show that the crystallites of the electrodeposits obtained in the presence of either As(III) or Sb(III) become non-uniform and are of finer sizes in comparison to that produced from pure nickel sulphate bath, however the deposits deteriorated more in the presence of Sb(III). With the increase in As(III) and Sb(III) in the solution to 1000mgdm−3 the deposits become very brittle and peel off the cathode. Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analyses indicate that the purity of the nickel deposits decreases with the increase in As(III) or Sb(III) content in the electrolytic solutions but the contamination of the deposit was more due to the presence of As(III) when compared with Sb(III) at higher concentrations.Nickel electrodeposition from a variety of electrolytes, including sulphate, chloride, sulphate chloride or sulphamate system has been studied by several researchers. Most of the investigations have been made with respect to current efficiency, polarisation behaviour and deposit structural characteristics ( Nickel metal is not only recovered from primary nickel ores but also by recycling of secondary resources such as scraps from obsolete consumer goods, scraps generated from fabricating plants during forming and shaping operations, spent batteries etc. ( Nickel is conventionally electrowon in the diaphragm cells which involves high capital as well as operating cost and does not allow the cells to run at higher current densities resulting in lower production capacity ( All the electrowinning experiments were conducted in an electrolytic cell made of glass containing aqueous solution of nickel sulphate (Ni, 50 Prior to electrowinning and polarisation studies, the surface of the cathodes were polished with 400 and 1200 grade silicon carbide paper and then rinsed with 1 The polarisation behaviour of the cathode during electrowinning of nickel in the presence and absence of As(III) or Sb(III) was observed using cyclic voltammetric technique. This study was carried out in a three electrode glass cell using Metrohm potentiostat/galvanostat model 128A. SS 304 and Pb–Sb sheets were used as working and counter electrodes, respectively. Standard Calomel Electrode (SCE) was taken as the reference electrode. Voltametric scans were performed in the potential range of − X-ray diffraction studies have been carried out to determine the preferred crystal orientations of the nickel deposits from the X-ray diffractograms generated from X-ray Diffractometer (PAN ANALYTICAL PW 1830). The changes in surface morphology and contamination of the deposits have been investigated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi) and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analyser. With the increase in the concentration of As(III) or Sb(III) in the nickel sulphate solution, the consequential effects on current efficiency (CE) for nickel electrowinning are shown in To understand the behaviour of the cathode towards As(III) and Sb(III) in the nickel sulphate solution, cyclic voltammetry studies were carried out. The polarisation behaviour of the cathode during electroreduction of nickel from sulphate solutions in the absence and presence of As(III) is shown in the corresponding current–voltage profile shown in Apart from all the above reactions the following two probable reactions cannot be ignored. Thus, in the present study all the above reactions could be possible during nickel electrowinning which could result in contamination of the deposits. It is also important to note that as compared to the concentration of nickel, the concentration of As or Sb is very low and due to diffusion limitations, nickel ions will reduce preferentially to As or Sb as was observed from the current–potential profiles. Presumably the presence of As(III) and Sb(III) in the nickel solution will have remarkable effect on the crystal growth pattern and deposit morphology of the nickel deposits.   The changes in the surface morphology of the cathodic deposits due to the presence of As(III) or Sb(III) in the electrolytic solutions were more lucidly evaluated by analysing their scanning electron micrographs ( It can be noted that presence of Sb(III) in the solution also resulted in particle size reduction (  The presence of either As(III) or Sb(III) reduces the cathodic current efficiency and increases the energy consumption during electrowinning of nickel from sulphate solutions. Depolarisation of the cathode occurs in the presence of As(III) or Sb(III) resulting in the electroreduction of nickel ions at more positive potentials. The preferred plane of orientation during crystal growth shifted from (200) to (111) in the presence of ≥ Both As(III) and Sb(III) when present in the nickel solution result in grain refining effect, however the deposits deteriorated more in the presence of Sb(III). The purity of the nickel deposits decreases with the increase in As(III) or Sb(III) content in the electrolytic solutions but the contamination of the deposit was more due to the presence of As(III) when compared with Sb(III) at higher concentrations. The authors thank Professor B.K. Mishra, Director, CSIR-IMMT for his support and encouragement to publish this work.