Hypercross-linked polymeric adsorbing materials are obtained under conditions that (i) their polymeric network is formed in the presence of large amounts of a thermodynamically good solvent (porogen) and (ii) the network is rigid. Hypercross-linked polystyrene is a transparent microporous low-density material with an apparent inner surface area of over 1000 m2/g and an unprecedented adsorption capacity. To enhance the mass transfer, the adsorbent beads may be provided with large transport pores, in addition to the inherent micropores; these beads are opaque. Hypercross-linked polystyrene sorbents are widely used for large scale adsorption of organic compounds from aqueous and gaseous media and for solid-phase extraction of trace components. Novel perspective application areas of the materials are high-performance liquid chromatography column packings and blood purification. Present mini-review summarises basic principles of obtaining hypercross-linked materials, their structural peculiarities and distinguishing properties, as well as major application areas. Important new unpublished data are also included.Modern liquid chromatography involves a whole series of really large, but rather independent areas such as water treatment, hydrometallurgy, ion-exchange, sample preparation, high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), ion chromatography, affinity chromatography, hemoperfusion, etc. Some of these areas exploit entirely frontal analysis, others are based ether on elution chromatography or on displacement chromatography. Even the terminology used by specialists of the different areas may differ substantially. However, column packing materials used in several different techniques are often identical, at least with respect to their chemical nature. Such as ion exchanging materials, activated carbons and neutral polystyrene-type resins. First styrene–divinylbenzene copolymers were synthesised in 1934 by Staudinger and Heuer Permanent porosity is characteristic of macroporous styrene copolymers, i.e. materials of second generation. They emerged in 1952 as a result of the efforts of several independent research groups, starting with the first USA patent by McBurney A substantially different network structure results from crosslinking polymerisation in the presence of a thermodynamically good solvent taken as the porogen. Here, no micro-phase separation occurs because of the full compatibility of the porogen with the polymer. An extended microporous network builds up under these conditions in the form of a homogeneous gel swollen with the porogen. Removing the porogen results in a low-density transparent microporous polymer of an extremely high inner surface area of over 1000 m A whole series of hypercross-linked polystyrene-based adsorbing materials is manufactured by Purolite International (Wales, UK) since 1993 under the trade name “Macronet Hypersol”. The list includes neutral hydrophobic adsorbents such as MN-200, as well as a series of chemically functionalyzed materials such as sulfonated resin MN-500. Some of the resins contain large transport macropores for facilitating kinetically limited processes and treating large volumes at high flow-rates. The other group like MN-100, are without macroporosity and efficiently discriminate large molecules from small molecules. Adsorption properties of hypercross-linked materials were summarised in a review Of rapidly increasing importance could be fine polishing of potable water. As Street et al. Unexpectedly, neutral hypercross-linked polystyrene having no functional groups was found to display a high affinity to heavy metal ions. Thus, mercury(II) ions slowly adsorb from acetate or nitric acid solutions in amounts of up to 400 mg Hg per 1 g of the polymer Formation of hypercross-linked networks has finally become a well understood and safely controlled process, which provides several possibilities for fine tuning the porous structure of the final material. Many variables can be operated, such as the amount, functionality, molecular length and conformational rigidity of cross-links, and also the amount and thermodynamic quality of the porogens. As already mentioned, precipitating porogens lead to macroporous materials, whereas thermodynamically good solvents produce microporosity. This regularity leads to a suggestion that Θ-solvents (the border between good solvents and precipitating media) when used as porogens during the formation of the hypercross-linked network, may result in the formation of an intermediate-size pores, between 20 and 200 Å in diameter. Such “mesoporous” polymers could prove efficient in the adsorption of middle-size molecules. One such acute problem is known to exist in the dialysis treatment of patients with malfunctioning kidneys. Dialysis procedures easily remove excess water and small toxic molecules, like urea, from patient’s blood, whereas large toxic molecules as β Extremely high adsorption capacity and the ability to be easily regenerated makes hypercross-linked polystyrene the material of choice for concentrating trace organic compounds by solid-phase extraction (SPE) technique. Indeed, a series of novel SPE materials appeared on the market, namely, Purosep (Purolite, Wales, UK), Isolut-ENV+ (International Sorbent Technology, Cambridge, UK), LiChrolut EN (Merck, Germany). It has been repeatably shown that they effectively adsorb the whole range of organic contaminants. They proved to be especially suitable for medium to highly polar substances. Unmodified phenol readily adsorbs on Purosep-200 and can be quantitated in a simple on-line system One potentially perspective, but barely examined thus far area of application of hypercross-linked polystyrene is HPLC column packing materials. Due to an extremely high degree of crosslinking and high mechanical strength, the microbeads should easily withstand high pressure drops in the column. Indeed, this has been shown to be the case All the above properties of hypercross-linked polystyrene make the packing rather versatile, useful for several different kinds of chromatography. First of all for reversed-phase, distribution, size-exclusion chromatography modes. The mechanism of retention on the packing remains to be examined in detail. There are no measurable amounts of polar and charged groups on the polymer surface The strong hydrophobic character of the hypercross-linked polystyrene packing and its expressed tendency to enter π–π interactions with the solutes have been revealed by analytical scale chromatography experiments with several classes of compounds, such as substituted phenols, phenylene diamines, aliphatic and aromatic acids, dialkyl phthalates, including aqueous organic and aqueous eluents with pH values varying from strongly acidic to 11.5 An outstanding and surprising property of the new packing material is that the efficiency of the column was found to drop only insignificantly with the flow-rate of the eluent increasing to very high values Finally, it could be mentioned that scaling down the size of beads of expanded hypercross-linked polystyrene networks can be continued to nanosponges ( The authors are grateful to Dr K. Sochilina (Purolite Int.) for providing an experimental sample of 10 μm monodisperse hypercross-linked polystyrene material.