Early infection after open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of a limb bone is defined as bacteriologically documented, deep and/or superficial surgical-site infection (SSI) diagnosed within 6months after the surgical procedure. This interval is arbitrarily considered sufficient to obtain fracture healing. The treatment of early infection after ORIF should be decided by a multidisciplinary team. The principles are the same as for revision arthroplasty. Superficial SSIs should be differentiated from deep SSIs, based on the results of bacteriological specimens collected using flawless technique. A turning point in the local microbial ecology occurs around the third or fourth week, when a biofilm develops around metallic implants. This biofilm protects the bacteria. The treatment relies on both non-operative and operative measures, which are selected based on the time to occurrence of the infection, condition of the soft tissues, and stage of bone healing. Both the surgical strategy and the antibiotic regimen should be determined during a multidisciplinary discussion. When treating superficial SSIs after ORIF, soft-tissue management is the main challenge. The treatment differs according to whether the hardware is covered or exposed. Defects in the skin and/or fascia can be managed using reliable reconstructive surgery techniques, either immediately or after a brief period of vacuum-assisted closure. In deep SSIs, deciding whether to leave or to remove the hardware is difficult. If the hardware is removed, the fracture site can be stabilised provisionally using either external fixation or a cement rod. Once infection control is achieved, several measures can be taken to stimulate bone healing before the end of the classical 6-month interval. If the hardware was removed, then internal fixation must be performed once the infection is eradicated.Early infection complicating open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of a limb fracture is often a challenge for both the surgeon and the patient. The patient may view the infection as a second unfair blow dealt by a surgeon who cannot be trusted, and the surgeon is legally liable for the outcome The incidence rate of early SSIs after scheduled arthroplasty has been extensively studied. In contrast, data are scarce for early post-traumatic SSIs, whose incidence rate has been estimated at 1 to 4%, with variations according to the fracture site and circumstances of the injury Although revision surgery occupies a place of prominence in the treatment of early SSIs complicating ORIF of long-bone fractures (SSI-ORIF), a multidisciplinary team of specialists must be involved in the treatment decisions. The treatment principles closely resemble those used for revision arthroplasty procedures This conference is based on a literature review that gave preference to recent work in large patient samples and/or to studies by French authors and medical-surgical teams in university hospitals. The key issues can be addressed via six questions. Early fracture-site colonisation by one or several bacteria is the simplest definition. The depth of the infection may be challenging to determine, however, particularly as the long limb bones (humerus, radius, ulna, femur, and tibia) are covered by layers of skin, fascia, and muscle that vary in thickness. Guidelines about SSIs distinguish superficial SSIs, which affect the incision but do not extend to the fracture site, and deep SSIs, defined as established infection of the bone at the fracture site Two comments are in order regarding the impact of skin breaks over a fracture of a long limb bone: everyday practice teaches that local outcomes are often less favourable after ORIF than after elective surgical procedures, particularly when the skin and adjacent soft tissues are damaged during the injury. This fact prompted Oestern and Tscherne to develop a classification for soft tissue injuries adjacent to fractures under intact skin disorders in healing of the traumatic and/or surgical wounds may occur during the first few post-operative weeks. Similar healing disorders have been reported after prosthetic surgery. Presentations include wound inflammation, a serous discharge, and partial dehiscence Superficial SSI is characterised by bacterial colonisation of the skin and subcutaneous tissue that does not extend in depth through the barrier of muscles and fascia overlying the fracture site. Both the anatomic relationships of the fracture site and the fixation technique used play a major role in the course of superficial SSIs. Thus, when the fracture site is located immediately under the subcutaneous tissue and, most importantly, when latero-cortical fixation material is implanted, spread of the infection beyond the superficial plane is virtually unavoidable. Both the clinical and the bacteriological features of SSI-ORIF deserve attention. There are three main clinical presentations: a purulent discharge from the incision and/or surgical site with a fever, although strongly suggestive, is the least common presentation; healing disorders and/or unwanted and unusual local symptoms (local or regional pain or joint stiffness) are less obvious signs of infection; absence of radiological evidence of bone healing after a few Laboratory abnormalities may contribute to the diagnosis. However, in the early post-operative period, changes in laboratory parameters are non-specific. They may reflect the inflammatory response to the traumatic and surgical insults. For the serum C-reactive protein (CRP) level, the change over time is more helpful than the absolute value The definitive diagnosis of SSI-ORIF requires identification of a micro-organism within the surgical site. Presence of a micro-organism is the only objective finding that differentiates infections from healing disorders. Consequently, scrupulous technique must be used when collecting the samples. Swabbing is unreliable, because the surgical incisions and traumatic lacerations are usually contaminated by the resident flora The sampling technique varies with the condition of the skin if the wound is healed, skin preparation is the same as for ORIF: local and regional detersion, rinsing, and painting with an antiseptic agent. The surgical approach and/or fracture site are aspirated using either a large bore needle or a catheter on a metallic guidewire; in the event of wound dehiscence or discharge from a fistula, samples are obtained using a semi-rigid catheter that is gradually advanced as deeply as possible into the surgical site down to the bone; during early revision surgery for any reason, multiple deep samples should be obtained routinely from the surgical site. The optimal number of samples depends on the local conditions and amount of abnormal tissue or fluids. Five is the recommended number of samples. However, the collection of three samples from different sites spaced as far apart as possible is acceptable. The surgeon must ensure that the samples are carried promptly to the laboratory and accompanied with a detailed description of the clinical features. Samples are sent in a sterile vial for smears and cultures and in a heparinised vial for cytological testing. If the sample is small or the time to arrival at the laboratory exceeds 2 The results should be interpreted and discussed with the bacteriologist to reach a consensus about whether the patient has SSI-ORIF. Identification of a pathogenic micro-organism (e.g., During the early post-operative period after ORIF, a variety of healing disorders may develop. The bacteriological samples are negative. Healing disorders do not indicate an infection but may promote the development of an infection. An SSI should not be considered superficial when the fractured bone lies immediately under the skin. The clinical and laboratory manifestations may be more or less suggestive of SSI-ORIF. The definitive diagnosis is established when an organism is recovered from at least three, and optimally five, samples taken from sites in contact with the hardware and/or from the deepest portion of the surgical approach. Two different pathogenic mechanisms can lead to SSI-ORIF. One is infection due to skin-wound contamination caused by the injury and persisting despite initial debridement. The other is nosocomial infection of an initially closed fracture. In both cases, SSI-ORIF can be viewed as indicating failure of prophylactic antibiotic therapy. Pre-existing comorbidities may increase the risk of infection. Before elective surgery, patients can be treated for as long as needed to achieve optimal stabilisation of their comorbidities. In trauma patients, in contrast, there is no time to treat the comorbidities or ensure optimal preparation of the surgical site. Changes in population demographics in recent decades have modified the epidemiology of traumatic injuries. Patients with fractures are older and often in poor general health. The frequency of specific fracture types such as peri-prosthetic fractures has increased. These factors are associated with a greater risk of SSI-ORIF. The bacterial contamination responsible for SSI-ORIF can be related to either of two mechanisms, which can be differentiated based on time of occurrence and pathogenesis. One is direct inoculation of bacteria, during either the traumatic skin injury or the internal fixation. The other is hematogenous contamination by bacteria released from another site (e.g., catheter, urine, or lungs), which travel to the ORIF site via the bloodstream. Hematogenous contamination occurs chiefly in patients with multiple fractures who are managed in the intensive care unit and in those with a single fracture but severe comorbidities Bacterial contamination of the fractured bone generates a local inflammatory response that causes blood vessel thrombosis and, therefore, tissue necrosis and fibrosis. Antibiotics cannot readily penetrate necrotic or fibrotic tissue, which constitutes a haven for bacteria. These histopathological considerations underline the importance of local debridement, which should be repeated if necessary Risk factors for SSI-ORIF include a skin break over the fracture site, which inevitably leads to contamination, and a number of comorbidities. The classification of open fractures developed by Gustilo and Anderson Bacteria located at sites of injury are initially free-floating (i.e., planktonic). In the absence of effective treatment, the bacteria adhere to the metallic hardware and generate a biofilm as part of their survival strategy Development of a biofilm is inevitable. Consequently, two stages of SSI-ORIF can be differentiated depending on whether the bacteria are at the planktonic phase or attached to a biofilm. The early stage precedes the development of the biofilm, which occurs about 3 weeks after the fracture, i.e., at the end of the interval needed for the traumatic injury and/or surgical incisions to heal fully. The late stage starts after 3–4 SSI-ORIF is related to initial contamination through a soft-tissue break due to the trauma or through the surgical incisions. Comorbidities and pre-existing skin abnormalities increase the risk of SSI-ORIF. Local tissue changes due to the injury and/or surgical procedure play a pivotal role in the development and persistence of SSI-ORIF. More specifically, necrosis of the soft tissues and bone worsen and perpetuate the infection. A turning point in bacterial ecology occurs after 3–4 An often challenging decision for the trauma surgeon is whether to leave the hardware in place, under the assumption that antibiotic therapy will suffice to eradicate the infection, or to remove the hardware while administering appropriate antibiotics. In the past, trauma surgeons managed SSI-ORIF alone, after establishing the diagnosis on an emergency basis or during a scheduled follow-up visit. Now, both the bacteriologist and the infectious diseases specialist play an active part in managing SSI-ORIF. The time to treatment initiation varies with the clinical presentation. In a patient with obvious local and systemic signs of infection, the treatment can be started early, before the bacteriological results become available; if needed, adjustments can be made when the organism is identified. In contrast, after failure of the first line of treatment the infection should be categorised as complex and managed at a referral centre (guideline issued by the French General Healthcare Agency [DGOS] in December 2010). A detailed evaluation of the situation is then the first step. The principles of treatment stem from the pathophysiology of the infection and behaviour of the bacteria. Few data have been published on the principles that should guide the treatment of SSI-ORIF. Guidance can be taken, however, from the abundant information about arthroplasty infections Without concomitant surgery, antibiotic therapy alone cannot ensure a full recovery from SSI-ORIF, even when appropriate drugs are used in high dosages. Surgery must be performed also. The traumatic injury and/or surgical approaches, including the fracture site, should be aggressively debrided and washed. Necrotic tissue is a haven for bacteria and must be completely removed. Similarly, bone fragments that have lost their blood supply will inevitably undergo necrosis and must be removed. Power-pulsed lavage is an effective cleansing method The two main issues are whether the hardware should be left or removed and how coverage of the surgical incisions and traumatic injuries can be achieved. In the event of successful fracture reduction and optimal mechanical performance of the fixation material followed by a diagnosis of SSI-ORIF within 3–4 one-stage removal of all the hardware followed by internal fixation, i.e., the equivalent of one-stage exchange arthroplasty; two-stage management with removal of the hardware, fracture site stabilisation using orthopaedic methods (pin traction or plaster cast) and, finally, internal fixation; an intermediate strategy consisting in removal of the deep hardware and stabilisation by an external fixator, which may suffice to obtain fracture healing; if the fracture does not heal, internal fixation is performed. Antibiotics that act synergistically on the causative micro-organism(s) must be given parenterally for 4–6 Surgery is the mainstay of the management of SSI-ORIF. The type of procedure is selected based on the time since ORIF, damage to the soft tissues, and stability of the fixation. The surgical strategy and antibiotic treatment should be discussed during a multidisciplinary meeting. The optimal antibiotic treatment should be determined by consensus among the surgeon, bacteriologist, and infectious diseases specialist. Although antibiotics are indispensable, a full recovery cannot be achieved without an effective surgical procedure. At the limbs, superficial fracture sites consist of the distal humerus, proximal ulna, and proximal and distal tibial metaphyses and epiphyses. The fracture site is covered only by the skin, the subcutaneous tissue, and a thin fascia. Consequently, necrosis due to the injury or to impingement of the hardware on the skin, however limited, leads to an SSI-ORIF with exposure of the fixation material. A direct impact and/or marked displacement of the bone fragments may damage the tissues overlying the fracture. Two classification systems exist for these lesions, one developed by Tscherne for closed fractures This section is largely based on the results of multicentre prospective observational studies reported recently at a SoFCOT meeting The general principles described above should be followed. Further recommendations can be made depending on the time to the infection. The hardware can be left in place. Conservative debridement is performed and the skin is then re-sutured. Appropriate antibiotics must be given. This is the most favourable situation. If the debridement or necrosis caused by the injury and infection result in exposure of the hardware, a reconstructive procedure is performed immediately. The most reliable procedure is coverage with a local flap, i.e., a pedicled latissimus dorsi flap for the posterior aspect of the elbow, a medial gastrocnemius flap for the anterior knee, a lateral supra-malleolar flap for the ankle, or a bipedicled fascio-cutaneous flap for the middle third of the leg. The advice or active involvement of a plastic and reconstructive surgeon must be obtained in complex cases. A vacuum dressing combined with continuous irrigation keeps the wound clean and allows granulation tissue to develop, after which coverage can be performed (using a split-thickness skin graft or flap). This simple method was introduced only recently and needs to be assessed in comparative studies When a delayed infection develops, the hardware must be removed. Two situations can be distinguished based on the condition of the skin. Stabilisation should be provided temporarily by non-invasive immobilisation or external fixation. If the fracture healing process is well under way, the temporary stabilisation method is continued until healing is complete, after which it can be stopped with no further treatment. Otherwise, the first step consists in controlling the infection. Internal fixation is then performed using a two-step technique to stimulate bone formation. In this unfavourable situation, the fixation material must be removed, the site covered, and the fracture stabilised. After removal of the fixation material, the trauma surgeon or a reconstructive surgeon fashions a flap to cover the site. Stabilisation of the limb is achieved by external fixation. If needed, the joint may be bridged temporarily until the infection is eradicated, allowing internal fixation. When SSI-ORIF develops at a superficial site, the main challenge is soft-tissue management. The treatment depends on whether the material is covered or exposed. Fascio-cutaneous defects should be managed using a reliable reconstructive procedure, either immediately or secondarily. A vacuum dressing can be used for a brief period until a reconstructive procedure can be performed. During this period, any comorbidity can be optimally controlled. Furthermore, reconstruction is performed as a scheduled procedure, with the best possible technical and human resources. When the fixation material must be removed, external fixation is useful to stabilise the site and allow fracture healing. External fixation may be used until the fracture heals or only until internal fixation can be performed. Deep ORIF sites at the long limb bones are the diaphyses of the humerus, radius, ulna, femur, and tibia. Nails and plates are the two types of material used for primary internal fixation at the tibia and, above all, the humerus. For femoral fractures, the treatment of choice is locked reamed nailing. Forearm fractures are chiefly managed by latero-cortical plate fixation. Skin breaks caused by the injury are of less concern in deep fractures, which are protected by the overlying muscle and fascia. The medial tibia is an exception, however, as it is superficial and directly receives the impact during the trauma. After intramedullary nailing, surgical sites include the approach used to introduce the nail, the approach for the locking screws, and in some cases a soft-tissue injury produced during the trauma. In contrast, latero-cortical plate fixation usually requires a single approach. Regardless of their number, surgical sites must be debrided, trimmed, and washed down to the hardware. The above-described general principles should be followed: the hardware is left in place in immediate infection and removed in delayed infection. However, the choice between these two options should be modulated by the condition of the skin after debridement, type of internal fixation material, and progression of the bone healing process. In immediate SSI-ORIFs, the fixation material can be left in place. Soft-tissue management is the main issue but is simpler at deep than at superficial sites, since primary closure of the various incisions is usually feasible. In closed or low-grade open fractures, fracture-site coverage and skin closure are often feasible and always recommended In delayed SSI-ORIF, the fixation material must be completely removed to eradicate the infection. Several options are available to stabilise the fracture: with both intramedullary nailing and plate fixation, provided tight, viable skin closure can be achieved, one-stage exchange of the material can be performed (using the same or a different fixation method) if the fracture site is still unstable; with plate fixation (e.g., for a fracture of the humeral or tibial diaphysis), the two metaphyses are intact and the infection is confined to the diaphysis. In this situation, external fixation until complete fracture healing is a reliable solution; after removal of an intramedullary nail, temporary stabilisation can be obtained by inserting a custom-made cement rod fashioned over a guidewire finally, when stringent criteria are met (mechanically stable construct, complete local debridement, and nearly complete bone healing), the fixation material can be left in place. Appropriate antibiotic therapy should be given. The final curative treatment of the infection is performed when the material is removed, after the fracture site is fully healed. A multidisciplinary discussion is indispensable, and this course of action should be followed only if agreed on by all participants. In deep SSI-ORIFs, the key decision is whether to leave or to remove the fixation material (intramedullary nail or latero-cortical plate). Temporary stabilisation after removal of the material can be achieved using external fixation or a custom-made cement rod. Internal fixation is then performed secondarily. Early infection is among the leading causes of non-union. The bone formation needed to achieve healing can occur only if three conditions are met: the fracture site is covered, there is no infection, and only minimal gaps separate the fragments. Complete eradication of the infection is a prerequisite to fracture healing. In SSI-ORIF, eradication of the infection can be confirmed only after discontinuation of the antibiotics, i.e., after 2–3 The first step is to confirm the eradication of the infection, based on a converging set of findings from the clinical evaluation (complete healing of all incisions with no local or regional evidence of inflammation), laboratory tests (return to normal of CRP levels and other markers for inflammation), and imaging studies (signs of fracture healing), together with the knowledge that a full course of antibiotic treatment was given If the initial fixation material is still in place, its nature governs the type of method used to enhance bone healing. The simplest methods are removal of the locking screws to activate a nail-fixation site and grafting of autologous bone marrow or platelets If the internal fixation material has been removed, the strategy depends on the method used for temporary stabilisation. In the event of external fixation, the device is best removed to allow healing of the pin insertion sites. Internal fixation is then performed after 1–2 In early SSI-ORIF, once the infection is controlled, active treatments aimed at enhancing bone formation should be considered. If the infected fixation material is removed, repeat internal fixation must be performed once the infection is eradicated. SSI-ORIF is fairly uncommon after closed and low-grade open fractures. The frequency of these infections should be monitored carefully in each centre The prevention of SSI-ORIF requires an accurate evaluation of the skin at the injury site. Pre-operative skin preparation is challenging and should be performed after the patient is sedated or under general anaesthesia The management of SSI-ORIF draws from that of joint prosthesis infections, as changes in bacterial ecology are similar in both situations, with the major turning point being establishment of a biofilm. Paul Bonnevialle has no conflicts of interest related directly to this lecture. He is an education and research consultant for Amplitude, Stryker, and DePuy-Synthes. I am grateful to Dr Marion Grare, microbiologist; Prof. Jean Michel Laffosse, head of the CRIOC Grand Sud-ouest; Dr Aymeric André, reconstructive surgeon; and the entire staff of the trauma department at the Toulouse University Hospital. I am indebted to Prof. Denis Huten for valuable advice and to Dr Jean Yves Jenny and Dr Simon Marmor for critically revising the manuscript.