Rare earth elements (REE) can be efficiently extracted from umbers, ferromanganese metalliferous sediments of the Troodos ophiolite (Cyprus) by simple leaching and selective precipitation, without accumulation of radioactive by-products. Umbers are dominantly composed of amorphous Fe and Mn oxides with minor goethite, quartz and zeolites, and contain 350–500 mg kg
                     −1 of rare earth elements and yttrium (REY), 200 times lower than many of the major REY source ores. To compensate for relatively low grades, a cost-effective extraction process was developed that utilises a weak lixiviant concentration (0.1–1.5 N) and short reaction times (5 min to 11 h). Acid solutions recover 70–85% of the initial sample REY content even at 20 °C. By contrast, extraction using ionic solutions of NaCl and ammonium sulphate proved ineffective. Acid recoveries of REY increase by nearly 10% at 70 °C and the use of different acids (HCl, HNO3, H2SO4) yields comparable results. The main impurities in the leachate include Ca and Na at even the weakest acid concentration (0.1 N). However, two-step leaching method greatly reduces concentrations of impurities in the REY-rich liquor, although with REY losses approaching 20%. Purification of the leach liquor via selective precipitation of REY as an oxalate is highly efficient although pH dependent. With maximum REY precipitation (96–99%) occurring between pH 1 and 2, the precise adjustment of pH allows separation of REY from other precipitating impurities (Ca). The maximum purity of the precipitate is achieved at pH 1.1 (>65%). Strong and consistent fractionation along the lanthanide series observed during the precipitation experiments has been successfully explained using a speciation modelling software (PHREEQC). The uptake of REY by oxalate in the experiments closely follows the bell-shape distribution of REY-oxalate solid complexes stability constant (−log β (RE2Ox3·nH2O)) replicating the fractionation trends observed at pH < 1.1. In addition, the modelling demonstrates that at equivalent REE concentration in solution, oxalate precipitates fractionate REY in the following order: middle REE > light REE ≫ heavy REE. This ordering and the variable degrees of uptake reflects the interplay of aqueous REY-oxalate complexes (log HOxβ1, Oxβ1 and Oxβ2) with the natural fractionation induced by solid REY-oxalate stability constant distribution. Overall, the combined leaching process and selective oxalate precipitation produces a total enrichment factor ranging between 1400 and 2400 for REY from the sample to the oxalate precipitate in a simple two-step process forming a high-purity end-product of mixed REY.The perceived supply risk for essential materials used in the development of green energy and other state-of-the art technologies provides motivation to investigate new sources for these raw materials. Many are characterized as “critical”, given supply risks posed by geographic location, the economic and political stability of producing countries, limited possibilities for substitution and currently low-levels of recycling (European Solvent extraction constitutes the most common treatment of REE-bearing minerals, such as xenotime (YPO Another problem associated with REY production is the handling of radioactive waste as most REY-rich primary magmatic deposits possess high concentrations of actinides; monazite contains 4–12 wt% Th and although U concentrations are generally low, anomalous content of up to 14 wt% can occur ( Considering the problems associated with magmatic-related REY deposits and despite their abundance, alternative sources of REE more readily beneficiated with low radioactive waste are attracting attention alongside efforts to increase recycling of REY from scrap or end-of-life consumer products. The abundance of neodymium-iron-boron magnets (NdFeB) in cell phones, hard drives and wind turbines forms the major target for this recycling effort with promising results on Nd recovery in the laboratory ( This study investigates the potential recovery of REY from umbers, metalliferous sediments of the Troodos massif in Cyprus, as analogue to numerous oxide-based deposits found on-land that may provide an alternative to magmatic-related REY deposits that currently dominate global supply. Herein, we report the influence of various kinetic parameters such as the nature and concentration of lixiviant, reaction times, temperature and pulp density, on the release of REY during simple and sequential leaching experiments. We also explore in detail the efficiency of oxalate precipitation for the selective extraction of low concentration REY from other impurities present in the leach liquor via pH-dependent experiment and geochemical modelling. Umber deposits constitute the basal facies of the sedimentary sequence that accumulated above the extrusive lavas of the Troodos ophiolitic massif, Cyprus. These metalliferous formations resulted from the precipitation and accumulation on the paleo seafloor of Fe and Mn oxides from high temperature hydrothermal solutions in the Tethyan Ocean 91 million years ago ( Umbers comprise brown Fe-Mn-rich mudstones with an amorphous oxyhydroxides-dominated mineralogy, formed by the accumulation of hydrothermal plume fall-out of Fe-Mn oxyhydroxides ( These Fe-Mn oxide formations thus have similar concentrations to the ion-adsorption clay (IAC) deposits that are mined in southern China (ΣREY = 300–1500 mg kg Leaching experiments were undertaken to investigate the potential recovery of REY from the metalliferous sediments. Leaching experiments tested a variety of common inorganic acids, such as nitric, sulphuric and hydrochloric acid, as well as ion exchange solutions of sodium chloride and ammonium sulphate, which are widely used in the treatment of IAC deposits in China ( Batch reactions experiments were performed using 1–10 g of powdered samples mixed with the appropriate volume of lixiviant for the desired pulp density in closed 500 mL Erlenmeyer flasks. The kinetic influence of temperature on leaching efficiency was investigated at controlled temperature (40 and 70 °C) by mixing powdered samples and acid solutions (1N HCl, HNO Sample PJ-CY-2014-91 ( The precipitation of REY from a pregnant leach liquor was investigated by the addition of ammonium oxalate at various pH values. A stock leach solution (SLS) was first produced by the leaching of 20 g of umber by 600 mL of 1 N HCl over 2 h at laboratory temperature (∼21 °C). This solution was used as a reference material for all further precipitation experiments and its composition after filtration of the solid residue through 0.45 μm cellulose nitrate membrane filters is presented in Major, trace and rare earth elements concentrations were determined by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) using an Element X-series 2 at National Oceanography Centre Southampton (NOCS). Solutions for measurement by ICP-MS were diluted to appropriate total concentrations with a 3% nitric acid solution containing an internal spike with In-Re (5 μg kg Imaging of the oxalate precipitate was obtained by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) at University of Southampton using a Carl Zeiss LEO1450VP. The instrument used an operating voltage of 20 kV and a working distance of 19 mm. The AZtec Energy Software was used for the processing of energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) with a process time of 5 on an average of 3300 counts s A numerical modelling approach, reproducing the conditions of the precipitation experiment was developed to assess rare earth element fractionation results in the oxalate precipitate. Modelling calculations were performed using the hydrogeochemical code PHREEQC version 3.3.9 ( Leaching experiments using ammonium sulphate ((NH₄)₂SO₄) or sodium chloride (NaCl) at different concentrations (0.05–1.75 N) and at a LS ratio high enough for the electrolytes not to be considered a limiting reactant (up to 100:1) are not effective for the leaching of REY from umbers ( Acid-promoted release of REY displays hyperbolic trends of recovery for all kinetic parameters tested ( Another important factor influencing REY recovery is the Liquid-to-Solid (LS) ratio, or pulp density. REY yields increase with increasing LS ratio up to 20 with recovery rates of 72%, 83% and 82% for nitric, sulphuric and hydrochloric acid respectively. Further improvements in REY recovery is only minor at higher LS ratios for nitric and hydrochloric acid. In contrast, an improvement of nearly 10% is achieved with sulphuric acid between SL ratio of 20 and 100. This effect can be partly explained by the partial neutralisation of the diluted acid during the reaction with umbers ( A threshold reaction time greater than 100 min is observed for the two acids tested here with only minor improvements in REY recoveries for longer leaching times ( As acid activity increases with temperature, elemental recovery in the leach increases as a function of temperature. Recovery for REY increases by 19% when using HCl as the leaching temperature rises from 20 to 70 °C, ultimately reaching 93% recovery of the initial REY content. However, no improvement in REY recovery is observed when increasing the temperature for the nitric and sulphuric acid leach. These results show that temperature is a key parameter during REY recovery using HCl especially at temperatures of around 70 °C. In all experiments, the recovery of U and Th follow similar trends to the REY but reaching asymptotic recoveries between 20 and 50% for Th and 40–70% for U across the range of parameters tested. Despite the discernible mobilisation of these elements, their combined concentrations are below 3 mg kg Simple leaching experiments recovered >80% of the initial REY content of the sample with acid concentrations greater than 0.8 N. Unfortunately, undesirable impurities such as Ca and Na also display strong leaching efficiencies (40–70%) in the weakest acid concentrations. A two-stage leaching process was designed using 0.05 N HCl acid for 1 h in a first stage (L1) to investigate the possible separation of impurities contained in easily dissolved phases from rare earth and yttrium. Following centrifuging and extraction of the liquid phase, a 1 N acid solution is introduced to the sample and allowed to react for another hour on a shaking table (L2). The first leach with weak acid shows that 66% of Ca, 64% of Na and more than 20% of Sr and U passes into solution ( Consequently, a two-stage leaching process appears to be a viable way of increasing the purity of the leach solution containing the dominant fraction of REY by removing 60–65% of the main impurities Ca and Na. These elements are present at less than 15% of their initial concentration in L2 compared to a single leaching step. However, 13.5% of the sample’s REY, equivalent to 19.6% of the overall inventory of leachable REY, are lost at the L1 stage, which constitutes an important loss considering the already low concentrations of REY in the umber ores available for recovery. Although the leaching efficiency for most major elements is below 10% (apart Na and Ca), the mass of major elements dominate the overall composition of the leachates and highlights that further steps of purification are needed. Protocols of sequential leaching for nodules and hydrogenetic ferromanganese crusts ( The precipitation of REY as an oxalate cake is widely used in industry for the selective extraction of targeted metals ( The distribution of measured element concentrations between the initial leachate and subsequent precipitate is calculated as a mass percentage ( The partition trends of the REY into the solid show that nearly complete precipitation of rare earth elements with oxalates is achieved between pH 1.3 and 2.3 ( As demonstrated by the mass distribution between solid and liquid phases, the precipitation of oxalates constitutes an effective stage for the purification of the leach solution. Nearly complete precipitation of REE can be realized, while most major and trace elements, considered as impurities, remain in solution. However, these trends do not address the purity of the precipitate, as substantial differences in mass are not considered in the above results. The purity of the precipitate is analysed as the ratio of the total mass of rare earth and yttrium (REY) divided by the sum of all measured masses ( Duplicates of the oxalate precipitation experiments were completed at pH 1.1 and 2.5 for SEM imaging. Two distinct crystal structures are observed between the two experiments, which reflects the difference in composition, notably the Ca content. At pH 1.1, oxalate crystals show platy prismatic and rectangular shapes up to 100 μm with smaller crest-like crystals covering them ( The EDS spectra highlight that 9 out of the 15 REY are in detectable range within the oxalate crystal at pH 1.1 whereas only Y, La and Nd, the three most concentrated REY in the experiment are detected in oxalate crystals precipitated at pH 2.5 ( The stock leach solution used for the oxalate precipitation experiment, corrected for appropriate dilution factors regarding sample PJ-CY-2014-91, contain 406 mg kg The formation of an oxalate precipitate has been demonstrated to be an efficient way of selectively precipitating REE from the solution and separating them from other impurities with an efficiency strongly dependent on pH. The minimal uptake during precipitation is observed for pH = 0.89 (61.5%) and rapidly increases up to pH = 1.3 where precipitation efficiency is > 96% for all REY. Adding the efficiency of oxalate precipitation on the leaching process (85% recovery at 70 °C), the REY recovery in the oxalate precipitate relative to the original sample increases from 51% of the initial REY content at pH = 0.89 to 82% for pH = 1.3–2. Relative to the impurities that are co-precipitating, the optimal purity for the precipitate is achieved for pH = 1.1 where 76% of the initial REY content of the sample is recovered. Based on these values following optimal leaching and precipitation conditions, the processing of 1 ton of umber with an average 500 mg kg Detailed recovery trends within the oxalate precipitate ( Following the conditions of the precipitation experiments, the REE contained in the leachate are partitioned between the solution and the precipitate formed after the addition of ammonium oxalate. However, not all oxalate ions will be in the correct ionic form to bind with REY to precipitate and form aqueous complexes that may remain in solution ( Precipitating REE-oxalate complexes have been reported to form hydrated REY salts (Eq. Although the formation of solid REY oxalates complexes has been considered since the 1950′s ( Although data from With relatively complete data over the lanthanide series and consistency with other studies, data from The PHREEQC speciation modelling therefore considers the following reactions (Eqs. In a similar way to REE, only partial data exists to describe oxalate complexation with other major or trace elements. Some data exists for Ca oxalates complexes ( The 5 most abundant complexes present in the results of the model have been selected and are displayed on Speciation calculated using PHREEQC with REE concentrations similar to those in the precipitation experiments displays important differences along the lanthanide series and show divergences with experimental results. In the range of pH and concentrations explored here, the Ca-oxalate complexes considered never reach saturation and remain in solution. In contrast with the experiments, no steep precipitation curve is observed between pH 1.1 and 1.5. Another major difference in the results from the model concerns the total lack of precipitation for Tb, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb and Lu. For these elements, complexation is dominated by aqueous single oxalates at pH < 0.8 and then by increasing proportions of double oxalate at more than 90% at pH > 1.6. It is important to note that these 6 elements have some of the lowest concentrations in solution ([RE] < 220 ppb). Interestingly, Eu precipitates although its concentration is only 138 ppb. All elements precipitating display convex upward trends of precipitation as a function of pH with a maximum reached for pH 0.9–1.1 ( Accordingly, the modelling was further adjusted to test these hypotheses by calculating the speciation of all lanthanides in equal concentration at 0.1, 0.5, 1, 5 and 10 mg kg Although the modelled and experimental trend for the precipitation of REE oxalate do not agree exactly, the model reproduces some of the observations from the experiments. For example: The fractionation observed in the recovery from the experiments and the model at pH < 1.1 follows closely the bell-shape of the RE The models show that at equal concentrations, the formation of precipitating RE-oxalate is favoured in the following order: MREE > LREE ≫ HREE. This trend results from (i) the positive gradient of log Under the model conditions, the maximum formation of a REE oxalate precipitate occurs at pH 1, similar to values previously reported for the purification of monazite leach liquor ( The absence of Ca oxalate precipitation in the model may explain the observed difference between REY recovery trends from the model and the experiment at pH > 2. In the experiments, Ca oxalate is the dominant precipitate at pH > 1.5 and REY are included as co-precipitating elements within the newly formed crystals. This may explain why REY recovery trends do not decrease as steeply as in the numerical model. Furthermore, a level of supersaturation of oxalate ion might be needed for the precipitation of a solid phase which is not considered in this model. This parameter might also contribute to the underestimation of the model for RE The use of ionic solutions tested here has proven to be inefficient for the leaching of REY from umbers. Although this method is widely used in China for the treatment of REY adsorbed in clay with economic yields, a similar approach applied here resulted in only 0.3% REY recovery in optimal kinetic conditions. These results highlight a major difference between IAC and umber deposits considering REY location and binding within the deposit. Although REY were initially adsorbed on the surface of Fe and Mn oxides during umber deposition in the Tethyan Ocean, the REY can no longer be considered as easily exchangeable cations and stronger acid conditions are needed for their extraction. This can be partly in response to modifications in the structure and mineralogy of umbers induced by diagenesis of the deposits. Umbers comprise only minor goethite, quartz and zeolite, with amorphous Fe-Mn oxides still dominant suggesting that REY remain bound to the oxides, although they might be incorporated within the oxide matrix following diagenesis and cannot be substituted easily by ions of equivalent size at neutral pH. In all acid leaching experiments, the mobilization of REY has been more efficient compared to the recovery of other minor elements scavenged by Fe and Mn oxides. The REY, in all oxidation states, have large ionic radii (0.86–1.04 Å), up to 60% larger, when compared to other cations potentially adsorbed like V (0.79 Å), Zn (0.74 Å), Cu (0.73 Å), Ni (0.69 Å) and Co (0.65 Å) in divalent state ( The upper limit for REY recovery, ∼80–92% of the total REY content in the original sediment, emphasizes the distinction between REY loosely bound to amorphous oxides and those incorporated within the mineral structure of minor minerals formed during diagenesis such as goethite which are more resistant to the acid leach. The grain size of the material to be leached also constitutes an important parameter to take into account to improve recovery. This parameter can easily be adjusted in a processing plant and the crushing size will have a positive impact on the potential release of REY as the reaction area increases. Through the experiments carried out in laboratory conditions, all parameters tested indicates a kinetic control over the release of REY in the solution, approaching a maximum of 80–92% REY extracted depending on the acid used. Threshold values when approaching asymptotes can be considered as the lowest conditions of the parameter tested to apply to optimize REY extraction for each parameter in the most cost-effective way. By implementing beyond threshold leaching settings of the n experiment within the n + 1 test, optimal leaching conditions can be determined for an optimized REY extraction recipe considering acid concentration, pulp density, time of reaction and temperature. From the results reported here ( This leaching process, when compared with industrial processes for the treatment of REY ore from alkaline rocks, pegmatites or carbonatites is relatively advantageous. It requires only low acid concentrations and near ambient temperatures, in contrast to cracking methods that employ concentrated acids and elevated temperatures (>200 °C), and yields good performance considering no physical pre-concentration treatment is needed apart from crushing and pulverizing of the ore. Compared to IAC heap leaching ( The projection of these results obtained in laboratory experiments to the industrial scale should consider the following adjustments for processing costs reduction and optimization of the plant economic viability. Optimal conditions for the leaching of umbers have shown that large volumes of acid are needed as 10:1 LS ratios are used. Implementing a distillation step following the leaching would allow recovering hydrochloric acid after condensing to recycle in the next batch ( Numerical modelling has demonstrated the importance of the initial leach REE concentration for the precipitation of oxalates. The higher the initial REE concentration the higher the precipitation efficiency. Therefore, the distillation and associated evaporation would induce an overconcentration of elements contained in the leach liquor and significantly increase oxalate precipitation efficiency that in turn would lead to a reduction in oxalate consumption. Similar to HCl recycling, consumption of ammonium oxalate can be greatly reduced if the oxalate cake is digested by sodium hydroxide (Eq. The hydroxides are then calcined to form a mix REY oxide product and the sodium oxalate reintroduced as a reactant in the precipitation step ( Umbers from Cyprus have been quarried extensively for pigments since ancient time and more recently for cement with a production decreasing from 30,000 tons per year in the late 70′s to an average 6000 tons per year in the last decade ( Although umbers deposits in Cyprus are now too scarce to be economically viable, similar metalliferous sediment deposits can be found in most ophiolitic sequences preserved on land with significant tonnage to be considered of interest. Potential deposits include the multiple occurrences of umberiferous deposits in Japan, such as the Mineoka Hills (Kenzai Industrial Company), the Kunimiyama deposits in the Chichibu Belt, and the Mugi and Tyujin umbers in the Shimanto belt ( Using Umbers, ferromanganese metalliferous sediments from the Troodos Ophiolite, as feedstock, the effectiveness of REY release in a leachate followed by selective precipitation was evaluated under different processing conditions. In contrast to the liberation of REY from many of the current ore feedstock’s, the extraction of rare earth elements from umbers by simple leaching using common industrial acids is effective without accumulation of radioactive by-products, and processes can be refined to maximise leaching efficiencies by adjusting acid concentration, temperature, pulp density and time of reaction. Although ionic solutions such as sodium chloride or ammonium sulphate are widely used in China for the treatment of ion adsorption clays, such approaches were not effective for leaching REY, demonstrating that REY could not be considered as easily exchangeable cations in umbers, and that stronger acid conditions are necessary for their extraction. Acid-promoted REY release displays hyperbolic trends of recovery for all kinetic parameters tested. REY constitute the most susceptible elements to the leaching conditions tested with recovery reaching 80–92% of the sample content in optimized conditions. Main impurities included in the leach solutions are Mn, Ca, Fe and Na by weight but Ca and Na show proportionally the highest recovery rate. The leaching stage therefore produces an enrichment factor ranging from 50 to 75 for REY from sample to leach solution. A two-stage leaching process using HCl is an efficient method to separate most of the contaminants (Ca, Na) into the first leach. However, around 20% of the total REY content of the sample is also leached out which represents an important loss given the low purity of the initial ore. Therefore, the valuable improvements in purity of the second leach must be balanced against significant reductions in yields of the targeted elements in the second leach. The use of oxalate is an efficient way of precipitating REY from acid leach liquor with more than 96% of the total REY content precipitated between pH 1 and 2. The strong dependence on pH for precipitation of diverse chemical species allows for the selective precipitation of REY from other impurities. The purity is optimal at pH 1.1 as abundant Ca-oxalate precipitates at higher pH. The fractionation observed between the different rare earth elements in the experiment was successfully explained via numeric modelling using PHREEQC: (i) the increasing recoveries from L- to M-REE and decreasing trends towards the HREE at pH < 1.5 follow the solid RE-oxalate solubility constant distribution −log β (RE With REO concentrations reaching 0.06 wt%, umbers are low grade, and far below concentrations encountered in main magmatic primary deposits. However, REO contents of umber deposits are within the range of concentrations encountered in IAC deposits ( These experimental results and modelling confirm previous views on the beneficiation potential of deep-sea sediments potential as a REY resource ( This research was funded by the Southampton Marine & Maritime Institute (SMMI), the Graduate School of the National Oceanography Centre (GSNOC), the Faculty of Engineering and the Environment of Southampton University and the Natural History Museum of London with PhD Scholarship to Pierre Josso from the SMMI and GSNOC. The authors would like to thank J. Schijf, J. Declercq and P. Warwick for their encouraging comments and help throughout the chemical modelling, M. Cooper for his assistance in the laboratory work, R. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 