Coal preparation technology is expected to play an important role in trace elements removal before coal combustion. The modes of occurrence of five trace elements (As, Se, Pb, Be, and Hg) in two coal cleaning plants in Guizhou, China, designated WJZ and ZZC, were studied using screening and float-and-sink tests. The behaviors of these trace elements when coal was cleaned were also investigated via sampling and analysis of raw coal, coal products, fresh water, and circulating water in two coal cleaning plants. Screening tests show that the content of trace elements is highest in 3–1 mm or 1–0.5 mm size fraction and they distributed mainly (more than 50%) in the +0.5 mm size fractions. Float-and-sink tests indicate that trace elements have a strong inorganic affinity and are significantly enriched, distributed in high-density fraction (+1.8 g/cm3). Over 50% of trace elements could be removed when pre-gangue removal is done with separation density of 1.8 g/cm3. The analysis of solid samples (raw coal, coal products) demonstrates that trace elements migrated mainly into gangue, and slime, enrichment of trace elements in middlings was also observed in ZZC plant. Results of water samples analysis suggest that Se, and As in coal are more likely to be released into water during coal cleaning while Be and Hg are present in a highly insoluble form in coal.Some of trace elements in coal, including Hg, As, F, and Se etc., have been listed as hazardous air pollutants (HAPs) and have drawn special attention because of their emission during coal combustion, which could cause severe environmental issues Therefore, a lot of focus had been placed on avoiding pollution and damage from trace elements in coal. It is reported that arsenic poisoning had been reduced in China, while endemic fluorosis is still occurring in some areas as it may also be related to the use of F-rich mixing clay in briquettes Coal preparation technology, the main functions of which are reducing sulfur, ash in coal and increasing its heating value, is expected to play a significant role in reducing the amount of trace elements in coal, as previous studies have shown that most of these elements have a close affinity with the minerals within coal, especial with pyrite and other ash-forming minerals. Davidson Nevertheless, there is still little data on the behavior of trace elements in coal in industrial coal cleaning plants, especially in terms of trace element migration from coal into water, which should be of significance as a basic reference for policymakers and researchers carrying out further work. Therefore, the aim of this study is to use a series analysis to examine the partitioning behavior of trace elements (As, Se, Pb, Be, and Hg) in coal and water samples from two industrial coal cleaning plants. Considering the significant effect of size and density on coal separation Coal and water samples were collected from two different coal preparation plants (denoted WJZ, and ZZC) in Guizhou. The feed coal for WJZ coal cleaning plant comes from WJZ coal mine, and the coal-bearing strata belong to the Upper Permian Longtan Formation The trace elements in the coal were determined using an inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (7900, Agilent) and a direct mercury analyzer (DMA-80, Milestone), and all the analysis results are shown in dry basis. The solid coal samples were pretreated via microwave digestion to transport the trace elements into a solution for the inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) analysis, and the digestion process was conducted in a microwave digestion system (MDS-6, Shanghai Sineo Microwave Chemistry). Coal samples weighing 0.1 g were placed in a Teflon tank with 4 ml concentrated HNO Standard samples produced by the Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Bureau in Qinhuangdao, China (Coal Reference Materials for Hazardous Trace Elements Analysis, GBW11159), were used to evaluate the accuracy of the microwave digestion and ICP-MS analysis; the results are shown in The distribution of trace elements in different size and density fractions in coal, which greatly affects their migration during coal utilization, was first studied using a series of screening and float-and-sink tests. Screening tests were conducted according to Chinese Standard GB/T 477-2008 using a series of standard sieves, the +0.5 mm part was processed using dry screening while those −0.5 mm part was processed via wet sieving. The size fractions obtained include 3–1 mm, 1–0.5 mm, 0.5–0.25 mm, 0.25–0.125 mm, 0.125–0.1 mm, 0.1–0.074 mm, 0.074–0.038 mm, −0.038 mm. As there may have been some Pb solder in the sieves, some Pb contamination may have occurred during the screening process although efforts were made to avoid it. The float-and-sink tests were carried out according to the fine coal float-and-sink analysis in Chinese Standard GB/T 478-2008. According to this method, organic liquids including tetrachloromethane, benzene, and bromoform were used to prepare heavy liquids with different densities and obtain products of different density fractions, including −1.4, 1.4–1.5, 1.5–1.6, 16–1.7, 1.7–1.8, +1.8, g/cm D: distribution ratio of trace elements in different size and density fractions, %; C C Y Proximate, total sulfur and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses of the raw coal samples were conducted first and the results are shown in The trace elements content of the raw coal samples was then analyzed and the results are listed in The screening tests results for WJZ and ZZC feed coal are given in The distribution of trace elements in different size fractions shown in The results of float-and-sink tests can provide data on the removability of trace elements using gravity separation, the most important process in a coal cleaning plant There is good correspondence in variation of ash, sulfur, and trace elements in different density fractions. All these factors increase, for all the trace elements except Pb in the −1.4 g/cm Trace element enrichment is only observed in segments +1.7 g/cm  Trace elements were analyzed in samples collected from different solid and liquid products in different coal preparation plants. The relative removal extent, calculated as Eq. R: relative removal extent, %; C C The coal preparation process for coal cleaning plant WJZ consists of three-product dense medium cyclone and flotation, the most common and effective process used in current coal cleaning plants Trace elements are enriched mainly in the gangue from dense medium separation and coal slime (flotation tailings). Gravity separation results in poor removal of As, Se, and Be. During gravity separation, As is enriched in gangue and fine clean coal, increasing the As content in the flotation feed. Flotation is more effective at removing As in WJZ coal; the As content in these decrease from 10.4 μg/g to 2.11 μg/g after two-stage flotation. The relative removal extent of flotation clean coal reaches up to 71.71% while that of gravity separation clean coal is only 13.61%. The removal of Se is relatively poor as the change of Se content in different product is not remarkable. Se also tends to be enriched in fine particles during the coal cleaning process, to a minor extent, because the Se content in magnetic separation tailings is higher than that of the products of gravity separation; the latter should be larger in size than the gangues from magnetic separation. The partitioning behavior of Hg is discrete with As. The content of Hg decrease by 202 ng/g during dense medium separation and the relative removal extent of clean coal of gravity separation reaches up to 50.88%, while the removal effect of flotation is so poor. This may be attributed to their enrichment and high distribution in the high-density fraction mentioned in The cleaning technologies used in ZZC coal is similar to that of WJZ coal, except that ZZC plant uses one-stage flotation. The types of samples collected were the same as those collected at WJZ plant; the results of the analysis of these samples are summarized in The removal of trace elements in ZZC coal is slightly different from that of WJZ coal, though the technological processes used at ZZC plant are similar to those at WJZ plant. During gravity separation, the trace elements in ZZC coal not only migrate and become enriched in gangues (significantly concentrated in fine gangue); this also occurred in middlings and can be ascribed to the enrichment and high distribution of trace elements in the middle-density fractions mentioned in Some trace elements also occur in water-soluble form, and as coal is completely soaked in water during the cleaning process, the release of some trace elements from coal into water is inevitable, considering the large amount of coal that is cleaned DR: dissolution rate, %; CW: concentration of trace elements in clean water, μg/L; RW: the concentration of trace elements in recycled water, μg/L.   Changing tendency of trace elements in different size fractions is various, they are greatly enriched in 3–1 mm or 1–0.5 mm size fraction and distributed mainly in large size parts. Over 60% of trace elements are distributed in +0.5 mm size fractions of WJZ, ZZC coal, making pre-screening could be a selectable method to remove trace elements in coal. Trace elements are higher in the fine fractions of ZZC coal compared to WJZ coal. Trace elements have a strong inorganic affinity, and they are significantly enriched in high-density portions (+1.8 g/cm Trace elements are enriched mainly in gangue of gravity separation and coal slime in WJZ coal cleaning plant. Flotation is more effective in removing As while Pb was greatly concentrated in flotation clean coal. As for ZZC coal preparation plant, trace elements not only migrated and enriched in gangues but also middlings. The removal of As in gravity separation is the poorest among the 5 trace elements, with a relative removal extent of only 21.44%, while the reduction of Hg is remarkable in gravity separation clean coal. Modes of occurrence of trace elements greatly affect the migration and removal of trace elements in coal cleaning plant. The enrichment and higher distribution of trace elements in middle-density fraction are responsible for the enrichment of trace elements in middlings of ZZC plant. And the better reduction of Hg in both the two plants should also attribute to its enrichment and high distribution in high-density fraction. Se, and As are more likely to be released into water during coal cleaning, they are greatly concentrated in the recycled water. The concentration of Be and Hg in water is unchanged and they should be present in an insoluble form. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support by the