In this paper, the study of an acid and thermal treatment in a mixture of niobium and tantalum oxides obtained from columbite mineral was performed. Initially, the mineral was physically prepared by milling and sifting, followed by characterization by X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). Subsequently, the mineral performed an acid leaching in order to remove iron and manganese present in its composition. A second acid leaching was necessary to eliminate the persistent cassiterite impurity by precipitation of Nb and Ta hydrated oxides. These oxides were characterized by XRF, XRD and SEM. Then the oxides were calcined at 800 °C, 900 °C and 1000 °C at different heating rates and calcination times to study their crystallization. The mixed oxides were characterized by XRF, XRD, SEM and nitrogen adsorption (BET method). The influence of heating rate was verified at 800 °C. An increase in crystal size was observed when the rate was reduced from 10 °C.min−1 to 5 °C.min−1. Greater crystallinity and formation of peaks related to the change of phase from hexagonal to orthorhombic were observed when the temperature was raised from 800 °C to 900 °C. At the temperature of 1000 °C, intermediate and low peaks related to formation of monoclinic phase of niobium pentoxide were observed. The change in calcination time from 5 h to 10 h at 1000 °C caused reduction in Nb2O5 to NbO2 and a decrease in crystal size and hence an increase in the surface area. The oxides heated at 900 °C showed the largest surface area.Columbite-tantalite is a solid solution in which occurs the substitution of niobium and tantalum and between iron and manganese, and its chemical composition varies between pure columbite [(Fe,Mn)Nb The columbite found in Brazil contains approximately 31–79% of Nb The extraction of niobium from columbite ore by leaching was studied using HF and H Niobium and tantalum oxides and Nb, Ta-containing materials, which exhibit valuable physical and chemical properties, are widely used in modern technology such as cell phones, laptops and superconductors. Nb Nb The physical properties depend not only on structural polymorphism, but also on the synthesis method of these materials. The great diversity in structural isotropy of Nb Synthesis methods of niobium pentoxide may also affect its textural properties. The co-precipitation method for obtaining niobium and tantalum oxides can also lead to the precipitation of these oxides in the hydrated form. In this case, it is necessary to heat the samples ( Furthermore, the inclusion of both niobium and tantalum in their pure oxides leads to modifications in their properties. In this paper, two main objectives were pointed out. The first objective was to create a methodology with viable conditions that could allow the extraction of niobium and tantalum from natural columbite, eliminating impurities beyond these elements. Secondly, an initial study of thermal treatments on the structural, morphological and textural properties of these mixed oxides was carried out in order to evaluate the behavior and influence of each element regarding the thermal conditions on the materials’ properties. Thus, it intends to provide parameters for obtaining these mixed oxides and to suit them when such properties are required. The mineral shown in The characterization performed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) with Shimadzu EDX720 equipment indicated that the mineral stoichiometry is: The high of niobium and tantalum content, as seen in  All tests performed based on the procedures reported in this section were reproduced at least three times with satisfactory levels of reproducibility. The procedures we adopted for both leaching and purification of the minerals start with an alkaline fusion and follow the methodology we used in our previous works for improved results ( Leaching tests were performed in a flask under reflux with 12 M concentrated hydrochloric acid as leaching agent for iron and manganese mostly ( A new leaching was carried out on the remaining powder from the first leaching in order to eliminate the tin present in the mineral, which is not expected to be eliminated with hydrochloric acid. The residue was then leached with a solution of hydrofluoric acid (5 After the acid treatment, the hydrated niobium and tantalum oxides were calcined at different conditions of temperature, heating rate and calcination time in order to evaluate their crystallization. The oxides were thermally treated in a furnace muffle at different temperatures, heating rates and duration on the isotherm in order to allow the identification of the influence of these parameters on the structural properties of the materials produced. All levels of these parameters (temperature from 800 to 1000 °C; heating rate of 5 and 10 °C/min; time duration on the isotherm of 5 and 10 h) were chosen to provoke the production of crystalline oxides, as seen on some papers ( The effect of adding potassium bisulfate to produce a 1:7 fusion ratio of agent and mineral, respectively, was evaluated and the quantity of the studied oxides is shown in It is observed that the mineral consists of 46.13% niobium oxide (Nb The use of hydrochloric acid as a leaching agent for the previously molten columbite during 8 h and 70 °C presented high efficiency in the elimination of iron and manganese. The acid attack caused the formation of soluble chlorides of these metals, which were eliminated by filtration and wash. The leaching with HF(5 The elementary analysis by XRF of calcined oxides showed about 99.6% purity of niobium and tantalum present in the mixed oxide. The XRF results for the insoluble powder have indicated the presence of 83.31% Sn, 5.49% Fe, 4.26% Mn and 3.82% Ta, corroborating the XRD results shown in The XFR analysis and XRD diffractograms provide the phases present in the sample and the relation of their constituent elements. In  The variation in calcination time from 5 h to 10 h caused the reduction of Nb A XRD diffractogram comparison between oxides heated at different temperatures studied is shown in The occurrence of intermediate peaks with low intensity at 1000 °C equivalent to monoclinic phase of niobium pentoxide is easily obtained by heating at 1000 °C of amorphous Nb According to the porous volume data, the consequent decrease in porosity of the materials is associated with the increase in crystallite size from 800 °C to 1000 °C. The increase in calcination temperature from 900 °C to 1000 °C caused progressive reduction of specific surface area of the mixed oxides. This fact is mainly due to the pore coalescence due to greater water loss and additional crystallization of pores’ walls ( It was verified that the purification of columbite ore with HCl was successful in eliminating iron and manganese oxides, but ineffective in leaching the cassiterite present in large quantities. This impurity was eliminated with HF and H  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are grateful to the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) for their financial support; to the Graduate Program in Materials Science and Engineering (PPGCEM-UFRN) for the XRD, XRF and SEM analysis, and the Nuclei of Education and Research in Oil and Gas (NUPEG) for the BET analysis.