The mechanical alloying of titanium has previously been performed using fugitive process control agents (PCAs). In this work, calcium, magnesium, MgY or CrY are used as process control agents to balance between the cold welding and fracture phenomena, significantly increasing the process yield. The milled powder was then sintered using Spark Plasma Sintering (SPS) at low and high temperatures to achieve the best mechanical properties and a high quality microstructure. To understand the behavior of the PCAs, the same samples were heat treated at high temperatures. The use of a small quantity of calcium, as low as 0.250wt%, permitted a high process yield, low oxygen content, good powder morphology and thermal stability. Due to the refined microstructure, the samples sintered at 950°C exhibited mechanical properties similar to commercially pure Grade 4 titanium but with a much lower oxygen content.Mechanical alloying is a flexible and powerful process that is used to produce advanced materials while in the solid state. It consists of deforming powder repetitively, continuously and plastically at room temperature to create new alloys and/or microstructures. Mechanical alloying can be performed using a number of different type of mills, such as planetary, ball, tumbler, roller, and drum mills. These are just a few examples and new systems are still in the process of being designed When using a planetary ball mill, the comminution and/or mechanical alloying of the material takes place primarily through the high-energy impact of grinding balls in rotating grinding bowls. The impact of the grinding balls on the charged powder and on the bowl walls causes plastic deformation in the particles and after sufficient time, alloying of the powder mixture. From a microscopic point of view, during mechanical alloying, each powder particle undergoes two distinct processes: joining, or high-quality cold welding, and fracturing. Cold welding of different powder particles occurs when particles penetrate into themselves upon impact. Fracturing occurs when larger particles break into smaller pieces after continuous impacts. The equilibrium between these two processes provides a stable particle size and allows the balls to incessantly move over the powder without slowing down or freezing the process. Depending on the material, either the cold welding or the fracturing may overwhelm the other process to create too many small particles, or the powder may be completely cold welded on the balls and the bowl walls, thus compromising the process yield. Many factors can alter the equilibrium between the cold welding and fracturing processes, such as the type of mill used, the nature of the materials, the initial particle size, the processing temperature and the milling energy. To properly setup the powder process, a Process Control Agent, or PCA, is needed. The PCA, which is usually a fatty acid, depresses the cold welding phenomena to restore proper equilibrium. Depending on the powder mixture, a different PCA is required, such as stearic acid, palmitic acid, ethylene bis(stearamide), ethanol, hexane, water and other surfactants Even for cases where a PCA is needed, the PCA can also have negative effects. First, a PCA may introduce new and potentially undesirable elements into the mixture and therefore into the final alloy. Second the PCA must be removed at some point to achieve the final bulk alloy. When mechanically alloying aluminum, a PCA is needed: usually, the PCA is 2 These issues are particularly problematic for advanced metals such as titanium, which requires strict control of the chemical composition and microstructure. Nevertheless, mechanical alloying of titanium is very interesting because it is possible to obtain new alloys without requiring a melting process, which is expensive due to the high reactivity of titanium A partial solution has been devised by Watwe It has been noted that magnesium, calcium and all the rare earth metals have a small solubility limit in titanium This paper reports on the results of testing the mechanical alloying of pure titanium powder with different PCAs, such as pure magnesium, pure calcium, MgY and CrY master alloys. Different PCA quantities were used to provide high process yields, uniform microstructures and proper particle sizes. The milled powder was then sintered using Spark Plasma Sintering to create bulk samples for microstructural analysis and mechanical testing. The initial material used in this study was titanium powder with an average particle size of <150 Milling was performed with a Fritsch Pulverisette 6 using a jar with a volume of 500 After ball milling, the powders cooled to room temperature in the jar in 2 The process batch yield was defined as the ratio of the weight of the recovered powder with a particle size less than 180 Mechanically alloyed powder with a prescribed PCA quantity was extracted after 40 cycles and mounted in epoxy resin in vacuum, polished and analyzed with an optical microscopy. Etching was performed using either Kroll's or Weck's reagent. The powders obtained with the most interesting features were sintered using Spark Plasma Sintering (Sumitomo Coal & Mining, Dr. Sinter Two sample shapes were obtained for the sintering process: cylindrical samples with a diameter 20 Heat treatments were performed in a metallic furnace with a high vacuum (10 The first important dataset from the mechanical alloying tests is the process yield results.  Based on this result, all the subsequent mechanical alloying experiments were conducted using a vacuum. This was also done to ensure that air did not contaminate the powder during milling because at the end of milling process, any air flow into the jar can be recognized.  The results for the CrY master alloy were substantially different. To better compare the results from different mills, the powders obtained with a fixed PCA quantity of 0.250    The four powders milled for 80 There is no outgassing observed from the powder in a vacuum at temperatures upto 700   Four other samples were sintered at 1250   A similar trend is noted when the heat-treated samples are examined (see The most interesting powder is the one created using a 0.25   The Ti–0.250 The milling results clearly show that calcium, magnesium, MgY and CrY are very effective PCAs for mechanical alloying of titanium. It should be stressed that without these PCAs, the cold welding phenomenon is so strong that just a few milling cycles are enough to completely smear the titanium on all the impacting surfaces. As previously mentioned, the use of olefinic PCAs has been avoided to reduce the possibility of introducing potentially dangerous interstitial elements such as oxygen, carbon, nitrogen and hydrogen into the mixture. Hydrogen can be easily removed during vacuum annealing, and a few authors have previously adopted this trick to mechanically alloy Ti In this work, the mechanical alloying process performed independently of the choice of PCA produced very little powder below a size of 25 Nevertheless, the powder is fully alloyed with just a small amount of PCA. This is not completely true for the CrY master alloy. At least 4 The use of calcium, magnesium, MgY or CrY as the PCA also has the positive effect of ensuring a fast and therefore cheap process to create the alloyed powder. A time of 80 All the powders were sintered using SPS at a pressure of 30 For samples sintered at 1250 The three-point bending test and the microstructures before and after the heat treatment show that calcium and CrY are the only PCAs that produce positive results. Magnesium or magnesium-based master alloys may function well as PCAs but should be avoided because they tend to melt or sublimate when heated. This was visually evident after the SPS because the dies used for producing the magnesium based samples were slightly coated with a shiny metal at certain points. Calcium and magnesium act similarly as PCAs but behave differently because of their physical properties. For example, calcium has a higher melting point, boiling point, vapor pressure and a lower solubility in titanium than does magnesium. These properties are important during sintering, and because calcium is generally more stable with respect to temperature, it does not precipitate out of the matrix in the form of an oxide or as a solid solution. The instability of magnesium is responsible of the blistering and formation of pores observed in the microstructures. It is interesting to compare the microstructure of the samples sintered at 950 The small grain size and the very small particles are responsible for the mechanical properties depicted in In this work, the effect of using calcium, magnesium, MgY or CrY as process control agents for mechanically alloying titanium was studied. Maximizing the process yield and minimizing the process time were treated as the most important goals and obtaining a sound microstructure and ensuring ease of handling were secondary objectives. The addition of 0.25 Consolidation was performed by means of spark plasma sintering. Full density samples with good mechanical properties were obtained at a sintering temperature of 900 The use of calcium as a PCA for mechanically alloying titanium allows the production of virtually any type of titanium alloy for a low price without requiring expensive melting and hot plastic deformation.