The quality and stability of the froth phase in flotation is mainly attributed to the amount and degree of hydrophobicity of solid particles reporting to the froth phase. These two parameters are influenced by the type and quantity of collectors and depressants added to the system. Frothers also influence the quality and stability of the froth mainly by affecting its water content.
                  Decoupling and identifying the effects caused by different flotation reagents is of primary importance in understanding flotation processes. Frothers and their influence on bubble formation and foam/froth formation have been studied extensively. The effect of collectors and depressants has also been investigated. However, no research has been done on the combined effect of depressants and frothers to identify the inter-reagent interactions taking place in the flotation process.
                  This study examines the effect of two polymers, namely Stypress 504, a modified guar gum, and Depramin 267 a CMC, on the foaming and frothing properties of solutions containing Dowfroth 200 frother. These polymers are used as depressants in the flotation of platinum bearing minerals. The frothing properties were evaluated through maximum froth height measurements, froth collapse studies and visual observation of the froth structure in air-liquid and air–liquid–solid systems.
                  The experiments showed that the presence of depressants had a significant effect on the foaming/frothing properties of the studied frother. Both the maximum froth height and the froth structure were altered. In order to identify the mechanism of the inter-reagent interaction, bulk and surface viscosity measurements and surface tension measurements were also performed.The separation of different minerals by flotation is achieved by the addition of various reagents such as collectors, frothers and depressants. These reagents all have their specific function in the process and in principle all promote the separation of the valuable minerals from the gangue. However, it has already been shown ( Polysaccharide type polymers are widely used as gangue depressants in the flotation of platinum bearing minerals. The most commonly used polymers are different types of carboxymethyl-celluloses, guars and starches. Frothers are important additives in flotation with a major influence on the bubble size, stability and mobility of the froth phase. One of the most widespread frothers used in flotation plants are non-ionic polyglycols such as Dowfroth 200, Dowfroth 250, etc. The combined effect of surfactants and polysaccharides has been researched in connection with many applications such as colloidal stabilization, wettability, adhesion and foam formation and stability ( From the flotation perspective there have not been any studies done on the interaction of flotation frothers and depressants and their combined effect on foams and froths. The froth quality and stability in flotation is mainly attributed to the frother type and the presence of fine solids that stabilize the froth. However, recent observations have shown that the froth quality is also influenced by the presence of other reagents such as depressants not only through their influence on the flotation and entrainment of solids, but also through their influence on the foam/froth quality by some other, so far un-discussed mechanism. The basic idea of this research came from the observation, that when shaken in small vials, frothers form more stable foams in presence of depressants than alone. In order to determine what is the reason for the above phenomena, a detailed experimental program was planned and carried out. The terms foam and froth are often used interchangeably, however based on the work by The reagents used in the experiments were of industrial and analytical grade. The frother was the polypropylene glycol ether Dowfroth 200 (DF200) (Dow Deutschland Inc.) used in 10, 30 and 50 All the solutions were prepared with Milli-Q ultrapure water, with resistivity > Chalcopyrite (− Fine pyroxene was used in the experiments as it is one of the main hydrophilic gangue minerals present in many flotation applications (e.g. Merensky ore) and presumably it often forms slime coatings on the valuable sulphide minerals. 10 grams of solids were added to 500 Contamination of glassware can have a significant effect on the reproducibility of the froth height and froth collapse measurements, therefore cleanliness had to be ensured. All the glassware and the froth column used in the experiments were washed thoroughly with special laboratory glassware cleaner solution, rinsed with acetone and then ultrapure water at least 8 times. Various methods are described in the literature to characterize foams and foam films (e.g. The experimental setup consisted of a graduated, 45 The dynamic foaming/frothing studies were carried out by froth generation. The gas flow rate was increased from 0.2 to 2 All the frother concentrations (0, 10, 30, and 50 The static foam/froth test determined the rate of collapse of the foam/froth after the gas flow was stopped. These foam/froth collapse studies were also performed in the experimental setup described above. The collapse rate of the froth after stopping the gas flow was recorded with the help of a camera. In the experiments, the foam column first collapsed, then a clear liquid surface appeared in the middle of the column. With time, the area of the clear surface increased to the point, when there was only one ring of bubbles around the perimeter of the liquid surface. The foam/froth was considered fully collapsed when the ring of foam on the top of the liquid has broken in at least one place. Relative froth height values (froth height/max. froth height) vs. time graphs were plotted for each froth collapse measurement. The uncertainty of the measurement of the froth height was ± Static foam/froth collapse measurements were also done in a 1 liter laboratory flotation cell. The point of full collapse of the froth was based on the same condition as in the case of the column study. The froth collapse rate was also measured in three-phase systems. 500 The flow of N The froth collapse studies in the laboratory scale flotation cell were performed with similar solid content. The maximum froth collapse time was measured as described above in the case of the two-phase system. The structure of the foam/froth was investigated in a 1 liter laboratory flotation cell. 500 In order to gain more understanding on the properties of the foam, chalcopyrite and pyroxene particles were sprinkled on the top of the foam and the behavior of particles, namely how fast the particles fell through the foam, was visually assessed for each reagent configuration. The surface tension of each frother and/or depressant containing solution was measured with pendant drop technique, using CAM200 (KSV Instruments Ltd.) optical contact angle and surface tension meter. In this measurement the surface tension of a liquid hanging from the tip of a syringe is determined from the shape of the drop based on the method described by The bulk viscosity measurements were performed with Ubbelohde capillary viscometer connected to Lauda PVS 1 automated measuring system. All the experiments were done at 25 A very brief surface rheological study was also conducted as a courtesy of KSV Instruments, Finland, where the applicability of the ISR 400, Interfacial Shear Rheometer for the investigation of surfactant-polysaccharide solutions was tested. The measurement principle of the instrument is simple. A teflon-coated magnetic needle is floated in a half-cylinder at the gas/liquid interface, and moved with an applied magnetic field. The movement of the needle is observed microscopically, and the difference between applied force and measured position provides phase shift, viscosity, elastic and loss moduli, creep and relaxation times. From the measured data, amongst others, one can predict the stability of foams and froths. The ISR measurements were only done at 50 The first experiments were performed with only frother or depressant added to the solution to obtain a baseline for the combined experiments. As it can be seen from the When only Depramin 267 or Stypress 504 polysaccharide type depressant were dissolved in the solution the foaming characteristics of the liquid changed only slightly compared to that of the pure water ( The next series of tests were performed with frother-depressant blends at different frother and polysaccharide concentrations. The addition of either of the two depressants caused a significant change in the foaming properties of the DF 200 frother solutions. The results of the dynamic foaming tests with the DF200-Stypress 504 reagent blend are presented on In addition to the differences in froth volume, there was a marked difference in the structure of the foam formed by the different reagents. With pure frother the foam was composed mainly of quite homogeneous, almost monodisperse bubbles. The formation of Polyederschaum was most pronounced at low frother and high Stypress 504 concentrations resulting a high standard deviation of the results. In case of the Dowfroth 200–Depramin 267 frother–depressant blend ( In the three phase frothing studies, the froth height was only measured in the glass column at the maximum gas flow rate of 2 The results show that the mixture of chalcopyrite and pyroxene enhanced the froth formation in the case when only frother was present in solution. However, the solids seem to inhibit frothing when depressants are also added to the system. This phenomenon could be observed in case of both polysaccharides, independently of their type. The appearance of the three-phase froth had the same character as the foams formed in the two-phase system. The bubbles forming the frother–guar froth were larger in size and were separated by thinner liquid films than in case of the frother–CMC blend. Mostly the top part of the froth formed by the frother–guar blend was much lighter in color than in the case of the frother–CMC blend, suggesting that there were fewer chalcopyrite particles present. This might be attributed to the strong depressing effect of the guar. However it is more likely that it is caused by the changed rheology of the liquid that enhances draining, and coalescence of the bubbles, so inhibiting the transport of the particles into the top layer of the froth. The Polyederschaum type of froth structure on the upper part of the froth was clearly visible when guar was added to the system, indicating a gas content of over 50–75%. The DF200-CMC froth on the other hand had much higher liquid and solid content resulting in a darker, mineralized froth. The overview of the results of the static foam collapse tests done with the frother alone and the frother–depressant blends in the glass column, are presented on The Dowfroth 200-Stypress504 blend at high frother (50 The figures show an opposite trend in the stabilizing effect of the two studied depressants: the Stypress 504 modified guar gum enhances the stability of the foam when used in small concentration (100 The study of the three-phase froth collapse was not possible in the glass column, because the visibility through the column was hampered by the particles sticking to the column wall. Therefore the froth collapse study was done in a laboratory scale flotation cell. Two sets of experiments were performed, the first with the mixture of pyroxene and slightly oxidized, less hydrophobic chalcopyrite was ground earlier (in the figure marked as “solids”), and the second with the mixture of pyroxene and freshly ground, un-oxidized, hydrophobic chalcopyrite (in the figure marked as “fresh solids”). The results of these tests are presented on The results show that in frother solution the presence of solids had a stabilizing effect on the froth. When oxidized and therefore less hydrophobic solids were added to the system, the stability of the DF200-Stypress 504 froth decreased considerably, while there was not any noticeable change for the DF200-Depramin 267 froth compared to the two phase system. In the presence of freshly ground, hydrophobic solids, the change in the froth stability was even more dramatic. The stability of the DF200-Stypress 504 froth decreased even more than in the previous case, while an opposite effect was observed in the case of DF200-Depramin 267 solution, with a significant increase in froth stability. During the foam height measurements it was noticed that the structure of the foam formed by the frother alone and the two frother/depressant blends had a very distinct structure. Therefore, the foam/froth structure formed with the different reagents was studied in a laboratory batch flotation cell. The foam/froth formed on the top of the cell was photographed. This approach gave two-dimensional information on the structure of the foam/froth. Due to lack of suitable experimental setup precise data on the 3D structure of the foams/froths could not be obtained (the cylindrical glass column is not suitable for imaging due to distortions and reflections). The images of the foam and froth surfaces produced by the different reagents are presented on In presence of the solid mixture consisting of pyroxene and slightly oxidized, less hydrophobic chalcopyrite the situation was slightly different. In absence of depressants ( The structure of the foam was also assessed by sprinkling particles on the top of the foam. By the visual observation of the penetration time, one could obtain some additional information on the structure of the foam. It was observed that for the foam formed by the DF200-Stypress 504 blend, the hydrophilic pyroxene particles fell through the foam more easily, while the freshly ground, hydrophobic chalcopyrite stayed on the surface and only slowly sank into the bulk phase. In the case of the DF200-Depramin 267 blend, both particle types stayed on the surface for a longer period than in case of the guar and sank into the bulk phase much slower. This means that the guar foam sets less resistance against the penetration of the particles than the CMC foam that could be caused by the lower liquid content. In order to map the possible reasons that cause the difference in behavior of the two depressants described in the previous sections, surface tension measurements were performed. The surface tension is plotted vs. the concentration of the Dowfroth 200 frother in absence and presence of increasing concentration of Stypress 504 or Depramin 267 depressant in The figures clearly show that both depressants have an effect on the surface tension, even if this effect is not very strong. The largest change in the surface tension caused by the reagents is only about 1.5 The initial increase and then decrease in surface tension with increasing polymer concentration is a clear indication that in case of the CMC depressant there is a complexation effect between the polymer and the surfactant. Similar effect is not likely to happen with the guar-frother mixture. Viscosity is known to be one of the main factors affecting foaming and foam stability. Therefore relative viscosity tests were performed to gain deeper insight into the characteristics of the studied systems. The results show that the presence of frother did not have a detectable effect on the viscosity of the studied liquids ( Even if there is no detectable difference in the bulk viscosity of the polymer solutions in the absence and presence of frother, the interaction of polymers and surfactants can cause a change in the surface rheological characteristics of the system leading to an alteration in the foaming and froth stability ( In flotation depressants are used to inhibit the flotation of gangue minerals. However, this study has shown, that polysaccharides in some cases can have a secondary effect as well, that influences the quality of the froths not only by influencing the amount of solids reporting to the froth, but also by changing the bulk and interfacial rheology. It has to be noted, that in flotation practice polymer solution concentrations are very much lower than the dosages used in this study due to strong adsorption and high pulp densities present. The results of the research suggest that the mode of action of the two studied depressants is very different from each other. Both depressants seem to act by influencing the rheological properties of the system, either directly, by simply increasing the bulk viscosity, or by polymer–surfactant complexation effects, that change the surface viscosity and surface elasticity, so contributing to changes in foaming characteristics. It was stated, that increasing bulk viscosity decreases the rate of drainage in the froth contributing to longer foam lifetimes. In this system this effect is not as much influencing the foam lifetime, but rather the foaming characteristics, leading to an increasing foam height, a more wet foam and probably less bubble coalescence in case of the more viscous frother–CMC mixtures. The complexation effects that take place at high frother (50 In case of the Stypress 504 frother the increase in bulk viscosity with increasing depressant concentration is not as dramatic as with the CMC and the depressant seems to influence more the surface viscosity that mainly has its contribution to the drainage of thin liquid films. This is in good accordance with the observation that this frother-depressant blend forms quite stable Polyedershaum type of foam structures. However, the colloidal impurities present in the guar might also contribute to the altered foam structure and stability. It was also shown, that the depressants affected the froth formation in three phase system as well. However, in this case the effect is much more complex, as the depressants not only change the bulk and surface rheology, but also adsorb at the solid/liquid interfaces, decreasing the hydrophobicity of minerals. Therefore in three phase systems the affinity of the polymer towards the minerals has also to be taken into consideration. The three-phase froth stability study has shown, that if very hydrophobic particles are present in the guar containing solution, the froth stability decreases dramatically compared with the case when the particles are less hydrophobic or when there are no particles in the system. As an opposite to this effect, the CMC does not affect the froth stability when the particles are less hydrophobic, but it increases froth stability with hydrophobic particles present. The suggested mechanism is that the more dry, guar froth composed mainly of thin films, is easily destabilized with the addition of hydrophobic particles, as these particles break the balance in the thin film, and therefore the bubbles burst. On the other hand, the hydrophobic particles added to the CMC froth contribute to the stabilization by attaching to the air/liquid interfaces and preventing the fast drainage of the liquid from the films. The aim of the research was to identify the effect of two polymeric depressants, namely the Stypress 504 modified guar and the Depramin 267 carboxymethyl-cellulose on the foaming properties of the Dowfroth 200 frother. The study has shown that depressants indeed influence the foaming and frothing properties of frothers in two and tree phase systems. Both depressants enhanced froth formation, but the mechanism of action is different. The Depramin 267 CMC depressant seems to act more through increasing bulk viscosity, while the Stypress 504 guar has more influence on the surface rheology. The Depramin 267 significantly enhanced the frothability, defined as the froth volume vs. the gas flow rate, due to increase in bulk viscosity that resulted in slower drainage and inhibited coalescence. The Stypress 504 increased the froth stability at low polymer concentration by increasing surface viscosity. These phenomena can most probably be attributed to formation of surfactant-polymer complexes taking place in the solution. In order to gain a comprehensive understanding of the surfactant-polymer complexation mechanism that contributes to the changes in surface viscosity and elasticity and therefore foam formation and stability, an in-depth interfacial shear rheological study is ongoing and the results will be published later. The support from the