The intensification of the thiosulfate leaching of silver, gold and bismuth from sulfide concentrates using mechanical activation and mechanochemical pretreatment step was investigated. The physico-chemical changes in a complex sulfide concentrate (Casapalca, Peru) as a consequence of mechanochemical pretreatment had a pronounced influence on the subsequent silver extraction. The optimum results from mechanochemical pretreatment and subsequent leaching of the concentrate with ammonium thiosulfate were achieved with 99% recovery of Ag after only 3 min of leaching. The leaching of gold from a mechanically activated complex sulfide concentrate (Banská Hodruša, Slovakia) using ammonium thiosulfate was studied as follows. Physico-chemical transformations in the concentrate due to mechanical activation have an influence on the rate of extraction and the recovery of gold. It was possible to achieve 99% Au recovery within 45 min for a sample mechanically activated. Mechanical activation proved to be an appropriate pretreatment for this concentrate before extraction of gold into thiosulfate leaching solution. The selective leaching of a bismuth from the lead concentrate (Atacocha, Peru) by using of sodium thiosulfate and mechanical activation as the pretreatment step was examined as the last example. It is possible to achieve more than 90% recovery of a bismuth in leachate even in three minutes for mechanically activated samples.The key stage for silver, gold and bismuth leaching from sulfide concentrates is the way of pretreatment of the concentrates and selection of leaching reagents. Chemical, biological and physical pretreatments are applied to the sulfide concentrates, with the aim of changing the chemical composition and/or particle size of the sulfides, thus facilitating the subsequent leaching ( Thiosulfate leaching represents an alternative for the non-cyanide leaching of gold, silver as well as for selective leaching of bismuth from complex sulfide concentrates ( The mechanical activation and mechanochemical pretreatment proved to be a very effective method of pretreatment of complex sulfide concentrates before extraction of examined metals into leach liquors. The process of thiosulfate leaching is bringing the kinetic advantage and moreover good selectivity in the cases of silver, gold and bismuth extraction. It is the aim of this paper to verify the possibilities of mechanical activation and mechanochemical leaching for three different sulfide concentrates with the application of thiosulfate salts in order to obtain good recovery and selectivity for Ag, Au and Bi extraction.  A silver-bearing complex sulfide concentrate (Casapalca, Peru) was used to test the effect of mechanochemical pretreatment and subsequent thiosulfate leaching of silver. The X-ray data indicated the presence of tetrahedrite (Cu A gold-bearing complex sulfide concentrate (Banská Hodruša, Slovakia) was selected as a model material for testing the effect of mechanical activation on the subsequent thiosulfate leaching of gold. Chalcopyrite (CuFeS Lead sulfide concentrate (Atacocha, Peru) was used to test the effect of mechanical activation and subsequent leaching of bismuth. XRD analysis indicates the presence of galena (PbS), sphalerite (ZnS), pyrite (FeS The chemical composition of the concentrates is given in The specific surface area ( X-ray diffractometry (XRD) was accomplished by using a DRON 2.0 diffractometer with a GUR-5 goniometer (Techsnabexport, Russia) equipped with an FeK The mechanochemical pretreatment of concentrate from Casapalca and mechanical activation of concentrates from Banská Hodruša and Atacocha was performed in a stirring ball mill (Attritor, Molinex PE-075, Netzsch-Germany) using of conditions listed in The leaching of concentrates Casapalca (Peru), Banská Hodruša (Slovakia) and Atacocha (Peru) was investigated at conditions presented in The mechanochemical pretreatment of concentrate Casapalca in alkaline solution (Na The typical change due to mechanochemical pretreatment and/or mechanical activation of all concentrates in an attritor was an increase in the specific surface area, The mechanochemical pretreatment and mechanical activation proved to be a very effective method of pretreatment of the complex sulfide concentrates before extraction of silver, gold and bismuth into leach liquor. The dependence of silver recovery on the leaching time for concentrate from Casapalca is shown in  The dependance of bismuth recovery together with the recoveries of accompanying metals is represented in The results demonstrated that mechanochemical pretreatment as well as mechanical activation of this sulfide concentrates leads to improved leaching selectivity. Mechanochemical pretreatment and mechanical activation of the complex sulfide concentrates from deposits Casapalca (Peru), Banská Hodruša (Slovakia) and Atacocha (Peru) in a stirring ball mill (attritor) influence the increase of their specific surface area as well as bring about the structural changes in the concentrates and this result in the following thiosulfate leaching. This type of leaching is more advantageous for selective and rapid extraction of silver, gold and bismuth from the concentrates. It is possible to achieve more as the 90% recovery of an examined metals. The process of thiosulfate leaching is nontoxic and moreover brings kinetic advantage over classical cyanide leaching. The support through projects VEGA 2/5151/5 and APVT-20-018402 is gratefully acknowledged.