The recycling of rare earth elements and base metals from recycling slag powders of nickel metal hydride (NiMH) batteries by ionic liquid leaching was studied. Leaching tests were conducted by using the ionic liquid 1-methylimidazolium hydrogen sulfate (HmimHSO4) selected after some preliminary leaching tests on slag powders. The HmimHSO4 concentration of aqueous ionic liquid solution was 30% (v/v) in all tests. The slag powders were ground and sieved to obtain two different particle-size fractions namely 63–90μm and 90–125μm in order to evaluate the leaching behavior and the kinetics. The most important metals present in the initial slag powders are iron (35.70% w/w), aluminum (9.95% w/w), manganese (3.45% w/w) and rare earth elements (REEs) such as lanthanum, cerium, neodymium and yttrium (totally 22.50% w/w). In the leaching experiments three parameters were studied: temperature, particle size and time. The average dissolution ratios of 63–90μm particle size slag powder were 100% for iron, manganese and yttrium after 2h at a temperature of 80°C. However, the maximum leaching efficiencies were about 15% for lanthanide and cerium and 20% for neodymium under the same conditions. As an explanation for the low recovery rates, a phase analysis with QEMSCAN (Quantitative Evaluation of Materials by SCANning electron microscopy) indicated decomposition in the initial REE phases but a precipitation as sulfates. The kinetic study of Fe and Mn dissolutions showed that the leaching process follows the shrinking core model with an unchanged particle size controlling diffusion through the product layer.The rare earth elements (REEs) comprise seventeen elements being the fifteen lanthanide series plus yttrium and scandium which are chemically similar to each other ( Spent NiMH batteries are one of the important REE sources, consisting of lanthanum, cerium, praseodymium, neodymium and yttrium together with significant amounts of valuable metals like nickel and cobalt. At the Institute of Process Metallurgy and Metal Recycling (IME) a process was developed to recycle NiMH batteries by Müller and Friedrich at RWTH Aachen University, Germany ( Some previous research has proposed hydrometallurgical recycling processes for the NiMH batteries using conventional acid leaching using H So far, ionic liquids have been studied as solvents in different leaching systems for the extraction of transition metals, gold and silver from their concentrates. In this study, the leaching of NiMH battery slag powders from a process, for the recovery of base and rare metals developed at the IME, was investigated by using ionic liquid 1-methylimidazolium hydrogen sulfate (HmimHSO The slag samples for this research study were prepared by the pyrometallurgical recycling process of NiMH batteries developed at The Institute of Process Metallurgy and Metal Recycling (IME) at RWTH Aachen University in Germany ( The ionic liquid, 1-methylimidazolium hydrogen sulfate (HmimHSO The leaching experiments were carried out in closed beakers of 250 In order to explain the relatively low extraction yields of rare earth elements, a phase evaluation of the residues was performed with X-ray powder diffraction. As a result, no crystallographic phase could be identified which explains the low extraction yields. Experiments using the 1-methylimidazolium hydrogen sulfate ionic liquid solution to leach pure lanthanum oxide leads to an exothermic reaction and a lanthanum rich residue. The X-ray powder diffraction indicates an amorphous phase which explains the failed X-Ray powder diffraction analysis of the initial battery leach residues. To overcome this limitation of conventional X-ray powder diffraction analysis, QEMSCAN analysis ( A combination of operations was carried out for the slag using a jaw crusher and a ball mill, successively. Screening tests were performed on the ground slag powders in order to obtain two different particle size fractions: + The chemical analysis of the slag powder with the particle size ranges of 63–90 The chemical analysis of the initial slag powders indicates that iron (35.70% w/w), aluminum (9.95% w/w) and manganese (3.45% w/w) are the major base metal elements. Other important elements are lanthanum, cerium, neodymium and yttrium (rare earth elements) in the ratio of about 10.00% w/w, 9.00%, 2.50% and 0.16%, respectively. The dissolution efficiency of iron at temperatures of 50 The effect of temperature and particle size on the dissolution percentage of manganese over 2 The leaching of rare earth elements in 1-methylimidazolium hydrogen sulfate ionic liquid solutions was also investigated. The effect of temperature and particle size of slag powders on the leach efficiency of lanthanum is shown in The leaching efficiency results of cerium and neodymium are presented in As shown in Leaching behaviors of rare earth metals with particle size of 63–90 A leaching process is a heterogeneous reaction in which a liquid contacts and reacts with solid particles forming a product according to Eq. Solid particles remain unchanged in size during reaction when they contain large amounts of impurities which remain as non-flaking ash or if they form a firm product material by the reaction of Eq. In order to determine the kinetic parameters and rate controlling step for leaching of the slag powders in ionic liquid solutions, the experimental data was analyzed based on the shrinking core model using equations shown in The experimental data in The apparent rate constant k is a function of temperature and the relationship between k and T can be expressed by the Arrhenius equation ( According to the Arrhenius Eq. The qualitative composition of identified phases is presented in The other phases did not show a pertinent and consistent REE distribution and are dominated by Fe, Al, Mn and Cr, as can be observed in The distribution of grains in the ground slag is illustrated in The evaluation results of QEMSCAN raw data including identified phases and their quantitative distribution (in vol.%) in slag powder and leached slag powder are shown in The evaluation of the leaching experiments indicated a good leaching efficiency of iron and manganese with metal yields of > A similar behavior can be observed by the dominant rare earth phases. The iron rich REE phase (red) (expected Only the aluminum rich REE phase (orange) was still present in the residue. In addition the evaluation of the QEMSCAN data with the compiled data base resulted in high rates of not matching phases, the low confidence phase (not shown in diagrams). Consequently a further phase with REEs has to be formed after leaching that might explain the low REE recovery rates. Accordingly a further phase with sulfur, oxygen, the REEs and iron was implemented as “must have” elements. The result of the reanalysis indicated that this REE sulfate phase (green) is almost not present in the initial material but is the dominant phase in the residue ( Rare earth elements lanthanum, cerium, neodymium and yttrium were found to exist in the structure of industrial NiMH spent battery recycling slag powders in additional to iron, manganese and aluminum. Ionic liquid HmimHSO We would like to thank The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) for its research fellowship 2214A to support Ayfer Kilicarslan Sahin for a three-month stay at the IME Department of Process Metallurgy and Metal Recycling, RWTH Aachen University. 