Grinding circuit needs to be stably controlled for high recovery rate of mineral ore and significant reduction of production cost in concentrator plants. Ball mill grinding circuit is essentially a multi-input–multi-output (MIMO) system with strong coupling among process variables. Simplified model with multi-loop decoupled PID control usually cannot maintain a long-time stable control in real practice. The response tests between four controlled variables (namely, product particle size, mill solids concentration, sump level and circulating load) and four manipulated variables (namely, fresh ore feed rate, mill feed water flow rate, pump speed and dilution water flow rate) are carried out to construct a four-input–four-output model of grinding circuit. Based on this modeling, constrained model predictive control (MPC) is adopted to handle such strong coupling system and evaluated in an iron ore concentrator plant. The variables are controlled around their set-points and a long-term stable operation of the grinding circuit close to their optimum operating conditions is achieved. More than three years’ operation in industry demonstrates the effectiveness and practicality of this control strategy.Ball mill grinding circuits are the most important operation units in mineral processing plants. The product particle size of grinding circuits has great influence on the recovery rate of the valuable minerals. According to statistics, the grinding circuits typically represent about 50% of the total expenditure of the concentrator plant, only 10% of the electrical power consumed contributing to grinding of ore. Considerable improvements in operation efficiency and significant reduction in production cost can be achieved if grinding circuits are operated in an appropriate way by process control ( Due to its complexities and difficulties, the control design of grinding circuit has attracted much attention. First, a large number of variables involved have severe interactions among them, which means that when one output or controlled variable is regulated with one input or manipulated variable, other controlled variables will be unavoidably influenced in an undesired fashion. Second, the existence of large time lags, time-varying parameters and nonlinearities can also cause undesirable effects on process behaviors. Simplified models based on control variables’ pairing, such as two-input–two-output model, are usually studied in earlier papers ( Much work has been done on the study and implementation of control strategies in grinding circuits ( Up to present, model predictive control (MPC) has become the most widely used multivariable control algorithm in chemical process industries and other areas ( This paper presents an application of model predictive control in ball mill grinding circuit. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: A model of ball mill grinding circuit with four inputs and four outputs is developed in Section The grinding circuit under study operates in a closed loop as shown in The feed, iron ore (from primary crusher, size ⩽14 Product particle size is the final and most important controlled variable in a grinding circuit. Mine ore has to be ground to a size called the liberation size that the imbedded mineral particles are exposed for effective recovery in the following flotation process. It should be pointed out that grinding to a size much smaller than the liberation size may also bring some disadvantages. Besides the higher power consumed in grinding, too fine particles or slimes are difficult to be recovered in the subsequent concentration and filtration process. It is very necessary to develop a multi-input–multi-output model to meet high quality requirements and maintain a long stable operation. Based on adequate analysis of the process, four controlled variables are selected, i.e. product particle size, mill solids concentration, sump level and the circulating load. Four manipulated variables are available: the fresh feed rate, mill feed water flow rate, pump speed and sump dilution water flow rate. The main technical parameters of the grinding circuit are shown in For the purpose of modeling, many experiments have been conducted in the process to show the relation between manipulated variables and controlled variables. For example, we need to know whether the increase in a particular manipulated variable can cause increase, decrease or other complex change of the controlled variables, also including the response rates of the action, slow or fast. Totally 16 open loop responses are obtained as shown in As shown in The responses of mill solids concentration, sump level and circulating load to the 4 manipulated variables can be similarly analyzed according to Traditionally, process model for automatic control can be established on the basis of physical laws governing the behavior of the true system and often be referred to as a first-principle model ( A four-input–four-output black-box model is derived based on The elements It is evident that severe interactions exist between the manipulated and controlled variables. That means when one manipulated variable is used to regulate a controlled variable the other 3 controlled variables will be inevitably influenced in some degree. As for conventional multi-loop PID controllers, they generally become sluggish, leading to poor control performances and precise control of the process is impossible in real practice. MPC scheme is much suitable for this case. The underlying philosophy of MPC scheme is based on the step response model, which can be illustrated in Model predictive control is based on real-time optimization of a cost function ( Magnitude and rate constraints on the manipulated variables and the controlled variables are expressed as follows ( Manipulated variable constraints: MPC scheme is implemented in a moving horizon framework. At any sampling instant, the optimization problem is formulated over the prediction horizon and a future manipulated variable trajectory is calculated that minimizes the objective function satisfying all the constraints. Only the first move is applied to the plant and this step is repeated for next sampling instant. The system based on MPC strategy was put into operation in an iron ore concentrator plant in 2003 and is now still running after three years. Two decoupled PID controllers based on a two-input–two-output model had been used for nearly one year before the implementation of MPC strategy. Particle size and mill solids concentration were chosen as controlled variables, while fresh ore feed rate and sump dilution water flow rate were selected as manipulated variables. Decoupled PID control had been frequently interrupted by changes in mineral ore hardness, feed rate, feed particle size, etc., though the performance of the closed loop control system had been much improved compared with that of the manual control system.  The schematic diagram of MPC applied in the ball mill grinding circuit is shown in All the signals from or to the grinding process are intercollected through digital-to-analog or analog-to-digital interfaces in a distributed control system (DCS) as shown in The main instruments and measurement methods applied in the system are: Product particle size and density by PSI 2601. This is an on-line particle size analyzer which can measure three inlets of slurry and incorporates on-line measurement of slurry density. Fresh ore feed rate by belt scale. Mill feed water flow rate and sump water flow rate by electro-magnetic flow meter. Sump level by ultrasonic level transmitter. Hydrocyclone feed slurry density by nuclear density meter. Hydrocyclone feed slurry flow rate by electro-magnetic flow meter. Cyclone pressure by pressure transmitter. Mill acoustic emission by frequency filtered “electronic ear”. Mill power by power transmitter. Circulating load measured indirectly by soft sensor. Mill solids concentration also estimated by soft sensor. The following tuning and weighting factors are used while applying the MPC scheme to control the grinding circuit: Prediction horizon Note that the weight on particle size is set to a large value of 1 as the particle size should be more tightly controlled compared with other three controlled variables, and also the weight on fresh feed rate is set to a large value of 1 because it is not permitted to move too freely in order to maintain a relatively stable production. Although the weights on the manipulated variables could be employed to constrain the variations of the control actions, strict inequality constraints should also be added to the criterion as mentioned in Eqs. The normal value of fresh feed rate in the grinding circuit is 70 There are 3 grinding circuits with the same process running in parallel in this concentrator plant, namely No. 6, No. 7 and No. 8, respectively. This control strategy is first applied in No. 8. As mentioned above, MPC has the abilities of prediction and coordination, which could lead to much smoother responses of manipulated variables while maintaining the controlled variables stable.  Model predictive control has been employed to handle the strong coupling multivariable system of grinding circuit. A four-input–four-output model of grinding circuit has been developed for process control. Constrained model predictive control has been evaluated in an iron ore concentrator plant. Compared with the former two-input–two-output model and conventional multi-loop decoupled PID controllers, the running results of MPC scheme have demonstrated significant performance improvements in grinding process control. MPC schemes can handle manipulated variable and controlled variable constraints explicitly and offer suitable tuning flexibility. The four controlled variables, namely the product particle size, mill solids concentration, sump level and the circulating load have been controlled around the set-points as required. The long-term stable operation of the grinding circuit close to their optimum operating conditions has been achieved. The run results show that the proposed MPC scheme is an effective and practical method to control ball mill grinding circuits. The authors thank the teammates who have contributed to the experimental work and system commissioning in industry. Funding for process modeling and control research is provided by Project 8508002025, Southeast University.