This paper presents an approach to modelling fracture networks in hot dry rock geothermal reservoirs. A detailed understanding of the fracture network within a geothermal reservoir is critically important for assessments of reservoir potential and optimal production design. One important step in fracture network modelling is to estimate the fracture density and the fracture geometries, particularly the size and orientation of fractures. As fracture networks in these reservoirs can never be directly observed there is significant uncertainty about their true nature and the only feasible approach to modelling is a stochastic one. We propose a global optimization approach using simulated annealing which is an extension of our previous work. The fracture model consists of a number of individual fractures represented by ellipses passing through the micro-seismic points detected during the fracture stimulation process, i.e. the fracture model is conditioned on the seismic points. The distances of the seismic points from fitted fracture planes (ellipses) are, therefore, important in assessing the goodness-of-fit of the model. Our aims in the proposed approach are to formulate an appropriate objective function for the optimal fitting of a set of fracture planes to the micro-seismic data and to derive an efficient modification scheme to update the model parameters. The proposed objective function consists of three components: orthogonal projection distances of the seismic points from the nearest fitted fractures, the amount of fracturing (fitted fracture areas) and the volumes of the convex hull of the associated points of fitted fractures. The functions used in the model update scheme allow the model to achieve an acceptable fit to the points and to converge to acceptable fitted fracture sizes. These functions include two groups of proposals: one for updating fracture parameters and the other for determining the size of the fracture network. To increase the efficiency of the optimization, a spatial clustering approach, the Distance-Directional Transform, was developed to generate parameters for newly proposed fractures. A simulated dataset was used as an example to evaluate our approach and we compared the results to those derived using our previously published algorithm on a real dataset from the Habanero geothermal field in the Cooper Basin, South Australia. In a real application, such as the Habanero dataset, it is difficult to determine definitively which algorithm performs better due to the many uncertainties but the number of association points, the number of final fractures and the error are three important factors that quantify the effectiveness of our algorithm.Hot dry rock (HDR) geothermal energy has the potential to make a significant contribution to achieving a sustainable energy future. Potential HDR geothermal systems occur in deep underground crystalline rock, where the rock matrix (granite) is almost impermeable and the only viable pathway for geothermal flow is through an engineered fracture network. Understanding the fractures and the fracture network within the geothermal reservoir is therefore critically important for the design and operation of the system Earlier mathematical models for fracture networks and flow through them include continuum models that assume a fractured rock mass can be represented as an equivalent porous medium The significant uncertainties associated with DFN necessitate a stochastic approach. Stochastic modelling of fracture networks originated in percolation studies Recently, DFN conditional on two- and three-dimensional data have been proposed; see for example: Fadakar et al. This paper presents a general stochastic model for fracture networks in a fractured HDR reservoir. Two challenging factors in a global optimization problem are the construction of an appropriate objective function and the formulation of an efficient model modification scheme. In our approach, the objective function consists of three components to minimize, respectively, the distances of the points to the fitted fracture model, the amount of fracturing and the volumes of the convex hull of the points associated with fractures. The model modification functions include two categories of proposals. The first category is for updating fracture geometry variables and the second is for adjusting the size of the fracture network (number of fractures). Simulated annealing (SA) is the core of our model in which it is used to minimize the objective function by accepting or rejecting any update proposed by the model modification functions The paper is organized as follows: In Section In discrete fracture network modelling, the most common approach is to use simple representations of fractures although it is possible to represent fractures by tortuous surfaces. Common approaches include circular discs, elliptical discs, planar polygons or planes with infinite extents The fracture model consists of a number of fractures each with its associated cluster of seismic points so that each point is associated with one, and only one, fracture in the model. Note that even the ‘best’ fitted model will not intersect all seismic points but the distances of the points to fracture planes (the orthogonal projection measure) can be used to assess the goodness-of-fit of the fracture model. The final objective function can be written as  Distances of the points to fracture planes: the summation of the shortest distances of the points to fracture planes is a major component of the objective function The amount of fracturing: the following objective is used The volumes of the convex hulls of the points associated with fractures: an objective function component calculated as the sum of the volumes of the convex hulls constructed from the associated points of fractures: The amount of the contribution of each component to the final objective function in Each seismic point is an indication of fracture growth or stimulation and these points are the only data available for modelling the fracture network. Thus, an essential, but not sufficient, criterion for the fracture model is that it should provide the best possible fit to all the seismic points. However, the model may fail to provide a good local fit in some areas or it may generate an unnecessarily high density of fractures. We address this problem (inappropriate fitting) by using weights in the objective function. The weighting procedure is based on the density of fractures; if the density of fractures around a point is large, a small weight is assigned to the corresponding term in the objective function The Distance-Directional Transform (DD-Transform), proposed by Seifollahi et al. Set Select a point Initialize Select two distinct points Fit a plane through the points Update ( Sort Sort the rows of The rows of Using random portions of points in Step 2 and Step 3.1 will reduce the computational time; in our experiments the number of samples used in Steps 2 and 3.1 is the minimum of the total number of points ( Fracture network modelling, conditioned to a seismic point cloud, requires a stochastic approach Two categories of proposals are incorporated in our model. The first category is related to the determination of fracture parameters, including the coordinates of fracture centres, dip direction, dip angle, rotation angle and major and minor axes of the fractures. The second category is related to the determination of a reasonable fracture network size by growing or pruning techniques such as proposing new fractures or removing redundant fractures. We use simulated annealing to find the solution in the model This proposal moves the centre of a candidate fracture towards one of the associated points of the candidate fracture. The candidate fracture, the point and the amount of translation are all chosen at random: The proposal is processed independently for each variable. For a given variable, a pair of fractures is selected at random and their corresponding variable values are swapped. As no new values of the variable are involved, the distribution of the orientation remains unchanged after this process. This proposal is repeated independently for each feature. For a given feature, a pair of fractures is chosen at random and their corresponding fracture sizes are swapped. The size distribution will remain unchanged after this process. The idea of this proposal is the same as that in Seifollahi et al.  Select the two similar fractures using Apply the DD-Transform to the associated points of both the candidate fractures to find the centre, dip direction and dip angle of a new fracture. Generate the rotation angle and major and minor axes of the new fracture from their distributions. Re-evaluate the point-fracture association given the new fracture. Accept or reject the proposal based on Eq. During the optimization process, fractures with a small number of associated points or a low point density (defined as the number of associated points per unit area of the fracture ellipse) are possible redundant fractures and are therefore candidate fractures for possible removal from the fracture network. Two versions are considered: A fracture is chosen based on the lowest density. A fracture is chosen based on the minimum number of associated points. The candidate fracture is then proposed to be removed from the network. The only computation, in both versions, is assigning the associated points of the removed fracture to other existing fractures. The acceptance or rejection of the proposal is decided on the basis of Eq. This proposal is to replace an existing fracture with a new one Choose an initial subset of candidate fractures based on the maximum associated distances; i.e., for each fracture determine the maximum point-fracture association distance. Select a set of fractures with the maximum association distance greater than the bandwidth threshold. Apply the DD-Transform to the associated points of each initial candidate fracture. Sort the matrix obtained in Step 2 in descending order. The first row then records the coordinates of the centre, dip direction and dip angle of the new fracture. Generate the other three parameters of the new fracture from their distributions. Replace the fracture corresponding to the associated points with the new one. Accept or reject the proposal based on the probability This proposal follows similar steps to the Replacement proposal except for Step 5 in which the candidate fracture is not removed, effectively resulting in the addition of a new fracture. The new fracture is chosen so that the difference between the orientation parameters of the new fracture and the old one is significant (as defined by a threshold); the threshold is set to 5 degrees. In the Replacement proposal, there is no such limitation for generating a new fracture. This proposal is similar to the Birth proposal except that the candidate fracture is replaced by two new fractures generated by applying the DD-Transform to the points associated with the candidate fracture. This proposal is also similar to the Split proposal in Seifollahi et al. In this section, we present the steps used in our approach to generate a general stochastic fracture network model conditioned to a point cloud with a strong emphasis on fracturing (fracture sizes and the number of fractures). In the initialization step (Step 1), a prior model, To evaluate the proposed method, we consider two three-dimensional examples. The first example is a simulated dataset and the second is a real dataset from the Habanero geothermal reservoir in South Australia. This dataset was generated in three steps. First we generate a set of fractures with centres in [1,10] The orientation of the major axis follows a lognormal distribution: A number of points from each fracture are generated at random; the larger the fracture, the greater the number of points generated (i.e., the number of points is proportional to the size of fracture). Given the fracture representation as an ellipse, a set of initial points are regularly sampled from the ellipse. Each sample point is considered as a point between two randomly selected points of the set. Although there is a rich literature of statistical sampling of point process Finally, noise, from a uniform distribution, is added to each point coordinate value (through the normal vector of the fracture plane) to create a dataset resembling reality.     The Habanero wells are part of Geodynamics’ HDR geothermal project in the Cooper Basin, South Australia. These wells have been drilled to depths of about 4400     For comparison of the output with that of Seifollahi et al. In the present work, we have developed a stochastic optimization approach for fracture network modelling conditioned to the micro-seismic points derived from the fracture stimulation of a HDR geothermal reservoir. The number of association points, the number of final fractures and the error are three important factors that quantify the effectiveness of our algorithm. On the basis of these measures we conclude that the algorithm presented here is a significant extension of our previous published work in Seifollahi et al. The time domain is an important feature of the seismic events (see The work reported in this paper was funded by