There is a widespread impression, reflected in recent legislation, that US Patent Office examiners issue many patents of dubious validity, and are insufficiently informed to distinguish these from other valid applications. We address this issue using related application outcomes at the European Patent Office as indicators for patent weakness. We create a proxy for potentially citable prior art using latent semantic analysis of US patent documents, and use this to construct a measure of examiner search effort. We find that US examiners tend to devote more search effort to weaker patents, implying that they can identify a substantial portion of the weak patents that they issue. Why the patent system fails to make better use of examiners' ability to identify weak patents is a question that merits further investigation.O34 O31 D83 D73 Among lawyers, economists, policy makers and businessmen there is a widespread belief that patent examiners at the United States Patent Office (USPTO) have allowed the grant of too many patents that do not satisfy the statutory criteria for allowance. Such “weak patents” impose social costs associated with increased uncertainty and abusive litigation without commensurate social benefits associated with increased innovation incentives. There is also a related impression that USPTO patent examiners allow many weak patents because they do not distinguish them from other applications that meet the patentability criteria. Given the resources at their disposal, examiners are ignorant of the quality of the patents they issue. In this paper, we empirically address this examiner ignorance hypothesis. It is important to distinguish the question of examiner ignorance from the ongoing debate regarding its causes, and what, if anything, should be done about it. Most adherents of the examiner ignorance hypothesis see a need to augment the time and financial resources allocated to the application process. The Leahy-Smith America Invents Act, signed into law in September 2011, addressed the perceived inadequacy of examination with provisions restricting the practice of diverting money from the USPTO, empowering the Office to set fees to hire more examiners and upgrade infrastructure, and instituting pre-grant submission of prior art or post-grant review by third parties. Others see the incentive structure for examiners as the main problem (for example However, not all supporters of the ignorance hypothesis assume such ignorance to be problematic. One influential legal scholar, in a stimulating contribution to the debate, postulated that US examiners “are ‘rationally ignorant’ of the objective validity of patents.” ( A lack of relevant empirical evidence constrains discussions of this topic. We have in particular found little empirical evidence regarding the ability, given the resources at hand, of examiners to distinguish the strong from the weak among the patents they issue. This paper addresses the claim that weak US patents are issued by examiners who are ignorant of the relative strength of patents they grant, focusing on the relationship between an individual examiner's efforts in searching for prior art for each of a set of patents he issues and the relative strength of those patents. Our sample is a set of US patents with a USPTO filing date between 1990 and 1995, for which applications were also filed in the Europe Patent Office (EPO). We use outcomes from the EPO application process, reflecting not only European laws but also procedures and traditions distinct from those at the USPTO, as indirect indicators of the strength of the related US patents. We use the number of prior patents cited on the front page of a given US patent Our empirical analysis indicates that this measure of search intensity for a US patent is significantly related to the probability of failure (withdrawal or rejection) of the related application at the EPO. Our findings are quite robust. The most convincing result is from a panel data model with We find that most of the examiners in our sample exhibit bimodal search effort, and among patents issued by an examiner, search effort is significantly positively correlated with failure of related applications at the EPO. An increase in our search effort measure by 0.4, roughly the average distance between the two modes, is associated with a rise in the rate of failure at EPO by at least 4.3 percentage points. We cannot meaningfully relate this rise to the total incidence of weak patents because estimates of the latter vary widely. Nevertheless our findings suggest that examiners are aware of the weakness of a substantial number of the weak patents they issue, and devote extra search effort to their examination. To understand our results, it is important to recognize that “One of the oddest things about the US patent system is that it is impossible for the USPTO to ever finally reject a patent application. While patent examiners can refuse to allow an applicant's claim to ownership of a particular invention, and can even issue what are misleadingly called ‘final rejections,’ the applicant always gets another chance to persuade the patent examiner to change his mind” ( One interpretation of our results is that if an examiner identifies an application he believes to be weak, he searches harder for prior art that would support a final “rejection” of the application, hoping to convince the applicant of the difficulties, delay and cost she can avoid by abandoning the application. Should the applicant nevertheless persist, the USPTO examiner cannot ensure a truly final rejection. Though he can increase the costs to the applicant by further delaying disposal of the application, by doing so he increases his own workload with no increase in the “counts” that measure his productivity and eligibility for a bonus. Hence the examiner often ultimately concedes. Interviews with examiners, ex-examiners and patent attorneys support our inference that examiners do attempt to build a case against allowance of a weak application by conducting more intensive searches for prior art. Our results are consistent with, though they do not directly address, an alleged In the following Section we offer some relevant institutional details about the USPTO. Why do examiners grant (allow) so many weak applications? Patent examination is a complex process involving examiners' understanding and evaluation of the patentability of an application based on personal knowledge of the field and information from various sources. These include, in particular, searches for prior art and interactions with the applicant, conducted within constraints and incentives imposed by the institutions and policies in the USPTO. To furnish a foundation for our empirical test of the ability of US examiners to distinguish the weak from the strong in the patents they grant, in this section we briefly review some institutional details about patent examination procedures and incentives at the USPTO. At the USPTO, patent examiners work in art (technology) units, each consisting of 10–15 primary and assistant examiners, led by a Supervisory Patent Examiner. Primary examiners, with at least 5 After receiving an application, the examiner reads and interprets it, and then searches for prior art (including previous patents, databases, journals) to determine whether the application is novel and non-obvious. This search typically begins with a review of existing US patents in relevant technology classes and subclasses, in recent years relying largely upon computerized tools, or by manual examination of hard-copy stacks of issued patents, as was a common practice in our sample period. If necessary, the examiner can extend the search to foreign patent documents, scientific and technical journals, or other databases. The applicant need only disclose in his application art of which he is aware that is “material to the patentability of the application.” The current law presumes that applications are patentable, not unpatentable ( If an examiner decides an invention is not patentable, he must articulate his reasons and provide relevant prior art to justify his “first office action on the merits (FOAM)” of a “non-final” rejection if it is based on obviousness or non-novelty. In contrast, allowance of an application does not require the examiner to prove anything. MPEP guidelines imply that, for a very good application, an examiner might conduct a less exhaustive search. Given the imbalance of burden of proof, it is understandable that an examiner, judging an application to be unpatentable, would search more diligently for prior art in order to build the case against allowance. Examiners give an overwhelming majority of applications a FOAM of non-final rejection, but issue a “final” rejection in the second office action for only a minority of these. Even applications that receive a “final” rejection are more likely than not to ultimately result in patents ( The compensation and promotion structures for USPTO examiners provide incentives for them to process applications quickly, which is most easily achieved by accepting (“allowing”) them without too much delay ( The term “final rejection” is a “classic legal misnomer” ( Of several measures of examination quality used by the USPTO, the most important is an audit of the examiner's error rate, Other measures such as the adequacy of prior art search and the examiner's grant rate help ensure that the examiner devotes a sufficient amount of effort to prior art searches for applications deemed to be strong. However the net effect of these “quality control” mechanisms is likely to encourage the examiner to allocate extra effort in the prior art search stage to applications that he considers to be invalid, to back up his anticipated negative assessment. Examiners also are influenced by less formal measures of the quality of their work. As one ex-examiner declared to us, he “does not want his patent to be the one that hits the newspapers” as especially ludicrous. In the early 1990s the US Congress made the funding of the USPTO dependent on the fees it collected. At the USPTO, nothing beyond filing and paying for an application is needed to initiate the full examination procedure, including the examiner's search for prior art. At the EPO, by contrast, filing of an application in our study period initiated only a prior art search by a searcher, at the EPO search office in The Hague, Netherlands. The searcher then wrote and published a search report that cited, categorized and labeled the prior art he identified (assigning Label X to cited prior art that, when taken alone, indicates that the claimed invention cannot be considered to be novel or to involve an inventive step; label Y to cited prior art that is particularly relevant if combined with another document of the same category; and labels A, P, O and D to other categories of prior art). Within six months after publication of the search report, the applicant must file a request for examination and pay the examination fee, or the application lapses. In the sample period, an EPO examiner in Munich (who was not involved in the prior art search) started the examination of its patentability. From the third year after the EPO filing date, the applicant must pay annual fees to keep the application alive until disposed of. The EPO incentives and institutional rules regarding patent examination differ from those at the USPTO. The EPO awards patent examiners twice as much credit for rejecting than for allowing an application, recognizing that “a rejection takes much more work than an allowance.” In this section we present a simple heuristic model to help motivate our claim that the strength of a patent could have a negative relation to the examiner's prior art search effort if the examiner can distinguish relative patentability of applications he examiners and form a good judgement about an application's patentability. If the examiner cannot, a patent's strength should have a positive relation to the examiner's prior art search effort. Suppose that the examiner forms a preliminary judgement of the relative merits of different applications. How would he allocate his limited search time and determine his search effort? Under the various legal, institutional and cultural incentives and constraints at the USPTO, discussed in More formally, let the underlying patentability of a U.S. application be With this perceived patentability The USPTO has a patentability threshold To try to put an end to an application that he deems invalid, the examiner conducts a more diligent search for prior art, to obtain evidence of non-patentability. A more intensive search is more costly to the examiner, as it consumes more time and thus reduces the points he will earn towards his biweekly production goal. We assume the cost of search to be A more intensive search, as signaled in the prior art cited by the examiner, can deter the applicant from persevering in pursuing the patent, by showing her the difficulty and cost of persuading the examiner. Let Formally, suppose In this simplified model, we further assume that whether an application is granted by the USPTO is determined solely by the applicant's persistence. The examiner determines his search intensity, The solution to this cost minimization problem is given by Eq. The derivative of We, as outside researchers, observe the examiner's search intensity For a granted patent, given that we observe the examiner's search intensity Note that if we observed the examiner's search intensity From Eqs. From Eq. When the examiner can form a good judgement about the application's patentability, the variance Intuitively, a granted patent with a higher search intensity has two opposing implications: (1) the examiner perceives it to be less patentable, but (2) the applicant decided to persist despite a more intense review of prior art by the examiner. For a patent granted by an informed US examiner, its strength is dominantly reflected by the first factor: when the examiner conducts a more intense search effort for an application, this implies that he had more negative assessment of the application, which is closely related to the true patentability. Thus the expected true patentability is lower. In other words, although the informed examiner ultimately grants a weak patent due to the applicant's persistence, the proportion of potential prior art that he locates is a signal of search intensity that should in turn be positively correlated with his assessment of the weakness of the patents he grants. For an ignorant examiner, his perceived patentability of an application has little to do with the true underlying patentability. One way to formalize this is to allow the variance Thus, the second term in Eq. Thus, for a patent granted by an ignorant examiner, its strength is dominantly reflected by the fact that the applicant decided to be persistent despite the examiner's search effort because he knows that the patentability is high. In summary, if examiners can and do distinguish the relative patentability of applications and allocate their search intensity accordingly, citation of a Therefore, an empirical study of the relationship between a patent's cited prior art and its strength, conditional on the potential art available, would be an indirect test of examiners' knowledge of the relevant strength of the patents they grant. To test whether the intensity of the examiner's search for prior art indicates his perception of the strength of the patents he issues, we first need an indicator of relative strength for a sample of US patents. Second, for each patent in the sample, we need to construct an indicator of the intensity of the examiner's search for prior art. Potential indicators of the validity of US patents, including outcomes of re-examination at the USPTO and of litigation for validity in courts, are available only for small and highly selected samples of patents. In practice, neither of these indicators is useful for our purposes. The USPTO re-examination, available since 1981, has serious disincentives and drawbacks and is rarely used ( Accordingly, we look to other modern patent offices for indicators of the validity of US patents. We use a sample of 22,300 inventions with US inventors who filed initially at the USPTO and obtained US patents (without continuation filings), and also filed applications, with the USPTO priority date, at the European Patent Office (EPO). We focus on the independent EPO examination as an imperfect second trial of the patentability of an invention claimed in a US patent. The EPO, though it uses different procedures for searches for prior art and for examination, applies patentability standards broadly similar to those of the USPTO, with notable exceptions with respect to patenting of genes and software. While many believe that it is more difficult to obtain a patent at the EPO, we assume only that the weaker is a US patent, the more likely the related application will fail (be rejected or withdrawn) at the EPO. In short, the outcome of an EPO application is an admittedly noisy but informative signal of the strength (validity) of the corresponding US patent. Our sample is selected in several ways, but such sample selection should not be crucial for the purpose of our study, which aims to shed empirical light on whether US examiners distinguish the relative patentability of applications and allocate their search effort accordingly. First, the inventors sought patent protection in both the USPTO and the EPO through non-PCT filings. Thus these patents might differ from those filed only for US patents, or from those filed at the EPO using PCT filings, (much less prevalent in the sample interval than later), in regard to potential commercial value or patentability. Second, the sample includes only US patents from single application filings, excluding patents that received a “final rejection” and then were filed as continuations at the USPTO. Since patent family members of these excluded patents are more likely on average to be rejected at the EPO (which does not allow continuations), their absence biases results against EPO rejection. In addition, the sample excludes applications unsuccessful at the USPTO, as the USPTO published issued patents only, not rejected applications, before 2000, again biasing against rejection at the EPO. For a US inventor who first files an application at the USPTO, and then at the EPO, There are three EPO application outcomes of interest: withdrawn by applicants, granted or rejected by the EPO. Excluding those still pending when the data were constructed, only 64% of the EPO applications corresponding to the US patents in our sample were granted; 30.1% were withdrawn and 5.9% were rejected, with grant rates varying significantly across technology fields (see Online Appendix A2). To construct a measure of the intensity of examiners' prior art searches, we collected information related to both the prior art that the examiner actually obtained through his search, and the uncited prior art he should have cited but did not. The prior art listed in a US patent comes from either the examiner or the applicant. We would prefer to use only examiner citations in constructing our measure of examiner search intensity. Unfortunately we cannot easily distinguish these two types of citations for the tens of thousands of US patents in our sample, To identify the set of potentially citable prior art that is not cited by a patent, patent by patent searches, involving detailed expert analysis of each claim such as is often conducted in the course of patent litigation, are far too expensive to be feasible for analysis of tens of thousands of patents in our study. As an alternative, we rely on Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) to determine how closely related other prior patents are to a given patent. The LSA analysis used in the paper was kindly furnished by M-CAM, which first made its services available in 1999, well after the last priority year of our sample, 1995. For each US patent  Moreover, among 623 examiners with no fewer than 10 patents in the dataset, 431 (69%) show bimodality (defined here as a distance between the highest and second highest bin greater than at least one bin) in PPSIs of the patents they examine; for 275 of these (44% of the 623 examiners) the highest mode is at bin 0.9–1.0; and for 207 of these (33% of the examiners) the highest mode is at bin 0.9–1.0 and the other modes at bin 0.5–0.6 or bin 0.6–0.7. The bimodal search effort exhibited by the majority of examiners seems consistent with the hypothesis that they focus extra effort on the subset of applications that they deem dubious. Next we empirically test whether a higher examiner search intensity (PPSI) suggests a weaker patent. Given that the constructed variable The prior patent search intensity for patent To control for heterogeneity in search intensity across US examiners, we match the names of primary examiners and assistant examiners (if any) to each of the US patents in the sample. We use two empirical strategies in the paper.  In the second strategy, we control for unobserved time-varying factors with impacts that might differ across different examiners and/or different technology fields. Over the course of six years (1990–1995), US examiners might gain in experience and efficiency and some technology fields might evolve more dramatically than others ( In this strategy, we identify the correlation between Panel A of Panel B of The regression results confirm the message revealed graphically in We first estimate the probability that an applicant decides not to withdraw before the final EPO decision to accept or reject, with the dependent variable equal to 1 for non-withdrawal and 0 otherwise. The estimated coefficients for We then group together as ultimately unsuccessful those EPO applications that were either withdrawn by applicants or rejected by the EPO; those EPO applications that were granted comprise the successful group. Search intensity, How does this result compare to the percentage of weak patents issued at the USPTO? We cannot answer this question with any precision. Despite the widespread impression that weak patents are a problem at the USPTO, estimates of the prevalence of weak patents vary surprisingly widely. Such estimates are predominantly derived from evaluations of issued patents by qualified persons other than the original examiner. One obvious yardstick is the failure rate at the EPO for applications related to our sample of US patents, which is 36%. If all failures are attributable to the weakness of USPTO patents, then our estimate of 4.3 percentage points is only a modest 12% of the share of weak patents. This 12% estimate is likely a lower bound. First, the 4.3 percentage point estimate is subject to attenuation bias. Second, the EPO failure rate is almost certainly substantially upward biased as an estimate of errors of acceptance by USPTO examiners in applying US patentability standards, since it includes rejection errors at the EPO, and rejections due to inter-office differences in patentability standards and patentable subject matter. Even if the under-utilization of examiner knowledge that we have identified in our data from the 1990s is responsible for only the modest share of weak patents indicated by its lower bound, the problem appears substantial enough to merit further investigation at the USPTO. We conduct a variety of robustness checks on the results that a US patent with a higher We test whether both the number of cited prior patents and the number of M-CAM uncited prior patents predict EPO application outcomes. This specification is more flexible than the specification involving PPSI, which is the ratio of the number of cited prior patents to the number of potentially citable prior patents. Panel A of We also include all the three variables ( As mentioned in Conversely, if applicants disclose prior art in systematic and strategic ways, then using all prior citations, instead of examiner citations, could introduce different biases into our results in To delve deeper, one possible strategy by applicants could be to conduct a more diligent prior art search, and disclose more prior art to the USPTO, for applications they believe to be of better quality or stronger ( The opposite strategy might well be of greater concern. Applicants might strategically cite large amounts of prior art for weaker applications, in an attempt to hide critical prior art (which they need to disclose under the “duty of candor”) to make the latter less likely to attract the examiner's attention. This citation “spamming” could boost To test whether our results are driven by such strategic citing behavior by applicants, we look at the subsample of US patents that cite no > A perceptive referee has noted that, for US patents issued between 2001 and 2010, in which examiner citations are distinguished from applicant citations, the correlation between total citations and applicant citations is 0.98 while the correlation is only 0.16 for examiner cites, raising the concern that applicant citation variations dominate total citation variations. However the large correlation of applicant citations with total citations is an artifact of a very small portion of patents with very large numbers of applicant citations (including instances of applicant “spamming” discussed above.) If we focus on patents with total citations no > Contrary to findings in the economics literature that examiners ignore applicant citations ( In sum, these results indicate that our finding that The results thus far indicate that, if a US patent has a higher In this subsection, we address several alternative rationales for the finding that a US patent with a higher Suppose that, before they report, EPO searchers learn what prior art is cited on the US patent. If so, an application corresponding to a US patent with a larger number of citations would, ceteris paribus, be more likely to fail at the EPO, simply because the EPO examiner is more likely to be aware of more prior art, including prior art that might be invalidating at the EPO. Thus, even if the variation in prior art cited by US patents is random and unrelated to the US examiner's perception of the strength of the application, we may still observe a positive correlation between To test this possibility, we look at the subset, about 40% of the total sample of US patents, for which EPO published search reports Our test for Rationale 1 raises the alternate possibility that information flow from the EPO to the USPTO generates biased results. If EPO searchers found a larger number of X or Y citations, ceteris paribus, the application is less likely to succeed at the EPO. If the EPO search reports issue during the US examination of the priority US patent, that patent is more likely to have a higher share of cited prior patents, To test this rationale, we collect information on prior patents cited by EPO searchers in search reports, including both the number of prior patents that EPO searchers regarded as critical (categorized as X or Y) and the number of total prior patents cited in search reports. We then investigate, for the subset of US patents for which EPO search reports had been published Columns 2–3 and 5–6 of Panel A in We also look at a subset of US patents for which the EPO published search reports It is also noteworthy that for both subsets of the sample, the number of critical prior patents listed in EPO search reports is significantly positively correlated with failure at the EPO, whereas the number of total prior patents listed in EPO search reports is less significantly correlated. These results are consistent with other studies (i.e., It might be inherently easier to find prior art for some inventions than for others, even after we control for technology fields. If this is the case, a high Columns 1 and 3 of Panel A in Panel B of Interestingly, when We must also address the possibility that our results are driven by business method patents in the sample: business method patents have been subject to the “second pair of eyes review” and thus could garner more citations at the USPTO; meanwhile, they are also more likely to be rejected at the EPO due to the EPO's skepticism about the patentability of inventions in this area. In our sample patents, filed at the USPTO between 1990 and 1995, there are only 40 business method patents (with primary US patent class of 705 “Data processing: financial, business practice, management, or cost/price determination”). Thus it is not plausible that unique features of business methods patents are driving our results. Prominent empirical studies of the role of examiners in the allowance of weak patents have focused on inter-examiner heterogeneity, in particular on the relatively poor performance of particular groups of examiners, including those who are particularly experienced ( Our study instead considers examiners in general as sources of weak patents, focusing on the relation between intra-examiner variation in the quality of issued patents. Utilizing latent semantic analysis of US patent documents to approximate the set of uncited prior art that could have been found by US examiners in an exhaustive search, we construct a novel measure of US examiner search effort, the share of all potentially citable prior art that is actually found by the examiner. Using the fate of a related application at the European Patent Office as an indicator of the weakness of the US patent, we find that variations in the search effort of a given USPTO examiner identify, among those he allows, patents whose related applications are more likely to fail due to withdrawal or rejection at the EPO. The search behavior of US examiners in our sample indicates that most possess richer information about the variation in quality of the patents that they grant than revealed in their final allowance decisions; indeed their effort allocation is typically bimodal, with high effort correlated with patent weakness. Our results indicate that an increase in our measure of an examiner's search effort by roughly the difference between the two main modes observed for the average examiner, is associated with an increase of the failure rate of a related application at the European Patent Office (EPO) by at minimum 4.3 percentage points. We conclude that the issue of weak patents is not solely a problem of inter-examiner heterogeneity, and that the under-utilization of examiner knowledge implied by our analysis of data from the 1990s appears to have a sufficiently substantial effect on the issuance of weak patents to merit attention at the USPTO, and further exploration by empirical economists. We are grateful to the United States Patent Office for arranging a seminar on this research with a group of patent examiners from various fields and to the European Patent Office for arranging meetings with patent examiners and other personnel. This work benefited from input by participants at the conferences of the Berkeley Center for Law and Technology, meetings of Gathering 1 Atlanta, Georgia and Gathering 2 at Intel, Cupertino, CA, the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute on Intellectual Property, the Center for Empirical Legal Studies, the Boalt Intellectual Property Seminar, the UC Berkeley Innovation Workshop, the PATSTAT conference, Vienna, 2010, and the Empirical Patent Law and Policy Conference at the University of Illinois College of Law 2015. M-CAM, Inc. kindly provided linguistic and semantic mapping services. We have also benefited from conversations with current and former patent examiners and patent attorneys who prefer to remain anonymous. This work has been financially supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at