Recovery of vanadium from desilication residue obtained from the processing of a spent catalyst was investigated by leaching, purification and precipitation. In the leaching process, 96.4% vanadium can be extracted when the desilication residue (1:4 g/mL) was stirred at 800 rpm for 45 min at 80 °C with 100 g/L sodium bicarbonate. After purifying leach liquor in a two stage precipitation process, over 99% Al, 95% Si, 93% P and 95% As were removed under optimum conditions with less than 4% loss of vanadium. Adding 50 g/L NH4NO3 to the purified leach liquor and adjusting the pH to 8.2, promoted the crystallization and precipitation of 99.7% vanadium as ammonium metavanadate. After roasting ammonium metavanadate at 500 °C for 2 h, the purity of the V2O5 product was up to 98.3%. In terms of desilication residue and spent catalyst, the recovery of vanadium in the process reached 92.5% and 88.7%, respectively. The proposed leaching, purification and precipitation steps provide a feasible recovery of vanadium from desilication residue and a new approach for the comprehensive utilization of spent catalyst.Vanadium has strategic and industrial importance due to its applications in many technological fields ( Spent catalysts contribute a significant amount of the solid wastes generated in the petrochemical industry ( During the past decade, considerable research was devoted to process spent catalyst ( In our previous research ( In practice, the removal of SiO The desilication residue used in this study was obtained from the processing of a spent catalyst (Al The leaching experiments were performed in a 250 mL three-necked flask heated in a water bath kept constant within ± Using the same equipment, about 5.2 mL of 30 wt.% H Sodium bicarbonate was found to be a suitable reagent for extracting vanadium from desilication residue leaving insoluble CaCO In the present study, the effects of sodium bicarbonate concentration, temperature and time were evaluated, and the optimum leaching conditions for the maximum recovery of vanadium were established. The effect of sodium bicarbonate concentration in the range of 20–120 g/L was studied for a period of 60 min at 60 °C with S/L kept constant at 1:4 g/mL. The results in The effect of temperature on vanadium extraction was examined in the range of 25–100 °C as shown in The role of leaching time on the extraction of vanadium under similar conditions is illustrated in Thus, the above results revealed that 96.4% of vanadium in the desilication residue can be extracted at 80 °C by stirring a 20% pulp density with 100 g/L sodium bicarbonate for 45 min. Under these above optimum conditions, sufficient quantities of leach liquor at pH 13.4 were generated for further purification studies. The main compositions in leach liquor were presented in In the leaching process, part of Al, Si, phosphate and arsenate were leached along with vanadium. Phosphate and arsenate can react with vanadium in solution to form many kinds of hetero-polyacids ( Aluminate and silicate were the main impurities in leach liquor. According to their chemical characterization, Al and Si can be precipitated in the forms of aluminum hydroxide and silicon dioxide colloid by adjusting the pH of leach liquor to a proper range with acid. In this study, 30 wt.% H Based on our experience, pH 9.5 is acceptable to precipitate Al and Si Therefore after adjusting the initial pH of the liquor to pH 9.5, the effect of reaction temperature in the range of 20–95 °C was studied for the removal of Al and Si in a period of 30 min. As seen from Impurities of phosphate and arsenate were removed by chemical precipitation with the addition of 5 g/L Mg(NO According to our experience, the initial pH of liquor, addition of Mg(NO The effect of initial pH on the precipitation of P and As, illustrated in Other experiments established that there was no appreciable effect of increasing Mg(NO The integrated purification results for removing Al, Si, P and As from leach liquor are listed in Due to the higher concentration of vanadium (V The optimum operating conditions for precipitating vanadium were achieved by adding 50 g/L NH Based on the all experimental results mentioned above, the flow sheet for recovering vanadium from desilication residue is illustrated in Studies were performed to develop an approach to recover vanadium from desilication residue obtained during the processing of alkali roasted spent catalyst. According to the results obtained, the following conclusions were made: Up to 96.4% vanadium can be extracted from desilication residue with 100 g/L NaHCO After the purification of leach liquor in two stages, over 99% Al, 95% Si, 93% P and 95% As were selectively precipitated as oxides and as magnesium–ammonium–phosphate/arsenate with < Ammonium metavanadate could be crystallized and precipitated from purified leach liquor by adding 50 g/L NH In terms of desilication residue and spent catalyst, the recovery of vanadium in the overall process can reach 92.5% and 88.7%, respectively. The proposed leaching, purification and precipitation steps give a feasible recovery of vanadium from desilication residue and provide a new approach for the comprehensive utilization of spent catalyst. However, the disposal of leaching residues and effluents has yet to be studied as it will depend upon the scale of operation and local factors.