Wet comminution tests of discretized dolomite sample were conducted in planetary ball mill and reported in this work. The effect of ball diameter and feed size on the comminution kinetics was investigated. Literature models were used in attempt to provide adequate selection function estimation.
                  Rajamani and Herbst model was proposed for evaluation of the selection functions (S
                     
                        j
                     ) in planetary ball mill under given process conditions. Model parameters were correlated to ball diameters. The methodology suggested in this paper can provide assessment of model parameters and consequently S
                     
                        j
                      parameters.
                  This work represents a good foundation for further quantification of interactions in the comminution processes, and thus the prediction possibility of product properties in various process units and process conditions.Comminution process has respectable implementation in majority industrial segments: production and processing of mineral raw materials, ceramic materials, bioorganisms, pigments, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, paper, food, etc. It is well known that 3–4% of the total world production of electrical energy is consumed in pursuing the comminution In every comminution process, existence of the two consecutive phenomena was found a particle selected for breakage; a broken particle results in a given distribution. Determination of selection function is generally provided applying one-size interval method. It was found that particle size of input material has a great influence on selection function parameter. Consequently, many mathematical models for selection function estimation were recommended in order to reduce the experiment duration. One of the most frequently used models is simple power-law model proposed by Austin and co-workers Function Function Snow The objective of this paper was to investigate the applicability of proposed models for simulation of selection function parameter at versatile process conditions. Mathematical correlation between appropriate model and process parameter would enable estimation of selection function knowing one of the process parameters and one experimental value. Dolomite sample was supplied from Samoborka Ltd., density 2780 Ground dolomite was discretized by sieving using ASTM E-11 sieve standard ( Experiments were performed in planetary ball mill Fritsch GmbH, Pulverisette 5. It consists of four identical bowls vertically mounted on the mill disc. Since the turning directions of the supporting disc and the bowls are opposite, the centrifugal forces alternately are synchronized and opposite. Because of such rotation, the motion of grinding balls is extremely intense, which leads to the generation of high-energy impacts and consequently improvement of comminution efficiency Mill specification data is shown in Wet comminution tests were carried out at versatile process conditions achieved by variation of diameter and number of grinding balls ( Each size interval was comminuted for 2–6 Mass of the total batch in each grinding bowl (90 If grinding is treated as a rate process, breakage of a given size fraction usually follows first-order law. The decrease rate of initial size interval ( Selection function was determined based on experimental data using one-size interval method. Change of unbroken material content with time is linear in all derived tests ( In particulate systems where the feed particle size distribution greatly influences the outcome of the process, proper sampling and granulometric analysis represents important step. Although the one-size interval method is commonly used for preparation of samples before comminution, it could also be a resource of certain error. Within these narrow size intervals, different particle size distributions could occur. As a result, one can experience an error in determining the selection function based on one experiment. Several size intervals were randomly selected in order to investigate the reproducibility of experimental data. Sets of experimental results are reported in Slight discrepancies allege on potential reproducibility of the comminution tests. Therefore, it was concluded that the values obtained in the first set of experiments are reliable for further mathematical calculations. As already mentioned, selection function parameter considerably depends on the feed particle size. Maximal selection function values were achieved at certain initial size ranges, differing for each experiment. Exception was observed for experimental set using 33 According to observed trend of the selection function alteration ( Parameters Research results published in this area of interest are mostly focused on the determination of model parameters According to exhibited results, ball diameter was depicted as most appropriate parameter for mathematical correlations. Furthermore, parameter Different trend of the selection function and the fact that breakage rates of smaller particles are significantly smaller, the fourth set of experiments was not taken into account when deducing mathematical model. Based on the four remaining experimental sets, two functions that describe the dependence of model parameters on ball diameter were suggested as SSE values indicate good agreement between experimental and estimated selection function values. Within this research, results show that Rajamani and Herbst model can be easily used for estimation of selection functions if ball diameter and Decreasing breakage rate of particles is linear indicating first-order breakage kinetics under given circumstances. Selection function parameter considerably depends on the particle size of feed material and ball diameter. Larger grinding balls will effectively break larger particles; however, at the same time will reduce the breakage rates of smaller particles. Greater comminution efficiency, with respect to the selection function, can be achieved by a combination of various ball diameters. Rajamani and Herbst model can be used for estimation of the selection functions in planetary ball mill under given process conditions. Model parameters can be correlated to ball diameters with proposed functions. Convenience of these functions was tested simulating different process conditions. According to derived results, it can be concluded that the assessment of model parameters and selection functions is possible by the suggested methodology. Disadvantage of these models is usage of limited ball diameters smaller than 30  Rajamani and Herbst model parameter Rajamani and Herbst model parameter Snow model parameter grinding ball diameter (m) mean grinding ball diameter (m) strength parameter of selection function (Snow model) (s selection function of maximum particle size (s selection function of size interval indexed by selection function of size interval indexed by selection function of size interval indexed by maximal value of selection function (s position parameter of the selection function (Snow model) time (s) mass fraction of unbroken material maximum particle size (m) upper limit of size interval indexed by feed size at which Austin model parameter sum of squared errors