Most Indian coals have high ash content of the order of 25–35%. High ash in the coal not only reduces the thermal value of coal but also leads to production of fly ash, which is a major environmental problem. Cleaning with gravity concentration techniques is ineffective and more efficient techniques need to be developed. In recent times, bioflocculation as an alternative preparation method has been reported for a number of mineral systems including high-sulfur coals. In this paper, bioflocculation of high-ash Indian coals has been studied using Paenibacillus polymyxa for two coal samples. A quartz sample was used for comparison purposes. Zeta-potential measurements showed that coal samples and the bacterium were negatively charged over most of the pH range with a point-of-zero-charge (PZC) around pH 2–3. Surface free energy, determined through contact angle measurements, showed that the coal samples were hydrophobic while the bacterium was hydrophilic. Among the coal samples, the coal with the lower ash content exhibited greater hydrophobicity. Adhesion tests revealed that adhesion took place in about 25 min and that maximum adhesion occurred around pH 2. Similarly, flocculation tests showed that the bacterium flocculated coal effectively and efficiently with the best results around pH 2. More than 90% of the coal flocculated in about a minute in the presence of the bacterium while compared to about 20–30% in the absence of the bacterium. Flocculation of quartz was retarded under the same conditions, indicating that it is dispersed. Ash analysis of the flocculated portion showed a decrease in ash by 60% thereby suggesting that selective flocculation of coal is possible.Separation of unwanted mineral matter from coal to produce clean coal of high BTU value is a problem faced worldwide. Generally, gravity concentration techniques are used in most preparation plants to remove mineral matter from coal. In case the mineral matter is finely disseminated in coal, then gravity concentration techniques are not efficient. In such cases, methods such as flotation In the past decade, bioprocessing of coal as an alternative to conventional processes listed above has been shown to have a great potential for cleaning coal. In the above studies, the difference in surface properties of coal and its associated minerals has been the primary reason for selective adhesion of the bacteria, thus leading to selective flocculation or flotation. The surface properties of coal also vary depending on the composition and rank of coal. Flocculation with synthetic flocculants is very much dependent of the type of coal, which in turn affects the separation of mineral matter from coal The microorganism A pure culture of the microorganism Two coal samples were obtained for this study and the source and analysis of the coals are shown in Zeta potential of the coal samples, quartz and the bacterium was measured using a Zeta-Meter 3.0 system. About 1 g of the mineral sample was added to 50 ml of 1×10 Contact angle measurements were performed using a contact angle goniometer (Ramé-Hart, NJ, USA). The coal samples were first molded in epoxy resin with one flat surface being exposed for contact angle measurements. The surface of each sample was polished using 1000 and 4000 grit SiC paper. Final polishing was carried out with 0.05 μm alumina suspension. The samples were thoroughly washed with distilled water before making the measurements. In case of the bacterium, the suspension containing the microorganism was filtered using a 0.2 μm Millipore filter paper as described by Contact angles were measured using the sessile drop technique. A 2 μl drop was placed onto the surface and measurements were made within 2–3 min of placing the drop. Angles on both sides of the droplet were measured. The average of about eight readings is reported here. The contact angles could be reproduced with an accuracy of ±2°. Adhesion tests were performed in shake flasks and the change in cell number was monitored by counting using a Petroff–Hausser counter. About 1 g of coal sample was conditioned in 50 ml of distilled water at the required pH. Similarly, the bacterial suspension was conditioned in 50 ml of distilled water of the same pH as that of the mineral suspension. After a few minutes, the two suspensions were mixed and the time from that point was taken into account. The effect of conditioning time and pH on adhesion were studied. Flocculation tests were carried out in 100 ml graduated cylinder. The coal and bacterium were mixed in a beaker for about 25 min and the required pH and then transferred to the graduated cylinder. The amount of coal settled after 1 min was determined at different pH values. The flocculated coal was analyzed for ash. Ash was determined as per the ASTM method D-3174. The surface charge of all the surfaces was determined by measuring the zeta potential as a function of pH at 1×10 The surface charge of The contact angle measurements were carried out to determine the surface free energy parameters for the mineral samples as well as the bacterium by the Adhesion of the bacterium on to the solid surfaces was carried out as a function of time and pH. The kinetics of adhesion After adhesion, the samples were washed with water to determine the nature of adhesion. It was observed that bacterium adhered to coal tenaciously and no cells were removed. The micrograph of Flocculation tests were conducted in the absence and presence of the bacterium and the amount of material settled was determined. The results of these tests are presented in The flocculated and unflocculated coal samples were separated and dried and analyzed for ash and the results are tabulated in The following conclusions can be arrived at from this study: (1) Zeta-potential studies showed that both the coal samples exhibited a PZC in the pH range of 2–3. The negative charge on the coal samples over most of the pH range can be attributed to the high ash content of the coal samples and is supported by the zeta-potential curve of quartz. The bacterium (2) Surface free energy calculations showed that as the ash content of coal increased the electron donor component of surface free energy increased. This also means that coal becomes less hydrophobic with increase in ash content. Quartz and the bacterium were found to be hydrophilic. (3) Kinetics of adhesion of (4) Studies on effect of pH showed that maximum adhesion occurs at pH 2, which is close to the PZC of the coal samples and that of the bacterium. Hydrophobicity of the solid surface appears to be the primary criteria for determining adhesion of bacterium to mineral surfaces. (5) At any given time and pH, the bacterium adhered more on to the coal with the least ash content and highest hydrophobicity. The amount adhering decreased with increase in ash content and a decrease in hydrophobicity. (6) Flocculation studies demonstrated that the bacterium flocculates coal effectively while the settling of quartz is retarded, thus indicating that selective flocculation is possible. Nearly 55–60% of the ash could be removed in a single-stage flocculation experiment with both the coal samples, thus demonstrating the potential for bioflocculation in deashing of high-ash Indian coals. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support provided by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, India for carrying out this work.