Developing a new distribution test system (DTS) for evaluation of customer interruptions costs (ECIC) is described in this paper. The test system is obtained from a well known standard test system (RBTS) containing different load types and sizes. Using Matlab software, accurate and approximate procedures for ECIC are implemented on DTS. Effects of outages duration, events occurrence time, customers' type, customers load profile, customers' damage functions, customer demand values, etc. (i.e. cost affecting factors) on customers interruption costs are investigated and compared in two different ways. Simulation results confirmed the effectiveness of the proposed DTS in ECIC and demonstrated that the real value of customer interruption costs can only be obtained by considering all cost affecting factors.customer damage function cost weight factor outage cost ($/kW) for outage at hour distribution test system evaluation of customer interruption costs expected customer outage cost expected energy not supplied individual customer damage function individual customer load profile interrupted energy assessment rate average load (kW) at hour load point customer damage function network customer damage function Roy Billinton test system sector customer damage function sector customer load profile standard industrial classification cost weight factor for load point cost weight factor for system at hour Deregulation in many countries has resulted in separation of electrical utilities to smaller sections such as production, transmission, and distribution companies. In the case of occurrence of different power quality disturbances, such as outages (the most costly event) Utility costs and the cost incurred by customers associated with voltage interruptions must be incorporated in planning and design of new electrical systems. Ref. Conducting survey is the best way to assess customers' interruption costs In some countries, outage costs are compensated by electrical utilities, extending more and more to many other countries. There are some procedures for outage cost evaluation The DTS description, fundamental data, outage costs calculation procedures, including accurate and approximate methods along with the simulation results and detailed analysis of the obtained results focusing on cost compensation issues are described in this paper. In none of the RBTS revisions, customer load profiles or relations between customer interruption costs and event durations have been introduced. All of the RBTS customers in each load point (LP), from viewpoint of type and demand values have been entirely assumed similar to each other. These assumptions are not realistic and make perception of ECIC different procedures capabilities, their implementation, examination, and comparison with each other, and therefore description of the customer cost compensation issues, to be an impossible task. In order to develop a test system suitable for ECIC, one of the RBTS subsystems In the RBTS modification process, damage functions for same industry customers and load profiles for each customer sector (for the first seven days of a winter) are created. All customers' demands of the old system are reconsidered and individual demand values are assigned to each customer. The authors did their best to create functions, profiles, etc. according to the existing test systems as well as experimental cases The created DTS has three sectors of customers, including residential, commercial, and industrial. Demand values of each of these sectors, number of customers in each sector, and proportion of each sector demand to the total demand of the system, are illustrated in It should be mentioned that in practical cases, in order to identify customers' type, their damage functions, load profiles and other required data, a detailed power quality survey should be implemented. This survey can be performed by using of inscribed questionnaires, and in a better manner, visiting customers In ECIC, three data sets, including customer data, load data, and cost data, are required Using the accurate procedure for ECIC, it is required to implement comprehensive survey in electrical systems. In these types of surveys it is necessary to define customer specification in each LPs of the test system. Customer specifications consist of customer type, its individual standard industrial classification (SIC) designation and its individual demand value. It should be mentioned that as residential customers have no subgroup, no SIC designation is assigned to them. Each customer has its individual load profile. However, electrical utilities often measure customers' energy consumption values as they usually have no access to customers' load profiles data. The only way to obtain customers' individual load profiles is the use of energy meter devices in surveys. However, after obtaining these data, by providing same-sector customers representing load profiles, individual customers can be modeled using their sector customer load profiles (SCLPs; i.e. residential, commercial, etc.) Each customer outage cost values can be represented as a cost-time function which is named customer damage function (CDF). This outage cost representation procedure is used in many studies as obtaining the real cost values has difficulties and limitations Dependency of customers' outage costs to the hour, day, month, and season of the event occurrence can be obtained from power quality surveys. Some customers, due to their activities seasonal natures, suffer from different costs at different times of the day, days of the week, and months of the year. Hence, it is necessary to consider this reality in outage cost evaluations. Thus, a parameter named customer CWF is introduced to reflect the influences of event occurrence time on interruption costs. To obtain this parameter, it is asked from customers to declare their cost variations at different hours of the day, different days of the week, and different months of the year when the event occurs. For weekly CWFs, for example, seven numbers are obtained from customers where the largest number is associated with the maximum cost value. In the ECIC algorithm, this number is set to 1 per unit and the other six numbers are considered as portions of this value. Refs. In order to evaluate customer outage costs based on the accurate procedure, it is required to implement the flowchart of As it can be seen from this flowchart and equations As it can be found from Using the approximate procedure has many advantages such as requiring a simpler computer code and low cost survey. However, it is obvious that this procedure can just provide the entire system cost indices. The accurate procedure, however, calculates the cost indices for the entire system and each LP as well as providing individual customer costs indices if ICLPs are used. Ref. In this investigation, upon creation of the required data for the DTS, by using of Matlab software, two computer codes were developed to implement the accurate and approximate procedures. In the case of long time outages (more than 1 h), average load and cost may vary during the outage. This issue has been considered in both computer codes. Generally, there are two methods for monetary compensation of customer interruption costs and damages. Calculating the costs can be performed either according to customers' demands and energy consumption profiles [i.e. expected energy not supplied (EENS) index], or using customers' equipments sensitivity quantity [i.e. interrupted energy assessment rate (IEAR) index]. Both EENS and IEAR can be obtained from power quality surveys, customers' claims, and electrical utilities recorded data. However, none of these indices can be considered as the only criterion to assess the real interruption costs which can be obtained from ECOST index.  Because of the paper space limitation, ECOST, IEAR, and EENS indices of five out of 38 investigated LPs (i.e. LPs 12, 25, 26, 29, and 38) are presented in this paper. LP No. 12 is commercial, LP No. 38 is residential, and the other three ones are industrial LPs. Moreover, LP No. 25 includes industrial customers with high interruption cost and low energy consumption (i.e. SIC-32). Industrial customers with high energy consumption and low interruption costs are considered for LP No. 26. Among this LP, industrial customers which influence the cost more than others, SIC-25 and SIC-27 can be mentioned. Finally, LP No. 29 consists of an industrial customer belonging to SIC-07 where its interruption cost influences the cost more than its energy consumption quantity. The calculated results related to the abovementioned LPs are shown in As it can be found from A similar comparison can be made between LPs No. 25 and 26. If the interruption cost compensation criterion is customers' equipments and processes sensitivities to interruption (when only survey row data is provided), then the interruption cost compensation for LP No. 25 must be more than LP No. 26. Whereas, due to high energy consumption customers in LP No. 26, its equipment low sensitivity to interruption is compensated by its EENS, and its cost values is higher than LP No. 25. Thus, from these simulations it can be found that to calculate costs, both factors (customers' energy consumption value and customers' equipment sensitivities to interruption) should be considered together. Another point that can be found from Moreover, it can be found from As mentioned earlier, although, the approximate procedure cannot calculate the interruption cost related to each individual LP, it has the ability to obtain total ECOST, total EENS, and total IEAR indices of electrical systems. From this point of view, the approximate procedure is comparable with the accurate approach. Using both procedures, total ECOST of the system is calculated, illustrated, and compared in It can be seen that in both procedures, relations between interruption costs and outage durations are non-linear. Therefore, it can be concluded that without implementation of the cost evaluation process, an outage cost in a specific duration cannot be evaluated using other outage durations costs correspondingly. As another issue, electrical utilities (especially distribution departments) sometimes need to interrupt electrical power of their customers necessarily due to unexpected events or maintenance periods. This can be done at different hours, times, and durations. According to the obtained simulation results, the best times to apply these interruptions can be found using ECOST curves. In this investigation, these curves are calculated for the DTS using both procedures and represented in A comparison between the results using the accurate and approximate procedures ( In this paper accurate and approximate procedures are utilized for evaluation of customer interruption costs (ECIC). Implementation of the accurate procedure, in contrary with the approximate method, requires a detailed data about customers and electrical systems. In order to perform and then to investigate and to analyze ECIC, one of the subsystems of a standard electrical test system (RBTS) is modified with the emphasis being placed on configuration and specifications of its customers. The proposed test system (DTS) consists of residential, commercial and industrial loads with a high capability to use in ECIC. Matlab simulations on the test system (DTS) approved that the interruption costs cannot be calculated only according to the customer load consumption or energy not supplied values and equipment sensitivities to outages. It is shown that other parameters such as customers load profiles, outage occurrence time and duration, cost weight factors, etc., are also should be considered for comprehensive evaluation of interruption costs. Comparisons are made between the results obtained using different criteria for ECIC where the most influencing parameters are recognized and introduced. ECOST curves are derived in order to evaluate the interruption costs as a function of the event occurrence time. Simulation results confirmed the effectiveness and capability of the DTS in ECIC investigations.