This work describes the use of Mistop®, a novel surfactant of natural origin that contains primarily triterpenoid saponins (active ingredient), to control acid mist in copper electrowinning (EW). Previous laboratory tests indicated that Mistop® has no negative effects on cathode quality, current efficiency, and overall solvent extraction (SX) process conditions (e.g. phase disengagement time, extraction/stripping kinetics, maximum charge/discharge, etc.).
                  In this work Mistop® was tested at pilot plant, semi-industrial and industrial scale. The work was performed in the facilities of Radomiro Tomic (RT), which produces approximately 900 tons copper/day. Pilot plant tests were performed during 6 months with product dosages in the electrolyte entering the EW cells within 0 and 32 ppm. The tests indicated that total acid aerosols could be significantly decreased at Mistop® dosages within 6 and 8 ppm in the electrolyte entering the EW cells. At these dosages no operational problems in the SX/EW process were encountered. The semi-industrial tests indicated that with 6 ppm of Mistop® in the electrolyte entering the EW system, acid mist aerosols decreased significantly with no negative impact on EW operational parameters (e.g. cathode quality, current efficiency). Industrial scale implementation showed that the addition of 8–9 ppm of Mistop® to the total electrolyte inventory (24,000 m3) every 24 h, decreased total acid mist aerosols in the tankhouse below present Chilean environmental regulatory requirements (e.g. 0.58 mg/m3). Under the operational conditions tested (e.g. electrolyte average temperature 45 °C, average current density 280 A/m2) the specific product consumption was approximately 0.21 kg Mistop®/ton copper cathodes, resulting in Mistop® usage costs significantly lower than that of alternative chemical surfactants.During the electrowinning (EW) of copper, oxygen bubbles are produced at the anodes. When these bubbles burst at the surface of the electrolyte, they generate an aerosol of sulphuric acid known as acid mist. The levels of acid mist are carefully controlled by international regulations since they represent a health hazard to EW workers and pose environmental and plant infrastructure problems. Acid mist can be controlled through the combined use of PVC spheres above the electrolyte, forced ventilation and the addition of surfactants to the electrolyte. The surfactants lower the surface tension (ST) of the electrolyte and modify the way the bubbles explode at the surface, significantly decreasing acid mist emissions. With the well known fluoro-chemical surfactant (FC 1100, 3M), an electrolyte ST of 55–60 dyne/cm effectively reduces acid mist ( We have focused our research on the development of novel, low cost natural surfactants, derived from extracts of the Chilean quillaja tree Mistop® was supplied by Natural Response S.A. (Quilpue, Chile). Pilot plant tests were performed continuously during 6 months. The objective was to determine if the continuous addition of Mistop® had a negative impact on the SX/EW process and to find a preliminary relationship between product dosage and acid mist aerosols. The experiments were performed at RT's SX/EW pilot plant described schematically in The EW process included two cells, each one having a width of 0.70 m, a length of 1.24 m, and a depth of 1.50 m; the electrolyte level was 1.2 m. Each cell comprised two cathodes and three anodes, with similar geometry and chemical composition than those used at the industrial plant. The cathodes were made of stainless steel having an effective area of 1 m During the 6 month experimental period, Mistop® was tested at different concentrations. During the tests, the following process variables were measured every 12 h using RT's standard laboratory practices ( Total acid mist aerosols were measured with a MIE equipment, model pDR-1200, which determines aerosol values in suspension instantly, as μg or mg aerosols/m ST was measured with a Krüss tensiometer, Model No. 02221. The organic/aqueous IST was measured by placing the platinum ring approximately 2 mm into 15 ml of organic phase. About 20 ml of the electrolyte were then slowly added. Once the interface stabilized, the IST was determined by recording the value at which the ring passed from the organic to the aqueous phase. Between measurements, the ring was washed sequentially using water and ethanol. The impact of Mistop® on the degradation of the organic was checked with proton nuclear magnetic resonance (Brucker equipment, 300 MHz). For this purpose, two samples (with and without exposure to Mistop®), were obtained and compared with a standard sample prepared in the laboratory according to the composition used in the pilot plant (21% v/v nonyl-salicyl-aldoxime and di-ester as solvent, 79% v/v diluent). The sample that had been exposed to electrolyte containing Mistop®, corresponded to organic that had been recirculated during 2 months. During that period, the dosage of Mistop® varied within 5 and 9 ppm. Prior to the analysis, the organic was discharged 3 times with a solution containing 200 g/L of H Following pilot plant tests, the effect of Mistop® on acid mist aerosols was tested in RT’s semi-industrial EW plant. Mistop® was supplied to cells 66, 67, 68 and 69, while cell 65 was operated without product for comparison purposes. Mistop® concentration was gradually increased from 0 to 6 ppm. The concentration of Mistop® was calculated based on the flowrate of fresh electrolyte that entered the system (e.g. 30 m During the semi-industrial EW operation, the following process variables were continuously monitored: copper and acid concentration in advance, rich electrolyte, commercial electrolyte and spent electrolyte; electrolyte temperature; ambient temperature; average flowrates of electrolyte entering the cells and total system flowrates; current efficiency; chemical and physical properties of the cathodes; ST of spent and rich electrolyte; concentration of acid mist aerosols in East and West zones and redox potential of the electrolyte. The electrolyte ST was measured as described above for the pilot plant tests. Acid mist aerosols were measured with a MIE Monitor, model pDR-1200, with sampling periods of 30 min at an approximate height of 1.50 m above the electrolyte free surface in the EW cells. Acid mist aerosols in cells that contained Mistop® were measured at points 1 and 2 in cells 68 East and West, respectively (see The effect of Mistop® on the decrease of acid mist was also tested in RT's industrial EW tankhouse. RT's EW operation has a production capacity of approximately 900 tons of copper cathodes per day. The tankhouse uses 984 cells made of polymeric concrete in a back-to-back arrangement, divided into six banks as shown in The average flowrate of rich electrolyte fed to each EW cell is 15 m Mistop® was first added to the total inventory of electrolyte (approximately 24,000 m ST and acid mist aerosols were measured as described for the semi-industrial trials. Two central cells of each bank and the middle points of each cell were selected as measurement points for aerosols. The two values obtained were averaged to obtain the final value for each bank. Comparative tests were conducted for the measurement of sulfuric acid contained in the acid aerosol determined by MIE, using the method described in NIOSH method 7903 based on silica-gel tubes and chemical analysis by ion-chromatography. Pilot plant tests were performed continuously during 6 months with Mistop® concentrations in the electrolyte entering the EW system within 0 and 32 ppm. The goals were to determine possible operational problems when Mistop® was added continuously to a closed EW/SX system and to obtain a preliminary relationship between product dosage and acid mist aerosols. During the tests, at all product dosages, the following process variables remained constant (average values): copper concentration in advance (50.5 g/L Cu  After 2 months of continuous operation, the solvent was analyzed with NMR, to check for any chemical degradation or physicochemical impact caused by the addition of Mistop®. During that period the pilot plant was operated at Mistop® levels of 5–9 ppm. Pilot plant tests also gave indications about the decomposition of the product in the electrolyte. For example a continuous addition of 8 ppm to the electrolyte entering the EW cells yields a concentration of 42.3 ppm in the electrolyte (e.g. 148 g of Mistop® per day in 3500 L of electrolyte), if the product had not decomposed. This would have caused PDT problems and excessive foam, but this was never observed, suggesting that the product probably decomposed completely after its passage through the EW system. This is very likely, since the sugars chains attached to triterpenic saponins hydrolyze very fast (e.g. 2 h) under extreme acidic conditions and temperature (e.g. 50 °C), liberating the triterpene ( In conclusion, pilot plant experiments indicated that there were no operational problems in the SX/EW process at Mistop®, except for an increase of PDT at very high product concentrations (e.g. 18 and 32 ppm). However, as was demonstrated with industrial scale experiments, the dosage required to decrease acid mist is much lower. The tests gave a preliminary indication of the effect of product concentration on acid aerosols, and it was recommended to operate the semi-industrial plant at a concentration within 6 and 8 ppm in the incoming electrolyte. It was also observed that the product probably decomposes due to extreme acid conditions, preventing its accumulation in the system. This issue is currently under extensive research. Semi-industrials tests were performed continuously during 4 months. The main objective was to assess the impact of Mistop® on the EW process (e.g. CE, cathode quality), as well as determining a product dose that could decrease acid mist aerosols to acceptable levels. During the test period, operational parameters such as copper and acid concentration in advance, rich electrolyte, commercial electrolyte and spent electrolyte remained constant and within normal values at all product dosages. Also the redox potential of the electrolyte kept constant at 580–600 mV and the CE varied within 90.1% and 94.1%. The physical quality of the cathodes in terms of the number of nodules, lateral deposits and short circuits remained constant. The same was valid for the chemical composition of the cathodes, which was similar to the cathodes produced in the industrial plant. The average electrolyte temperature in the cells was 43 °C.   Following the semi-industrial tests, Mistop® was tested at a full plant level. During these experiments, Mistop® was first added to the total inventory of electrolyte (approximately 24,000 m   During the tests all operational parameters remained constant and within normal values. In some cases some operational parameters improved. For example, PDT during extraction varied within 124 and 128 s with Mistop®, while the normal values were within 140 and 145 s. However, more experimental data at an industrial level is needed to confirm this. Also, the physical quality of the cathodes, entrainment, maximum charge and discharge and CE remained constant. Daily IR analysis of the organic showed no anomalies caused by the saponins. In conclusion, the industrial tests showed that with a specific product consumption of approximately 0.21 kg Mistop®/ton copper cathodes it was possible to control acid mist aerosols (and hence sulfuric acid aerosols) below Chilean regulatory requirements. This specific product consumption resulted in product usage costs significantly lower than that of fluoro-chemical surfactants. Due to this, the product has been used successfully at an industrial level for at least 10 months. Pilot plant, semi-industrial and industrial tests demonstrated that Mistop® can be used successfully to control acid mist in copper EW operations. Under the industrial conditions tested, approximately 0.21 kg Mistop®/ton copper were necessary to decrease acid mist aerosols below accepted levels. At this dose, the product was used continuously for at least ten months with no negative impact on the SX/EW process. Product usage costs were significantly lower than that of chemical surfactants. At present the importance of surface tension on decreasing acid mist, as well the decomposition of the product in copper electrolyte is under extensive research. The authors want to thank all the team that worked at Radomiro Tomic (Calama, Chile). Special thanks to Mrs. Patricia Muñoz who was in charge of the R&D team on behalf of the Catholic University. This work was supported by FONDEF (Chilean Research Council) Grant DI 1009.