Objective: To evaluate the results of treatment in children with open tibial fractures.
                  
                     Design: Retrospective review.
                  
                     Subjects: Eighty three children under 13 years of age treated for an open tibial fracture between 1989 and 1999.
                  
                     Main outcome measures: Patient demographics, mechanism of injury, fracture classification, treatment method, clinical outcome and complications.
                  
                     Results: Eighty one percent of children had an open tibial fracture as their only injury. According to the level of contamination, soft tissue injury and size of wound 46% were Gustilo grade I injuries, 30% grade II, and 22% (18) grade III (6 IIIa, 5 IIIb, 3 IIIc and 4 not otherwise specified). Sixteen fractures (19%) were treated using an external fixator and 65 (78%) using a cast. The average time to union was 15.5 weeks (range 9–31 weeks) for those treated with a frame and 10.4 weeks (range 5–40 weeks) for those treated with a cast. No deep infections, one delayed union and one non-union were recorded.
                  
                     Conclusions: Ninety four percent of these injuries were a result of a motor vehicle accident and involved a significant trauma-related energy transfer. Despite this the associated morbidity was low lending support to the literature, which suggests that open fractures of the tibia in younger children heal more predictably and with less complications than those occurring in adolescents or adults.In adults, open tibial fractures are associated with significant morbidity Our unit is a large children’s teaching hospital. It provides secondary care to a population of 900,000 and tertiary care to three million individuals. All surgical disciplines with the exception of paediatric neurosurgery are provided on-site. Children above 13 years of age are treated in adult hospitals within the city. We identified 1276 children from the departmental database who had sustained a tibial fracture in the 10 year period 1989–1999. Eighty three of these were open fractures (6.5%). A case record review of these 83 children was performed. Physeal injuries were excluded. Demographic information, the mechanism of injury and any associated injuries were recorded. All injuries were treated operatively with wound debridement and irrigation under intravenous antibiotic cover. Where necessary the advice of a plastic surgeon was sought at the earliest opportunity. The fractures were classified according to the wound size, periosteal stripping and contamination as described by Gustilo et al. All patients were followed up until complete resolution of all complications had occurred or until definitive uncomplicated union of the fracture had taken place. The average follow up was 26.5 weeks (range 5–140 weeks). The results are presented in According to the level of contamination, soft tissue injury and size of wound 38 (46%) fractures had been graded as Gustilo grade I injuries, 24 (30%) grade II, and 18 (22%) grade III (six IIIa, five IIIb, three IIIc and four not otherwise specified). Three children had sustained open fractures which had not been assigned a Gustilo grade by the performing surgeon, no attempt has been made to grade these retrospectively but they have been included in the total figures. There were no gunshot or farmyard injuries and no amputations were performed. Most fractures were situated in the tibial diaphysis (middle/lower, 1/3). The ipsilateral fibula was fractured in 66 cases. The mean time between injury and surgery was 5.9 The choice of immobilisation technique was dictated by the operating surgical team. Sixteen (19%) were treated using a monolateral external fixator and 65 (78%) using a plaster cast. In two additional cases plaster cast immobilisation was augmented by the use of Kirschner wires. External fixation was used for the duration of treatment in two children. It was discontinued and a plaster cast applied after a median of 9 weeks (range 3–24) in the remaining 14 children. Fixator dynamisation was not routine. Thirteen casts required wedging, without anaesthetic and seven remanipulations under anaesthetic were performed. The plaster treated group were immobilised for 10.4 weeks (S.D.±4.8 weeks), with long leg casts used for an average of 5.9 weeks before conversion to short-leg walking casts. One child took 40 weeks for the fracture to unite in a cast (grade I injury), and another developed a non-union for which grafting was performed at 6 months (grade IIIA fracture, cast immobilisation group). The average time to union was 15.5 weeks (range 9–31 weeks) for those treated with a frame and 10.4 weeks (range 5–40 weeks) for those treated with a cast. Seven fractures healed with a residual angulation of more than 5°; two in varus (7–8°), four in valgus (10–20°) and one procurvatum (12–15°). One child had both sagittal and coronal plane angulation. No corrective osteotomies have been performed and no child has a significant leg length discrepancy. No child developed a deep infection. Two superficial wound infections developed, both grew National guidelines have been published on the management of open tibial fractures in adults The average time to union was 12.9 weeks in this group which is much shorter than previously described, although longer than the 8.5 weeks taken for closed fractures to heal in a similar age group Infection rates in children’s open tibial fractures range from 7 to 25% Whilst we recognise that interobserver agreement with the Gustilo and Anderson classification is variable We do not advocate complacency in the management of these injuries and wholeheartedly support early and aggressive wound management, with early involvement of plastic surgeons where indicated. Following debridement and irrigation of the wound it is clear that a cast may be an appropriate method of fracture immobilisation, with a window enabling wound inspection as required. Close attention to detail is of course required, as with all casted fractures. However, it does not appear necessary to treat all open fractures in children with an external fixator, with the risks of pin track sepsis and potential osteitis. Obviously in injuries with little fracture stability and with more extensive soft tissue injuries a fixator would be a more appropriate choice for immobilisation; each case has to be judged on its own merits.