The Al85Co10Y5 (Co10) amorphous ribbon exhibits an excellent degradation performance in polluted water treatment for the first time by degrading methyl orange (MO) dye. Compared with the Al85Fe10Y5 (Fe10) amorphous ribbon for degradation MO solution, the Co10 ribbon has a higher degradation efficiency, a higher TOC removal rate, a lower reaction activation energy, a stronger reusability and a higher corrosion resistance. The Co10 ribbon is not only applicable for acidic MO solution, but also has high degradation efficiency in alkaline MO solution. Compared with the spherical particles on the surface of Fe10 ribbon, the maze like structure on the surface of Co10 ribbon can increase the reaction surface area and improve the degradation efficiency of MO solution. And more O2
                     − radicals by supplying photo catalytic Y2O3 under visible light irradiation and then enhance the degradation of MO solution. This work not only provides a new method with high efficiency and low cost for the degradation of MO solution, but also provides a new research direction for the degradation mechanism of Al-based alloys.Azo dyes have been widely used in textile industry. However, they have teratogenic and carcinogenic properties, chemical stability and non-decomposition [ Amorphous alloys have attracted more and more attention due to their unique metastable structure, excellent corrosion resistance and oxidation resistance [ At present, the amorphous alloys used to catalyze the degradation of synthetic dyes are mostly ribbon [ In recent years, some scholars have studied the ability of Y In this paper, we report the degradation of synthetic dyes by using Al The alloy ingots with nominal compositions of Al The amorphous structure of the as-spun ribbons was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D8 Discover) with Cu-Kα radiation and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM-2100). The amorphous structure of the ribbons was also certified by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC, NETZSCH-404) at a heating rate of 20 K/min. The surface morphology of the ribbons was observed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, JSM-7800F) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS). The binding states of elements on the surfaces of the as-spun and reacted Fe10 and Co10 ribbons were investigated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, AXIS Supra) with a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source ( First, 500 mL MO solution (10 mg L The electrochemical properties including polarization curves and impedance spectra (EIS) were measured using an electrochemical measuring instrument (CHI 660E) in the 25 mL DW or MO solutions (10 mg L  XRD and DSC analysis   TEM investigation In order to further characterize the microstructure and morphology of the as-spun Fe10 and Co10 ribbons, we carried out TEM investigations, which are shown in  UV–Vis absorbance analysis and degradation performance The UV–Vis absorbance spectra of the filtered methyl orange (MO) solution with pH = 1 after processing with as-spun Fe10 and Co10 ribbons for a series of time intervals ( According to the ln ( In order to further analyze the mineralization of MO solution during degradation with as-spun Fe10 and Co10 ribbons, their TOC removal rates are shown in  SEM images of surface morphology To understand the MO degradation process with Al-based amorphous ribbons, it is very important to study the structure evolution of the ribbon surfaces after the reaction. The SEM images on the surface of the as-spun and reacted Fe10 and Co10 ribbons are displayed in XPS analysis It is known that the surface elements especially their electronic structure of an amorphous ribbon have a great influence on the degradation efficiency. In The Y 3d spectrum exhibits a doublet due to the spin-orbit splitting into Y 3d The electronic structure of the as-spun and reacted Co10 ribbons is also obtained using XPS for comparison as shown in In D. Electrochemical analysis. The polarization curves and electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of the as-spun Fe10 and Co10 ribbons in DW and MO solutions with pH = 1 were shown in In both DW and MO solutions ( The fitting results like resistances of solution (  Effect of temperature In order to further compare the MO solution degradation efficiency of the as-spun Fe10 and Co10 ribbons, both ribbons reacted with MO solution at different temperatures ( Effect of pH  Reusability and stability of Fe10 and Co10 in degradation MO solution The reusability and stability of amorphous ribbon are important indexes to evaluate the potential of polluted water remediation. We tested the degradation efficiency Under different pH conditions, the degradation efficiency and degradation mechanism of the as-spun Al Through XPS results of the as-spun and reacted surface elements of Fe10 and Co10 ribbons, we found that consumption of Al In order to explore the degradation mechanism of MO solution under different pH conditions and clarify the contribution of reactive oxygen species during the degradation process, we investigated the degradation efficiency The degradation efficiency The homogeneity of the Co10 ribbon is higher than Fe10 ribbon ( Based on the thorough analyses of the elemental information, surface morphology and electronic structure of the Fe10 and Co10 ribbons during MO solution degradation, we have drawn the schematic diagram is illustrated in In this work, we have prepared Al Qi Chen wrote the article. Zhicheng Yan, Lingyu Guo and Hao Zhang did the help in the experiments. Laichang Zhang gave the key advices in organizing the article. Weimin Wang designed the experiment. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by the