Dielectric properties of Poly (vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP) based composites with surface hydroxylated BiFeO3 (h-BFO) particles were prepared by solution casting techniques. The h-BFO fillers were synthesized from BiFeO3 in aqueous solution of H2O2. The result showed that the dielectric properties of the h-BFO-PVDF-HFP composite exhibits better dielectric properties than that of the unmodified BFO-PVDF-HFP composites. Meanwhile, the 30 wt% of h-BFO-PVDF-HFP composite showed higher dielectric constant, better suppressed dielectric loss, high remnant polarization and high electrical conductivity. It is suggested that the strong interaction between h-BFO particles and PVDF-HFP matrix at the interface is the key role in the enhancement of the dielectric properties. It is helpful to understand the influence of surface hydroxylation on the interfaces between the filler and the polymer matrix. The outcome of this study may be exploited in the progress of high energy storage device applications.Polymer composites (PCs) with high dielectric constant and low dielectric loss have attracted considerable interest recently owing to their potential applications in electrical and electronic industries such as gate dielectrics As many studies have been done by the addition of different types of polymer with various kinds of filler containing high dielectric constant, low dielectric loss and good thermal stability, to date much research work has been focused on the interface between the ceramic filler and the polymer matrix for dielectric applications of the polymer based composites In this paper, we report a novel idea of preparing a surface hydroxylated BiFeO Poly (vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) [P (VDF-HFP)] was purchased from Sigma–Aldrich, India. Bi The preparation of BFO particles were prepared by the conventional solid state reaction method. The equi-molar quantities of Bi BFO particles (5 g) were dispersed in aqueous solution of H The BFO-PVDF-HFP composite film was prepared by solution casting technique. Firstly, the required amounts of BFO particles were dispersed in DMF by ultrasonication for 30 min. At the same time, PVDF-HFP was dissolved in DMF by the help of magnetic stirrer. The suspension of DMF and particles were added with the PVDF-HFP-DMF solution. Consequently, the solution was ultra-sonicated for 1 h and again stirred for 2 h to obtain a homogeneous mixture. Then the resulting mixture was poured into a clean glass petri-dish and dried in an oven at 80 °C for overnight to remove any traces of the solvent. The total preparation process is shown in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of the composite films were recorded by using an X-ray diffractometer (Mini Flex II, Rigaku, Japan) with Cu K  The effect of H   The dependence of the dielectric constant of the composite on the volume fraction of BFO fillers in a frequency range of 100–1000 Hz at room temperature is shown in  The dependence of the dielectric loss of the composite on the volume fraction of BFO fillers in the frequency range 100–1000 Hz at room temperature is shown in The frequency dependence of AC electrical conductivity of h-BFO-PVDF-HFP and BFO-PVDF-HFP composite with different wt% of BFO fillers at room temperature is shown in As shown in  The current–voltage (I–V) characteristic curve for the unmodified BFO-PVDF-HFP and modified h-BFO-PVDF-HFP composites is shown in In summary, the h-BFO-PVDF-HFP and unmodified BFO-PVDF-HFP composites were prepared The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support obtained from the