Background
                  Long-stemmed humeral components are often associated with revision shoulder arthroplasty. However, long-stemmed humeral components will likely prove useful in selected patients with extra large shoulders and in those with bone loss from nonarthroplasty causes and in humeral fractures. This study was developed to examine the frequency of use of longer humeral stems, identify the indications for their use, define the results, and enumerate the complications encountered.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Thirty-five primary shoulder arthroplasties were followed-up clinically and radiographically for at least 2 years or until revision surgery. The primary indications for use of an intermediate or long stem were a large humeral canal in 18 shoulders and severe preoperative metaphyseal or diaphyseal bone loss in 17. Average clinical follow-up was 6.5 years.
               
                  Results
                  Excellent or satisfactory results were achieved in 21 of 35 shoulders. No components met criteria to be considered radiographically at risk for clinical loosening. Intraoperative complications included an unrecognized nondisplaced diaphyseal fracture that later displaced in 1 shoulder. Late complications included deep infection in 1 and fracture nonunion in 1.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Intermediate or long-stemmed humeral components proved useful in obtaining a secure distal fit in patients with a large humeral canal or in those with significant proximal bone loss. Worse clinical results were achieved in those with bone loss. Radiographic follow-up shows these components are at a low risk for loosening.Difficult problems may be encountered at the time of primary or revision shoulder arthroplasty, including severe preoperative bone loss, acute fractures, and nonunions. Prospectively collected data in our institution’s Joint Registry were retrospectively reviewed. Between January 1, 1976, and December 31, 2006, 3623 primary shoulder arthroplasty procedures were performed at our institution. Of these, 80 (2.2%) involved insertion of a humeral component with an intermediate or long stem, defined as a component 150 mm or greater in length, thus excluding all standard-length stems from different arthroplasty systems. We also excluded 28 oncology patients and 3 patients in whom a long-stem component was placed for an acute intraoperative fracture. Of the remaining 49 patients, 35 had clinical and radiographic follow-up of at least 2 years and comprised our study group. Average length of clinical follow-up was 6.5 years (range, 2.1-15.8 years), and average length of radiographic follow-up was 3.4 years (range, 2.1-15.8 years). The diagnoses were osteoarthritis in 15 shoulders, nonunion in 10, acute traumatic fracture in 6, rheumatoid arthritis in 3, and malunion in 1 ( An extended deltopectoral approach to the shoulder was performed. After humeral osteotomy, the humeral canal was prepared with a circular reamer. For those with a large humeral canal, the goal was to extend the length of the implant at least 2 cm into the isthmus of the canal to obtain firm stability for the distal portion of the stem. For those with proximal bone loss, the goal was to obtain at least 5 cm of firm purchase in the diaphyseal bone. There were 19 Cofield (Smith & Nephew, Memphis, TN, USA) intermediate-length stems (195 mm), 12 Cofield long stems (245 mm), and 4 Neer (Biomet, Warsaw, IN, USA) long stems (252 mm). The component was cemented in 10 and uncemented in 25. A bone graft was used in 15 shoulders, comprising autograft in 10, allograft in 2, and both autograft and allograft in 3. The average operative time was 270 minutes (range, 70-578 minutes), including positioning, preparation and draping, the procedure, application of the dressing, and placing the immobilizer. Clinical data, including pain, function, range of motion, and patient satisfaction, were recorded preoperatively and at each final follow-up visit. Patients who were unable to return for follow-up were contacted and completed a validated shoulder questionnaire. A modified Neer rating system was used to classify clinical outcomes as excellent, satisfactory, or unsatisfactory. The humeral component was divided into 8 zones. Lucency about the humeral component was evaluated by presence, location, and thickness. A humeral component was determined to be radiographically at risk for clinical loosening if a radiolucent line 2 mm or greater was present in 3 or more zones or there was tilt or subsidence of the implant on sequential x-ray images. Comparisons of preoperative with postoperative status for pain, active forward elevation, and external and internal rotation were made using a paired Pain ratings (on a scale of 1 to 5) decreased from a mean of 4.5 (SD, 0.71) preoperatively to 2.4 (SD, 1.09) postoperatively ( Overall mean active elevation increased from 81° (SD, 41.4°) preoperatively to 110° (SD, 56.5°) postoperatively ( Excellent or satisfactory results were achieved in 21 of 35 shoulders according to the modified Neer rating system: 14 of 18 in the large humeral canal group and 7 of 17 in the bone loss group. Of the 14 unsatisfactory results, 9 were due to lack of active elevation to 90° or external rotation to 20°and 5 were due to moderate or severe pain, as detailed above. At the most recent radiographic follow-up, there were 29 components without lucent lines and 6 components with radiolucencies. These radiolucent lines were 1 mm incomplete in 3 and 1.5 mm incomplete in 3 and involved 1 zone in 3 shoulders, 2 zones in 2 shoulders, and 3 zones in 1 shoulder. Five of the components with lucent lines were uncemented and 1 was cemented. Four of the components with lucent lines were in the large humeral canal group and 2 were in the bone loss group. No humeral component changed in position between early postoperative and late follow-up radiographs, and no components met the criteria to be considered radiographically at risk for clinical loosening. On the most recent radiographs, 8 shoulders (23%) had a moderate or severe subluxation of the glenohumeral joint. This was in the superior direction in 7 and the anterior direction in 1. The diagnoses of shoulders with moderate or severe subluxation were osteoarthritis in 3, rheumatoid arthritis in 1, and an acute fracture or nonunion in 4. Intraoperative complications were encountered in 1 patient during preparation of the humerus and insertion of the component. An unrecognized nondisplaced diaphyseal fracture later displaced and required revision surgery for open reduction and internal fixation. Distal cement extrusion or cortical perforation while inserting the stem was not encountered in this series. Late complications occurred in 2 patients. Deep infection developed in 1 patient 7 years postoperatively, and resection of the components combined with irrigation and debridement was performed. A fracture nonunion developed in a second patient who later underwent bone grafting with enhanced internal fixation and component retention for this nonunion, which ultimately went on to heal. This study reports the frequency of use and clinical indications for longer-stemmed humeral components in primary shoulder arthroplasty. In addition, the number and type of complications are enumerated and the results are reported, including the security of fixation of these longer-stemmed components. Their use has been rare, with longer-stemmed components used in approximately 2% of primary arthroplasty cases. It seems these components proved useful in patients with large and often long humeral canals, in those with significant proximal bone loss, such as rheumatoid arthritis with bone resorption, or in a variety of fracture situations, including acute fractures, fracture nonunions, and rarely, fracture malunions. The long-stemmed humeral component was stable in all 35 shoulders. Of the 10 procedures performed for a chronic nonunion, 9 went on to heal. The shoulder that did not heal at the index procedure underwent a reoperation with bone grafting and further internal fixation and ultimately healed. Only 1 of the 35 components was removed or revised, and this case was a resection arthroplasty for a late deep infection. These longer-stemmed components seem to be clinically useful in the settings outlined above. One must be aware that occasionally an intraoperative humeral fracture will be created or propagation of a more proximal humeral fracture will occur during insertion of these longer components. In addition, clinical outcomes can be variable relative to pain relief and return of motion. These seem largely determined by the presence of preoperative bone loss and the integrity of the proximal soft tissues, including the capsule and the rotator cuff, structures that may be compromised by fracture or rheumatoid arthritis. The literature related to long-stemmed humeral components is seemingly confined to their use in humeral fractures or in revision surgery. Problems associated with the humeral component that may require revision surgery are loosening, humeral bone loss, and periprosthetic fracture. Periprosthetic fractures of the humerus occur during and after shoulder arthroplasty. Our study demonstrates that the long-stem humeral component is useful in the primary setting to manage problems such as preoperative bone loss, with all 17 components implanted for this indication stable, without gross loosening, at the most recent radiographic follow-up. Similarly, the long-stem humeral component was useful in addressing acute preoperative fractures, with all 6 acute preoperative fractures healing in our study. The use of long-stem femoral components to achieve distal fixation in primary and revision hip arthroplasty is well described, including periprosthetic fractures and proximal bone loss. This is a large series of patients who underwent primary shoulder arthroplasty with an intermediate or long-stem humeral component. Its strengths include the number of patients in the study, the variety of stem fixation and use of bone graft, thorough radiographic analysis, and the duration of clinical and radiographic follow-up. A relative weakness of the study is its retrospective nature. Intermediate or long-stem humeral components are useful in obtaining a secure distal fit in cases involving diaphyseal fracture, significant bone loss, or in patients with a large humeral canal. Caution should be taken to avoid intraoperative fractures distally. Outcomes are often determined by proximal bone loss and soft tissue integrity and are not affected by long-stem placement. Neither clinical nor radiographic follow-up showed these components were at high risk for loosening. Robert H. Cofield discloses royalties from Smith & Nephew and DJO. John W. Sperling discloses royalties from Biomet. The other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.