Fractures of the bones of the hand are among the commonest fractures in humans, but their management varies widely in the different regions of the world. This variability is due to many reasons, including availability of resources, social factors, geographic constraints, surgeon preference and experience, and local practice patterns. Developing countries are more likely to apply less expensive methods of managing hand fractures. The treatment of these injuries will fall somewhere along a continuum that parallels the historical development of hand fracture management. This paper will review the history of phalangeal and metacarpal fracture management to infer global differences in the treatment of hand fractures. An overview of how different health care systems are likely to manage these injuries will assist health care providers in choosing the most appropriate treatment method.Hand and upper extremity injuries are one of the most common injuries treated in emergency departments. The principles of fracture management remain the same regardless of the techniques used with the goal to restore full hand function. As a general rule, this can be accomplished through anatomic reduction, obtaining adequate stability to allow early range of motion and minimising additional soft tissue injury. Early techniques of splint immobilisation worked well for simple hand fractures, but fell short in more complex injuries. Over time, progressively more invasive and more expensive techniques have been developed to treat complex and/or unstable fractures of the hand skeleton. While there are generally accepted guidelines for management of various hand fractures, It is, however, reasonable to assume that various regions of the world will be on a continuum of economic and health care development that mirrors the historical evolution of various techniques of hand fracture management. Less developed countries may employ more closed reduction methods, as the tools necessary for placement of pins, plates and screws are either inaccessible or prohibitively expensive, and implant placement may be associated with high infection rates due to a lack of effective sterilisation methods, and infrastructure to look after complex injuries. Bach in 2004 observed in Africa that surgeons were taught to “never close an open fracture nor open a closed one”. The specific techniques used will be limited by what is available and what is affordable. Expensive modern techniques of open reduction and internal fixation will not be used in areas where the fixation systems are not available, the supporting infrastructure not present, the staff not sufficiently familiar with their use, or the cost of the implants unaffordable. In cases where more expensive techniques may be indicated, but are not available, the treating physician will have to resort to less expensive, earlier techniques based on splinting and casting or percutaneous pinning. For this reason, an examination of the history of phalangeal and metacarpal fracture treatment can provide insight into what techniques may be most appropriate. The earliest and least expensive techniques for management of hand fractures involve immobilisation followed by protected motion with splinting and/or casting. The specific method of immobilisation varies from buddy taping to plaster casting and splinting to custom-molded orthoplast splints. For many fractures today, even when more advanced techniques are available, this is the preferred method of treatment, and it is particularly suited to non-displaced fractures and to fractures that can be stably reduced. Even when a perfect anatomic reduction cannot be obtained, not all fractures benefit from rigid fixation. Simple immobilisation of a fracture, which is not stable after closed reduction or has a greater than acceptable degree of angulation, displacement or comminution of the articular surface, can lead a malunion. This causes decreased function of the hand due to changes in the biomechanics of the joints, bones and tendons. Patients having metacarpal fractures with excess dorsal angulation may have grip weakness and pain. Prolonged immobilisation may be necessary for healing of severe fractures without the use of internal fixation. Unfortunately, more than 3 weeks of immobilisation can cause finger stiffness and tendon adhesions. In an attempt to address fractures that would not have a satisfactory outcome with closed reduction and immobilisation, Lambotte, Tennant, and Kirschner, among others, began to seek ways to stabilise these surgically. In the early 1900s, Lambotte began experimenting with the treatment of phalangeal and metacarpal fractures using wires, pins, screws and plates in various combinations. The use of percutaneously inserted wires and screws has remained a mainstay of the treatment of hand fractures to this day and advances in the tools used for inserting percutaneous pins has resulted in improved results. The hand is particularly amenable to such treatment due to the subcutaneous location of the bones and the easy access to them. Percutaneous fixation techniques address the shortcomings of splinting and casting but complications occur in 16–18%. These include pin loosening, pin tract infections, osteomyelitis, non-union, malunion, and nerve, tendon or artery injury. About the same time as percutaneous pinning became a widely used treatment for fractures of the hand, the use of plates and screws was described. The first plating system for the hand was developed in the late 1930s. Their advocacy spurred an interest in plate and screw fixation of finger fractures. Over the years, there has been a developing consensus that miniature plate fixation is particularly useful for certain fractures types. These include fractures that are severely comminuted, those with segmental bone loss, and open fractures of the hand where early range of motion is desirable due to a substantial amount of swelling and soft tissue trauma. Clearly, plate fixation is indicated in situations where anatomic reduction and stabilisation cannot be maintained with simpler, less invasive techniques. Plate and screw fixation results in greater strength of the fracture fixation immediately after the reduction. Many early authors, however, have reported disappointing results with plate fixation of hand fractures, particularly fractures of the phalanges. The difficulties have primarily been related to problems with pain, prominence of the plate, infection, and tendon adhesions. These complications have been more pronounced with phalangeal fractures than with metacarpal fractures. In early series, as many as 75% of plates were removed in secondary procedures. Many of the early studies were done with so-called mini-plating systems or with craniomaxillofacial systems that had been adapted to use in the hand. It was felt that the larger size of the plates and screws was a primary difficulty in their use in the fingers. For this reason, smaller plating systems were devised with smaller screws and lower profile plates. More recent studies done with the newer plating systems have shown few complications when used in complex injuries of the hand. Recent reports have shown excellent results with micro-plate fixation for phalangeal and metacarpal fractures. Over 93% of patients regained their pre-fracture ability levels completely and only 12% had any subjective impairment. There were no non-unions, contractures, or tendon ruptures. Significant complications were seen in 10% of patients. While dedicated hand mini- and micro-plating systems provide rigid fixation and allow quick return to motion, they still have the disadvantage of often needing plate removal. Recent development of bioabsorbable mini-plating systems for use in craniomaxillofacial trauma has resulted in interest in these types of plates for use in the hand. These plates are reabsorbed by proteolysis and offer theoretical advantages as they do not need to be removed. The biomechanical properties of these plates are comparable to currently employed fixation methods and are sufficient for fracture stabilisation. While the use of bioabsorbable plates may avoid a secondary procedure to remove metal plates, it remains to be seen whether they are superior. Reported complications in the craniomaxillofacial literature include transient increased post-operative edema and erythema, Since the start of the 20th century, we have become increasingly able to successfully treat fractures that 100 years ago would have left someone with significant disability. This is due to the progressive development of increasingly sophisticated methods of fracture reduction and stabilisation. Along with the improved technology, there is a significant increase in the cost of treatment. Each new technological advance requires more intricate instrumentation and hardware, as well as more sophisticated surgical skills. Simple immobilisation requires very little capital investment. All that is needed is access to reasonable quality surgical tape, plaster, dressing materials, and an X-ray machine. These are materials that are readily available across the globe and likely to be available to most physicians. The use of percutaneous pinning requires increased costs in materials. Placement of pins typically requires access to hand-held drills (preferably power operated), fluoroscopic imaging, and training in the technique. Care must be taken to recognise the limitations of the health care system. While advanced techniques of internal fixation and fluoroscopically guided pin placement can provide excellent results in the developed world, similar results may be difficult to achieve in developing countries. Injudicious application of technology may lead to disastrous consequences when used inappropriately or with insufficient support personnel and services. Every hand injury is unique and treatment must be tailored to the injury, the patient, and the skill of the treating physician. Fortunately, most hand fractures can be adequately treated with inexpensive and non-invasive techniques. It is the more severe injuries that are most likely to be poorly treated in less developed areas of the world where the financial resources and skilled manpower are not available. Each doctor will have to decide, based on patient and health care resources, the patient's ability to participate in their own care, and their own comfort level, how to treat each individual hand fracture.