Undercooled melts of Nd–Fe–B alloys, the chemical composition of which is stoichiometric Nd2Fe14B, were solidified during free falling in a 26m drop tube. Microstructures of the as-dropped samples were examined with X-ray diffraction analyzer and an energy-dispersive X-ray analyzer. The microstructures of the samples cooled with relatively slow rates consisted of the Nd2Fe14B phase formed via peritectic reaction between the pro-peritectic α-phase and the balanced melt. The samples, however, cooled with relatively high rates contained a great volume of the metastable phase with the crystal structure similar to the rhombohedral Nd2Fe17 phase, the chemical composition of which is not Nd2Fe17 but similar to that of the source alloy. In the samples cooled with the intermediate rates, the microstructures showed pearlite-like morphology that seemed to be formed via eutectoid decomposition from the metastable phase during post-solidification cooling stage. The critical cooling rate for the metastable phase to be directly formed from the undercooled melt is between 1.9×103 and 3.0×103
                     Ks−1, that is well consistent with the estimation from the empirical relation between cooling rates and microstructures obtained by rapid cooling techniques such as metallic mold casting and melt spinning.It is well known that the superiority of Nd–Fe–B magnets results from the intermetallic Nd In the present study, the containerless processing by means of a 26 Several pieces of the source alloy with the chemical composition of stoichiometric Nd The bulk composition of as-dropped samples was analyzed by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES). The constituent phases of the samples were identified by powdered X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Cu-K In spite of the high oxidization tendency of the Nd–Fe–B alloy in the ambient air, the surface of as-dropped samples showed metallic brightness. This means the droplet solidified in the oxygen-free atmosphere.  Summarizing these results, we arrive at a preliminary conclusion, that is, the microstructure of the as-dropped Nd–Fe–B alloy samples can be categorized into two types: type I is pro-peritectic α-Fe and peritectic Nd As aforementioned, in containerless solidification of the Nd–Fe–B alloys the as-dropped microstructure was categorized into two types: type I is the microstructure formed via peritectic reaction between the pro-peritectic γ-phase and the alloy melt, where the predominant phase is Nd In this section, the critical cooling rate for the metastable phase to be formed is discussed. The cooling rate experienced by a droplet falling in an atmosphere is given by Summarizing the results, the containerless solidification of the Nd–Fe–B alloy during free fall in the drop tube results in various microstructures depending on the cooling rates experienced by the falling droplet: in low cooling rate, the microstructure is dominated by the Nd Gao et al. Using the Nd–Fe–B source alloy with the chemical composition of stoichiometric Nd This work was financially supported by a grant-in-aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. One of the authors (SO) acknowledges the Japan Society for Promotion of Science (JSPS) for offering a JSPS fellowship.