Introduction
                  Little information exists on radial head implant diameter sizing methods. When the native head is absent due to extensive comminution or previous excision, the lesser sigmoid notch may be a useful landmark for sizing. We evaluated the reliability of native radial head measurements, and the lesser sigmoid notch, as landmarks for radial head implant diameter sizing.
               
                  Methods
                  We examined 27 fresh frozen ulnae and their corresponding radial heads. The maximum, minimum, and dish diameters of the radial heads were measured. A radial head implant diameter was selected based on the congruency of the trial implants with the radius of curvature of the lesser sigmoid notch. Intraobserver and interobserver reliability for all measurements and implant selection were assessed using intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC). Correlations between the native radial head measurements and the selected radial head implant diameter or the lesser sigmoid notch radius of curvature were assessed using the Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC).
               
                  Results
                  Radial head diameter measurements demonstrated strong to excellent intraobserver (ICC ≥ 0.75) and interobserver reliability (ICC ≥ 0.82). The lesser sigmoid notch sizing method showed poor interobserver reliability (ICC = 0.34). Only a moderate correlation was found between the native radial head and the lesser sigmoid notch (PCC ≤ 0.80) or the selected radial head implant size (PCC ≤ 0.59).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Radial head diameter measurements showed excellent reliability, suggesting that the excised radial head, when available, should be used to select the implant diameter. The reliability of using the lesser sigmoid notch for sizing the diameter of radial head implants was only moderate, suggesting this is an unreliable landmark for implant diameter sizing.Radial head replacement is a commonly performed procedure for the treatment of comminuted radial head fractures. Commonly, the excised fractured native radial head is assembled and used to choose a radial head implant diameter size that best matches the native head. Because the native radial head has an elliptical shape rather than a circular one, there is controversy about whether the maximum diameter (D The purpose of this study was (1) to evaluate the reliability of measuring D Twenty-seven fresh frozen ulnae and their corresponding radial heads, from 18 male and 9 female donors, were thawed and denuded of all soft tissue. The D For each of the 27 proximal ulnae, 4 investigators independently selected a radial head implant diameter (Evolve; Wright Medical Technology Inc, Arlington, TN, USA) based on its congruency with the radius of curvature of the lesser sigmoid notch, so that it forms a highly congruous fit ( Intraobserver and interobserver reliability was calculated using the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). Correlation between the native radial head diameter and the size of the selected radial head implant was performed using the Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC). CT scans of acceptable quality were available for 23 (15 male and 8 female) the 27 denuded ulnae. The CTs were used to create 3-dimensional surface mesh and bone models using Mimics software (Materialise, Louvain, Belgium). Ten points were selected on the model surface within a transverse plane through the middle of the lesser sigmoid notch, orthogonal to the axis of rotation of the proximal radius ( Correlations between the 3 lesser sigmoid notch radii of curvature and the diameters (D The average D Interobserver reliability testing demonstrated an ICC of 0.99, 1.00, and 0.82 for the D The intraobserver reliability of selecting a radial head implant diameter size based on its anatomic congruency with the lesser sigmoid notch was good, with an ICC of 0.76. However, the interobserver reliability was poor, with an ICC of 0.34. Moreover, only moderate correlation was found between the average native radial head measurements and the selected radial head implant diameter, with a PCC of 0.56, 0.59, and 0.51 for the D The average radius of curvature of the complete lesser sigmoid notch was 13.5 ± 2.0 mm. The average radius of the anterior half of the lesser sigmoid notch was 18.4 ± 7.4 mm and that of the posterior half was 10.2 ± 2.1 mm. The correlation between the CT-based radius of curvature of the complete lesser sigmoid notch and the measurements of the native radial head showed a PCC of 0.72, 0.74, and 0.80, for the D When radial head replacement is performed, choosing an optimally sized implant that best approximates the native radial head is crucial. Studies have demonstrated that incorrect sizing can lead to suboptimal clinical results and long-term complications. We had postulated that the radius of curvature of the lesser sigmoid notch might correlate with the dimensions of the native radial head and, as such, would be a useful landmark for radial head implant diameter sizing when the radial head is unavailable. However, contrary to our hypothesis, this study demonstrated that using the lesser sigmoid notch to choose a radial head implant diameter size based on congruency of the notch and the trial implant has poor interobserver reliability. In addition, there was only a moderate correlation between the measurements of the native radial head and the selected trial implant diameter sizes based on the lesser sigmoid notch. This suggests that the curvature of the lesser sigmoid notch is an unreliable landmark for radial head implant diameter sizing. Furthermore, this study illustrated that there was a positive but only moderate correlation between the CT-based measurements of the radius of curvature of the lesser sigmoid notch and the measurements of the native radial head. In fact, there was a large difference between the radius of curvature of the anterior and posterior halves of the lesser sigmoid notch, implying that the lesser sigmoid notch is not uniform in shape. The correlation between the lesser sigmoid notch radius of curvature and the corresponding native radial head measurements was moderate to strong when the full notch was used to calculate the radius of curvature and weak when the anterior or posterior half was used. Hence, the lesser sigmoid notch should not be used as a landmark for radial head diameter sizing, neither CT-based nor intraoperatively. This is the first published report, to our knowledge, that evaluates the reliability of measuring the radial head dimensions as well as using the lesser sigmoid notch as landmarks for sizing the diameter of radial head implants. Presently, the best measurement parameter to select the diameter of a radial head implant is unknown. Some surgeons use the maximum outer diameter of the radial head, others the minimum outer diameter, and some use the maximum diameter of the articular dish. Future clinical and biomechanical studies are required to determine which parameter best recreates native elbow kinematics and optimizes contact mechanics and load transfer. The main limitation of this study is that the reliability testing of the native radial head measurements were performed on a nonfractured radial head, which would likely be different than measuring a fractured radial head that would require reassembly. In the future, a study designed to assess the reliability of measuring the dimensions of a fractured radial head would be useful. Other limitations include the small sample size and the unequal distribution of specimens from male and female donors. Moreover, CT measurements of the lesser sigmoid notch would only account for the osseous measurements and does not account for the cartilage. Finally, CT measurements of the lesser sigmoid notch radius of curvature were only performed by 1 observer with no evaluation of reliability. This study demonstrated that the native excised radial head, when available, should be used to choose the diameter of the radial head implant. When the radial head is too comminuted or unavailable, the lesser sigmoid notch is an unreliable intraoperative or CT-based landmark for radial head diameter sizing. Future studies should evaluate other local and nonlocal landmarks, such as the capitellum or the contralateral normal radial head, to assess their correlation with radial head measurements and their reliability in guiding correct radial head implant diameter sizing. Funding for this project was provided through research grants by the Dr King is a consultant and receives royalties from Wright Medical Technology Inc. All other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.