The availability and efficiency of water use is now a major concern for the global minerals industry. Seawater is a potential water source for mineral beneficiation and metal extraction processes. With a focus on using seawater for heap leaching, we investigated and modelled the kinetics of chalcocite leaching with ferric chloride. To this end, a series of leaching tests were carried out in jacketed reactors under fully controlled pH and solution potential at ambient temperature using pure chalcocite as the model mineral. The effects of key parameters, including chloride concentration, ferric concentration, ferrous concentration, ferric/ferrous ratio, temperature, and particle size, were determined on the first and second stages of chalcocite leaching.
                  The first stage leaching rate was sensitive to ferric concentration, temperature, and particle size, whereas it was insensitive to ferrous and chloride concentration. The second stage leaching rate was independent of chloride concentration but sensitive to solution potential, temperature, and particle size. A distinct kinetic model was obtained for each stage of chalcocite leaching. Based on the kinetic models, it is concluded that the leaching rate of the first stage was controlled by the diffusion of ferric ions, while a mixed kinetics governed the second stage kinetics, i.e., a combination of mineral decomposition and ferric reduction. The findings of this research are important for prediction of copper extraction performance when seawater is being applied to heap leaching of chalcocite to replace fresh water.The efficiency of water use has increasingly become a priority for the global minerals industry, especially in regions with limited freshwater supplies, such as northern Chile, southern Peru and Australia ( As opposed to the understanding of copper leaching kinetics and pathways in sulfate media, there is not as much understanding in chloride media. The knowledge gained with the sulfate system provides valuable guidance in understanding the chloride system. The completion of the first stage of chalcocite leaching has become a matter of controversy. Some researchers believed that the first stage was completed as chalcocite was converted to blue remaining covellite (Cu The kinetics of chalcocite and covellite leaching in chloride media have been investigated using chemical and electrochemical techniques, with different oxidants in the leaching system, including oxygen, ferric, and cupric ions ( The dissolution mechanism of the first and second stages of chalcocite leaching with ferric chloride have been reported in the literature ( Most of the existing studies were carried out at temperatures higher than ambient temperature and under uncontrolled redox potentials (ORP). Temperature and redox potential have been shown to considerably affect chalcocite leaching, particulary the second stage of leaching that may convert secondary covellite to elemental sulfur ( This study aims to investigate and model the kinetics of chalcocite leaching in acidified ferric chloride media by carrying out chalcocite leaching experiments at fully controlled temperature, pH and ORP. Two individual kinetics models were developed to simulate the rate of copper extraction from chalcocite in the first and second stages of leaching. This body of knowledge would enhance the understanding of the key factors that control the kinetics of chalcocite leaching in ferric chloride media, which will provide insights on the application of seawater in heap leaching. Leaching tests were designed ( Natural chalcocite purchased from Ward's Science was ground by a Spex sample prep ball mill and then sieved to varied particle size fractions including −212 + 180, −150 + 125, −125 + 106, and − 75 + 53 μm. The wet sieving was conducted by means of Taylor sieves and a Rotap shaker to provide various narrow-sized fractions. All chemicals used were purchased from either Fisher Scientific or Sigma-Aldrich and were of reagent grade. These chemicals include ferrous chloride, hydrochloric acid for pH adjustment, ferric chloride as the oxidant, hydrogen peroxide for ORP control, saturated potassium chloride for refilling pH electrodes, 4 M potassium chloride saturated with silver chloride for refilling the ORP electrodes, and sodium chloride for adjusting chloride concentration. The chalcocite sample was ground to an optimum grain size range for quantitative X-ray analysis (<10 μm) by milling under ethanol in a vibratory McCrone Micronizing Mill for 10 min. XRD analysis was performed using a Bruker D8 Advance Bragg-Brentano diffractometer equipped with an Fe monochromator foil, 0.6 mm (0.3°) divergence slit, incident- and diffracted-beam Soller slits and a LynxEye-XE detector. Step-scan X-ray powder-diffraction data were collected over a range 3–80°2θ with CoKα radiation. The long fine-focus Co X-ray tube was operated at 35 kV and 40 mA, using a take-off angle of 6°. The X-ray diffractogram was analyzed using the International Centre for Diffraction Database PDF-4 and Search-Match software by Bruker. X-ray powder-diffraction data of the sample were refined with Rietveld program Topas 4.2 (Bruker AXS). Prior to leaching, chalcocite mineral was acid washed in 5% sulfuric acid under nitrogen for 1 h to remove any copper oxide mineral. Leaching experiments were conducted in 500 mL jacketed reactors. 1 g chalcocite was added into 250 mL leaching solution, whose temperature was kept constant using a water bath to circulate water through the jacket. The experimental apparatus is shown in Aliquots of 0.5 mL of the leachate samples were taken more frequently during the first hour and less frequently over the next nine hours and then on a daily basis. The samples were analyzed for copper content by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES Agilent 5100). The leaching residues were washed four times with deionized water and dried at 60 °C, digested in aqua regia solution using the Ethos Up Microwave Digestion System, and then analyzed for copper content by ICP-OES. The shrinking core models (SCMs) are the established kinetic models that are most commonly used to describe the rate of leaching reactions ( In Eqs. The overall copper extraction (X) from both stages is defined as Eq. The results of quantitative phase analysis by Rietveld refinements are given in Prior to performing the designed tests to study the kinetics of chalcocite leaching, the reproducibility of the experimental results was evaluated by conducting the same leaching test in four replicates, from which standard errors were calculated. The chloride concentrations of 0.172, 0.522, 1.522, and 3.022 M were generated by adding sodium chloride to the leaching solution. For reference, the concentration of chloride ions in seawater is around 0.5 M. The leaching solution ORP was maintained constant at 810 mV in all leaching tests. Despite the insignificant effect of chloride concentration, the beneficial role of chloride ions compared with sulfate media on copper sulfide leaching has been postulated to be twofold. First, chloride ions may accelerate copper dissolution by forming copper-chlorocomplexes, which contribute to the oxidization of copper sulfide minerals ( The ferric concentrations studied were chosen based on the iron concentration range typically encountered in heap leaching. A typical ferric concentration range in heap bioleaching of chalcocite is 0.02–0.1 M ( The effect of ferrous concentration on copper extraction is shown in The effect of ferric/ferrous ratio on the second stage was also investigated by conducting leaching experiments at varied ferric/ferrous ratios while the total iron concentration was maintained constant at 0.1 M. The ferric/ferrous ratios of 0.33, 1, 4, 100 were selected, which corresponded to redox potentials of 660 mV, 700, 760, and 820 mV, respectively. The effect of redox potential on the second stage of chalcocite leaching and on covellite leaching have been reported in both sulfate and chloride media ( The effect of temperature on the copper extraction from chalcocite is shown in Particle size fractions of −75 + 53, −125 + 106, −150 + 125, and − 212 + 180 μm were selected to investigate the effect of particle size distribution on chalcocite leaching kinetics. Considering the electrochemical polarization curves and the Tafel equation,  From this equation, two types of leaching kinetics can be obtained: Type I: Type II: In Type I leaching, ferric reduction is slow, and therefore irreversible and far from equilibrium. Consequently, the reverse cathodic reaction can be safely ignored. In contrast, in Type II leaching, ferric reduction is rapid and at equilibrium and the mixed potential corresponds to the reversible potential of the ferric/ferrous electrochemical couple. Nicol's theory has been used to explain leaching kinetics in several studies ( The kinetics equation for the first stage of chalcocite leaching in ferric chloride was derived as Eq. The reaction order with respect to ferric concentration was found to be 1.05. This value is very close to unity, which supports the hypothesis that the first stage reaction was a Type III leaching reaction, i.e., the mass transfer of the oxidant towards the mineral surface limits the reaction. Eq.  Two individual kinetics equations were derived to describe the kinetics of chalcocite leaching in the first and second stages. The first stage of chalcocite leaching with ferric chloride was fast and controlled by the diffusion of ferric ion towards the mineral surface. This hypothesis was supported by the low activation energy and the first order dependence of the dissolution rate on the ferric concentration. The rate of the second stage was slow and limited by a mixed kinetics; a combination of chemical reaction and ferric reduction in the second stage. It was confirmed by the high activation energy and the chemical composition equation used in the kinetics equation to fit the experimental data. The kinetics of chalcocite leaching in ferric chloride media were comprehensively studied, with the ultimate purpose of using seawater for heap leaching. We quantified the effects of chloride concentration, ferric concentration, ferrous concentration, ferric/ferrous ratio, temperature, and particle size on chalcocite leaching using jacketed reactors under fully controlled pH, solution potential, and temperature. Using the experimental data obtained, we derived two distinct kinetic models for the two stages of chalcocite leaching. Model results suggested that the rate limiting step was diffusion of ferric ions through the reaction product layer in the first stage and a combination of chemical reaction and ferric reduction in the second stage. The kinetic models derived from the reactor leaching provided such key information as reaction orders and activation energy. However, they could not be directly applied to predict copper extraction in heap leaching of chalcocite in chloride media, because the hydrodynamic factor, specifically, the movement of leaching solution and air through packed ore beds, was not considered in the reactor leaching. As a result, column leaching tests are currently being conducted to scale up the present kinetic models. Above all, the present kinetic models recommend managing heap heat to keep the heap temperature as high as possible and maintaining a high solution potential. An efficient re-oxidation of ferrous to ferric in heap leaching is crucial to maintaining the solution potential, which is being investigated. Chloride concentration might play a key role in the re-oxidation of ferrous to ferric, thereby controlling solution potential in a practical heap leach pad.