The classical application of theory of sampling (TOS) is univariate. However, most practical situations address multi-analyte issues, in which the common belief is that one should focus a variographic study on the analyte with the most heterogeneous distribution. This paper introduces a multivariogram approach to process sampling and compares it with the classical univariate and multivariate approaches of variograms as applied to principal component analysis (PCA) scores. A case study of low-grade kaolin residue sampling for metallurgical testing is used to illustrate this methodology. A total of eight important properties are analysed, including chemical analytes, size distribution properties and pulp density. The results show that the classical univariate approach can underestimate the global sampling error if the sampling protocol is designed by using only the highest variance property. Variograms that are calculated from PCA scores highlight distinct spatial patterns through variable grouping in a reduced number of variograms. Multivariograms can be used to summarise time variations in multiple analytes and highlight the multivariate time autocorrelation aspects of these analytes. However, the resulting sampling variance is very high, and an alternative approach that applies multivariograms to PCA scores, filters noise from the data, and only keeps relevant data information, which reduces the global sampling variance, is proposed. This case study illustrates the usefulness of multivariate approaches to help multivariate variographic modelling in mineral processing and in many other fields within science and industry that deal with multi-analyte sampling issues.Perform variable reduction Filter noise from the data Study the spatial characteristics of all individual parameters Design the optimal sampling protocol for one property Summarize the overall variability in one variogram Assess the global sampling's representativeness Highlight distinct spatial patterns through variable grouping in a reduced number of variograms Design the optimal sampling protocol Summarize the (filtered) overall variability in one variogram Assess the (filtered) global sampling's representativeness Study and then summarize the spatial characteristics of all individual analytes In every mining project, economic improvements pass through metallurgical assessment based on a series of metallurgical tests that are performed on so-called process samples. Process samples are typically extracted from flowing streams of ore, concentrate or residue at regular intervals to obtain representative samples of a given chemical analyte, a mineralogical or physical property. Metallurgical tests explore the best operating parameters to reach the desired recovery objectives and grade contents, therefore improving the process. The effectiveness of these improvements will depend directly on the representativeness of the samples that are initially collected for the tests Theory of sampling (TOS), which was introduced by Pierre Gy, has been widely described in many reference books Random sampling: the samples are collected randomly during the sampling period Stratified sampling: the sampling period is divided into uniform intervals and one sample is collected randomly in each interval Systematic sampling: samples are collected at equal distances (lags) along the time axes The choice of the sampling mode is very important because it changes the variance of the lot’ mean. In most cases, systematic sampling will lead to the lowest sampling variance TOS introduced semi-variograms (referred to as the process variability over time and the magnitude of the different variability components, the lot's mean and the uncertainty of a single measurement with respect to the autocorrelation phenomenon, the optimal design and mode (i.e., random, stratified or systematic) for the sampling protocol. In a typical variographic experiment, a set of The shape of the variogram is an important source of information to characterise a process variation ( However, the results from metallurgical tests often depend on several properties (chemical analytes or physical properties). Hence, the process samples must be representative not only for one property but for a certain range of properties. In these situations, the practical approach is to identify the property with the highest heterogeneity contribution and to consider only this property. The main difficulty of this approach is that it does not account for the multivariate nature of heterogeneity. In the case of a typical increasing variogram with finite range, heterogeneities of samples spaced in time (or space) of a distance equal or greater than the range are no longer autocorrelated. On the contrary, the closer samples are (spatially) to each other, the more their difference in heterogeneity declines. As a result, reducing the problem to one variogram model, which is a univariate (spatial) function, to represent the (spatial) structure of heterogeneity, which is generally a multivariate measure, can lead to an underestimation of the large difference in heterogeneity that occur between close neighbors The importance of considering the multivariate nature of heterogeneity is well-known in geostatistics and particularly for spatial data analysis but has not been frequently addressed to TOS. An initial solution to this issue in the field of spatial data analysis was proposed by Oliver and Webster, who suggested to perform a principal component analysis (PCA) on the data and to study the variogram of the first few principal components A reverse approach that involves applying a PCA analysis on the individual variograms is also worth mentioning The heterogeneity contribution is now assumed to be a multivariate measurement. If a material is characterised by a number Contrary to the previously mentioned multivariate approaches, this approach captures the variability of all of the variables in a single variogram. Thus, calculating the auxiliary functions and, consequently, the error-generating functions for each sampling mode is still possible by using classical point-by-point calculations The purpose of this paper is to introduce multivariograms as a new tool for process sampling and to compare them with the classical univariate approach and multivariate approach of variograms as applied to PCA scores. A case study of a process stream from a kaolin mining plant (St. Austell, Cornwall) that has been sampled for metallurgical testing is used to illustrate this approach. This stream is a micaceous residue, which is a potential source of metals The samples that were used in this work were collected with the help of Imerys Minerals Ltd., UK. The primary objective of this sampling exercise was to design a protocol to collect a representative sample from a residue stream of a kaolin plant that operates at an approximate flow rate of 15 Accurately estimating the pulp density and wet mass is critical because the moisture content of samples can change rapidly after sampling from evaporation. Thus, all of the samples were stored in sealed containers. However, condensation may occur inside the container, which is difficult to mix back into the sample The studied material was sampled for metallurgical testing by gravity concentration. Thus, the analytical methods that are chosen for the variographic study must be adapted to this objective. In addition to classical chemical analysis, the size distribution was measured because it is a critical characteristic of a material for gravity concentration A set of 18 elements/oxides were analysed, including LREEs (La, Ce, Nd), Nb and Sn. Representative 10 Four properties were retained to describe the particle size distribution of the material: D10, D50, D90 and the Rosin Rammler (RR) slope; the first three represent particle sizes below which 10%, 50% and 90% of the particles are distributed, respectively, and the last represents the slope of the size distribution with the Rosin Rammler model The analytical results of the 8 selected properties (pulp density, D10, D50, D90, RR  The individual variograms and the auxiliary functions The variograms of pulp density and Nb display a classic increasing variogram shape. A minimum can be observed in the LREE and Sn variograms at Similar observations can be made for the variograms of the size distribution properties (D10, D50, D90, and RR The classical conclusion at this point would be to focus the sampling protocol on the property with the highest sill, i.e., the LREE content and to base the sampling protocol on the standard deviation of the sampling error for the LREE content according to the sampling mode (see supplementary material, Appendix A.2). The 3 sampling modes are quite close, but systematic sampling remains the sampling mode with the lowest variance. Even with this simplification, the recommended sampling protocol is hard to define because of the different periodic phenomena. Using stratified random sampling or systematic sampling with at least 5 or 10 increments and a sampling frequency that is higher than two per period of 18 However, even if this sampling protocol is the best for the LREE content, it will certainly not be for the other properties, notably because of the different trends and periodic phenomena that these factors display. This observation illustrates why this approach does not account for the multivariate nature of heterogeneity and can lead to a misunderstanding of the spatial structure of the variability and to an underestimation of the global sampling variance. Principal component analysis (PCA) is a well-known variable reduction procedure in chemometrics that simplifies data by summarising them into a smaller number of more relevant or more interesting components The results of a PCA analysis that was applied to the autoscaled St. Austell micaceous residue process data are shown in The eigenvalues correspond to the explained variability that is carried by each component ( The critical values of this test depend on the number The PC1 variogram can be interpreted to reflect the particle size variability of the micaceous residue stream with time. Its variogram displays a slightly increasing trend that reaches a sill for the last lags, which reflects a long range variation. The auxiliary function shows the nested structure of PC1, with two distinct ranges at On the contrary, the variogram of PC2 displays a clear short range structure with an increasing trend at short lags and a sill that was reached quickly at PC3 is obviously related to a cyclic variation with a rather short period of approximately 5 lags. Even if PC3 is loaded by LREEs, the pulp density and RR The 8 selected properties can be divided into 3 distinct classes, namely, the size distribution (D10, D50, D90 and RR Each class have a multivariogram that is best modelled by a bounded linear model (blinear) with a clear delimited range. The size distribution and metal content multivariograms both display high sills, which is a consequence of the individual variabilities of the properties that are used for the calculation, compared to the pulp density univariate variogram. However, the ranges are completely different: the size distribution multivariogram clearly displays long range variation, whereas the metal content and pulp density (multi)variograms display medium to small ranges ( The global multivariogram displays a relatively high sill, which is a consequence of the metric that was used for the computation. Hence, the sampling variance is much more important compared to the univariate case. However, the results suggest a low-frequency phenomenon with a period of approximately 23–25 lags whereas the data only contains 50 lags. Hence, the estimation of the sill values and length of periods is uncertain. To confirm this phenomenon, the length of the variographic experiment should be extended over 3 work shifts (6–9 An alternative approach to summarise data variability is to use the PCA scores instead of the raw analytical results, as suggested in the univariate case The global shape of the multivariogram is already achieved by using only the two first PCs; additional PCs beyond PC3 do not contribute much more information aside from noise, which increases the nugget effect. By keeping only the first two PCs, the resulting standard deviation of the sampling error remains less important than if all of the initial data were kept. One could use this PC1–PC2 multivariogram to assess the necessary number of increments to reach the representativeness objective for a composite sample. For instance, the standard deviation with 10 increments sampled is already approximately 20%.  PCA variograms offer the advantage of combining a variable reduction procedure that describes the correlation between variables and a procedure that characterises autocorrelations within an ordered dataset. This approach first highlights the property groups by using PCA and distinct spatial patterns by using variograms. Nevertheless, even if this process significantly reduces the number of variables for the variographic study, the same number of variograms is available to study because no significant PCs are present. Thus, assessing the true sampling error and choosing which variogram will be based on the sampling protocol are still an issue. Furthermore, this approach requires a large dataset with a number of observations Multivariograms summarize the overall spatial variability of a set of properties by one structural function and thus highlight the spatial structures that are One can combine the two previously mentioned multivariate approaches to avoid this issue by computing the multivariogram of the first PCs' scores, which reduces the influence of noisy data and thus reduces the sampling variance. However, in some cases that deal with a high number of properties, the same issues that are linked to the PCA technique may arise and limit this approach. These problems could be avoided by applying the multivariogram to the linear coregionalization model, which was proposed by Bourgault and Marcotte Importantly, the variographic experiment on the St. Austell micaceous residue sampling case study was performed on a shift-scale sample, which is a small scale for process sampling, especially because variograms of a given process can change with time as a function of ore variability The multivariate approach that was presented in this paper is a powerful tool when the overall time-variability of process streams must be summarized in terms of a large set of properties. However, this approach is not meant to replace the previously introduced conventional approaches but instead to complement them because they can all be applied to distinct objectives ( Most of the variability of the St. Austell micaceous residue process stream is due to the LREE concentration on an individual scale, whereas the multivariate scale indicates that size distribution is the most important contribution. If the process samples from this stream were to be used for metallurgical testing, for instance, by gravity concentration, a minimum of 10 increments should be collected by systematic sampling to ensure an acceptable overall representativeness. This paper has introduced effective multivariate approaches to describe the overall variability of a material and design an optimal process sampling protocol. However, this case study could also be applied to environmental, feed and food, pharmaceutical or any other fields that address multi-analyte sampling issues. The authors hereby declare that there is no conflict of interest associated with this publication. The authors wish to thank Imerys Minerals Ltd., UK, and especially S. Moradi, P. Chauhan and A. Coe for their help during the sampling exercise. We are also grateful to S. Lightfoot and P. Budge for their advice and technical support during the sampling campaign. We thank C. Gauthier for its help in the sample preparation process. This work has been financially supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at