Large area self-supporting carbon foils in the thickness of range of 8–22μg/cm2, coated with approximately 4μg/cm2 MgO have been prepared by e-gun evaporation. They were mounted on frames with apertures of 130cm2. Problems related to the parting agent preparation, floating procedure, and mounting onto frames are discussed. Special precautions necessary to avoid damage during foil drying, storage and transportation are suggested.Determination of the value of the beta asymmetry coefficient in free neutron decay can be performed by detection of the charged particles created during the neutron decay process. Protons created in this process are identified by electrons knocked out from carbon foils The preparation of the carbon foils coated with MgO layers was performed in two steps, in two different high-vacuum evaporation plants, both equipped with e-guns. In the first step, carbon was deposited on 20 The carbon evaporation was begun when vacuum in the plant was about 2–3×10 After carbon deposition, the substrates remained in the vacuum plant for at least 1 One problem, identified at the very beginning, was the preparation of a uniform layer of the betaine-parting agent. The best results were achieved when approximately 2 A second problem was the optimisation of the carbon evaporation–deposition rate. If carbon was deposited too slowly, the long exposure to the UV light from the carbon source resulted in bad quality foils due to decomposition of the betaine. Usually, such foils did not separate from their glass slides during the flotation process or the foils became wet on the surface and, in consequence, they sank during this process ( When the evaporation rate was too high, large carbon particles were ejected energetically from the source and damaged the layer already deposited. The foils have been mounted on 1 A method of slow immersion of the glass into water as described by Muggleton During this step of the foil preparation it was important to fill the tank at an adequate rate to ensure a proper, smooth border between the part of foil already free and the part still attached to the glass slide. If that border is too sharp, the MgO layer would crack and, in consequence, water could leak through the foil. In the extreme case, these leaks could cause the foil to sink. It was equally important to avoid interruptions in filling the tank, otherwise cracks would appear at the border between the part of the foil already free and the part still on the glass slide. One other reason of foil loss during the flotation process was their tendency to adhere to the tank wall at the end of the filling step, after the foil was already released from the glass slide. Further raising of the water level was necessary for proper foil collection on the frame, which required total immersion of the frame into the water in a position perpendicular to the carbon foil. It was observed that manual handling and the use of water directly from a deionisation plant were causing electrostatic charge build-up on the tank walls. Such charges attracted the foil, which adhered to the wall with a force sufficient to tear the foil to pieces if one tried to release it. The problem was solved by wearing natural leather shoes and by storing the water needed for flotation in a beaker for a minimum of 1 The frames with mounted foils were left in a grooved, metal plate placed on the bottom of a plastic container until the foil had dried. To cover the container, a glass plate placed on small protrusions was used. A spacing between the cover and the container edge was necessary, not only to allow the water to evaporate, but also to minimise air perturbation when removing the cover. Dry foils were stored in a specially prepared PVC container ( The storage of the foils before packing them for the final transportation for the experiment was another problem. Due to their fragility, moving the foils from the operating area to a safe storage place and back without using a vacuum container required great care. Use of the vacuum container would mean frequent pumping and venting which increased the risk of foil breaking. The best way to bring them to a safe storage area was to carry the container loaded with foils by hand, walking very slowly, barefoot, to minimise shocks. Of course, for long-distance transportation to the experiment area, the container with foils was placed in a special vacuum chamber. To ensure a slow air evacuation and venting the chamber was equipped with a needle valve. The method described and all the applied precautions allowed us to prepare and deliver for the experiment 28 foils in the carbon thickness range of 8.0–22 Most of the foils were mounted on frames with a 13 This work was supported by Beschleunigerlaboratorium München which is funded by the Freistaat Bayern.