Particle-level correlations that guide product structure–property outcomes in advanced processing and manufacturing unit operations for material processes are well documented. The influences of bulk granular and powder property effects on structure–property functions, however, remain elusive. The bulk effects depend on the ensemble of particle packing and require a multi-scale evaluation (characterization), which includes the nano/micro-scale (particle level), meso-scale (stress networking and packing fluctuations), and the macro-scale (bulk behavior). Granular and powder bed characterization for the purpose of predicting suitability for forming is traditionally limited to static particle-level characterization. To enable the characterization of meso-scale linkages between the nano/micro-scale and granular/powder bed bulk properties for structure–property function, it is suggested that granular/powder process understanding should be an integration of three areas: (1) static particle-level characterization (i.e., size, shape, surface area, chemical composition, etc.), (2) comminution and dynamic (transformative) granular and powder characterization (e.g., the bulk solid rheology), and (3) final part forming. The aforementioned static characteristics are necessary but not sufficient in light of insights gained from selected dynamic bulk granular/powder bed characterization techniques.
               A review of granular- and powder-scale challenges to advance research, development, and manufacturing unit operations are addressed.Materials science and technology is based on control of the triaxial space of structure, properties, and processing. To achieve the desired properties and structure of a final product, various comminuted raw materials are blended with the interest of meeting a target chemical composition to be processed to meet the final product’s specifications. To assess the suitability of comminuted materials to meet the target attributes of organic and inorganic processing, classic static raw material characterization protocols have required one or more of the following seven types of measurement: Chemical composition. Mineral and crystallite makeup. Particle shape and size distribution. Pore size and size distribution. Specific surface area. Bulk and/or skeletal density. Microscopy and imaging methods. These methods represent historical particle-level (static) characterizations deemed necessary to qualify component raw materials and batch ( Inattention to flow regimes (e.g., transformative attributes, such as frictional slow flow (quasi-static) elastic inertial (intermediate), and inertial collisions (fluidization) as well as compressibility, permeability, internal angles of friction, etc.) favors a predisposition toward classic static characterization techniques obscuring valuable information necessary to understanding de-mixing of complex inorganic granular and powder bed systems ( Granular (size distribution >100 µm) and powder (size distribution <100 µm) beds’ flowability are not described via classical descriptors as for fluids and gases due to inadequate understanding of the bulk state of granular and powder materials from the particle level ( First principle models exist for effects, such as particle-level (static) flowability and friction, adsorption kinetics, hygroscopicity, etc. ( This is not to suggest that spray drying is exclusively motivated by concerns of powder flow (and in the absence of knowledge and/or tests a “brute force” mass spray drying is employed); many other advantages and motives exist for spray drying beyond achieving high flowability, but this is an example of the awareness of concerns regarding flow without a rigorous method to measure it. The lack of full understanding of bulk powder flow from the particle level as a continuum forces empirical modeling of bulk systems with the inability to sufficiently define a continuum and successfully bridge powder to particle-level mechanics and modeling ( The following are examples of complementary tests at the granular and powder scale measuring bulk behavior (albeit empirically) that better explain processing of complex single or multicomponent (batch) systems. An example is shown below in  Attempting to dispense the holding bin in a mass flow regime results in a relatively unchanged particle size distribution, as measured by the weight percent retained on screens for fine material (<106 µm) and coarse material (>600 µm). However, note that when bin refill practices allow dispensing material to levels below the fill height of the cone (i.e., less than 100% of the fill level of the cone), transient effects of particle size distribution variation due to bin fill are evident, as measured by the increased variation of the aforementioned sieve weight percent retained on a coarse screen and the fine fraction collected in the pan. These values of coarse and fine are represented in The aforementioned data shows how we can meet target properties of particle size distribution of a batch and meet target composition of reconstituted batch with measurements in a very bulk scale. However, the time series data for sieve analysis above shows how inattention to transport effects, such as dispensing a holding bin into conditions that foster funnel flow leads to segregation by particle size, thereby causing localized variation of particle size distribution. By definition, segregation in a single component system is by particle size only; for multicomponent systems where discrete batch component particle sizes are present and where local uniformity of components is necessary, inattention to transport properties creates unwanted variation in mixedness (by phase) at whatever the critical length scale of the process is. As seen in Another system’s particle size distribution is shown below in The aforementioned particle size distributions were obtained via a common static light scattering method of particle size measurement, and show little or no differentiation between a set of four powder batches.  Clearly, particle size distribution alone is insufficient to describe the suitability of the powder batch to form a cohesive contiguous ribbon, as shown by the inferior quality of the extrudate shown in the pictures of 3 and especially 4. Additional characterization of the powder batches was performed by a Freeman Technologies’ FT4 powder spindle rheometer (intermediate flow: inertial elastic) coupled with vessel aeration to monitor the energy of fluidization (fluidized flow: inertial collisions). Sample 1 shows a continuous steady-state-specific energy over the available range of aeration flow rates. Sample 2 similarly shows this continuous profile at a lower steady-state-specific flow energy, which correlates with the superior quality of extrudate compared with Sample 1, as seen in the pictures above. Sample 3 showed a truncated-specific energy steady state due to overloading encountered at 75 mm s Sample 4 was a highly fibrillated “ball.” The greater ease of dispersion and lower effective energy for a given aeration flow rate correlates with the better quality of the extrudate produced (hence the better quality of the ribbon produced in “2”).  Differences observed in particle size and surface area is minor, when compared to the large differences observed in the compressibility, which impacts the bulk density during a forming process or in the final product attributes. Moreover, in spite of the higher compressibility of material A, note that material B exhibits a greater rate of densification than material A as evidenced by the larger beta value in the Weibull plot. Another example is shown below in The aforementioned “good” and “bad” lots were observed to exhibit differences in manufacturing with respect to bin discharge, assisted with pneumatic conveyance. The so-called “bad” lot was observed to exhibit the common rat holing defect (last in, first out), whereby the effective storage capacity of the bin for refill and discharge was constricted. Aerodynamic dispersion for static light scattering was used to provide an in-process particle size profile of the two powder lots. Note again that particle size is insufficient to differentiate between the two powder lots. To address the issue of flowability during discharge, a Jenike and Johansen fluidized segregator was utilized to circulate material and determine the quantity collected at stages positioned at various heights in the aeration column (bottom, middle, top, funnel and filter paper atop the funnel). A photograph of the configuration is provided below ( Segregation results are shown in As seen in the bar graph above a high percentage of the so-called “bad” lot is retained in the funnel portion. Photographs are shown below in  The aforementioned set of dynamic characterization techniques are presented with the intent of conveying adjacencies to the aforementioned classical suite (the stock seven techniques described in the introduction) of characterizations performed on granular and powder raw materials. These are intended primarily to convey a nuanced understanding of granular or powder systems and not to convey a supposed “missing link”; indeed a concession of this work is that characterization of particulate materials for materials processing is highly dependent on the application and instances where the three methods discussed above in detail may not be applicable. Conversely, the stock seven techniques described earlier may similarly be parsed to glean useful information from the dynamic characterization techniques relevant to a given application. Numerous other dynamic characterization techniques are available to obtain better understanding of an inorganic/organic batch system. Two examples not discussed above but highly relevant to powder systems include powder vibratory assisted auto agglomeration ( The authors are grateful to Jonas Bankaitis and Sowmya Krishnamurthy from Corning Incorporated’s MT&E and S&T Divisions, respectively for their support and helpful discussions.