Enrichment and migration regularity of coal particles in compound force field provided by Falcon concentrator were studied. Influence of centrifugal force and fluidization water pressure on the distribution rates and ash contents of materials that enriched in overflow, top separation area and bottom separation area were tested respectively. Radial velocity of fluidization water, having an important influence on the sedimentation of particles, was calculated and results show that radial velocity of fluidization water in top groove is greater than that in bottom groove, which contributed to the selectivity and recovery of combustible. Besides, density composition of products in different enrichment areas was studied. Results show that in the upward migration process, particles with high density are gradually captured. Therefore, the material density is gradually reduced from bottom to top separation area. Meanwhile, mismatch phenomena occurred as the existence of heavy particles in overflow, and light particles in the grooves. Based on the morphology analysis, it is can be deduced that particles mismatch is the results of the increase of drag coefficient since the irregular shape.For fine particles, conventional gravity separation technology is inefficient due to low settling velocity of particles. Therefore, enhanced gravity field was introduced into concentrator to strengthen the separation process. Enhanced gravity separator (EGS) has been proved efficient for the beneficiation of fine and ultrafine particles ( Clean process of fine coal represents an application whereby the density differences between coal and minerals are lower than 1 Knelson concentrator can achieve effective separation of coal particles in size of + However, researchers were mostly concerned about the quality of the final product in the above mentioned papers. Although the natures of the overflow product have been analyzed in detail, it is difficult to reveal the law of particle separation. Thus, enrichment and migration regularity of particles in the separation process cannot be revealed. Therefore, separation tests of fine coal samples were carried out to study the mass distribution and ash distribution in overflow, top separation zone and bottom separation zone. The enrichment regularity of particles in different enrichment areas under different operating parameters were analyzed. Therefore, the motion of particles in the separation process could be obtained. A laboratory Falcon concentrator (SB40) was used in this investigation. Mechanical structure of the concentrator is shown in It is clear that there are two zones in the separation area, the top and bottom separation zones. Usually, the materials enriched in the two regions are mixed as the high density product after the completion of separation process. However, the two materials were collected and analyzed respectively in this paper to investigate the enrichment regularity of particles in separation process. Coal sample with ash content of 30.21% was chosen as the test materials. The particle size and density had significant effect on the particle sedimentation. Thus, the size composition and density composition were obtained by screening and float/sink test and the results are shown in As can be seen in Density composition analysis results show the low-density peak (1.3–1.4 In separation zone, including top separation area and bottom separation area, the main factors affecting particle sedimentation are centrifugal force and radial velocity of fluidization water. In this part, outlet flow rate of fluidization water was measured under different fluidization water pressure. The geometric parameters of the separation area of the concentrator were determined, thus, the radial velocity of the fluidization water in the radial direction on top and bottom groove were calculated consequently. The above analysis was based on the assumption that the radial velocity of the fluid was uniformly distributed over the section. The result is helpful to understand the enrichment law of particles in the separation process. There were two grooves in Falcon concentrator, which were called as top groove and bottom groove in the following discussion. Sorting process has been elaborated in Distribution rate was used as evaluation index and determined using the following equations: In the above equation, m The flow of fluidization water in the separation process is composed of the flow in top groove and flow in bottom groove. V is volume of fluidization water; V It should be noted that hole numbers in the top and bottom separation zone is different, which cause the different flow rates and radial velocity of fluid consequently. Numbers of recoil holes in the top groove and bottom groove are n The outlet flow rate was obtained by measuring the mass flow in unit time, and the average values were obtained by the multiple measurement. The structure of the separation zone is shown in In unit time: Thus, In addition, Thus, the relation between the radial velocity of the fluid in the radial direction in the top groove and bottom groove can be obtained and are shown in As shown in Under the comprehensive action of the centrifugal force and the resistance of medium, the particles have been separated efficiently, and the enrichment area of the material with different density and particle size is obviously different. After the separation process, products in overflow, top groove and bottom groove were collected respectively. The mass and ash contents of products were measured. Thus, the mass and minerals regularity can be achieved. The results of quantitative analysis of mass and ash content in overflow are shown in As shown in In order to analyze the separation efficiency, the density composition of the overflow product was analyzed by float/sink analysis and the results is shown in  The movement of particles in the composite force field has the dual characteristics of inevitability and randomness. The inevitability is reflected by the fact that the separation process is driven by density difference in general. The physical phenomenon of this point is the significant reduction in the coal ash that is the reduction of the density. The randomness is reflected in the mismatch of particles, that is, a small number of high-density particles into the overflow. The reason for the existence of high density particles in overflow is that the separation accuracy is affected by various factors. The sorting process is a complex process involving the interaction between the particles and the separation medium, as well as the interaction among particles. Thus, the randomness of the particle movement exists, which cannot be expressed quantitatively because of its complexity. The shape of mismatch particles was analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Quanta™250), and the elemental distribution was analyzed by electron spectroscopy (Bruker QUANTAX400-10).  Material in the underflow is divided into top groove and bottom groove. The results of quantitative analysis of mass and ash content in top groove shown in As shown in The density composition of products in top groove was also tested and the results is shown in Compared with Similarly, distribution rates and ash content of materials in bottom groove is shown in  It should note that the distribution rates of particles in bottom and overflow are greater than that in top groove, the main reason is the radial velocity in top groove is greater than that in bottom groove, which causes the particle is difficult to be captured. The top groove is the second separation zone to achieve the secondary separation process. Its role is to capture the high-density particles that is not captured in bottom groove, the radial velocity is high so that only the high-density particles will be captured, which helps to improve the selectivity and improve the recovery rate of the combustible. As shown in In order to compare the density difference between the three kinds of products, the density composition of the products was compared. The distribution rate of each density level of products in overflow, top groove and bottom groove is described and the result is shown in More explicit description is presented in By comprehensive comparison of Enhanced gravity concentrators that employ centrifugal force to enhance the settling rate of fine particles have been proved to be an effective equipment to upgrade the fine mineral particles. Unlike previous studies, which only concern the final separation product, this paper mainly focuses on the enrichment and migration of the particle group in the separation process. The radial velocity of fluid is calculated by measuring the outlet flow and geometric size of separation zone. Results show that radial velocity of fluidization water gradually increases along the radial direction. In addition, the radial velocity in top groove is greater than that in bottom in the same radial position. The radial velocity difference is helpful to improve the selectivity of the separation process and improve the recovery rate of the combustible. Separation tests of coal samples were carried out, products in overflow, top groove and bottom groove were collected. The influence of centrifugal force and fluidization water pressure on the distribution and ash content difference were described. The enrichment area and migration rule of the particle can be obtained. Separation results show that the influence of operating parameters on the distribution rates and ash content of the material is obvious. Ash content in the bottom groove is greater than that in top groove that is larger than that in overflow. The separation process can be illustrated as follows: material enters into the bottom groove is separated for the first time. The high density material is preferentially concentrated under the combined action of the centrifugal force and the fluidization water resistance. Lower density materials enter into the top groove to be cleaned for the second time, high density material enriches in the top groove. Low density material goes to the overflow, clean coal is obtained and the separation is completed. The density of the products in overflow, top and bottom groove were tested respectively. Density analysis results show that product in overflow is mainly consists of low density materials. Materials in top and bottom grooves mainly consist of medium density and high density materials. Furthermore, the randomness of separation is proved by the existence of heavy particles in overflow, and the existence of light particles in grooves. This phenomenon shows that although the overall movement of the particle group has an obvious regularity, the movement of the particles has significant randomness for single particle. The shape of mismatch particles was analyzed. The results show that the particle shape is irregular and the ratio of length and width is greater than 2, which increases the settling resistance of the high density particles and causes the particles to enter the overflow. This work is supported financially by the