To study the effects of ethylene oxide (EO) number in surfactants on low rank coal (LRC) flotation, dodecyl ethoxyl ethers (C12EOn) with three different EO numbers were selected and their adsorption and flotation behaviors were experimentally investigated. The results show that all C12EOn can obtain the same maximum flotation recovery. Increasing the number of EO in C12EOn lowers the necessary amount of reagent. Greater selectivity can be achieved with increasing EO number in C12EOn. Furthermore, the surface model of LRC (organic matter) and kaolinite (representative of mineral matter) was constructed, and the adsorption behavior of C12EOn on the LRC surface was analyzed based on the adsorption configuration, interaction energy, hydrogen bond interaction and surface areas. The calculated results show that increasing the EO number in C12EOn could accelerate the interaction between LRC and C12EOn at low surfactant concentrations. Since the same chemical structure of C12EOn, increasing the EO number does not make any significant difference in their interaction when the surfactant concentration is high. A combined theoretical approach [density functional theory (DFT) calculations and molecular dynamics simulations (MD)] was adopted to investigate the microscopic mechanism of the increase in LRC hydrophobicity by C12EOn adsorption. Finally, the competitive adsorption of C12EOn between organic matter and kaolinite was studied. The research results indicate that the selectivity is higher with increasing EO number in C12EOn, which is consistent with the experimental results. The microscopic mechanism of EO groups in surfactants on LRC flotation discussed in this study may have potential use in surfactant design and selection.Flotation is an effective method for fine mineral separation upon the wetting ability differences between the valuable constituent and the worthless gangue in aqueous solutions [ Surfactant adsorption from aqueous solutions is often used for surface modification to alter the properties of a solid surface. Over the last few years, various studies have been conducted regarding surfactant adsorption at the solid-solution interface and the effect of surfactants on the flotation of LRC [ Recently, molecular simulations have been widely used to investigate the dynamic and structural behaviors in many processes [ In this work, we investigate the effects of EO groups in surfactant on its floatability improvement of LRC. First, C Wangping coal (from the Datong Coal Field, China) was used in this study. The coal samples were crushed and screened to −200 μm. The proximate and ultimate analyses of the coal are given in All batch adsorption experiments were performed in flasks containing 30.00 g of adsorbent and 1000 mL of the surfactant solution of known concentration and were shaken in a constant temperature (298 K) water bath. The adsorption experiments were conducted at their natural pH for 120 min. For studies of pH effects on the ash content, surfactant solutions were adjusted over a pH range of 2–10 by adding 0.1 mol/L NaOH or 0.1 mol/L HCl into the solutions. The experiments were done at least three times in parallel. After each adsorption experiment, the surfactant solutions were isolated by centrifugation. The surfactant analyses for C Flotation tests of LRC treated with different initial surfactant concentrations were completed in an XFG flotation machine with 140 mL of cell with pulp density at 16%. The impeller speed of the flotation machine was 1800 rpm, and the airflow rate was 0.2 L/min. The dosage of the kerosene collector was 1500 g/t, and octanol was used as the frother with a dosage of 100 g/t. The temperature during experimentation was 298 K, and distilled water was used in all flotation tests. The concentrate and tailing samples were filtered, dried, weighed and combusted for ash determination. The DFT calculations used DMol The MD simulations could model relatively large systems consisting of hundreds of atoms such as mineral–reagent systems. The polymer consistent force field (PCFF) was specially designed for covalent organic matter and provided reliable parameters for hydrocarbon chains [ The MD simulations were performed in the Forcite module using Materials Studio 6.0. The previously proposed molecular structure of Wender coal [ The crystal unit-cell of kaolinite was imported to the work project. The crystal parameters of kaolinite are a = 5.15 Å, b = 8.93 Å, c = 7.38 Å, α = 91.93°, β = 105.04° and γ = 89.79°. Smart minimizer as implemented was used for the geometric optimization. Following the optimization of the unit cell, a supercell mode of kaolinite (12 × 8 × 2) was chosen with a periodic boundary condition. The (001) plane of kaolinite [ The above molecular dynamics simulations were performed using the Nosé–Hoover thermostat and volume-temperature (NVT) ensemble with a 1 fs time step. Next, 1000 ps simulations were conducted to interact fully with each other. The Ewald method with a precision of 0.00 1 kcal/mol was used for electrostatic interactions, and the Van der Waals interaction was calculated under the atom-based option with a cutoff of 12.5 Å. The output files were analyzed and discussed. The interaction energy was calculated after the simulation. The associated energies can be expressed by Eqs. As The flotation behavior of the treated LRC was studied. The improvement of LRC floatability is to increase its hydrophobicity. In this section, we attempt to analyze the adsorption behavior of C The model (  For nonionic surfactants, their interactions with the oxygenated LRC surface parts can be adsorbed by hydrogen bonds [ In addition, the microscopic valleys of the LRC surface could be effectively covered by surfactant adsorption to reduce its hydrophilicity. To form a quantitative view of the surface roughness, a probe radius of 1.4 Å is used to calculate the accessible surface area of all systems in MD simulations [ From the above analyses, we know that C Three representative model molecules with different polarities in LRC, namely, benzoic acid, phenol and methylbenzene, were selected to analyze the interactions with water molecules. The interaction energy, △E, is defined as the difference between the energy of the complex and the sum of the energies of the monomers constituting it. The interaction energy can be calculated by the following equation: The model ( An effective surfactant is required to improve the flotation recovery at a lower increase in ash content. As shown in Unlike organic surfaces with a peak-and-valley structure, the kaolinite surface is smooth. In order to save calculation time, the simulation protocol involved placing only one C The calculated interaction energy results are shown in The effects of solution pH on adsorption of surfactants on solids are widely used to demonstrate if the electrostatic interaction is the driving force [ As shown in In this work, dodecyl ethoxyl ethers (C The authors acknowledge the financial support from the