As the osteocyte progenitor cell on the bone surface differentiates into an early osteocyte, a unique process occurs, that of mineralization. During this time the cell has undergone a dramatic change in shape and gene expression. Genes/proteins thought to be important in the change from a cuboidal to a dendritic morphology include E11/gp38, cdc42, destrin, CapG, and others. Genes important in the mineralization process include Pex and Dmp1 as deletion or mutation in either of these genes results in hypophosphatemic rickets due to an elevation of FGF23 in osteocytes. Whereas E11/gp38 is a marker for the early osteocyte, Hormonal regulation as through PTH and mechanosensation/transduction provides a means to release this “brake” to bone formation by down regulating sclerostin and Dkk1 expression. Early responses to mechanical loading include calcium signaling within seconds, followed by nitric oxide, ATP production, and prostaglandin release soon thereafter. All four of these small molecules are essential for an anabolic response of bone to loading. Prostaglandin signals through multiple pathways including the Wnt pathway. Signaling through the prostaglandin/Wnt pathway appears to be responsible for gap junction function, for the maintenance of osteocyte viability and resistance to apoptotic factors, and potentially for the down regulation of Wnt pathway inhibitors in response to mechanical loading. Whereas key molecular pathways have been identified in osteocytes regarding phosphate homeostasis and mechanical loading, little is known as to how osteocytes recruit osteoclasts or regulate calcium metabolism. RANKL and M-CSF are most likely involved in osteocyte recruitment and activation of osteoclasts, but at this time, little is known regarding how osteocytes can remove and replace their perilacunar matrix during lactation or in response to hormones. The molecular biology of the osteocyte has become a new frontier for bone research. The author and colleagues' work is supported by NIH NIAMS P01 AR046798.