Longwall mining has a significant influence on gas wells located within longwall chain pillars. Subsurface subsidence and abutment pressure induced by longwall mining can cause excessive stresses and deformations in gas well casings. If the gas well casings are compromised or ruptured, natural gas could migrate into the mine workings, potentially causing a fire or explosion. By the current safety regulations, the gas wells in the chain pillars have to be either plugged or protected by adequate coal pillars. The current regulations for gas well pillar design are based on the 1957 Pennsylvania gas well pillar study. The study provided guidelines for gas well pillars by considering their support area and overburden depth as well as the location of the gas wells within the pillars. As the guidelines were developed for room-and-pillar mining under shallow cover, they are no longer applicable to modern longwall coal mining, particularly, under deep cover. Gas well casing of failures have occurred even though the chain pillars for the gas wells met the requirements by the 1957 study. This study, conducted by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), presents seven cases of conventional gas wells penetrating through longwall chain pillars in the Pittsburgh Coal Seam. The study results indicate that overburden depth and pillar size are not the only determining factors for gas well stability. The other important factors include subsurface ground movement, overburden geology, weak floor, as well as the type of the construction of gas wells. Numerical modeling was used to model abutment pressure, subsurface deformations, and the response of gas well casings. The study demonstrated that numerical models are able to predict with reasonable accuracy the subsurface deformations in the overburden above, within, and below the chain pillars, and the potential location and modes of gas well failures, thereby providing a more quantifiable approach to assess the stability of the gas wells in longwall chain pillars.In the eastern United States, abundant gas wells have been drilled through coal seams that are being actively mined by longwall mining. The existence of gas wells in the U.S. coal fields, whether active or abandoned, has caused many issues for longwall mining. First of all, any gas well in the mining area has to be located by all possible means. Secondly, the gas wells within longwall panels have to be plugged as cutting through gas wells will allow natural gas to flow into the active longwall mines. On the other hand, the gas wells within longwall chain pillars or barrier pillars can be left in place if the wells are protected by properly designed pillars. Gas wells located within longwall chain pillars are influenced by longwall mining. Subsurface subsidence and abutment pressure can induce significant stresses and deformations in gas well casings. If the gas well casings are compromised or ruptured by excessive stresses and deformations, natural gas could migrate into the mine workings, potentially causing a fire or explosion. By the current safety regulations, the gas wells in the chain pillars have to be either plugged or protected by adequate coal pillars. The current regulations for gas wells in longwall chain pillars are based on the 1957 Pennsylvania Gas Well Pillar Study Few studies have been conducted on gas well coal pillars. Peng et al. published the first gas well pillar study for longwall mining More recent studies were conducted by Scovazzo et al. The study described in this paper presented seven cases of conventional gas wells that were situated within chain pillars in the Pittsburgh Coal Seam. FLAC3D modeling was used to model the abutment pressure, subsurface deformations, and the performance of the gas well casings for one of the cases with gas well damage. The study demonstrated that numerical models are able to predict with reasonable accuracy the subsurface deformations in the overburden above, within, and below the chain pillars, and the potential location and modes of gas well failures, thereby providing a more quantifiable approach to assess the stability of the gas wells in longwall chain pillars. Seven cases of gas wells located in longwall chain pillars have been collected in this study as shown in Of the seven cases, damage was found in two gas wells, and the other five wells were mined without safety issues. One gas well damage occurred 4.6 m below the coal seam after the second panel was mined as described by Luo et al., and another gas well damage occurred one foot below the coal seam also after the second panel was mined For the first damaged well case, the total gate-entry pillar width was 61 m center-to-center, with the gas well situated 16 m from the gob-side rib in the large 37 m center-to-center pillar. NIOSH researchers have developed a standardized procedure to model longwall-induced stresses and strata movements around the longwall panels using the FLAC3D modeling software Using this procedure, a FLAC3D model was constructed for the gas well damaged 4.6 m below the coal seam based on the geological and mining conditions near the gas well. The model, which simulates a 3-m-thick slice across the width of the longwall panels, includes detailed inputs of the gas well installation and the sequence of the longwall retreating. To model the effect of two longwall panels on the subsurface movements at the gas wells, the actual sequence of longwall mining and gas well installation are simulated. The gas well is installed before the first and the second panels are retreated.     Longwall-induced subsurface movements transfer deformations to the gas well casings through back-filled cement. As the modulus of steel is high, a small amount of subsurface movement will induce high stresses in the casings. In response to subsurface movements, the casings are likely to experience vertical compression or tension, horizontal compression, bending, and shear. To evaluate the effects of ground movements on the stability of gas well casings, the construction of the casing and sequence of gas well installation have to be modeled. In this case, two casings are modeled as they were actually installed in the field. The annuli between the inner casing and the outer casing and between the outer casing and the surrounding rock are filled with cement fillings. Vertical stress in the casings can be induced by differential vertical movement in the subsurface as well as by the weight of the casings. Differential horizontal movements along bedding planes in the subsurface induce shear stress in the casings. Under the influence of subsurface movements and induced stresses in the casings, the stability of the steel casings can be assessed by the von Mises failure criterion. The von Mises equivalent stress can be calculated in FLAC3D using the following equation:  The stability of the gas wells in longwall chain pillars is influenced by the stability of the pillars themselves, as well as the location of the wells within the pillars, the stability of the floor, overburden geology, and the construction of the gas wells. To assess the stability of the gas wells in chain pillars, it is important to identify where gas well failures could occur in the overburden as well as within and below the coal seams. As gas well failures are very uncommon, the multiple failure cases from the PA 1957 gas well pillar study provide valuable data for the stability analyses of gas wells through coal seams Stable pillars are a primary requirement for the protection of gas wells in chain pillars. If pillars fail, large deformations can be induced in gas well casings, likely resulting in the casing buckling. When pillars are stable, the location of the gas wells within the pillars has a great influence on the stability of the gas wells. If a well is close to the pillar rib, it could be in the yield zone of the pillar, potentially subject to large compressive strain in the casings. Furthermore, the distance of the wells from the edge of the gob determines how much abutment pressure is applied to the rock surrounding the wells, which subsequently affects the deformations and induced stresses in the gas well casings. It is not a good practice to place the wells within 6–15 m from the gob edge because the wells are very likely to be in a location near peak abutment pressure.  Gas well failures in the roof and overburden are largely associated with rock type and stratification, especially bedding planes between weak and massive, strong rock layers. Weak claystone layers and massive, strong sandstone/limestone layers have a major influence on horizontal displacement in the overburden over chain pillars. Large deformations can occur at weak claystone layers due to their low modulus and low friction along the interface with stronger, stiffer rocks. Gas well failure in the floor is clearly associated with the presence of weak claystone in the floor, which is common in the Pittsburgh Coal Seam. In fact, some claystone layers in the Pittsburgh Coal Seam are very weak and sensitive to moisture. A claystone floor can induce not only vertical stress but also shear stress in gas well casings as shown in the modeled case. The induced vertical stress in the casings is associated with vertical compression of the weak rock layers, and the induced shear stress is related to horizontal shear displacement along the weak claystone layers in the floor. Gas well failure in the floor can occur under different overburden depths, depending on the amount of abutment pressure at the gas well and the strength and thickness of the floor as well as presence of water in the floor. As implied by the two damaged cases in the chain pillars, the gas well failure in the floor is a major concern under deep cover if claystone floor is present. Therefore, in evaluating the stability of the gas wells in chain pillars, floor stability should be assessed in addition to pillar stability and overburden horizontal movements. Under the influence of abutment pressure and subsurface deformations, gas wells are likely to be subject to vertical compression, horizontal compression, and horizontal shear. The potential modes of failure for gas wells penetrating through coal seams are most likely to be buckling failure under vertical or horizontal pressure and shear failure along interfaces between weak and strong layers. The failure cases and numerical modeling of the damaged gas well demonstrate that, under deep cover, the location with the highest potential for failure is in the floor near the coal seam horizon. Past failure cases and field measurements of horizontal ground movements over chain pillars suggest that gas well shear failures could occur in the overburden above coal seams under shallow cover. To assess the stability of the gas wells in chain pillars, it is important to quantify subsurface movements and their effect on gas well casings. This study shows that the standardized numerical modeling approach developed by NIOSH for longwall mining is an effective way to quantify subsurface deformations and induced stresses in gas well casings by taking into consideration geological and mining factors as well as the parameters of gas well construction. The sequence of longwall mining and gas well construction are important and should be incorporated into the numerical model. The stability of the gas wells can be evaluated by the numerically calculated von Mises stress in the casings. Based on the analysis of gas well failure cases and numerical modeling of gas well stability in longwall chain pillars, the following conclusions are made: The stability of gas wells in chain pillars are influenced by the pillar stability factor, overburden depth, gas well location, weak floor, overburden geology, and construction of gas wells. Longwall mining induces subsurface movements including vertical, horizontal, and shear at gas wells located within chain pillars. These movements, in turn, induce vertical, horizontal, and shear stresses in gas well casings. Buckling and shear failure of casings may occur under excessive stresses and deformations. For gas wells in chain pillars, potential failure could be buckling failure in the weak claystone floor under large overburden depth or shear failure along a weak claystone layer in the overburden above the coal seam under shallow overburden depth. The standardized numerical modeling approach developed by NIOSH is an effective way to quantify subsurface deformations and induced stresses in gas well casings by taking into consideration the geological and mining factors as well as the parameters of gas well construction. Induced von Mises stress in gas well casings can be used to assess the stability of gas wells in chain pillars. The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the official position of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Mention of any company or product does not constitute endorsement by NIOSH.