Fe based amorphous alloys with high boron and gadolinium contents have been developed through a systematic alloy design technique for neutron shielding applications. Amorphous ribbons with the Gd content up to 10at.% were prepared by a melt-spinning method and used as reinforcements within polyester matrix and concrete matrix, respectively. Excellent neutron shielding efficiency about 75% was obtained from the polyester hexahedron composites (5cm×5cm×1cm) including only 1vol% ribbon with the composition of Fe72B15Mo3Gd10. Moreover, a concrete composite (φ 10cm×5cm thick) in which the amorphous ribbons with the composition of Fe72B24.5Mo3Gd0.5 were uniformly distributed exhibited neutron shielding efficiency of around 86% demonstrating the applicability of amorphous ribbons as reinforcements in various composites for neutron shielding facility constructions.As global warming issues become serious, the electric production using nuclear power is considered to reduce the consumption of fossil fuel for the electric production. However, nuclear power plant inevitably arises issues on the safe and economic storage of spent nuclear fuel ( In Fe-based crystalline alloys, the solubility of B and Gd is very limited and thus, excess B or Gd forms intermetallic compound(s) deteriorating corrosion resistance and ductility of the alloys ( As an alternative application example of Fe-based amorphous alloys with relatively low GFA, Fe-based amorphous ribbons with high corrosion resistance, strength and flexibility attributed to the amorphous nature of the ribbons have been attracted. Fe-based amorphous ribbons with the nominal composition of (Fe, Cr) In this study, Fe-based amorphous ribbons with high B and Gd have been fabricated through a melt spinning process. The ribbons can be applied as reinforcements of various composites to enhance neutron shielding efficiency. Moreover, when the ribbon reinforcements with flexibility, i.e., ductility are added to brittle composites such as concrete, facture toughness of the concrete can be increased with enhanced neutron shielding efficiency. Effects of B and Gd contents on the neutron shielding efficiency, corrosion resistance and mechanical properties have been discussed. The Fe-based amorphous alloys with high B and Gd contents can be used for thermal neutron shielding applications in various types. Master alloys (20 The phases in the ribbons were identified by X-ray diffraction (D/Max-2500, Rigaku) using CuKα radiation. Thermal properties of each amorphous ribbon were analyzed by The simultaneous TGA/DSC (SDT) (Q600, TA Instruments) at the heating rate of 10 The tensile strength of each alloy ribbon was measured by a universal testing machine (Instron 4482, Instron) operating at a speed of 1.04 Electrochemical properties of the ribbons were evaluated using a potentiostat (Parstat 2273, Princeton Applied Research) at a scan rate of 1 Thermal neutrons were produced by a polyethylene moderator with dimensions of 20   Due to the amorphous structure in which no slip system can be activated ( To increase corrosion resistance of the ribbon containing Gd, optimum amounts of Cr should be added to the Fe-B-Mo-Gd ribbons ( Thermal neutron shielding efficiency of each specimen was listed in To demonstrate the applicability of the amorphous ribbons as reinforcements within concrete that is a conventional neutron shielding material ( Through a systematic alloy design technique, Fe based amorphous ribbons have been developed in the alloy system Fe-B-Mo-Gd for neutron shielding applications. Due to the amorphous phase formation within ribbons, large amounts of B (∼25 at.%) and Gd (∼10 at.%) could be alloyed without forming intermetallic compounds deteriorating mechanical and corrosion resistance. Also, to enhance corrosion resistance, large parts of Fe could be replaced by Cr maintaining amorphous structure and thus, high corrosion resistance could be obtained. Amorphous ribbons could be used as reinforcements within polyester matrix and concrete, respectively. The polyester hexahedron composite (5 This research was supported by a grant (