Metal–matrix composites (MMCs), as light and strong materials, are very attractive for application in different industries. In the present work, nano and micro-composites (A356/Al2O3) with different weight percent of particles were fabricated by two melt techniques such as stir-casting and compo-casting. Microstructural characterization was investigated by optical (OP) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Tensile, hardness and compression tests were carried out in order to identify mechanical properties of the composites. The results of microstructural study revealed uniform distribution, grain refinement and low porosity in micro and nano-composite specimens. The mechanical results showed that the addition of alumina (micro and nano) led to the improvement in yield strength, ultimate tensile strength, compression strength and hardness. It was indicated that type of fabrication process and particle size were the effective factors influencing on the mechanical properties. Decreasing alumina particle size and using compo-casting process obtained the best mechanical properties.Metal–matrix composites (MMCs) are most promising in achieving enhanced mechanical properties such as: hardness, Young’s modulus, 0.2% yield strength and ultimate tensile strength due to the presence of nano and micro-sized reinforcement particles into the matrix. Generally, regards to the mechanical properties, the reinforcements result in higher strength and hardness, often at the expense of some ductility Aluminum-matrix composites (AMCs) reinforced with particles and whiskers are widely used for high performance applications such as in automotive, military, aerospace and electricity industries because of their improved physical and mechanical properties A356 aluminum alloy is a very commonly Si-containing Al-alloy used as the matrix in MMCs. It is characterized by: low cost, ease of handling, good strength and ductility and resistance to atmospheric corrosion. Hard particles such as Al Mechanical properties of composites such as strength and ductility may be improved, simultaneously if the dispersed particles are of nano-size. The enhancement of mechanical properties in the novel nano-particle reinforced MMCs has been reviewed recently In addition, the mechanical properties of MMCs are sensitive to the processing technique used to fabricate the materials. Considerable improvements may be achieved by applying science-based modeling techniques to optimize the processing procedure. Several techniques have been employed to prepare the composites including powder metallurgy, melt techniques and squeeze casting There are two types of melting methods to fabricate composites, depending on the temperature at which the particles are introduced into the melt. In the liquid metallurgy process, the particles are incorporated above the liquid temperature of the molten alloy, while in compo-casting method the particles are incorporated at the semi-solid slurry temperature of the alloy. In the both processes, the vortex occurs and the composites have high porosity. However, the melting process has two major problems firstly, the ceramic particles are generally not wetted by the liquid metal matrix, and secondly, the particles tend to sink or float according to their density relative to the liquid metal. Consequently, the dispersion of the ceramic particles is not uniform. In order to decrease the porosity in the composite material, the pressure casting such as die and squeeze casting methods is needed Although powder metallurgy produces better mechanical properties in MMCs, melt processing has some important advantages. They are as: better matrix-particle bonding, easier control of matrix structure, simplicity, low cost of processing, nearer net shape and the wide selection of materials Investigation of mechanical behavior of aluminum alloys reinforced by nano and micro hard particles such as Al In the current research, A356 alloy and particulate alumina powder with size of 50 Composite specimens were manufactured by compo- and stir-casting methods using mechanical mixing of the molten alloy. Micro and nano-particles were injected into the melt by argon gas in a graphite crucible inserted in a resistance heating furnace. The magnitude of alumina powder injected into the composites were chosen 1, 3, 5 and 7.5 To study the microstructure of the specimens they were cut by an automatic cutter device. The specimen surfaces were prepared by grinding through 600 and 1200 grit papers and then by polishing with 3 The porosity volume percent of the composites was determined by comparing the measured density with that of their theoretical density. The Brinell hardness values of the samples were measured on the polished samples using a ball with 2.5 To investigate the mechanical behavior of the composites the tensile and compression tests were carried out using Zwick 760 testing machine according to ASTM.B 557 and ASTM E9-89a, respectively. The crosshead speed was set at 3 Fabrication of metal–matrix composites with alumina particles by casting processes is usually difficult because of the very low wettability of alumina particles and agglomeration phenomena which results in non-uniform distribution and weak mechanical properties. In the current work, A356 aluminum alloy matrix composites with micro and nano-size alumina particles were produced by two casting methods (stir- and compo-casing). The chemical composition of A356 aluminum alloy is shown in The porosity content of micro and nano-composites is shown in The stress–strain curves of the nanocomposites are shown in To investigate the strengthening effects of nano and micro-particles on the hardness, tensile and compression properties of the composites such as yield and ultimate strength a model has been proposed which is summarized as bellows The shear transfer of load from the soft matrix to the hard ceramic nano or micro reinforcements during tensile and indentation tests, especially when there is a good interfacial integrity between the two phases, is called the load bearing effect, The contribution of grain refinement to the strength levels could be discussed on the basis of the classical Hall–Petch equation The interaction of dislocations with the non-shear-able nanoparticles increases the strength of composite samples according to the Orowan mechanism. Due to the presence of the dispersed nano-sized particles in the matrix, dislocation loops form when dislocations pass the particles. The difference between the coefficient thermal expansion (CTE) values of reinforcement (Al  The great enhancement in the values observed in the composites in comparison to the base aluminum is due to grain refinement according to the Hall–Petch theory ( The type of used processes for fabrication of composite in this research (stir- and compo-casting) is an effective factor on the mechanical properties of the composites. The results of the porosity and microstructure study show that the porosity volume percent and grain size in compo-casting is lower than those in stir process because of good wettability of particles in compo-casting ( Moreover, the particle size is one of the important factors in strengthening mechanism. Nano-particles play an important role in the high strength, hardness and ductility of the composites in comparison to micro-particles because of the good interface between nano-particles and matrix  The influence of nano and micro particle content on the hardness is depicted in The strength (yield and ultimate) and the hardness also increase with increase in the reinforcement content. However, according to the results of this research, quite significant improvement in strength and hardness is noted when 3 The compression stress–strain curves of the composites are shown in According to the results obtained from The results presented in In the current research, micro- and nano-composites were fabricated using stir- and compo-casting processes and effects of different fabrication parameters on microstructure and mechanical properties were investigated. The following results were obtained: The SEM micrographs show good distribution of particles and very low agglomeration of alumina produced by compo-casting method. The stress–strain curves show that the yield strength and tensile strength increase while fracture strain decreases with increasing nano-particle content. The yield, ultimate and compression strength of the composite increase with increasing Al The type of used processes for fabrication of composites in this research (stir- and compo-casting) was an effective factor on the mechanical properties. The porosity and microstructure results showed that the porosity percent and grain size in compo-casting was lower than stir-casting process because wettability of particles in compo-casting was better than stir-casting process. Increasing of hardness with increasing weight percent of nano and micro-particles is mainly due to grain refinement and particle strengthening effects. The significant improvement in strength and hardness is noted when 3 Ductility increased with decreasing particle size and particle percent. Also, ductility of compo-casting was greater than stir-casting samples. The authors wish to express appreciation to