Sesame oil is one of the most valuable oil due to its bioactive properties, unique taste, odor, and flavor. Therefore, consumers tend to consume and willing to pay a higher price for sesame oil due to increasing awareness of consuming healthier and better food. However, sesame oil is subjected to adulteration risks with lower price vegetable oils which impairs consumer rights and human health. In this study, we purposed an ATR-FTIR based method for the rapid detection of food adulteration in sesame oil. For this purpose, sesame oil was adulterated with hazelnut, canola, and sun flower oils in different concentrations ranged from 1 to 50%. Cluster analysis of FTIR spectra was performed for differentiation and classification of pure sesame oil from adultured vegetable oil samples. In addition, a calibration curve was obtained to determine relationship between actual adulterant concentration and FTIR predicted concentrations using partial least square (PLS) method for each oil samples. According to these results, it could be concluded that ATR-FTIR technique has a potential for adulteration of sesame oil as a non-destructive, rapid, and effective alternative method.Vegetable oils have replaced animal fats as the major source of dietary fat in recent years. The reason of change in consumer demands is due to the both pleasant flavour, nutritional, and health benefits. Because of expanding of vegetable oil market, adulteration of valuable edible oils has become an important issue in terms of customer rights, unfair competition, and human health. High price oil adulteration with low price oil, edible oil adulteration with non-edible oil, and qualified vegetable oil adulteration with waste cooking oil are among the widely used adulteration methods ( Sesame oil is an edible vegetable oil derived from sesame (Sesamum indicum) seeds. It provides many health benefits because of including various nutrients such as polyunsaturated fatty acids, sesamin, sesamolin, sesamol, tocopherols, and inorganic elements ( Different methods such as capillary Electrophoresis-Single Strand Conformation Polymorphism method based on Polymerase chain reaction technology ( In the present study, potency of Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) in terms of detection of sesame oil adulteration was examined. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy has been widely used in researches related with foods for over 15 years. It has become an authoritative analytical tool in the study of edible oils and fats. It is a rapid and non-destructive technique and needs minimum sample preparation with attenuated total reflection (ATR) apparatus ( The aim of this study was to develop a FTIR spectroscopic technique as an alternative method for the determination of sesame oil adulteration with various vegetable oils (sunflower oil, canola oil, hazelnut oil). This study was made by using attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared (ATR–FTIR) spectra combined with chemometrics. Sesame oil was produced by cold pressed technique and three different edible refined vegetable oils including sunflower, hazelnut and canola oils were purchased from the local market in Istanbul, Turkey. Cold pressing operation was conducted at industrial scale by Neva Food LLC, Istanbul Turkey. After cold pressing process, oil and meal-oily cake were collected and the oil was immediately filtered to remove coarse materials. Thirty six (36) adulterated sesame oil samples were prepared by mixing sesame oil and the vegetable oils at the ratios of 1%, 2%, 4%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 25%, 30%, 35%, 40%, 45% and 50%. The adulterated samples were prepared by mixing sesame oil with the required amount of the other vegetable oils for vortexing 3 min at room temperature. Fatty acid compositions of oil samples were determined with gas chromatography coupled with flame ionization detector (GC-FID) (Agilent 6890). 100 mg of oil samples were saponified with 100 μL 2 mol/L KOH and mixed with 3 ml hexane. The mixture was shaken for 1 min with a vortex and centrifuged 2516 A Bruker Tensor 27 spectrometer (Bremen-Germany) equipped with ATR accessory with a diamond crystal module were used in this study. The detector was a DLaTGS detector with a KBr beamsplitter. OPUS program Version 7.2 for Windows from Bruker Gmbh was used for instrument control and data acquisition. Infrared spectra were recorded in the wavelength ranged from 3800 to 600 cm FTIR spectra data are combined with suitable multivariate methods such as principal component analysis and cluster analysis in order to investigate differentiation of the tested vegetable oil samples depending on their FTIR spectra characteristics. OPUS Software (Version 7.2, Bruker, Germany) was used for hierarchical cluster analysis. ATR–FTIR spectra of all oil samples were evaluated using cluster analysis to distinguish the pure oil samples from adulterated oil ones. In order to successfully carry out cluster analysis, obtained spectra was derivatized to first order with 9 smoothing points and vector-normalized. Spectral range used for clustering were optimized based on the most successful separation of sesame oil was achieved. Spectral range (1267–1209 cm In addition, calibration curves were also drawn for each oil used for adulteration purposes in this study. Quant method (standard method OPUS 7.2) using partial least square fit method was performed to correlate actual percentage of added adulterant vegetable oil to sesame oil and FTIR predicted percentage. Whole spectral range were used for obtain calibration curve. The equation established for the determination of relation between actual and predicted values was also determined using OPUS 7.2 software. All measurements related to fatty acid composition were carried out in triplicate and the results were reported as mean ± standard deviation. Mean comparison were performed by Tukey’s test (P < 0.05). Statistics (17.0) (SPSS Statistics 17.0, Armonk, NY, USA) was used to performed an ANOVA to show significient differences between fatty acid compositions (p < 0.05). FTIR spectra of the pure sesame oil and other vegetable oils (hazelnut, canola, and sunflower oils) used for adulteration purposes are presented in Sunflower, hazelnut and canola oils were added to sesame oil in different concentrations (from 1% to 50%) for adulteration purposes. FTIR spectra of the tested vegetable oils were used to classify the oil samples, depending on the functional group absorbance diversity resulting in variation in the spectral change. Prior to classification the spectral data, they were derivatized into first order or normalized for pre-processing. Different spectral ranges were used for the classification in order to achieve the most successful discrimination. Euclidean distance and single linkage method was performed for the classification. Dendrogram formed for the classification of the sesame oils, adulterated sesame oils with hazelnut, canola and sunflower oil and pure oils is shown in Hazelnut, canola and sunflower oil concentration predicted using FTIR versus real one is shown in Adulteration of valuable oils with valueless ones is a crucial problem of the food industry. FTIR could be used for determination of adulteration level of different oils in sesame oil. In the present study, sesame oil might be separated from the pure hazelnut, canola, sunflower oils, and adulterated sesame oils. During clustering, selection of wavenumber ranges be used as a fingerprint is very important for accomplished separation. According to the finding of this study, it could be concluded that FTIR might be used as a non-destructive, rapid, effective, less time-consuming, inexpensive and rapid alternative tool for determination of adulteration level of sesame oils.