The feldspar mineral has been ground using a planetary ball mill with a stainless steel ball and bowl. During grinding, the ground sample gets contaminated with Fe from ball and bowl wall, the same as the amorphization and agglomeration of fine particles that increase as grinding time progresses. The effect of sintering is carried out in the recrystallization and consolidation of the mechanical activation of anorthoclase feldspar to transform albite and anorthite, and iron to hematite in the glazed matrix.Feldspars consist essentially of aluminum silicates combined with varying percentages of potassium, sodium and calcium. The general formula is XAl Flotation process to remove igneous rocks and iron mineral specimen. Feldspar from sand is recovered by washing with water and wet gravimetric concentration, using a different-size screen and the products are then dried The main purpose of this work is to provide information on mechanical activation of anorthoclase feldspar by means of sintering process. The sample applied in this research is bearing feldspar mineral from Ahuazotepec, Hidalgo State, Mexico. According to the determination of X-ray diffraction, the main peak of the sample’s pattern identifies the anorthoclase [(Na, K)AlSi The first stage of the experimental procedure in this work indicates that the anorthoclase feldspar was dried in an oven 393 The methodology used for characterization of anorthoclase feldspar, a ground sample and sinter product was done by using a Philips X-ray diffractometer equipment (XRD) for identifying the mineral specimen and the current phases. The specific surface area of the anorthoclase feldspar and ground products was determined by the BET method (Absorption of benzene vapor). To determine the chemical composition of SiO     On the other hand, the early grinding time can be observed in the curve of SSA, in which a maximum value of surface area is obtained; later, it has a tendency to decrease in value as seen in the curve. This behavior has a tendency to reduce particle size, agglomerate and amorphous particles that occur at progressive grinding time. Hence, the sintered products were transformed for the phases of albite and anorthite in samples with early grinding time. However, when increasing the amount of amorphous phase, the crystalline structure begins to decrease, consequently the glassy matrix is increasing as a function of grinding time as shown in the sample ground for 120   The experimental results of this study are summarized as follows: The specific surface area of the anorthoclase feldspar in early grinding time reaches about 11.9 The anorthoclase feldspar transformation to anorthite and albite in the glazed matrix was carried out with samples which had been ground for 15–60 The anorthoclase mechanically activated at 120 We are grateful to the technicians of CIMAV: Armando Reyes R, Hilda Esparza, Silvia Miranda, Francisco Paraguay, Wilber Antunez F. and Arturo Hernandez G. for their collaboration.