The fabrication of the intermetallic phase T2-Mo3Si with continuous matrix of α-Mo was attempted with the combination process of high energy ball milling, pulverization of arc-melted ingot, addition of Mo by hydrogen reduction of MoO3 and spark plasma sintering processes. High energy ball milling or arc melting of Mo-16.7Si-16.7B (at %) powders were performed to obtain to intermetallic phase T2 and Mo3Si. The Mo phase of 57vol% distributed intermetallic compound powders were prepared by hydrogen reduction of MoO3 and further mixing of elemental Mo powders. X-ray diffractometry analysis revealed that the intermetallic phase T2-Mo3Si can be produced by the pulverization process of arc-melted ingot. Hydrogen reduction of 1vol% MoO3 mixed intermetallic powder followed by further addition of Mo powders was a more adequate method enabling the homogeneous distribution of the Mo phase than that of added MoO3 powders with total amount. The powder mixture was successfully consolidated by spark plasma sintering yielding a sound microstructure comprising the intermetallic phase T2-Mo3Si uniformly distributed in a continuous matrix of α-Mo.As a refractory metal, molybdenum (Mo) exhibits a high melting temperatures and excellent high temperature strength. However, pure Mo is easily oxidized above 500 The fracture toughness of the intermetallic phases may be improved by the presence of the more ductile Mo phase. In particular, a typical microstructure of Mo-rich Mo-Si-B alloys yields a matrix of the Mo solid solution (α-Mo) providing good fracture toughness and ductility below 600 A variety of methods such as casting or powder metallurgy process have been suggested for producing Mo-rich Mo-Si-B alloys In the present study, we have attempted to fabricate the α-Mo to be continuously distributed in fine intermetallic phases. The T2-Mo The elemental powders of Mo (99.95%), Si (99.99%) and B (99.9%) were used as starting materials. The composition of the powder mixture was Mo-16.7Si-16.7B (at %) to obtain intermetallic phase T2 and Mo To fabricate the intermetallic compound powders with homogeneous distribution of α-Mo powders, the MoO The α-Mo distributed intermetallic compound powders were sintered at 1200 and 1300 Mechanical alloying of Mo-16.7Si-16.7B powders was carried out to fabricate intermetallic phases. The XRD profiles registered for the ball-milled powders are shown in  In order to fabricate the intermetallic compound powders with homogeneously coated α-Mo particles on their surfaces, the powder mixture of MoO  Thus, new approach to fabrication of powder mixture with fully reduced Mo was introduced by two step addition of Mo. Firstly, 1 As shown in The intermetallic phase T2-Mo This work was supported by a research fund of the