The giant Almadén mercury deposit (Spain) is hosted by the Lower Silurian Criadero Quartzite; in turn this ore-bearing rock unit is cross-cut by the so-called Frailesca unit, a diatreme body of basaltic composition. The geochemical characteristics of the Silurian to Devonian Almadén District volcanic units indicate that these rocks originated from an enriched, evolving mantle source that ultimately yielded basanites–nephelinites to rhyolites, through olivine-basalts, pyroxene-basalts, trachybasalts, trachytes, very scarce rhyolites, and quartz-diabases. The Silurian intraplate alkaline volcanism developed in submarine conditions which triggered widespread hydrothermal activity resulting in Hg ore formation and pervasive alteration to carbonates. The δ18O, δ13C, and δ34S isotopic signatures for carbonates and pyrite suggest different sources for carbon and sulfur, including magmatic and organic for the former and magmatic and sea water for the latter. The most important and efficient natural source of mercury on Earth is by far the volcanic activity, which liberates mercury via quiescent degassing and catastrophic (Plinian) events when eruptions can overwhelm the atmospheric budget of Hg. Thus, we suggest that CO2 degasification and coeval distillation of mercury from the volcanic rocks fed the huge hydrothermal system that led to massive deposition of mercury at Almadén. Build up of Hg0
                     gas in magmatic chambers during waning rifting in the Late Ordovician, followed by renewed volcanism in the Early Silurian, would have resulted in massive degasification of the accumulated mercury. Part of this mercury went into the Criadero Quartzite leading to formation of the huge Almadén deposit and others (e.g., El Entredicho) along the same stratigraphic level. Progressive depletion of the deep seated magmatic Hg stock would have resulted in a drastic reduction in ore deposit size after the Lower Silurian when smaller deposits formed (e.g., Las Cuevas).The Almadén district ( Mining has ceased, but many of the uncertainties that surround the genesis of the giant mercury ore deposit of Almadén and others in the district still remain. We here argue that these unique mercury deposits required unusual geologic conditions, involving: 1) the existence of high porosity detrital rocks (the Criadero Quartzite and sister units); 2) coeval explosive volcanism under submarine conditions; and last but not least 3) a persistent enriched mantle source that ultimately led to the formation of the Almadén magmatic rocks. As we argue in this work, Almadén could be one of the few cases in which mafic intraplate volcanism has yielded economic mineralization of any type. We are not here presenting ‘new’ data on Almadén, but reviewing the geologic, petrologic and geochemical evidence to generate a conceptual model for the full district. This model involves aspects that were either neglected or its full importance inadequately recognized in the past: 1) the role of the intraplate mafic magmatism as a potential deep source of mercury; 2) the unparalleled efficiency of volcanism for degasification and even formation of Hg deposits; and last but not least 3) the post Lower Silurian persistent hydrothermal activity (up to Devonian time) that led to the formation of minor, however relevant deposits of mercury. The Almadén district is located within the so-called Central Iberian Zone of the Iberian Variscan Massif (e.g., As shown in Almadén is by far the largest deposit of the district but not the only one of economic relevance. Other important deposits hosted by the Criadero Quartzite include those of El Entredicho and La Nueva Concepción, Las Cuevas formed in the Upper Silurian whereas minor deposits such as Corchuelo and Guadalperal are found in the Devonian ( A variety of magmatic rocks are recognized at the Almadén syncline. These differ in petrography, geochemical signatures (to be discussed later) and emplacement styles. The magmatism spanned from Ordovician to Devonian, and key petrographic features are the following ( Diatremes of basaltic composition with a matrix of lapilli tuffs (the so-called Frailesca rocks), composed of completely altered olivine-basalt clasts, and sedimentary clasts. The Frailesca (or Porphyritic lavas, ranging in composition from basanites and nephelinites to rhyolites, through olivine-basalts, pyroxenitic-basalts (pyroxene cumulates), trachybasalts, trachytes, and very scarce rhyolites. Basanites, nephelinites and olivine basalts are the main petrographic types, whereas the intermediate and felsic members are much less abundant. Minerals in these rocks comprise olivine phenocrysts; diopsidic pyroxene as phenocrysts and matrix; analcite as phenocrysts and matrix; plagioclase (microlites in the less differentiated, phenocrysts and matrix in intermediate and felsic varieties); biotite phenocrystals in intermediate rocks; and K-feldspar and quartz as phenocrysts and matrix of the felsic rocks. Late magmatic kaersutitic amphibole and Ti-rich biotite are also conspicuous in the mafic types. Textures are porphyric, with a crystalline matrix, and often vesicular. These rocks crop out as horizons of variable thickness interbedded with the detrital sequences, and in places can be also recognized as sills. Subvolcanic mafic rocks with doleritic texture, which allows classification as diabases. Major minerals are augitic pyroxene and calcic plagioclase. Minor minerals are olivine as small phenocrysts in olivine diabases, and alkaline feldspar and quartz (interstitial or in graphic intergrowths) in quartz-diabases. Olivine diabases are fine grained and outcrop as sills of metric scale thickness, almost indistinguishable from the porphyritic varieties, whereas the quartz-diabases are medium grained and outcrop as small stocks, and sills up to 5 Ultramafic fragments that occur as clasts in the Frailesca rocks and as xenoliths in the least differentiated basalts. They contain 50–80% olivine, pyroxene, and minor spinel, usually unaltered, which allows their classification as spinel lherzolites. These are key pieces of the Almadén geologic history because given that the upper mantle cannot be investigated by direct sampling, it follows that peridotite xenoliths hosted in basaltic rocks provide a powerful insight to define its main petrological features (e.g., The distribution of the different volcanic rock types in the stratigraphic column shows some remarkable features ( Thirty four samples comprising the different rock types with the least possible alteration were selected for whole-rock analyses ( The geochemical and mineralogical data suggest that the Almadén mafic magmas had an upper mantle origin, and were then extruded and/or emplaced in a continental intraplate setting, evolving from alkaline basaltic lavas and olivine diabases to quartz-diabases of transitional tholeiitic affinity. The K/P and Nb/U ratios, coupled to the absence of a negative Nb anomaly, rule out a crustal component in the generation of the Almadén mafic magmas (  On the basis of the most frequent mineral assemblages in the Almadén volcanic rocks (albite–chlorite–carbonate–quartz Oxygen isotope compositions reported by Thus we can use this value as a reference in our δ The carbon isotope compositions of Almadén hydrothermal carbonates ( Besides, this is the least one might expect in a submarine hydrothermal system triggered by volcanic activity, and the same can be said for sulfur on what multiple sources is concerned. The sulfur isotopic compositions reported by Leaching of sulfur from the volcanic rocks by geothermal waters provides an indirect mechanism for incorporating variable proportions of magmatic and seawater sulfur into the mineralizing fluids, contributing (along with fractionation and physical chemical variations) to the variable isotopic compositions of Hg sulfides. Sulfate can be converted to sulfide by organic matter-mediated sulfate reduction either by bacterial activity (bacterial sulfate reduction, The leaching of sulfur from the volcanic rocks by geothermal waters provides an indirect mechanism for incorporating variable proportions of magmatic and seawater sulfur into the mineralizing fluids, explaining the variable isotopic compositions of Hg sulfides. On the other hand, lead isotopic data for cinnabar ( Subsequent cinnabar deposition may follow if sulfur is available in the system, although this mineral is unstable in a vapor-dominated system ( Thus, given the highly volatile character of mercury, the path to ore deposition can be entirely different to that of lead (or even sulfur), and as such, it would be unwise to mix up the sources of one and the other. In very simple terms: the fact that two objects are found side by side does not necessarily imply that they ‘came together’ to that particular site. This is particularly relevant to the case of open hydrothermal systems, in which the solutions can be leaching metals from entirely different sources such as older sedimentary rocks and the volcanic units that actually triggered the system. Derivation of the Almadén Hg from sediments (e.g., Ordovician black shales) has been advocated by Illite is associated with a later stage of Hg mineralization (cinnabar The huge, unique, Almadén Hg deposits should have required exceptional conditions for their genesis. We suggest that such a world-class geochemical anomaly should ultimately reflect the characteristics of the mantle source for the alkaline basaltic magmas; indeed, mantle metasomatic activity and the low degrees of partial melting inherent to the genesis of the Almadén mafic magmas ( Whatever the case, and beyond the nuances of On the other hand, neither alkaline intraplate nor tholeiitic ocean ridge basalts appear to be particularly enriched in mercury, showing a range of 2 to 9 At this point we should take into consideration the widespread, pervasive alteration to carbonates in the Almadén rocks. As explained above, the volcanic rocks have CO Based on the data from Thus, a volcanogenic origin for mercury, followed by distillation from a hot solution and transport, is not only plausible from the geothermal point of view (in a CO At a larger scale a final question concerns the role of the Almadén Frailesca unit. As shown above, Frailesca type rocks were emplaced from Ordovician time onwards, but it is only at the base of the Silurian that huge Hg deposition took place ( There is an additional matter to deal with, and that concerns the huge amount of mercury deposited at the Almadén deposit compared to other mineralized sites in the world. In this regard, most mercury deposits are very small and belong to the hot-spring type ( As shown by This work was partially supported by grant