Simultaneous optimization of the performance and simplification of flotation circuits using experimental approaches is almost impossible. The logical way is to use a mathematical model to describe the process as accurately as possible along with an appropriate optimization method. In this research the flotation process was modeled using first order kinetics approach with discrete-distributed rate constants. The contribution of non-selective particles transfer mechanism to the concentrate because of hydraulic entrainment was also considered. Then, genetic algorithm was applied for both optimization of the circuit performance and simplification of the circuit. Since there are only few appropriate solutions in the search space which sounds logical regarding the flotation process, the search routine was oriented to satisfy four process-based rules. One of these rules stated as concentrate and tailing streams must not recycle between two stages. The gene mutation which changed chromosomes in an intelligent way based on flotation process not only reduced the search time but also provided simpler circuits. The algorithm was applied for two optimization examples with the objective of achieving a desired concentrate grade within a specific total cells volume. The comparison of the results with the published data indicated that the proposed oriented genetic algorithm decreased the calculation time by 1/60 for a two-stage flotation system and provided a simpler circuit with a similar performance. The algorithm was then used to optimize a flotation circuit with four stages processing 100t/h feed containing three species with high, medium and low rate constants. The best separation efficiency for this circuit with the concentrate grade of 65% was found to be 82%.Separation of values from gangue is rarely accomplished in one stage and usually various stages are needed to obtain a concentrate with a desired quality. The design of these stages and networks of streams which is also called circuits has been a challenging task ( In the last 30 years GA has been applied successfully to several optimization problems ( Because of its probabilistic nature, GA does not require initial guesses of the decision variables and needs only their lower and upper bounds. GA works only with the values of the objective functions not their gradients. GA can solve single-objective, multi-objective as well as multi-modal optimization problems. GA can handle a number of decision variables and constraints efficiently ( The details of GA could be found elsewhere ( Every optimization technique has its limitations and a generalized comprehensive method has not yet been presented. Some of these limitations and shortcomings are summarized below: High sensitivity to the initial values Slow convergence near the limits of decision variables or convergence to local optimal Need for non-linear objective functions or constraints One major step in finding the optimum flotation circuit configuration is to calculate performance of the proposed circuit. To accomplish this, flotation kinetics was described in terms of a first-order rate process which is a well established approach in the field ( There are common circuit configurations used in most plants. These are known as rougher, cleaner, scavenger and re-cleaner stages which based on the ore type one or more of these stages are utilized to achieve the desired metallurgical targets. The question which is usually put forward is whether the selected circuit configuration is the optimum one. Since the number of possible circuit configurations rapidly increases, the task of finding the optimum circuit becomes experimentally impractical and mathematically challenging. To further illustrate the idea, the possible circuit configurations for a three-stage flotation system are shown in The steps taken to find the optimum circuit which is commonly used in optimization works are shown in Feed characteristics, circuit constrains and objectives are introduced. One of the possible circuit configuration (i.e., one set of structural values) is chosen. Based on the first order kinetics, flotation for the selected configuration is modeled. The objective function which could be recovery, grade, separation efficiency, economic criterion or combination of these indices is calculated. For the first circuit, the calculated results are saved as the optimum case. For the next circuit the objective function is compared with that of the optimum case and the characteristics of the better one are saved as the new optimum configuration. If the stop criterion is not met, another set of structural values are chosen and steps 2 to 5 are repeated. This step is continued until the stop criterion of the search is met. In other words, the optimum circuit configuration is found. Flotation process is modeled considering true flotation and entrainment. True flotation is described by first-order kinetics with distributed rate constants. Entrainment is modeled by taking into account water recovery to concentrate and classification coefficient. The latter parameter indicates what fraction of any size class is transferred to the concentrate by entrainment. Among various factors affecting classification coefficient, particle size and particle residence time in the froth are of paramount importance. One important step in modeling flotation is classification of the feed into various species based on flotation rate constants. The more accurate is this characterization the closer is the result to reality. Mass transfer to concentrate or tailing for each species is calculated separately and finally the sum of all species determines the total concentrate or tailing mass. The ratio of mass flowrate of species m in the concentrate ( The loss of species m to tailings in bank i in a system where the above model used to describe the RTD of particles is: If the mass transfer to the concentrate by entrainment or recovery by entrainment ( Calculation procedure starts from obtaining The only unknowns of Eq. This step is repeated until As the number of flotation stages increases, the possible number of circuit configuration modes increases drastically. It was found that many of the circuit configurations proposed by GA with respect to physical principles of the process or experiences gained over the years were not logical. Due to random nature of the search performed by GA this limitation was not unexpected. If the number of cases studied could be limited by an intelligent orientation of the search, the time required for the computation could reduce significantly. A few basic rules were integrated in the search which basically modified the proposed structural values. These simple rules were: For a two-stage circuit the fresh feed must go to only one stage Concentrate and tailing streams from one stage must not simultaneously go to another stage Concentrate and tailing streams must not recycle between two stages (i.e., when tailing of stage 1 goes to stage 2 at the same time tailing of stage 2 must not go to stage 1) Every circuit must have a concentrate and a tailing One of the limitations of the circuit configuration proposed by GA is the high number of streams branching. These types of circuits are not practiced in the industry because of a need for high number of pumps and junction boxes. It is therefore necessary to simplify the optimum circuit by reducing the number of streams branching. For every set of structural values the four basic rules were applied and then the circuit simplification routine was activated. At the first stage of the routine, the streams going out of the bank for the concentrate and tailings were sorted from small to large values. For any product (i.e., concentrate or tailings) the structural values showing the fractional mass flowrates were added. When the sum reached 0.20, the streams which were included in the sum were set to zero. This meant that the mass flowrates of those streams were very low. The value which was selected for the sum (i.e., 0.20) was arbitrary could be set by the user. The remaining streams values were normalized because the sum of all streams of a product must be equal to 1. The approach taken in this research was proved to be successful in reaching optimum and practical circuit configurations. All calculation steps starting from generation of structural values up to finding the optimum circuit configuration with the highest value for the objective function were coded in the MATLAB software. This provided the flexibility needed to implement any modifications and also increased the speed of matrix calculations. The main constrains in the optimization were to respect certain grade and bank volume. In the GA based search routines this is usually implemented by giving a penalty to the fitness value of the corresponding circuit configuration. This approach decreases the probability of their selection in the next generation. In this study due to generation of erratic variations in the algorithm, the approach was replaced by a fitness function (FF) incorporating yield, grade and cells volume. The proposed fitness function met all the constraints imposed in the search without introducing any significant variations in the algorithm. The volume function was obtained by: GF and VF were defined such that their value varied between 0 and 1. The coefficients used in the fitness function (FF; Eq. In order to compare the proposed approach with other algorithms an example solved by Once the validity and advantages of the GA oriented by process-based rules were verified in solving a two-stage flotation system problem, it was decided to use the approach to solve a four-stage flotation system problem. Unlike previous studies, the hydraulic entrainment was taken into consideration in modelling flotation. This was fulfilled assuming a set of classification coefficients for the feed and using water recovery to concentrate based on water mass balance. Recovery by entrainment (R The initial values for the oriented GA search are given in It is of vital importance that in the GA based search the convergence occurs in the last generations after a complete search in the corresponding space. In order to achieve this, the mutation rate is usually decreased in the last generations. The following relationship was proposed and used to determine mutation rate (Pm) The circuit configuration obtained using the oriented GA for the two-stage flotation system was identical to the circuits which were obtained using direct search ( The main advantage of using the oriented GA was a significant reduction in the computation time. The results of this approach for 100, 1000, and 10,000 generations along with the results obtained with 100,000 by In order to verify the stability of the solutions proposed by the oriented GA, the approach was repeated 30 times for generation numbers of 100, 1000, and 10,000, respectively. The average and relative standard deviations for the best-so-far and average fitness values were calculated ( Once the validity of the oriented GA was obtained through the comparison with the results of well established works, it was then used to solve more complex problems.  A genetic algorithm oriented by process-based rules was proposed and tested to find optimum circuit configuration for two and four-stage flotation systems. The calculation time needed to find the optimum circuit using conventional genetic algorithm (i.e., not oriented) was significantly higher than that of the proposed oriented genetic algorithm. For a two-stage flotation circuit the calculation time decreased by over 90%. The application of the proposed approach to find the optimum circuit configuration for a four-stage flotation system with three species not only resulted in higher separation efficiency (82%) in comparison to common industrial circuits (79.5%) but also it provided simpler circuit.  constant in grade and volume functions constant in grade and volume functions fraction of concentrate leaving bank j and going to bank i mass flow rate of the mass flow rate of total feed to the circuit mass flow rate of the fitness function for each solution fraction of feed going to bank i grade of circuit product desired grade of circuit product grade function enrichment ratio of kinetic rate constant of number of species in feed number of perfectly mixed reactors mutation rate in maximum mutation rate (mutation rate in first generation) minimum mutation rate (mutation rate in last generation) tailing flow rate obtained from modeling tailing flow rate when the residence time distribution was measured recovery by entrainment water recovery generation number maximum number of generations mass flow rate of the fraction of tailing leaving bank j and going to bank i total cells volume maximum allowable total cells volume maximum volume which one circuit could have volume function coefficient of grade function coefficient of volume function coefficient of yield function circuit yield classification coefficient of size class A measured residence time of perfectly mixed rector for bank i measured residence time of plug flow reactor for bank i calculated residence time of perfectly mixed reactor obtained from modeling of bank i calculated residence time of plug flow reactor obtained from modeling of bank i The help received from Prof. H. Nezamabadi and H. Naghavi in understanding some aspects of genetic algorithms is greatly acknowledged.