We conducted a study to determine why the pH of wood ant nest materials is typically higher than that of the surrounding forest soil. An experiment with litter bags demonstrated that the pH of litter increased significantly (after only 7 months) in ant nests. Because the food that foraging ants bring into the nest contains easily decomposed carbohydrates and basic cations (largely in the form of honeydew and prey) that can cause increases in pH, we then estimated the amount of this influ of basic cations and easily decomposed carbohydrates. Based on these estimates, we conducted a second experiment to determine whether addition of field-determined quantities of an easily decomposed carbohydrate (glucose) or a basic cation (Ca2+) would increase the pH of the litter in artificial ant nests in the forest. Both glucose and Ca2+ additions significantly increased the pH of the litter but the increase was greater with Ca2+. The rate of pH increase in the artificial nests was similar to the rate of increase in natural nests. According to our study, ants collect substantial amounts of mineral-enriched materials in this ecosystem, which collectively increase the pH of nest material.Because they substantially affect energy and nutrient flow, food web structure, and soil properties of temperate and boreal forests, wood ants ( Although materials for nest construction come from the surrounding area, the properties of the nest material differ from those of the surrounding forest floor ( Researchers have suggested two explanations underlying the differences in soil and litter properties of ant nests compared to those of the surrounding forest floor. One explanation, which was offered by Ants bring large amounts of food (i.e., honeydew and prey) and plant materials (litter) into their nests ( The aim of this study was to test the hypotheses that ant activities are responsible for the changes in pH in their nests and that such changes are caused by the addition of glucose or basic cations to the nest. To test these hypotheses, we determined (1) the changes in properties of litter exposed or not exposed to the activities in ant nests, (2) the quantities of glucose and basic cations that are brought to the nest by foraging ants, and (3) the effects of glucose and basic cations on the pH of the litter. The study was conducted in an 80- to 100-year-old forest dominated by Norway spruce ( Litter bags were used to measure how ant activities affected the pH of ant nest materials ( Input of basic cations into ant nests was estimated based on their contents in two main food sources, honeydew and prey. For this estimate, the amount of honeydew and prey and the concentrations of basic cations in honeydew and prey were measured. Procedures for determining the number of workers returning to the nest per day and the quantities of honeydew and prey brought to the nest were taken from The amount of basic cations imported into the nest in honeydew was determined by analysing the bodies of workers leaving and returning to the nest. Ants were sampled on three days during times of the year when the ants were active (30 June, 17 July, and 10 September 2009) at five comparable nests (volume of cca. 1 The amount of basic cations imported in prey was determined by sampling the prey carried in the mandibles of workers returning to the five nests. The prey, which were collected on only one day (17 July 2009), were removed from the mandibles with pincers, dried, and weighed before basic cations were measured. For basic cation determination, ant bodies and prey were mineralized in 2 Daily input of basic cations from honeydew into one nest ( Daily input of basic cations from prey into one nest ( Annual inputs of basic cations from honeydew (A Twelve mounds of volume 0.02 The mounds were divided into four groups (each consisting of three mounds) according to litter treatment. Prior to the construction of the nests, the litter was sprayed using a sprayer with 600 Litter bags as described for experiment 1 were used to determine the changes in litter properties. Three litter bags were located 10 After collection, the litter bags for both experiments were placed individually in plastic bags and immediately transported to the laboratory. Water content, pH, contents of basic cations, and quotient Q 4/6 (see below) were determined. Water content of litter mass (g of water/100 For experiment 1 with natural ant nests, paired The pH of the litter placed in the litter bags at the start of the experiment was 4.89. After only 7 months, the pH of the litter was 5.2 The mean dry mass of honeydew brought by one worker ant into the nest was 55 The amount of basic cations that one worker collected with honeydew was 0.47 The total annual inputs of basic cations from food into one nest of Litter pH significantly differed among the four treatments ( Ca The quotient Q 4/6 did not significantly differ among the four treatments ( The water content of the litter did not differ among the four treatments ( Our study showed that the pH of the litter in wood ant nests is higher compared to that of the surrounding soil, which indicates that pH changes are most likely caused by ant activity inside the nest. The differences occurred relatively rapidly (i.e., within 7 months), which is consistent with the findings of other authors ( As we hypothesized, additions of glucose and Ca The amounts of glucose and Ca Ants bring large amounts of food and building material into their nests, and this food and building material contains substantial quantities of basic cations. The honeydew and prey brought into the nest annually may contain up to 272 The pH of the litter was increased more by Ca In experiment 2, we also focussed on humic acids which belong to the most important buffer systems in soils. The proportion of humic and fulvic acids is particularly important in this context ( Water content in the litter was found to be higher compared to the original litter. This is not surprising given that ants maintain low moisture levels in real nests but were absent from our artificial mounds ( Soil pH is a very important soil property ( In conclusion, previous studies have documented that pH is higher in wood ant nests than in the surrounding soil ( The study was supported by the research plan of the