Increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in chronic kidney disease (CKD) represents an emerging major health problem. Indeed, disturbances in mineral and bone metabolism occur frequently in CKD and are termed chronic kidney disease – mineral and bone disorder (CKD-MBD). These can lead to cardiovascular pathology, resulting in an increased cardiovascular risk. Bone alkaline phosphatase (BALP) is essential for biomineralization. Recent findings demonstrate a crucial role for BALP in the pathogenesis of vascular calcification and identified it as a promising predictor of mortality in CKD. In conjunction with parathyroid hormone (PTH), serum BALP has been suggested as a biomarker of bone turnover in CKD-MBD. In contrast to PTH, serum BALP demonstrates a lower variability and may thus be better suited for the diagnosis and longitudinal follow-up of bone turnover. The linear association with mortality, compared to the U-shaped curve for PTH, is an additional advantage, making BALP more suitable than PTH as a treatment target in CKD. Here we review the main characteristics of alkaline phosphatase isozymes/isoforms and the various assays currently used in clinical routine laboratories. We also discuss the role of BALP in both physiological and pathological mineralization, and the clinical benefit of BALP determination in CKD.Alkaline phosphatases (ALP, EC 3.1.3.1) are ubiquitous enzymes and membrane-bound glycoproteins that catalyze the hydrolysis of phosphate monoesters, like inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi), with an optimum activity at basic pH values Derived from a common ancestral gene, four genes are involved in the synthesis of human ALP isozymes (TNALP, IALP, PALP and GCALP). The bone (BALP), liver (LALP) and kidney (KALP) isoforms derive from the same protein, i.e., TNALP. They are characterized by the same amino acid structure and differ only by post-translational modifications The first information about the structure of ALP were provided with the crystallography of ALP from The main structure of ALP is similar among the isozymes, with largely conserved domains at the active site, even if their amino acid structure is variable with approximately 50% sequence identity comparing TNALP with the tissue-specific ALP isozymes (IALP, PALP and GCALP). It is a metallo-protein with four metallic ions, including two Zn Post-translational modifications, like glycosylation, are the most important differences among the ALP isoforms, particularly between BALP and LALP. PALP and GCALP have two sites of N-glycosylation while IALP and TNALP have three and five N-glycosylation sites, respectively. Little is known about the glycans moieties, but various experiments, such as desialylation with neuraminidase and lectin precipitation have demonstrated the presence or the absence of terminal sialic acid on the sugar chain structures of each ALP isozyme. Unlike BALP and LALP, IALP does not have any sialic acid residue on its carbohydrate chains. In addition, except LALP, these isozymes have several amino acids that are O-glycosylated ALP catalyzes the hydrolysis of orthophosphoric monoesters with an optimum activity at basic pH values. Following this reaction ( The endogenous phosphocompounds PPi and pyridoxal-5′-phosphate (PLP; the active form of vitamin B6) have been defined as natural substrates for TNALP. Accumulation of PPi and PLP is common in plasma samples from patients with hypophosphatasia, a rare inborn disease due to mutations in the Characterization and discrimination of the ALP isozymes has always been challenging. Thus, several biochemical, electrophoretic and immunological methods have been developed to discover new methodological approaches to discriminate and quantify the ALP isozymes. The first method employed to study the isozymes was heat inactivation In combination with heat inactivation or alone, chemical inactivators have also been commonly used to discriminate the ALP isozymes. Several small molecules can be used to inhibit the ALP activity, leading to an uncompetitive and stereospecific (only L-isomers are active inhibitors) inhibition Electrophoretic methods are frequently used in clinical routine laboratories for the separation and quantification of ALP isozymes. Agarose gel is often used as supporting media which allow a separation based on the differential electrophoretic mobility of isozymes. By adding wheat-germ lectin, BALP and LALP are separated after precipitation of BALP due to its high affinity for the lectin The rise of chromatography techniques in the field of biomedical sciences led to the development of high-performance chromatography methods for separation and quantification of ALP isozymes. Thus, different chromatography processes like affinity or ion-exchange were used for the analysis of ALP isozymes. In 1990, Anderson et al. In order to improve the specificity, a weak anion-exchange HPLC was developed for ALP isozyme determination and identification For the quantitation of total ALP activity in serum, recommended methods based on a quantification of the catalytic activity of the enzyme have been developed. The International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine (IFCC) published in 2011 the primary reference measurement procedure for serum ALP These ALP enzymatic assays provide information about the level of total ALP in human serum, but this technique cannot discriminate the various ALP isozymes and isoforms. Therefore, the use and the reliability of this analysis in the clinical assessment of bone formation is limited in patients with hepatic disorders The use of monoclonal antibodies against BALP and the emergence of immunoassays for serum BALP determination allowed to overcome the previously used techniques limitations (laborious, time-consuming, poor sensitivity and specificity) for total ALP measurement Inter-method variability and inability of BALP immunoassays to discriminate specifically isozymes in serum affect the reliability of these assays and, therefore, might influence the diagnosis of the clinician. In order to overcome these problems and to obtain a lower variability and a better specificity, innovative methods involving separative techniques, with high resolution power such as more specific antibodies, time-efficient chromatographic assays or capillary electrophoresis should be developed in the future. These should allow a separation of the ALP isozymes/isoforms and an absolute quantitation no longer based on the enzymatic activity of the protein, but on its effective mass in blood samples. Tissue mineralization can be defined as a process in which minerals, such as hydroxyapatite crystals, are deposited in the extracellular matrix. In physiological mineralization, this process occurs in hard tissues such as bone, growth-plate, cartilage and dentin. In bone, different actors are involved in the mineralization process. Among them, osteoblasts, which are the cells responsible for the formation of hydroxyapatite, and MVs, which are extracellular vesicles with a diameter of 50–200 nm rich in several phospholipids and proteins. MVs are formed by polarized budding from the surface membrane of chondrocytes or osteoblasts Early in the last century, Robert Robison proposed a role for ALP in the physiological mineralization of bone Nowadays, the role of ALP in physiological mineralization is better known but not fully elucidated. Indeed, BALP plays a role in bone mineralization by promoting the growth of hydroxyapatite crystals, initially formed in the MVs of osteoblasts, after protrusion of the crystals into the extracellular matrix. To be functional, BALP must be anchored on the outer surface of the matrix vesicle membrane, then it will degrade PPi, an inhibitor of the hydroxyapatite formation, present in the extracellular matrix Secreted by osteoblasts and osteocytes, in response to high levels of phosphate and vitamin D, fibroblast growth factor-23 (FGF-23) suppresses renal phosphate reabsorption and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D production in renal proximal tubules, and promotes uptake of calcium and sodium in renal distal tubules. Recent findings have shown that this bone-derived hormone may be responsible for a paracrine or autocrine negative feedback to locally fine-tuning the bone mineralization. Indeed, FGF-23 suppresses the The scientific and clinical interest in ALP continues to emerge, since several studies demonstrate an association of ALP with increased morbidity and mortality in a large variety of populations Frequently, an increased level of BALP activity is found in human serum during either physiological or pathological processes, corresponding to a high osteoblastic activity In contrast, a decreased BALP level is rarely found in human serum but it can occur in hypophosphatasia, a rare metabolic bone disease, in multiple myeloma with osteolytic lesions or secondary to a growth hormone deficiency and hypoparathyroidism The discovery of the four BALP isoforms permitted to shed light on their specific clinical significances. We have previously demonstrated a predominance of the B1 isoform in cortical bone. With an increased activity in trabecular bone, B2 appears to be a promising and useful marker of bone formation in Paget’s disease when total ALP activity is low, whereas the B/I isoform has the lowest activity in serum and bone in comparison with others Kidney failure in CKD is characterized by severely decreased glomerular filtration, resulting in a disturbed mineral balance with consecutive bone metabolism disorders. These disorders are termed CKD-MBD and are defined by three main aspects, laboratory abnormalities with abnormalities of mineral or hormone metabolism (calcium, phosphorus, ALP, parathyroid hormone (PTH), FGF-23, vitamin D), bone abnormalities including abnormalities in bone turnover, mineralization, volume, linear growth, or strength, and extra skeletal calcifications Extraskeletal calcification, especially vascular calcification, is associated with an increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in CKD Various studies about the pathophysiology of arterial calcification due to deficiency of CD73 (ACDC), an autosomal recessive disease characterized by a reduced conversion of extracellular adenosine monophosphate (AMP) to adenosine, have highlighted an important involvement of TNALP and increased activity in ACDC patients The cardiovascular consequences of vascular calcification include vascular stiffening, reduced compliance and elastance, increasing systolic blood pressure and cardiac workload. These can cause left ventricular hypertrophy and heart failure Recent studies have described a possible role, not fully elucidated, of epigenetics in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases associated with CKD. Actually, modulation of TNALP expression is a complex mechanism, requiring the presence of BET (bromodomain and extra-terminal) proteins which bind acetylated lysines on chromatin and thus regulate gene transcription Among these drugs, apabetalone (RVX-208) is an oral small molecule BET protein inhibitor, currently evaluated in clinical trials to improve cardiovascular outcome in high-risk populations. Apabetalone targets preferentially the second bromodomain (BD2) of BET family member BDR4, modulating, among others, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, inflammation, coagulation, and vascular calcification in conditions where these patho-mechanisms are up-regulated. Recent findings demonstrate an inhibition of VSMC calcification by apabetalone, paralleled by reductions of ALP gene expression, protein content and activity. In addition, apabetalone treatment reduced circulating ALP and prevented cardiovascular events in placebo-controlled phase II studies Currently, as recommended by KDIGO (Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes), bone biopsy and bone histomorphometry are the gold standard analysis for the diagnosis of specific bone disorders in CKD BALP is an important biomarker with biological and analytical advantages in the clinical laboratory. Indeed, the protein is present in blood (plasma or serum) and its activity can reflect bone formation. Its degradation is hepatic and, thus, does not accumulate with the progressive loss of GFR. Moreover, BALP has a low biological variation, a relative long half-life in vivo (1–2 days), is stable ex vivo, and is not affected by diurnal variation Increased morbidity and mortality in patients with CKD-MBD represent an emerging global public health problem. Indeed, CKD-MBD is frequently associated with a higher cardiovascular risk and reduced patient survival. Even if some biological mechanisms still must be fully elucidated, recent literature suggest a key role of BALP in CKD-MBD. In the near future, this protein, involved in both physiological and pathological mineralization, may become an important diagnostic tool in the management of renal bone diseases and a potential treatment target for the prevention of cardiovascular complications and mortality in CKD. Unfortunately, none of the current BALP assays have all the ideal analysis requirements for routine application (high sensitivity, high specificity, ease of application and high reliability). Thus, further studies need to be conducted to improve the clinical utility of BALP and the patient care by clinicians. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. Adrien Nizet has written the paper. Etienne Cavalier, Peter Stenvinkel, Mattias Haarhaus and Per Magnusson has critically reviewed and improved the manuscript.