In an area near an arsenic mine in Hunan Province of south China, soils were often found with elevated arsenic levels. A field survey was conducted to determine arsenic accumulation in 8 Cretan brake ferns (Pteris cretica) and 16 Chinese brake ferns (Pteris vittata) growing on these soils. Three factors were evaluated: arsenic concentration in above ground parts (fronds), arsenic bioaccumulation factor (BF; ratio of arsenic in fronds to soil) and arsenic translocation factor (TF; ratio of arsenic in fronds to roots). Arsenic concentrations in the fronds of Chinese brake fern were 3–704mgkg−1, the BFs were 0.06–7.43 and the TFs were 0.17–3.98, while those in Cretan brake fern were 149–694mgkg−1, 1.34–6.62 and 1.00–2.61, respectively. Our survey showed that both ferns were capable of arsenic accumulation under field conditions. With most of the arsenic being accumulated in the fronds, these ferns have potential for use in phytoremediation of arsenic contaminated soils.Arsenic contamination is a severe environmental problem in the world. Currently, no economical and effective remediation method is available for arsenic contaminated soils ( Although arsenic accumulating plants have been reported early from mining and smelting waste sites in the United Kingdom ( Several studies have demonstrated that arsenic reduction from arsenate to arsenite is an important mechanism for arsenic tolerance and accumulation ( More than 300 species of plants belong to genus brake ferns ( Based on this idea, a field survey was conducted to collect plant and soil samples for analysis to validate arsenic accumulation character of Chinese brake fern and Cretan brake fern and their potential in phytoremediation. Attention was paid to collect samples from sites away from anthropogenic arsenic pollution sources. This was because it is important to determine the arsenic accumulation in brake ferns under naturally elevated arsenic conditions, which is important for phytoremediation practice. The arsenic concentrations, bioaccumulation factors and translocation factors were investigated on the two ferns, with emphasis on the Cretan brake fern for its potential in phytoremediation. The survey area is located at an arsenic mine in Shimen county, Hunan province in central southern China, with north latitude of 29°38″30′ and east longitude of 111°02′25″ ( The area is in a sub-tropical climate zone with an annual average 1700 The arsenic concentrations in the soil of the arsenic mine were very high due to the intensive mining and smelting activities, with 5000 The survey was conducted in November, 2000. There were a total of 20 sampling sites in a 12 The fern samples were washed in tap water to remove adhered soils and dusts, then rinsed in deionized water, oven dried in 60–70 Dried samples were ground into powder in a stainless steel electrical miller to obtain homogeneous samples, while root samples were cut into pieces with an iron scissor. Soil samples were air dried, after picking out stone and plant debris, and then ground with a quartz mortar to pass through 100 mesh (150 A series of chemical reagents were used as extractant for bioavailable arsenic in soils. These reagent were chosen to match various properties of different soils, especially the pH ( Correlation was made using bi-variation method, with one-tailed significance and Pearson correlation coefficients using SPSS software. The Cretan brake fern accumulated relatively high arsenic concentration in its fronds, with 149–694 Arsenic concentrations in the fronds of Chinese brake fern were between 3 and 704 Previous research showed that Chinese brake fern demonstrated greater arsenic accumulation property both in contaminated soils and in pot experiments with added arsenic salts in greenhouse, with the arsenic concentration in fronds being often greater than 1000 In this study, we are unclear as to what factors caused the low arsenic accumulation by Chinese brake fern in the field. Nevertheless, this points out the importance of the influence of soil properties on arsenic accumulation of Chinese brake fern and its phytoremediation capacity. Unlike nickel and zinc hyperaccumulators, Chinese brake fern is not endemic to sites with elevated arsenic levels, it grow in clean soils as well as contaminated soils with low to elevated arsenic levels. Systematic surveys and experimental studies on the arsenic accumulation by different ecotypic Chinese brake ferns are being conducted by our group in order to elucidate the complex mechanisms of arsenic accumulation. The BFs of Cretan brake fern were between 1.34 and 6.62 and 12 and 35 based on “total” and “bioavailable” arsenic, respectively ( Among the 16 sampling sites, Chinese brake fern in 6 sites had BFs less than 1, although at these sites the arsenic concentrations were below 230 At the sites where both Chinese brake fern and Cretan brake fern were collected, the BFs of the two ferns were all greater than 1 (0011SM03, 23, 26, 30). In this survey, no samples of Cretan brake fern were found on the sites where Chinese brake fern grew with arsenic BFs less than 1. Is it a coincidence due to the limited pool of fern samples? It may probably imply that soil properties are determinant on the habitat and arsenic accumulation of the two ferns. More surveys with expanding pool of sampling sites at specific areas are desired to elucidate the actual relations between them. The TFs (ratio of arsenic in fronds to roots) of Cretan brake fern were from 1.00 to 2.61 for six sampling sites ( Cretan brake fern was recently reported to accumulate about 6000 Both Cretan brake fern and Chinese brake fern can accumulate arsenic in the field with elevated arsenic levels resulting from underground mineralogical formation. Data of total arsenic concentrations in fronds, bioaccumulation factors and translocation factors showed that Cretan brake fern had steady arsenic accumulation characters in the field. However, the arsenic accumulation by Chinese brake fern was different from site to site possibly due to the difference in soil properties at each site. This study demonstrated the potential of Cretan brake as a candidate for phytoremediation of arsenic contaminated sites. This study was financially supported by the National Science Foundation of China (40071075, 40271099) and National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in China (40325003). We thank Professor Xianchun Zhang from the Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences for his kindly help on identification of the ferns. The authors greatly acknowledge Mr. Zechun Huang and Ms. Xueqing Zhang for their assistance in field sampling.