The gas sensing properties of Al-doped ZnO nanoparticles (NPs), which were synthesized via a hydrothermal method, have been described for the detection of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) such as acetaldehyde, toluene, and benzene. The maximum sensing response (R = 2250) of these Al-doped ZnO NPs was observed upon exposure to 10 ppm acetaldehyde at an optimal operating temperature of 500 °C, which was almost 173 and 125 times higher than that observed for toluene and benzene, respectively. The highest dipole moment of acetaldehyde among the three VOCs is responsible for its highest sensitivity. The Al-doped ZnO NPs also show a higher selectivity toward acetaldehyde than that of different interfering gases and their response to acetaldehyde was superior compared with the previously reported responses of other materials. The enhanced sensing performance of Al-doped ZnO NPs to acetaldehyde compared to undoped ones may be explained by an increase in specific surface area, oxygen vacancies, and conductivity after Al doping.Each day in modern life, large quantities of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are released into the atmosphere from both anthropogenic and natural sources [ In order to address these issues, gas sensors based on metal oxide semiconductors have been investigated for the detection of VOCs because of their high sensitivity, easy fabrication, and high chemical stability. A number of metal oxide semiconducting materials, including WO The Al-doped ZnO NPs are more sensitive to acetaldehyde than to benzene, toluene, and other interfering gases such as NH Al-doped ZnO NPs were synthesized by a hydrothermal method. Aluminum acetate was used as the Al source to add to the zinc precursor solution under stirring. The doping concentration of Al was controlled to 1 at% (0.065 g of aluminum acetate for 1 at% of Al). The synthetic procedure has been previously described in detail [ The shape and morphology of the as-synthesized Al-doped NPs were probed by a field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM; JEOL 7001F). Its microstructural properties were characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL JEM ARM 200F). The gas sensing measurements were conducted by using the gas detecting system, as described in a previous work [ The SEM image of the Al-doped ZnO NPs after annealing on the Pt electrodes ( In order to assess the sensing properties of the Al-doped ZnO NPs, tests for 10 ppm of acetaldehyde, toluene, and benzene were performed at different operating temperatures.  The response of the Al-doped ZnO NPs to VOC concentrations in the range of 0.1–10 ppm at 500 °C was also recorded (  From the above results, a possible mechanism for Al-doped ZnO NPs in the detection of acetaldehyde can be illustrated as shown in In order to confirm the sensing mechanism for undoped ZnO NPs in exposure to acetaldehyde, we carried out sensing measurements for undoped ZnO NPs to 10 ppm of acetaldehyde, benzene, and toluene at 500 °C. The sensing response of the undoped ZnO NPs was found to be We found that the response of the Al-doped ZnO NPs is 16 times higher than that in undoped ZnO NPs in exposure to acetaldehyde. Recently, we investigated the physical and chemical characteristics, such as oxygen vacancies, optical band gap, and specific surface area, of undoped and Al-doped ZnO NPs to demonstrate the significant influence of Al dopant on the enhancement of sensing properties. Firstly, according to x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis [ In this work, the effect of Al dopant on the gas sensing properties of ZnO NPs was investigated. These NPs were synthesized by a hydrothermal method and used for the detection of VOCs such as acetaldehyde, toluene, and benzene. The Al-doped ZnO NPs showed a maximum sensing response of R = 2250 and a short response time of ∼2 s for the detection of 10 ppm acetaldehyde at an optimal operating temperature of 500 °C. The Al-doped ZnO NPs exhibited a high selectivity toward acetaldehyde compared to other VOCs (toluene and benzene) and interfering gases (NH This research was supported by the Basic Science Research Program (2017M3A9F1052297) and the Priority Research Centers Program (2009-0093823) through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning. ATG and SEP gratefully acknowledge funding by the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant #200021_159763/1).