Cemented paste backfill (CPB) plays a vital role in mineral engineering and understanding the cement hydration is crucial for its successful application. As an important constituent in ordinary Portland cement (5–15 wt%), ferrite is heavily used in CPB without being fully demonstrated due to its composition complexity. In this paper, the structural and electronic properties of Ca2Fe2O5 (C2F), Ca2AlFeO5 (C4AF) and Ca2Al2O5 (C2A) were investigated using first-principles calculations. The results indicated that lattice parameters and bond length decreased with increasing substitution of the smaller Al3+ for the larger Fe3+. The chemical reactivity of the unit cell was derived mainly from O 2p, Fe 3p, Fe 3d, and Al 3p orbitals. The O atoms were prone to electrophilic attack with cations such as H+. In contrast, the Fe/Al atoms were prone to nucleophilic attack with anions such as OH– and the Fe atoms were more reactive than the Al atoms. This study provides new insight into the structural and electronic properties of ferrite at the atomic level, which will provide a better understanding of cement hydration and promote the application of CPB.The world economy strongly depends on raw materials, such as metals and aggregates, provided by the minerals excavation. To improve its technical, environmental and economic performance, the cemented paste backfill (CPB) technology has been accepted to be an important procedure during underground minerals excavation ( The ordinary Portland cement (OPC) clinker typically contains four important constituents, namely alite (Ca In this paper, first-principles calculations were performed to analyse the structural and electronic properties of Ca The first-principles calculations were conducted using the density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna In this paper, three representative points in the Ca All specific structures from the Ca  Generally speaking, the lattice parameters and bond length decreased with increasing substitution of Al To gain insight into the chemical reactivity of C  Similarly, the Fe atoms at the tetrahedral site (Fe_T) were more reactive than the Fe atoms at the octahedral site (Fe_M) as the Fe_T donated 1.698 e The electronic properties of C The foregoing electronic analysis can promote our understanding of the cement hydration mechanism in ferrite phases by providing information about the reactivity and dominating sites. In the case of C It is also found that the chemical reactivity of each point in the Ca We report here a theoretical analysis of the structural and electronic properties of C The lattice parameters and bond length decreased with increasing substitution of the smaller Al The chemical reactivity of the ferrite phases was mainly originated from the O 2 The chemical reactivity of O atoms varied within different materials. For C The The author is supported by There are no conflicts of interest to declare.