Aluminum electrode foils are the most essential components inside electrolytic capacitors, which are widely used in diverse electronic systems. The production involves the usage of various chemicals, and it generates a huge amount of exhausted bath solution consisting of highly-concentrated ammonium adipate and trace Cl− impurity. The loss of these expensive chemicals is a heavy burden for the foil manufacturers. The current work innovatively applies diffusion dialysis (DD) to selectively remove the chloride from this abandoned solution, which makes the reuse of these chemicals possible. In the process, Cl− ion presents a superior permeability compared with adipate2− ion, and a high permselectivity of 6 is obtained by using conventional anion exchange membranes. The effects of flow intensity and chloride concentration on the selective dechlorination performance have been thoroughly studied, respectively. Furthermore, the long-term stability of the membranes has been carefully investigated, and their performance is unchanged during a six-month period. The overall economics of this new process is very encouraging, and a stunningly short pay-off period (43 days) is achieved. This work not only solves the problem of reusing the exhausted adipate bath solution, but also further demonstrates the great potential of the DD process in selective ion separation applications.As one of the main passive components (resistors, capacitors and inductors), capacitors are widely utilized in various aspects of electric systems The foils and bath solutions must be of the highest purity, and the tanks and apparatus must be of the highest cleanliness in the above manufacturing process However, it is difficult to maintain this high cleanliness throughout the whole process in industrial practice. As illustrated in During our previous work on the reclamation of waste acid in the etching procedure of foil industry The anion exchange membrane (AEM, TWDDA standard) used in this work was provided by Shandong Tianwei Membrane Technology Co., Ltd., China. Detailed specifications are listed in In the current study, more than 10 samples of real adipate formation solution were collected from a local foil manufacturer and analyzed in our lab, and the results are listed in Batch-mode DD tests were conducted with a home-built dialyzer as illustrated in The continuous DD tests were carried out with another home-built dialyzer, as presented in During every continuous DD test, the feed and stripping solutions were delivered counter-currently through the dialyzer as shown in The concentration of Cl The apparent dialysis coefficient Similar to the diffusion coefficient The permselectivity of one species A relative to another species B, The main purpose of this study is to selectively remove Cl The Continuous DD tests were further conducted to systematically investigate the separation performance and the economics, which has been described in The inlet flowrates of both streams were well controlled by the metering pump, while the outlet flowrates were calculated precisely from the sample volumes and sampling intervals (also provided in Table S2). In all tests, obvious volume variations were observed. Specifically, the flowrate of feed streams is increased while the flowrate of stripping streams is decreased. This phenomenon is mainly caused by water osmosis The concentrations of Cl According to the related concentrations and flowrates of the outlet streams listed in Table S2, the removal ratios of Cl A significant increasing trend of Cl As a result, it is shown clearly in For the origination of the observed Cl The influence of Cl Typically, IEMs are polymeric materials that may be attacked or fouled by organic substances, including ammonium adipate. Therefore, the long-term stability of the TWDDA membrane has been investigated here intensively to address this potential risk. Specifically, two pieces of TWDDA membranes were stored in a simulated feed solution (about 1000 mL, ammonium adipate 100 g L As mentioned above, the exhausted formation solution in the foil industry is mainly composed of ~10 wt% ammonium adipate and a small amount of Cl Currently the exhausted formation solutions in foil industry are treated and disposed by external vendors, without extra disposal fees. The procedures are as follows. Firstly, excess strong inorganic acids (typically HCl) are introduced into these solutions to obtain precipitations of adipate acid. Then, the resulting filtrates are further disposed by the same vendor. The related disposal cost is as high as $40.0 m After figuring out the actual profits of the recovered ammonium adipate, we can accomplish the routine cost analysis for the continuous DD process, similar to our previous work In this work, we present a novel process to selectively remove Cl The authors are grateful for financial support by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: