The densification and grain growth of bodies made from a commercial ultrafine alumina powder was investigated. The primary powder was initially subjected to dry (uniaxial cold pressing) and wet shaping (slip casting), followed by conventional (CS)-, two step (TSS)-, and microwave (MS) sintering to explore the effect of each series of treatments on the densification and microstructural evolution of the specimens. It was demonstrated that a uniform microstructure with higher density would be obtained using the wet shaping method. In addition, microwave sintering was found to be more effective into the densification of the specimens and in yielding a finer grain structure. It is believed that the high heating rate and effective particle packing are responsible for the improvements in these properties. On this basis, it was also demonstrated that the fracture toughness of the samples increased significantly through the application of microwave sintering.Most ceramic bodies are required to be sintered to a nearly full dense structure to meet the superiority of properties for structural applications. Therefore, a variety of approaches in the field of sintering have arisen due to the widespread demand of ceramics in recent decades. Hence, understanding how the processing variables affect microstructural evolution is the key to initiating a proper sintering procedure. Different processing steps and variables are required to be considered for the manufacturing of samples with densities close to the theoretical value. For example, one may use variable methods in the shaping step, such as simple die compaction, isostatic pressing, slip casting and gel casting, based on the properties required for the final product. In light of shaping methods, not only the sintering conditions but also the sintered properties may differ noticeably. Krell and Klimke In addition, the various techniques employed through the sintering step can be the sources of inconsistencies in the properties of sintered nanostructures. Mazaheri et al. In the present study, nanocrystalline alumina powder has been subjected to the shaping methods of UP and SC to highlight the significance of the consolidation technique. Additionally, to understand the effect of the green state on the sintering path and mechanical properties of sintered bodies, the microstructural evolution was investigated. Moreover, microwave heating and two-step sintering were applied on some samples to explore the effect of the sintering technique on the grain growth. The alumina powder (Taimicron TM-DAR; Taimei Chemicals Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan ( To investigate the effect of the shaping method on the densification behavior of the samples, green bodies formed via DP and SC methods were conventionally sintered with a heating rate of 10 TSS, alternatively, was conducted via heating to 1250 The hardness and fracture toughness measurements were performed by applying indentation and measuring the crack length (Buehler, MTX-AL, Germany), according to ASTM C1327. The indentation tests were performed on polished samples with a load of 10  As shown in On the contrary, the external forces through dry pressing can hardly move an individual particle into the voids available.  On the other hand, the SC bodies show significantly higher fractional fired densities compared to the pressed compacts sintered at equivalent temperatures. For instance, while soaking the SC specimens at 1250     Although the advantage of a wet shaping method, such as SC, caused an enhancement in the densification kinetics ( As presented in previous publications The hardness and fracture toughness (FT) of nearly full dense samples are summarized in Based on the present results, the only definite conclusion is that the grain-size reduction of the CS and SC bodies from 1.95 to 1.5 The microstructural evolution of the ultrafine alumina powder subjected to variable shaping methods (DP and SC) followed by different sintering techniques (CS, TSS and MS), has been detected in the current investigation. A summary of the consequences includes the following: The slip casting as a wet shaping method a more successful method in deriving nanostructures with a higher green density. While the maximum accessible green density of dry-pressed (at 600 The SC samples, due to the finer pores (75 versus 135 Nearly full dense bodies with grain sizes of ∼500