Coal permeability models are required to define the transient characteristics of permeability evolution in fractured coals during CBM recovery. A broad variety of models have evolved to represent the effects of sorption, swelling and effective stresses on the dynamic evolution of permeability. In this review, we classify the major models into two groups: permeability models under conditions of uniaxial strain and permeability models under conditions of variable stress. The performance of these models is evaluated against analytical solutions for the two extreme cases of either free shrinking/swelling or constant volume. For the case of free shrinking/swelling none of the swelling/shrinking strain contributes to the change in coal permeability because effective stresses do not change. Conversely, for the case of constant volume the full swelling/shrinking strain contributes to the change in coal permeability because the coal is completely constrained from all directions. Therefore, these two solutions represent the lower bound and the upper bound behaviors of permeability evolution, respectively.
                  Review of laboratory observations concludes that although experiments are conducted under conditions of free shrinking/swelling the observed response is closest to that for constant volume condition. Similarly, review of in-situ observations concludes that coal gas reservoirs behave close to the constant volume condition although these observations are made under undefined in-situ stress and constraint conditions anticipated to be intermediate between free swelling and constant volume (i.e. for uniaxial strain). Thus comparison of these laboratory and field observations against the spectrum of models indicates that current models have so far failed to explain the results from stress-controlled shrinking/swelling laboratory tests and have only achieved some limited success in explaining and matching in situ data. Permeability models under uniaxial strain are more appropriate for the overall behavior of coal gas reservoirs under typical in situ conditions while models representing variable stress conditions are more appropriate for behavior examined under typical laboratory conditions. Unlike permeability models under the uniaxial strain condition, models under the constant volume condition are effective-stress based and can be used to recover the important non-linear responses due to the effective stress effects when mechanical influences are rigorously coupled with the gas transport system. Almost all the permeability models are derived for the coal as a porous medium, but used to explain the compound behaviors of coal matrix and fracture. We suggest that the impact of coal matrix-fracture compartment interactions has not yet been understood well and further improvements are necessary.Advances in our understanding of coal–gas interactions have changed the manner in which we treat coalbed methane: from mitigating its dangers as a mining hazard to developing its potential as an unconventional gas resource recovered as a useful by-product of CO As found in nature, coal is a typical dual porosity/permeability system ( The production of CBM dates back to the early 1930s. Yet, it was not until the early 1980s that research and development projects began to show the enormous potential of this energy resource. Major reserves exist in many countries and more than 90% of the estimated reserves are in Canada, Russia, China, the United States and Australia. Compared to conventional gas reservoirs, coal reservoirs have low effective porosity and high compressibility and are dominated by gas desorption. CBM recovery triggers a series of coal–gas interactions. For primary gas production, the reduction of gas pressure increases effective stress which in turn closes fracture apertures and reduces the permeability. As the gas pressure reduces below the desorption point, methane is released from the coal matrix to the fracture network and the coal matrix shrinks. As a direct consequence of this matrix shrinkage the fractures may dilate (zero volume change condition) and fracture permeability correspondingly increases. Thus a rapid initial reduction in fracture permeability (due to an increase in effective stress) is supplanted by a slow increase in permeability (indexed to matrix shrinkage). Whether the ultimate, long-term, permeability is greater or less than the initial permeability depends on the net influence of these dual competing mechanisms ( CBM extraction induced complex interactions between stress and sorptive chemistry exert strong influence on the transport and sorptive properties of the coal. These include influences on gas sorption and flow, coal deformation, porosity change and permeability modification. We label this chain of reactions as “coupled processes” implying that one physical process affects the initiation and progress of another. The individual processes, in the absence of full consideration of cross couplings, form the basis of very well-known disciplines such as elasticity, hydrology and heat transfer. Therefore, the inclusion of cross couplings is the key to rigorously formulate the behavior for coupled processes of coal–gas interactions. The complexity of these interactions is reflected in the extensive suite of coal permeability models available in the literature — with many of these models implemented into computer simulators to quantify coal–gas interactions. The primary goal of this paper is to review and evaluate the performance of these disparate models of coal permeability evolution and to define principal physical conditions where they, and their application in simulators, can be most successful. In this section, stress–strain relationships for a linear elastic porous medium are derived. The derivation makes use of an analogy between thermal contraction and matrix swelling/shrinkage associated with gas adsorption/desorption in coalbeds. Stress–strain relationships for a thermoelastic porous medium can be readily found in the literature ( From Eq. Considering a porous medium containing solid volume of We assume that the sorption-induced strain for the coal is the same as that for the pore space. Without the gas sorption effect, the volumetric variation of the porous medium satisfies the Betti–Maxwell reciprocal theorem, Using the definition of porosity, the following expressions can be deduced as ( Solving Eqs. Substituting Eqs. Rearranging the above equation gives Because generally The free-swelling volumetric strain Only Δ Relations, When coal is recovered by mining, or fluid recovered or injected, complex interactions of stress and chemistry have a strong influence on the properties of coal. These include influences on gas sorption and flow, coal deformation, porosity change and permeability modification. In this review, we define this chain of reactions as “coupled processes” implying that one physical process affects the initiation and progress of another. The individual process, in the absence of full consideration of cross couplings, forms the basis of very well-known disciplines such as elasticity, hydrology and heat transfer. Therefore, the inclusion of cross couplings is the key to rigorously formulate the full mechanics of coal–gas interactions. This defines the scope of the review: (1) to define coal porosity and permeability models; (2) to understand the interaction of multiple processes; and (3) to define important knowledge gaps. It is clear that there is a relationship between porosity, permeability and the grain-size distribution in porous media. When the porosity is much smaller than 1 (normally less than 10%), the second term of the right-hand side asymptotes to unity. This yields the cubic relationship between permeability and porosity for the coal matrix Therefore, coal porosity and permeability can be defined as Eqs. As shown in Eqs. When the change in total stress is equal to zero, Assuming the coal sample is under conditions of uniaxial strain and the overburden load remains unchanged, they can also be defined as a function of gas pressure and temperature only. When the impact of coal fractures and gas compositions is considered, coal porosity and permeability models can be linked to fracture parameters and gas concentrations. In this paper, we review two important forms of coal permeability models: coal permeability models under conditions of uniaxial strain and coal permeability models representing conditions of variable stress. An equation for permeability and porosity of a collection of matchsticks are discussed by Differentiating with respect to hydrostatic stress and combining the relationship between coal physical properties gives ( The first term in parentheses represents the contribution of changes in the coal matrix to the stress dependence of permeability. This term is analogous to grain compaction in conventional reservoir rocks. The second term represents the cleat volume contribution to the stress–permeability relation, which is normally two to three orders of magnitude larger than the coal matrix term (  By assuming that an individual fracture reacts as an elastic body upon a change in the normal stress component, The exponential relation was used for the permeability calculation  This model considered the effects of coal-matrix swelling/shrinkage only, ignoring the impact of coal compressibility. Therefore, their model is limited to specific conditions in which sorption-induced strain (matrix swelling or shrinkage) dwarfs pressure-induced, elastic changes in cleat permeability ( Based on the matchstick geometry model and the relation between permeability and porosity developed by Based on the theory of linear elasticity for strain changes, By assuming the uniaxial strain condition, The cubic relation between porosity and permeability was used for this derivation, as shown below An improved P&M model has been developed, and is summarized in Similarly, the Advanced Resources International (ARI) group developed another permeability model ( Following the above work, The cubic relation between permeability and porosity was used to calculate coal cleat permeability change. By assuming constant overburden stress and uniaxial strain conditions, this permeability model was extended to be Recently,  In this model, the effective porosity of the matrix block is assumed to be zero, leaving the fracture system to provide the only interconnected void space. The permeability model was expressed as Based on the theory of poroelasticity, a general porosity and permeability model was developed by Similarly, Contrary to previous models developed for field conditions, their model mainly deals with variable stress conditions commonly used during measurement of permeability in the laboratory. When experimental results from these tests are interpreted, a matchstick or cubic coal model is typically assumed with the matrix blocks completely separated from each other in a stacked structure. Under this assumption, matrix swelling does not affect coal fracture permeability under conditions of constant confining (total) stress, because, for a given pore pressure, An alternate reasoning has been applied by The fracture permeability was expressed as This study also considered the resultant change in coal permeability, which combined the outcome of the reduction in fracture opening due to coal matrix swelling and effective stress change as well as the decrease in effective stress due to changes in fluid pressure and confining stress for the matrix system, defined as   The permeability change can be calculated by the following expression The permeability models as reviewed above do not reflect the directional behavior of permeability change. The anisotropic characteristics of a coal matrix-fracture structure suggests that the evolution of coal permeability should be direction-dependent. With cubic coal cores,  Following this Recently, they extended their work by considering discontinuous coal masses as an equivalent elastic continuum. The implementation procedure of an explicit-sequential coupled simulation using such permeability models in industrial simulators is complex but feasible for coupled simulation in pressure depleting CBM reservoirs ( The total change of matrix block is defined as The following expression is used for the permeability calculation   The directional permeability expression is defined as follows Recently, Dual permeability or multiple permeability models have been developed to represent the porosity and permeability of all constituent components (  As reviewed in the previous chapter, there is a large variety of coal permeability models. These span conditions represent constant stress through variable stress conditions. In this section, these models are evaluated through comparing laboratory and in-situ measurements with theoretical solutions of the two extreme cases, as illustrated in A matchstick or cubic coal model is typically assumed with matrix blocks completely separated from each other in a coal sample. In this arrangement matrix swelling will not affect coal fracture permeability under the constant confining (total) stress conditions. When an adsorptive gas is injected, the gas occupies the fracture and the gas pressure in the fracture reaches the injection pressure almost instantly. At this stage, the maximum imbalance between fracture pressure and matrix pressure is achieved. However, this imbalance diminishes as the gas diffuses into the coal matrix. The pore pressure in the matrix increases which in turn reduces the effective stress in the matrix. As a consequence of the diffusion, coal matrix swells due to both the matrix pore pressure increase and the gas sorption. Because the effective stress in the fracture remains unchanged throughout the whole process, the coal matrix swelling will result in swelling of the blocks alone, rather than changes in fracture aperture. The ambient effective stress also exerts no influence on matrix swelling, due to the complete separation between matrix blocks caused by through-going fractures. Therefore, the permeability should not change. In other words, 0% of the swelling/shrinking strain contributes to the coal permeability change, which can be seen from Eq. The theoretical solutions for these two cases are derived as Solutions of these two cases are illustrated in In the following sections, we briefly review experimental observations of coal permeability under the influence of gas adsorption/desorption, in-situ observations of a coal gas reservoir during gas production, and compare them with the bounds of their behaviors as shown in Early studies ( Assuming all of these observations were made under controlled stress conditions and the applied confining stresses were maintained constant during the tests, the influences of these external stresses on the coal permeability change could be eliminated. Under hydrostatic stress condition, 0% of coal shrinkage would contribute to changes in coal permeability. This may represent the free shrinkage case. Assuming the experiments were conducted under completely constrained condition then the bulk volume of a coal sample would not change during the experiment. Under this assumption, 100% of coal shrinkage would contribute to the enhancement of coal permeability, which represents the constant volumetric case. Because most of the experimental observations were made under conditions of controlled stress, they should be equal to or close to the theoretical solution under the free shrinkage condition. As shown in Direct observations of the influence of coal swelling on permeability change were made by Similar to the gas desorption cases, because all of the mentioned experimental observations were made under controlled stress conditions, they should be equal to or close to the theoretical solution under the free swelling condition. As shown in In-situ measured data show that the absolute permeability of coal gas reservoirs increases significantly with continued gas production ( However, the opposite observation was made when CO Assuming all of coal gas reservoirs are under conditions of controlled stress and the ground stresses are maintained as constant during the gas extraction/injection, the influences of these constant ground stresses on the coal permeability change could be eliminated. Under the hydrostatic stress condition, 0% of coal shrinking/swelling would contribute to the coal permeability enhancement/reduction. This represents the free swelling case. Alternately, assuming coal gas reservoirs are under conditions of complete deformational constraint then the bulk volume of a coal gas reservoir would not change during the gas extraction/injection. Under this assumption, 100% of coal shrinking/swelling would contribute to the enhancement/reduction of coal permeability. This represents the constant volumetric case. Comparison of field observations with both the free shrinkage model and constant volumetric model is presented in Laboratory observations are made under conditions of controlled stress. Under these conditions, coal samples are free to swell/shrink and no swelling/shrinkage strain contributes to the coal permeability change. However, these theoretical conclusions are not consistent with experimental observations. These observations indicate that although the experiments were conducted under controlled stress conditions the experimental measurements are more closely related to those expected under constant volume conditions. These discrepancies illustrate the obvious drawbacks of the current coal permeability models. If a coal gas reservoir is treated as a whole, with full lateral restraint and invariant overburden stress, its behavior should represent components of the free swelling/shrinkage and the constant volume models. This could explain why current coal permeability models representing conditions of uniaxial strain condition can successfully match some field data. All of the coal permeability models are derived based on the theory of poroelasticity. These models honor their various assumptions, but have failed to fully replicate laboratory observations, and achieved only limited success in matching field data. The most recent viewpoints ( Gas flow within coal seams differs significantly from that of conventional reservoirs. Detailed studies have examined the storage and transport mechanisms of gas in coal seams. In situ and laboratory data indicate that the storage and flow of gas in coal seams are associated with the matrix structure of coal and the absorption or desorption of gas. Coal is a naturally fractured dual-porosity reservoir, consisting of micro-porous matrix and cleats. Most of the gas is initially stored within micro-pores in the absorbed state. When gas recovery begins, the gas desorbs and diffuses from the matrix to the cleats due to the concentration gradient. The rate of gas flow through the cleats is considered to be controlled by the permeability of the coal seam. Gas flow within coal seams is a complex physical and chemical process coupling solid deformation, gas desorption and gas movement, as shown in According to As concluded in the discussion of fundamental principles (  Considering coal to be a triple-porosity system, the implementation of a bidisperse pore-diffusion model in a coalbed reservoir simulator was discussed by These prior studies did not accommodate geomechanical influences related to the role of changes in total stress on performance. When coal is under variable stress conditions and the impact of coal fractures and gas compositions is considered, coal porosity and permeability models are defined as a function of effective stress, coal matrix–fracture interactions, and gas compositions. Under these conditions, important non-linear responses due to the effective stress effects must be recovered. This can be achieved through loose coupling. In loose coupling, different sets of equations are solved independently (as in one-way coupling), but information is passed at designated time intervals in both directions between the simulators. The theory describing fluid–solid coupling was first presented by In order to recover important non-linear responses due to the effective stress effects, mechanical influences must be rigorously coupled with the gas transport system. This can be achieved through the full coupling approach. For full coupling, a single set of equations (generally a large system of non-linear coupled partial differential equations) incorporating all of the relevant physics will be solved simultaneously. A coupled mathematical model for solid deformation and gas flow was proposed and implemented by To define a fully coupled computer simulator for the full mechanics of coal–gas interactions, a single set of equations (generally a large system of non-linear coupled partial differential equations) incorporating all of the relevant physics must be derived. Full coupling is often the preferred method for simulating multiple types of physics simultaneously since it should theoretically produce the most realistic results. This is the only approach to represent important non-linear responses due to the effective stress effects when mechanical influences are rigorously coupled with the gas transport system. Laboratory observations indicate that although experiments are typically conducted under conditions of free shrinkage/swelling, measurements are more like those anticipated under conditions of constant volume. Similarly, in situ observations demonstrate that coal gas reservoirs behave more closely to the constant volume case although all of the in-situ observations are made under unknown in-situ stress conditions. These comparisons demonstrate that current models have so far failed to explain the results from stress-controlled shrinking/swelling laboratory tests, and only achieved some limited successes in explaining and matching in-situ data. The most recent views of this contradiction (  the width of the coal matrix block material constant material constant Langmuir pressure constant (Pa fracture aperture fracture aperture change the initial aperture the mechanical aperture of a fracture coal cleat compressibility shrinkage compressibility the effective diameter of grains Young's modulus of coal Young's modulus for the fracture Young's modulus of the solid phase Young's modulus for matrix system Young's modulus without swelling influence a fraction between 0 and 1 the shear modulus of coal the crack length coal permeability initial permeability in i direction current permeability in i direction the bulk modulus of coal the bulk modulus of coal grains the bulk modulus of coal pore system Langmuir sorption constant (mol/kg) the gas pressure within the pores Langmuir pressure constant equivalent sorption pressure. the gas constant (8.314 elastic modulus reduction ratio cleat spacing the change of the adsorbate mass reservoir temperature shear displacement of fracture peak shear displacement of fracture Poisson's ratio of coal Poisson's ratio for solid phase Density for solid phase. the Kronecker delta (1 for coal porosity the cleat porosity current principal strains the maximum volumetric strain the total change of linear strain of a composite unit the sorption-induced volumetric strain the volumetric strain of coal the total effective volumetric strain the incremental pore volume strain the incremental rock bulk volume strain the incremental grain volume strain the change of normal strain of fracture (cleat) the directional effective strain the mechanical deformation due to stress change the mechanical deformation due to pressure change matrix shrinkage/swelling due to desorption/sorption thermal contract/expansion due to temperature changes. the Biot's coefficient the coefficient of volumetric thermal expansion. change rate in fracture compressibility the horizontal stress the initial horizontal stress the internal swelling stress the volumetric welling/shrinkage coefficient grain compressibility change of shear strain of a fracture the mobilized dilation angle The views expressed in this review have developed as a result of support from the