Although many studies have been conducted to date to investigate the effects of grinding aids (GAs), none of them specifically examined the effect of GAs on transportation rate of material inside the ball mill. In this study, the effects of GA on transportation rate of the ground material inside the cement ball mill and the effects of this change on the whole grinding circuit were investigated. In this context, industrial tests were carried out with three different dosages of an amine-based commercial GA in a closed-circuit cement ball mill. During the tests, the throughput of the circuit and all operating parameters of the mill and air classifier were kept constant. Thus, in dependent of all other variables, the effects of GA on the overall circuit, ball mill and air classifier were able to be examined. When GA was added to the circuit, the residence time of the material inside the mill decreased and the mill product became coarser. In fact, though the coarser ground powder was fed to the classifier, the cut size of the classifier decreased and, as a result, final product became finer with increasing the GA dosage. The results of this study based on industrial data will provide a better understanding of the mechanism of action of GAs in grinding circuits and pave the way for more efficiently use of GAs in industrial applications.An enormous amount of energy is consumed for the grinding process during cement production. More than a half of the energy consumed for cement production is used for grinding process of clinker (38%) and raw material (33%). In order to decrease the greenhouse gas emission, it is critically important to reduce the energy used for comminution. Therefore, increasing the efficiency of grinding process is a serious consideration that should be taken into account GAs provide the ability to increase throughput at the same product fineness or to produce finer product at the same throughput when they are mixed with the powder to be milled Weibel and Mishra To date, many laboratory-scale researches have been conducted to investigate the effects of GAs on grinding performance. Schoni et al. Assaad et al. Li et al. Although there have been many studies investigating the effects of GAs on milling performance, the number of researches examining their impacts on classification is limited. Toprak et al. Even though the laboratory-scale tests performed with GAs provide us very important and valuable information, it is not possible to adapt these results directly to the industry. When the results of the laboratory-scale tests performed with GAs were compared with industrial data, it was concluded that the specific energy consumption detected in the laboratory was higher and the product particle size distribution was coarser and wider than that realized in the industry Undoubtedly, scale-effect is the most important factor that causes these differences. The main factors affecting the milling process are the mill dimensions (length and diameter), the critical speed, the mill lining design, the ball filling ratio and the maximum ball size. The residence time of the ground material inside the mill is another important factor that should be taken into consideration. Ventilation is also affects the residence time since the fine particles that reach a certain product fineness are transported out of the mill with the help of air. GAs increase the fluidity of the powdered material and reduce the residence time inside the mill Toprak et al The aim of this study is to provide a better understanding of the mechanisms of action GAs by examining the effects of GAs on the residence time of the material inside the mill and the resulting changes in the grinding circuit. For this purpose, influences of 250, 350 and 450 g/t of dosages of an amin-based commercial GA on the cement grinding circuit was compared with the condition in which GA was not used. The effects of GA dosage on the ball mill and air classifier were examined in detail considering the change in the residence time of the material. Unlike the previous industrial tests performed with GAs, all operational parameters (production rate, classifier rotor speed and air volume, etc.) were kept constant during the tests and only the dosage of GA was changed. In this way, regardless of other operational variables, only the effects of the GA on the circuit were examined and a better understanding of the mechanism of action of GA was provided. Thus, GA manufacturers will be able to prepare new chemical compositions that can be more effective in grinding circuits. It is thought that the results of this study will shed light on GA manufacturers and cement producers as well as the researchers working on GAs. In order to investigate the effects of GA on cement grinding circuit, three different dosages of a commercial GA were tested and samples were collected around the circuit. The GA used during the tests was amine-based (major active material was triethanolamine) and has a specific gravity of 1.033 g/cm The circuit is equipped with a dynamic air classifier and a two chamber ball mil operating in closed circuit. There is a slotted diaphragm between the two chambers. This slotted diaphragm allows the fine grains in the first chamber to pass to the second chamber, while the coarse particles are held in the first chamber to keep grinding. The liners of the first chamber have designed to lift the balls optimum height and the second chamber has classifying liners that contribute to improve grinding performance by allowing a better classification of grinding media. Some of the fine particles inside the mill are transported out of the mill by air and held in the filter and then fed to air classifier. Coarser particles that cannot be transported by air are carried from the mill to the air classifier by bucket elevators. The rotor speed and the air rate of the classifier can be adjusted depending on the desired product fineness. The fine stream of the classifier is sent to the silos as the final product, while the coarser stream is transported to the ball mill by pneumatic conveyor for regrinding. The night before the tests started, supply of the GA previously used by the plant was cut off and the circuit was operated for approximately 12 hours without GA. Samples were collected around the circuit after checking the control room data and the fineness of the final product to ensure that the system was at steady state conditions. The data recorded from the control room under steady state conditions was tabulated in Then, the system was crash-stopped and the mill covers were opened. Afterwards, representative samples were taken from the 1st and 2nd chambers at 1.2 m intervals ( After the sampling process was completed, the mill covers were closed and operation of the grinding circuit was restarted by feeding GA at the concentrations of 250 g/t. The time required to reach steady-state was about 7 hours and samples were collected around the circuit under these conditions. The same procedure was also applied for the tests performed at the concentrations of 350 and 450 g/t. The tests were performed one after the other and in order to prevent instability, the clinker and raw materials were fed from the same kiln and quarry. The chemical composition of the cement is given in The particle size distributions of the collected samples were determined in two stages. Firstly, all samples were sieved from top size to 150 µm in a dry condition. Then, the size distributions of the samples finer than 150 µm were determined by laser diffractometry method. Finally, the data obtained from these two methods were combined to obtain full particle size distribution. Particle size distribution graphs of the samples collected around the circuit and inside the mill during reference condition (without GA) were plotted in Mass balance studies were carried out by using the data recorded from the control room and the measured particle size distributions. Thus, the flow rate of each stream around the circuit was calculated and the particle size distributions were adjusted taking into account the experimental errors arising from sampling and analysis. The graph showing the measured cumulative passing values against the calculated values is presented in When the flow rates of each stream were calculated, it was observed that the circulating load of the circuit increased as the dose of GA increased ( Previous researches concluded that the circulating load was decreased due to an increase in the dosage of the GA  Even though the air flow rate and the rotor speed of the air classifier were constant, finer cement was produced with the increase of the GA dosage ( Previous studies clarified that 0.75% of the energy was consumed on surface and agglomeration energy during the dry grinding of tricalcium silicate (C The most important thing to consider in the performance evaluation of the mill is undoubtedly its success in size reduction. When the particle size distributions of the mill feeds were examined carefully, it was seen that the particles size distribution of the mill feed was the coarsest under reference condition (without GA) and the finest under the condition that 450 g/t of GA was added. As can be seen in Surprisingly, although the mill feed distribution was coarser than the other test conditions; the finest mill product was obtained under the reference conditions. Indeed, it was clear that the product size became coarser with an increasing dose of GA. The reason of that was surely shortening of residence time due to the addition of the GA. The graphs in The increase in reduction ratio (F  Although the amount of finer particles than 30 µm in the mill product increased by the adding of GA; when the mill products were examined in itself, it was seen that the proportionally the highest amount of the fine particles were obtained under the condition that GA was not used ( When evaluating the performance of an air classifier the efficiency curves are plotted by calculating the ratio of the amount of the material in each size fraction in feed to coarse flow. An ideal and actual efficiency curves are illustrated as an example in The fine material in the product size that goes to directly coarse flow of the classifier without being subjected to classification is defined as bypass It is clear from the Even though this finding seems to contradict with the results of previous studies, in fact, it is not as contradictory as it may seem. This can be explained as follows: The residence time of the ground cement was shortened by increasing the dosage of GA dosage, and therefore the mill product became coarser. This caused an increase in the amount of the material which returned to the mill until the system reached the steady state conditions. As a result, the circulation load of the circuit and the dust load of the classifier as well as the bypass ratio increased. The reduced efficiency curves were plotted in order to evaluate the performance of the classifier independently of cut size and bypass. The size of the particles with the equal probability of flowing to coarse or fine stream of the classifier is defined as cut size. The curve obtained by subtracting the bypass from the actual efficiency curve is called the corrected efficiency curve. The corrected cut size is determined on the basis of these corrected efficiency curves The sharpness of the separation depends on the operational and design parameters of the classifier The initial rise of the fine particles on the efficiency curve is called as fishhook ( The reduced efficiency curves were plotted in The earlier study conducted with air classifiers reported that the fishhook dropped by increasing the air flow rate and reducing the rotor speed of the classifier The dust load of the circuit increased depending on the rise of the circulating load due to the adding GA to the system so that the bypass ratio was increased. It is important to state that, this was an indirect effect of the GA on cut size. As a result of the rise of the bypass, the cut size of the air classifier became even finer. The classifier feed rate was 69 tph for reference condition while this value was 165 tph at the dose of 450 g/t. Therefore, when GAs were added to the mill, despite the coarser particle size distribution of mill discharge, the amount of finer particles formed per unit time was much more than the reference condition. For example, the percentages of 20 µm sized particles in classifier feed for reference and 450 g/t of GA conditions were 5% and 3,5% respectively. On the other hand, when the production rates of 20 µm sized particles were examined, the values for reference and 450 g/t conditions were 3 and 6 tph, respectively ( When GA was not used, the corrected cut size of the air classifier was 53 μm, whereas with the adding of the grinding aid to the system the cut size became finer and even it was 29 μm at the dosage of 450 g/t. Within the scope of this study, the effects of three different dosages of an amine based GA were tested in a closed circuit operated cement grinding plant and their effects on the residence time of the powders inside mill and the performance of the grinding circuit were investigated. For this purpose, the throughput of the circuit and the rotor speed and the air flow rate of the air classifier were set to the same values for all test conditions. Thus, regardless of the influences of the other operational parameters, only the impacts of GA on the circuit were examined. It is important to state that, finer cement was produced in the same production rate by feeding GA to the system, although the rotor speed and the air flow rate of the air classifier were not changed. Interestingly, contrary to what was expected, this was not actually due to the positive effect of GA on grinding; it was due to its impact on the classification. The residence time of the cement particles inside the mill was shortened by adding the GA to the circuit. On the one hand, the shortening of the residence time provided a great advantage in efficient use of energy by preventing the overgrinding, while on the other hand, it caused some particles to leave the mill coarser than the expected size due to the reduced number of collisions with balls. These coarse particles caused an increase in the amount of material returned from classifier to mill. As a result, the circulating load ratio in the system increased, and therefore the dust load in the classifier feed also increased. Because of this increase in dust load, the bypass rate in the classifier increased with the addition of 450 g/t of GA. In spite of the fact that the rotor speed and air flowrate of the classifier were kept constant, the cut size of the separation reduced on account of the rise in the bypass ratio. Consequently, finer cement was able to be produced at the same production rate and specific energy consumption. The results of this study revealed that the influences of GAs on the discharge rate of the particles in the mill were at least as crucial as their effects on the fracture behaviour. The future outlook would entail the measurement of the impact of GAs on powder flowability in the laboratory and the estimation of its effects on the performance of the cement grinding circuits.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors appreciate Bursa Cement Plant for the assistance in industrial tests, and Hacettepe University Mining Engineering Department for providing laboratory facilities.