Difficult hand fractures with multiple butterfly fragments, multiple cortical splits or intraarticular extension continue to pose a challenge for optimal stable fixation that allows early postoperative mobilisation. In this study, we describe the use of cerclage-wire-assisted fixation of 17 difficult hand fractures in 16 patients. The cerclage wires helped to maintain the reduction, so providing sufficient initial stability for placement of a plate and screws. Stable fixation of the fracture was then accomplished without losing the reduction. One to three cerclages of stainless-steel wires were used for the preliminary fixation. Stable fixation was then accomplished by a bridging or neutralising plate technique. Postoperatively, the fixation was sufficiently stable to allow immediate mobilisation. With an average follow up of 44.5 months, all 17 fractures united without loss of reduction. At final follow-up, the average total active range of motion was 247° (range 220–260°).Unstable hand fractures that have failed initial conservative treatment or are obviously unsuited to conservative management require surgical treatment. Open reduction and internal fixation are often chosen to provide good fracture reduction and stable fixation, to allow early postoperative mobilisation. However, some fractures have a configuration which is difficult by virtue of the presence of multiple butterfly fragments or multiple cortical splits and/or with intraarticular extension. In these fractures, it can be impossible to obtain fracture reduction and temporary stability which can be maintained during fixation with implants. Despite improvements in the implants and instrumentation, there are still many instances in which these difficult fractures are inadequately reduced and fixation compromised. Consequently, there is still a high incidence of stiffness, non-union and other unsatisfactory results ( In our study, we treated these difficult fractures by using the technique of cerclage wires to assist in maintaining the reduction and giving sufficient temporary stability to allow the fracture to be further stabilised with bridging or neutralising plate and screws. We report the results of 17 fractures in 16 patients who were treated successfully with this technique. Sixteen patients with 17 difficult hand fractures underwent preliminary cerclage-wiring to assist fixation over a period of 4 years. Ten were metacarpal and seven were phalangeal fractures. The details of the patients and fractures are shown in The procedure is performed under general, or regional, anaesthesia with tourniquet control. The fracture site is usually exposed through a straight dorsal incision or through a longitudinal extension of the laceration in cases with open fractures. For proximal phalangeal fractures, the extensor tendon is split in the midline and, for middle phalanx fractures, the triangular ligament is split. For metacarpal fractures, the fracture is exposed by retracting the extensor tendon. Care is taken to avoid aggressive stripping of the periosteum, to minimise devascularising the bone fragments. After initial reduction of the fracture fragments, a small gauge stainless-steel wire (usually gauge 26 for metacarpal fractures and gauge 28 for phalangeal fractures) is carefully threaded round the bone to encircle the fragments. This manoeuvre is greatly facilitated by the use of a 19-gauge hypodermic needle bent carefully into a C-shape, serving as a guide ( Depending on the extent of the fracture, more than one cerclage wire may be needed to hold the fragments together ( In closure of the wound, where possible, the periosteum is sutured. The split extensor tendon is then repaired. Postoperatively, we start patients on active mobilisation on the first postoperative day. For the metacarpal fractures, the emphasis is on maintaining full flexion of the metacarpophalangeal joint. For the phalangeal fractures, emphasis is on full extension of the interphalangeal joints. If an extension lag of more than 20° is present, a volar trough splint is worn in between mobilisation exercises, which are carried out 100 times per day. The patients are supervised and followed-up at regular intervals, usually, 1, 2, 6, 12, and 24 weeks. At each follow-up, check X-rays are performed and range of motion at the three finger joints recorded. These 16 patients were reviewed retrospectively for fracture union, loss of reduction, other complications and functional outcome. Loss of reduction, angular deformity and failure of fixation were detected by comparison of serial X-rays. Bone union was defined by radiological evidence of bone trabeculae crossing the fracture site on at least two views (refer Assessment of the functional outcome was made by using the total active motion (TAM) system, as recommended by the The average follow-up period was 44.5 months (range 2–6 years). All 16 patients had no loss of reduction, angular deformity or implant failure. All 17 fractures united within 6 months (range 5 weeks to 6 months, average 12.7 weeks). The average TAM in this series was 247° (range 220–260°), which is rated as excellent in all cases. The average TAM for phalangeal fractures was 229° and 259° for the metacarpal fractures. Comparing the two groups, there is a statistically significant average TAM difference of 29.7°, in favour of the metacarpal fractures (95% CI 21.09, 38.34,  The challenge in treating a complex fracture is to achieve a stable fixation that allows early intensive mobilisation. Stable internal fixation is difficult to achieve in these cases. Cerclage-wiring was one of the earliest forms of internal fixation in the hand, as described by The effects of cerclage-wiring have been studied by In comminuted fractures however, it is possible that damage to the endosteal blood supply to a certain degree might have occurred. In the surgical approach, we try to have minimal manipulation of these fragments, so as to avoid further damage. During the insertion of the cerclage wires, we attempt not to strip the periosteum completely. Insertion occurs only at specific points of the bone, which should help preserve as much of the periosteal blood supply as possible. In particular, for the volar fragments, attachment of the flexor pulleys and tendon sheaths are not being stripped during the fixation. One important consideration in use of this technique is to avoid catching the flexor tendon. The method of avoiding this described earlier in this paper is useful in this respect. In our cases, the metacarpal fractures had slightly better final TAM, compared to the phalangeal fractures. This can easily be explained by the fact that anatomically, the extensor tendon is more closely related to the bone in the phalanges than in the metacarpals. It is unlikely that the difference is due to the different fracture character or fixation technique applied.