The development of environmental-friendly process for strategic metal extraction, limiting organic solvent use and effluent production, appears to be quite a challenging purpose. Production of pure molybdenum using supercritical CO2 extraction process, from sulfuric solution obtained by ore or used catalyst leaching, has been evaluated. Two organic ligands, trioctylamine and 2-ethylhexyl 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid, were studied to extract Mo as metal complexes solubilized in supercritical CO2. Extraction with trioctylamine revealed to be non-efficient due to a lack of Mo-trioctylamine complex solubility in CO2, even if extraction selectivity of molybdenum versus iron impurity was interesting. On the contrary, extraction with 2-ethylhexyl 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid leads to high Mo collection efficiency (up to 90% in 7h). However, no selectivity was observed between molybdenum and zirconium. The selectivity of 2-ethylhexyl 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid towards molybdenum in presence of iron was better but clearly decreased in presence of zirconium.Currently, metal extraction using hydrometallurgy processes generally involves several steps such as leaching (with alkaline or acidic solutions), extraction with organic solvent and precipitation Since Laintz et al.’s first extraction study of metal complexes in supercritical carbon dioxide using diethyldithiocarbamate as organic ligand Two ligands have been chosen, based on their liquid–liquid extraction performances, to carry out this study: trioctylamine (TOA) and 2-ethylhexyl 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid (PC88A). TOA is an anion exchanger known for having a strong affinity with molybdenum in solvent extraction from sulfuric acid medium Sulfuric solutions for extraction experiments, containing Mo as well as for specific experiments Fe and Zr impurities, were prepared by dissolving ammonium molybdate tetrahydrate (VWR BDH Prolabo), ferric sulfate (VWR BDH Prolabo), zirconium sulfate (Alfa Aesar) and ammonium sulfate (VWR BDH Prolabo) in deionised water. Acidity is adjusted with 1 TOA extractant ( Dodecane (Sigma–Aldrich), ammonium carbonate 0.5 As an anion exchanger, TOA first need to be preequilibrated with sulfuric acid, to become efficient for extraction. TOA sulfate is prepared by mixing TOA and 1 The metal complexes are formed by mixing, during 1 An experimental set-up combining dynamic and gravimetric method has been developed to measure extractant solubility in supercritical CO Solubility is determined by weighing the recovered solute in the collection vessels (without taking into account the solute recovered during depressurisation). Solubility in molar fraction is calculated using Eq. For metal complex, which is diluted in ligand, solubility is preferentially expressed in The mass balance deviation is also calculated, according to Eq. An apparatus has been developed to carry out dynamic extraction. It is slightly different from the one used for solubility measurement as a second high-pressure autoclave (Top Industrie) for extraction and an automatic back-pressure regulator (JASCO BP-2080) have been added. 5–15 After the extraction procedure, metal ions contained in the aqueous solution in the extraction vessel are analyzed by ICP-AES (Thermo Icap 6000). The extraction efficiency is calculated using Eq. After analysing the collection solvents by ICP-AES, it is possible to calculate the collection efficiency by Eq. In this study, TOA and PC88A ligands and metal-complexes solubility is first measured for different operating conditions and discussed in order to evaluate their potential use is supercritical CO To ensure that the equilibrium has been reached, TOA solubility has been measured at several flowrates between 0.5 and 1.5 TOA solubility increases with pressure at 40 PC88A solubility ( Metal complex (diluted PC88A-Mo) solubility has also been measured at 25 PC88A solubility in supercritical CO Concerning metal ligand solubility, according to Ashenbrenner et al. The speciation of molybdenum is not very well known although several studies were carried out on solvent extraction of molybdenum from sulfuric solutions Under our operating conditions (pH As PC88A is a cation exchanger, MoO 20 Extraction of molybdenum in supercritical CO Extraction experiments of molybdenum are carried out on sulfuric solutions containing [Mo] Whatever the conditions tested, molybdenum is completely extracted from the aqueous solution after 3 Selectivity experiments are carried out on sulfuric solutions containing [Mo] The molybdenum contained in the solution is totally consumed after 0.5 Two extraction experiments were performed on an aqueous solution containing [Mo] Preequilibration has no influence on the extraction efficiency. It is also observed that TOA has no selectivity towards molybdenum in presence of zirconium. Protons are totally consumed during extraction in both cases as observed in the previous experiments. Again, less than 1% of Mo and Zr was collected. However, for the experiment without TOA preequilibration, a layer of organic phase was found above the aqueous phase after extraction. The analysis revealed that this organic phase contained 26.0 One dynamic extraction is carried out on a solution containing [Mo] All experiments with PC88A were performed with 15 One dynamic extraction using PC88A is carried out on a solution containing [Mo] According to the ICP-AES analysis of the aqueous phase, molybdenum is completely extracted and no organic layer was found above the aqueous phase after extraction. Moreover, a very good collection efficiency of molybdenum is obtained: 89.6 The collected organic phase mass is very low at the beginning of extraction but is very concentrated in molybdenum ( Two different solutions were used to conduct this selective study. The first solution contains molybdenum and iron and the second solution contains molybdenum, iron and zirconium ( Concerning the selective study between molybdenum and iron, there is a disparity between the collection efficiency and the extraction efficiency of molybdenum. This is also the case for iron. It might come from a mass loss in the experimental set-up even if more than 96% of the initial organic phase was found ( In presence of zirconium and iron, little molybdenum is collected. The collection efficiencies are also very low whereas the extraction efficiencies are very high. Most of the molybdenum that is not collected at the exit of the experimental set-up is found in the organic layer above the aqueous phase in the extraction vessel. A large quantity of iron is found in the organic layer too, which is not the case for zirconium. Moreover, white precipitates were found at the bottom of the extraction vessel. These precipitates might not only contain zirconium but the remaining molybdenum which is neither collected nor found in the aqueous solution. These precipitates will be further studied in order to understand this phenomenon. Molybdenum extraction in supercritical CO A continuous flow apparatus was developed for measuring solubility of ligands and metal complexes in supercritical CO Dynamic extraction experiments with supercritical carbon dioxide were carried out on sulfuric acid solutions containing molybdenum with and without impurities at 25 We would like to thank the