Bacteria and fungi are important micro-organisms in the soil, but may differ in their impact on net N-mineralization. The hypothesis was tested that fungi are characterized by low microbial activity, but also low immobilization, and bacteria by high activity and high immobilization. A one-month laboratory incubation experiment with selective inhibition of fungi (cycloheximide) or bacteria (streptomycin) was conducted with samples of organic layer and mineral topsoil (0–10cm) from neutral, bacteria-dominated and acidic, fungi-dominated Luxembourg beech forests. In the control treatment, respiration was higher in neutral than in acidic soil, but net N-mineralization was lower, due to higher immobilization. In the antibiotic treatments, differences in nitrification suggest that selective inhibition indeed occurred; in all soils and horizons, nitrification was especially limited by bactericide. Besides as inhibitor of the target group, antibiotics may also serve as source of C and N for the non-target group. For both bactericide and fungicide, acidic soils showed higher net recovery of C and N from antibiotics than neutral soil, which suggests that uptake or sorption of antibiotics is higher in the latter. Clear differences between neutral and acidic soils arose when the main micro-organisms were stimulated. In bacteria-dominated neutral soil, application of fungicide led to increased microbial respiration. In fungi-dominated acidic soil, however, application of bactericide did not lead to higher respiration, but to increased net N-mineralization per unit respiration, which supports a lower immobilization. Differences between antibiotics were consistent for organic layer and mineral topsoil, with increase in activity with fungicide, and lower immobilization with bactericide. The results provide correlative and experimental evidence that reduced immobilization by fungi compensates for their lower rates of activity with respect to N-availability to the vegetation.Fungi and bacteria are different micro-organisms, which live in different places in the soil ( Yet, there are some problems with this scenario. More than a few studies report higher instead of lower net N-mineralization in acidic, fungal-dominated systems, compared to neutral, bacteria-dominated soil ( Nevertheless, this scenario has not been experimentally tested, with e.g., selective inhibition. Selective inhibition of fungi and bacteria has been applied in many short-term experiments, often with substrate induced respiration (SIR), used to separate fungal and bacterial activity ( In this study, we applied selective inhibition with the fungicide The effects of bactericide and fungicide on C and N-cycling may be complicated, because neutral and acidic soils are dominated by different microbial groups. Apart fom selective inhibition of the target groups, we therefore also used side effects to the non-target groups such as extra supply of C and N ( The study sites were selected in Luxembourg, south of Diekirch, with humid temperate climate and rainfall in all months, and consisted of two clearly different model ecosystems: neutral and acidic beech ( Bacteria and fungi were selectively inhibited with the bactericide Potential net N-mineralization was measured in a one-month laboratory incubation experiment. Samples were homogenized by hand, and roots were removed. Fresh samples were put into large petri dishes and brought to optimal gravimetric moisture levels, where microbial activity was not hampered by drought or oxygen stress (300% for organic and 50% for mineral soil samples; Microbial C and N were measured with chloroform fumigation and extraction ( Respiration was measured at the start and end of the incubation experiments, as preliminary experiments indicated that CO Efficiency of N-mineralization was calculated as net N-mineralization per unit C respired, which can be used as proxy for microbial immobilization, and the relative amount of N available to the vegetation ( Microbial immobilization could only be calculated for the control treatment, in which microbial C and N were measured at the start and end of the incubation experiment. Immobilization was calculated with a theoretical model, which must be seen as indicative rather than absolute. The model is based on existing theoretical equations of C and N dynamics ( Substrate C:N ratios were derived from fresh samples. Microbial C:N ratios were derived from mean values, over the entire incubation period. Microbial C:N ratios used in acidic soils were 6.6 Differences between soil types in soil and microbial characteristics in fresh soil were tested with two-way analysis of variance, with soil type (neutral and acidic) and horizon (organic layer and mineral topsoil) as independent factors ( Potential effects of antibiotics on nitrification and net recovery of C and N from antibiotics were tested with three-way analysis of variance, with soil type, horizon and treatment (control, bactericide and fungicide) as independent factors, and post hoc LS-means tests. For potential effects of antibiotics on C and N-cycling, net N-mineralization and respiration were calculated per kg OM, to allow a direct comparison of neutral and acidic soils, as well as organic layers and mineral topsoils. In addition, the dataset was separated into two parts: one with stimulation of the main group of micro-organisms, to enlarge differences between bacteria and fungi as much as possible, and the second with inhibition of the main group, to reduce differences in microbial community composition and/or shift this towards the other group. In the first set, fungicide was used in neutral soil, and bactericide in acidic soil, to inhibit the minor and stimulate the main microbial group in both organic layer and mineral topsoil. In the second set, bactericide was used in neutral soil, and fungicide in acidic soil, to inhibit the main and stimulate the minor microbial group in both organic layer and mineral topsoil. Differences in C and N-cycling between soil types, horizons and antibiotic treatments were tested for the stimulation and inhibition set separately. In each set, three-way analysis of variance was applied with soil type, horizon and treatment (control and stimulation, or control and inhibition of the main group) as independent factors. Because values of the control treatment were used in both sets, Bonferroni-corrections were applied, and differences were significant below 0.025 instead of 0.05. Differences between individual mean values were tested with post hoc LS-means tests. The relative contribution to total C and N-cycling of soil types and horizons largely differed due to differences in amount of OM, and respiration and net N-mineralization of the upper 10 As expected, neutral and acidic soils clearly differed in soil characteristics ( Neutral and acidic soils also clearly differed in microbial C and N. Microbial biomass per m Microbial behaviour also differed between neutral and acidic soil in both organic layer and mineral topsoil. Respiration, based on CO With respect to soil type, net N-mineralization showed opposite results. Net N-mineralization per kg OM was 5.5 and 2.3 times lower in neutral than in acidic soil for organic layer and mineral topsoil, respectively. Low values for net N-mineralization in neutral soil were also measured when expressed per m Before they can employ their inhibitive effects, antibiotics should first be taken up by the micro-organisms. In most cases, only part of the C and N supplied with antibiotics was recovered, for both bactericide and fungicide ( Recovery of DOC and DON clearly differed between neutral and acidic soils, for both organic layer and mineral topsoil. In neutral soil, recovery of DOC and DON was on average 1.8 times lower than in acidic soil, and microbial uptake and/or sorption to soil particles presumably higher. Recovery of DOC varied between 37–49% in neutral soil, compared to 73–108% in acidic soil. For DON, recovery was even lower and ranged from 25 to 36% in neutral soil to 46–62% in acidic soil, independent of the type of antibiotic. In the control treatment, the amount of nitrate net produced was lower in neutral than in acidic soil for both organic layer and mineral topsoil, due to the overall low net N-mineralization ( In acidic soils, nitrification in the control treatment was high for both organic layer and mineral topsoil. This was the case in absolute amounts, due to high overall net N-mineralization, but also for the relative amounts, which amounted to approximately 100% of total net N-mineralization in both layers. In acidic soils, like in neutral soils, application of bactericide led to a clear drop in nitrification, in both absolute and relative amounts. This suggests that the bacterial process was negatively affected also in acidic soil. However, in contrast to neutral soil, nitrification also decreased with fungicide, when the dominant fungi were negatively affected and bacteria stimulated. This was the case for both absolute and relative amounts. In neutral soil, net N-mineralization significantly increased compared to the control treatment in both antibiotic treatments ( In neutral, bacteria-dominated soil, respiration significantly increased when the main group of micro-organisms was stimulated with fungicide, but not at all when inhibited with bactericide. Net N-mineralization per unit C respired did not change when bacteria were stimulated. However, when bacteria were inhibited, net N-mineralization per unit C respired significantly increased, which points to lower immobilization. The increase in net N-mineralization in neutral soil with antibiotics may thus have different causes: increased respiration and activity when bacteria are stimulated, and lower immobilization when bacteria are inhibited, and fungi stimulated. In acidic, fungi-dominated soils, respiration increased in the organic layer, but only when fungi were inhibited by fungicide, and bacteria stimulated. When fungi were stimulated, respiration did not change. However, when fungi were stimulated, net N-mineralization per unit C respired increased, especially in the mineral topsoil. This points to lower immobilization when fungi are stimulated. As already indicated, extra supply of N from antibiotics and dead micro-organisms did not lead to increased net N-mineralization in acidic, fungi-dominated soils. Nevertheless, when fungi were stimulated, immobilization, which was already low in this soil type, further decreased. In contrast, when fungi were inhibited, respiration increased, which suggests higher microbial activity when fungi decreased and bacteria increased. In the control treatment, net N-mineralization per m In acidic soil, net N-mineralization per m The above results suggest that the two antibiotics evoked specific responses in microbial activity in all horizons, independent of soil type and initial microbial composition. In almost all horizons, net N-mineralization per m In this study, we further explored the paradox that neutral soils often have lower net N-mineralization than acidic soils, despite higher biological activity. We tested with selective inhibition whether differences in net N-mineralization could be related to differences in activity and microbial immobilization between bacteria and fungi. Changes in microbial community from neutral to acidic soil are naturally more complex than just a shift from bacteria to fungi (e.g., Unfortunately, bacterial and fungal populations could not be measured during the experiment. However, earlier research in previous years showed that the neutral and acidic soils of this study consistently differed in dominance of bacteria and fungi ( Selective inhibition was also supported by the differential effects of bactericide and fungicide on nitrification, especially in neutral soil. Nitrification is basically a bacterial process ( Our results suggest that bacteria and fungi really differ in cycling of C and N, especially with respect to microbial activity and N-demand. In the control treatment, the results further support the hypothesis that neutral soils have higher biological activity than acidic soils, but that net N-mineralization may nevertheless be lower due to higher microbial N-demand and immobilization. This could explain why net N-mineralization was lower in neutral than in acid soil in e.g., In the antibiotic treatments, microbial activity and N-demand were also higher for bacteria than for fungi. This was most obvious in the most extreme soils when the main micro-organisms were stimulated: neutral soil with fungicide, and acidic soil with bactericide. In neutral soil with fungicide, respiration not only increased compared to the control treatment, but was also much higher than in fungi-dominated acidic soil. Net N-mineralization per unit C respired however showed the opposite response, with increased values in acidic soil with application of bactericide, and higher values than in neutral soils in any case. Higher N-demand by bacteria than by fungi may to some extent be supported by the lower recovery of DOC and DON in neutral than in acidic soil. Lower recovery could be partly due to higher sorption of DOC and DON to soil particles, especially since the neutral soil is also loamy, and stabilization of organic matter by clay and silt should be more pronounced than in the sandy, acidic soil ( Differences between bacteria and fungi in microbial activity and N-demand even emerged when the main group of micro-organisms was inhibited, and microbial communities probably more mixed. Despite differences in soil types and initial microbial community structure, application of fungicide showed surprisingly similar responses in neutral and acidic soil, and in organic layer and mineral topsoil, with a general increase of respiration when bacteria were stimulated. For bactericide, the response was also more or less similar for all soil horizons, with increase of net N-mineralization per unit C respired, which points to lower immobilization when fungi are stimulated. The differences in response to the two antibiotics cannot be explained by differences in dosage. For example, DOC-input from antibiotics was the same for fungicide and bactericide in neutral soil, but respiration only increased with fungicide, in both organic layer and mineral topsoil. The results thus further support the evidence that bacteria and fungi really differ in microbial activity and immobilization. The different strategies for N-cycling of bacteria and fungi are important to ecosystem functioning. In accord with High bacterial immobilization in lime-rich ecosystems may be compensated to some extent. Earthworms, excluded from most incubation experiments, are prominent in neutral soil and may increase net N-mineralization by excretion of N in mucoproteins and dead tissue ( This study provides correlative and experimental evidence for higher activity, but also higher N-demand in bacteria than in fungi. The assumption that neutral, bacteria-dominated soils have high net N-mineralization and high N-availability to the vegetation due to high microbial activity and gross N-release is thus too simple, because microbial N-demand is not taken into account. In neutral soil, where microbial N-demand is high, ecosystem N-fertility is sustained by high gross N-release. However, in acidic soil, net N-mineralization may be substantial despite low gross N-release, because fungal N-demand is low as well. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. We would like to thank Leo Hoitinga, Leen de Lange and Piet Wartenbergh for their laboratory assistance. The study was funded by the