In this study, the kinetics of agglomerate growth in a batch oil agglomeration process has been studied using bituminous coal. The effect of operating variables such as kerosene concentration, pulp density and speed of agitation on the agglomeration process was investigated. It has been found that the second-order kinetic equation describes the growth of agglomerates adequately. The growth of the agglomerates in the oil agglomeration process shows a self-preserving growth. Using this, a characteristic curve has been developed. For the prediction of the size distribution of the agglomerates, the d
                     50 values of the agglomerates must be known. Therefore, a model has been developed by using the kinetic equation for estimation of d
                     50 values of agglomerates for this coal. It was shown that the size distribution of the agglomerates for any levels of the process variables studied can be predicted using the equation of characteristic curve and d
                     50 values. Knowledge obtained from this study will be helpful for technological advancement of this kind of study.Oil agglomeration is a method for coal cleaning. This method depends on difference between the surface properties of hydrophobic (organic) and hydrophilic (inorganic) particles. In this method, hydrophobic particles have been agglomerated by using an immiscible oil known as bridging oil, while hydrophilic constituents remain in suspension. The agglomerated product is generally separated from the suspension by sieving. The principles and application conditions of oil agglomeration process have been investigated in detail in various studies As it is known, to investigate the kinetics of a process it is necessary to study the variation of the dependent variable with respect to time. For the oil agglomeration of coal, the dependent variable may be the agglomerate size, agglomerate weight (yield) or organic matter recovery of coal. The kinetic equations obtained from laboratory data are used to model the oil agglomeration process. The developed model can be used for purpose of scale up to full-size operation without the need for expensive and time-consuming tests on commercial units. In other words, the kinetic studies are important for design, operation and control of system. Various factors affecting the yield, organic matter recovery, ash content and size of the agglomerates have been investigated in detail Although considerable works A Turkish bituminous coal sample from Zonguldak colliery was taken for this study. The sample was ground to −0.425 mm for oil agglomeration tests. The proximate analysis result of this coal sample is given in The experiments were performed in a 600 ml beaker with three baffles at the borders to create turbulence. In the experiments, IKA RE 16 type mechanical stirrer was used. The agitation was provided by a centrally located flat black turbine impeller (consisting of four blades, 50 mm in diameter and 10 mm in with) at fixed distance from the bottom of the vessel. Tap water (pH ∼6.85) was used in the experiments. The pH of coal-suspension was about 7.05 and the volume of the suspension (except the experiments aimed for investigation of effect of pulp density (PD)) subjected to agglomeration was 320 ml. In the experiments, kerosene was used as a bridging liquid. It was characterized by 0.78 g cm The mixture of coal–water was conditioned for 3 min before the bridging liquid addition in order to achieve complete wetting of the coal particles in water. Thereafter, the coal samples were agglomerated by bridging liquid (kerosene) addition. The bridging liquid concentration was based on the mass ratio of kerosene to dry feed coal. Agitation was continued for a predetermined period (called agglomeration period) and then stopped. The agglomerated product was separated from the unagglomerated residue using a 0.500 mm sieve. The agglomerates were taken as oversize product. Then, the agglomerates were wet screened over a set of sieves and each size fraction was dried and weighed to estimate the size distribution. The agglomerates were sufficiently strong, therefore any unwanted breakage did not occur during wet screening. The experiments were conducted at different levels of the variables and various agglomeration periods. The experimental details are given in The results of the agglomeration experiments were evaluated for determination of characteristic curve, kinetics of agglomerate growth and modelling of agglomeration process for the prediction of the size distribution. Following equation were used for their evaluation. For determination of characteristic curve, Plitt equation  In other works The equation of characteristic curve (Eq. The growth of agglomerates was quantified using the size The cumulative 50% passing size ( This behaviour of the It is observed from The size distribution of the agglomerates for various degrees of agitation is given in The values of the constants The particle size distributions of the agglomerates obtained from the results of the experiments performed with change in PD are given in As it is known, the distance between particles and kerosene droplets and between particle and particle at low PD is greater than that of higher PD. Therefore, the necessary interactions at low PD to produce kerosene coated particles and agglomerates are lower than that of higher PD. As a result of this, the It has been shown that the size distribution of the agglomerates exhibits a self-preserving behaviour A characteristic curve for the agglomeration of this coal has been developed in the light of its behaviours mentioned above. Eq. The slope of the straight line The modelling of the oil agglomeration process is related with the prediction of the size distribution of the agglomerates at different levels of the process variables in the present investigation. The size distribution of the agglomerates can be predicted if the equation of the characteristic curve and the As can be seen in It can be observed from The results of this study are as follows: Kinetic data analysis showed that a second-order rate expression can be used to describe the oil agglomeration kinetics. The The rate constant The growth of agglomerates in the oil agglomeration process shows a self-preserving behaviour in the form of a characteristic curve under a variety of operating conditions. Using this behaviour a characteristic curve was developed for the oil agglomeration process. The characteristic curve was quantified using Rosin–Rammler type of equation which fitted the experimental data well. The size distribution of the agglomerates can be predicted if the The relationships developed between The equation developed in this study may be used in scaling up of the oil agglomeration process.