The objective of the present study was to develop a procedure for flotation circuit design that accounts for uncertainty and water efficiency. The design process considers two stages: 1) optimal process design without considering water consumption and 2) efficient use of water considering property integration.
                  For the flotation circuit design, we applied stochastic programming. In the optimization problem, it is desired to find the optimal configuration, equipment design and operational conditions of a circuit with multiple stages (rougher, scavenger, cleaner). The problem includes uncertainty in the feed composition and in the metal price. Each uncertain parameter is characterized probabilistically using scenarios with different occurrence probabilities. Then, considering the solutions to different scenarios, property integration is used to design the water integration system. Three properties are included: pH, oxygen concentration, and conductivity.
                  The application of the procedure to an example shows that including uncertainty in the design process can be useful for finding better designs. The property integration method can be extended for use in mineral processing. The novelty of this work is the integration of both methodologies and the application of these tools to mineral processing.Flotation is a physicochemical process that facilitates mineral separation such as copper and molybdenum sulfide minerals from the remaining minerals that form most of the parent rock substrate, including contaminants such as arsenic ( Although flotation is a technology widely used in industry, the future of mineral processing will likely include more complex mineral processing involving higher levels of toxic elements and higher charges at refineries and/or smelters for treatment of minor or toxic elements. For example, future treatments of copper ores will contain higher arsenic levels and higher penalties from the copper smelter ( The methods employed in flotation circuit design can be generally classified into heuristic ( In the design of flotation circuits, large numbers of variables are handled, of which some may involve uncertainty, such as the feed grade, metal or product price, toxic elements composition, distribution of mineral, particle size, and others. Simonsen and The objective of the present study is to develop a procedure for flotation circuit design including uncertainty and water efficiency. The design process considers two stages: 1) optimal process design without considering water consumption and 2) efficient use of water considering property integration. In this section models, for optimal process design without consider water consumption and water integration are briefly described. The flotation process depends on several design and operation variables. We consider a superstructure that includes three flotation stages: rougher, scavenger and cleaner stages, as is shown in For the deterministic, model we have only a single scenario, and the model then simply maximizes the total income subject to the dynamic and economic constraints. In the stochastic models, we assume we have more than one scenario. Because of this, we need to replace the objective by the maximization of the expected total income. For this, we need the probability of a given scenario. In addition, we know that some of our decision variables can depend on the scenarios. This model corresponds to a stochastic MINLP. After the optimal flotation circuit configuration is determined, the water integration problem is addressed. This problem has not been analyzed before because the main concern in mineral processing has been the recovery and the product grade. Water can be recycled from tail or concentrate dewatering operations. However, only some of the water recovered in these operations can be recycled because it affects the flotation behavior. Recently, The overall problem definition given by Consider the superstructure shown in The stochastic parameters are the copper grade in the feed and the copper price. Due to the variability of the ore processed and the copper price, three levels are considered for both parameters. Then, the combination of these parameters is represented in 9 stochastic scenarios. For example, scenario 1 has a probability of 5%, and corresponds to a feed grade of 0.7% chalcopyrite, 0.3% tennantite, and a copper price of 4.409 U.S. $ /Ton. In the first case we use the deterministic model using as an input the average value of the stochastic parameters. This is the usual methodology employed in process design. The objective value of this problem was equal to 25,149,648 US$/year. However, the design and residence times for this solution were infeasible for several scenarios. We corrected this solution by fixing the obtained configuration and equipment dimensions and maximizing the income for each scenario by varying the residence time in each flotation stage. The expected income was 24,050,246. US$/year, with an average concentrate grade of 17.8% Cu and 0.70% As. We then apply the stochastic model, allowing all operational variables to be flexible with respect to the scenarios. Hence the residence times of each stage and the recirculation flow directions (cleaner tail and scavenger concentrate) vary for each scenario. The design variables, such as equipment sizing, are fixed for all scenarios. This results in a real expected income of 24,146,287 US$/year, with an average concentrate grade of 17.7% Cu and 0.69%As and a completely flexible structure for each scenario. Recirculation flow directions that vary with the scenarios might not always be implementable, so we also considered a stochastic model that only allows the residence time to vary. This results in a real expected income of 24,129,825 US$/year, with an average concentrate grade of 17.28% Cu and 0.7% As. Both MINLP problems used in the previous sections are very hard to solve, even with a state-of-the-art solver such as BARON ( A model for the design of flotation circuits under uncertainty has been presented. Uncertainty is represented by scenarios, including changes in the feed grade and metal price. The model makes it possible to change the operating conditions (residence time and mass flows of each stream) and flow structure (tail and concentrate stream of the cleaner and scavenger stage management) for each scenario, maintaining a fixed design (size and number of cells in the flotation banks) for all scenarios. The model can be modified to include other uncertainties and other adaptive variables. After the optimal flotation circuit configuration was determined, the water integration problem was addressed. The property integration approach developed by The financial support from CONICYT (Fondecyt 1090406), CICITEM (R10C1004) and the Antofagasta Regional Government is gratefully acknowledged.