The effect of pulp oxidation potential, Eh, on the flotation of copper-activated pyrite at pH 9.0 in the presence of xanthate was investigated. It was found that pyrite recovery is at a maximum value when the Eh during conditioning is approximately 35mV (SHE), but decreases at lower and higher Eh values. Solution and surface analytical techniques (EDTA extraction, and UV–visible and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopies) were used to explain the trends observed in the pyrite recovery with Eh. The increase in pyrite recovery with increasing Eh values has been attributed to an increase in xanthate adsorption at the pyrite surface while the decrease in recovery at high Eh values is the result of an increase in the proportion of surface iron oxidation species covering the hydrophobic species.Iron sulphides, particularly pyrite, are often associated with copper sulphide minerals in ores. During grinding and conditioning, a variety of surface reactions can take place. For example, activation of pyrite can occur as a result of dissolution of copper species from chalcopyrite ( Pyrite in the presence of xanthate can only float in acidic to neutral pH conditions where dixanthogen, the oxidation product of xanthate, is stable ( Pulp oxidation potential (Eh) controls the formation of these surface species responsible for pyrite flotation, polysulphide, elemental sulphur and xanthate but also sulphate and ferric oxide/hydroxide. For example, xanthate adsorbs on pyrite through an electrochemical reaction ( Infrared and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopies, and cyclic voltammetry have been used to study the effect of Eh on copper activation of pyrite and more particularly the species formed on the pyrite surface ( In this study, we have used a range of solution and surface analytical techniques (EDTA extraction, and UV–visible and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopies) to identify and quantify the species formed on the pyrite surface at pH 9 as a function of Eh values with the aim to correlate these species with results of pyrite flotation. All chemicals used were of analytical grade. The collector, sodium isopropyl xanthate (SIPX), was further purified by dissolution in acetone and recrystalization from petroleum ether using the methodology described by Ethylene diaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) was used to extract oxidation products (oxide, hydroxide and sulfate) from the pyrite surface ( A CARY 1E spectrometer was used to measure the concentration of SIPX remaining in solution after contact with the pyrite sample. The molar absorptivity of xanthate is 17,500 A X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS), Perkin Elmer Physical Electronics Division (PHI) 5100, with a MgKα X-ray source operated at 300 Pyrite flotation in the absence of copper sulphate was very low (<10%) even in the presence of collector, and is mostly attributed to entrainment. A maximum flotation rate of pyrite at pH 9.0 was obtained at copper sulphate and SIPX concentrations of 1000 and 120 Using a chalcopyrite electrode, Several studies have shown that the flotation of a sulphide mineral is related to the surface hydrophobicity of that mineral which in turn depends on the balance of hydrophobic (e.g., collector, polysulphide) and hydrophilic (e.g., metal oxide/hydroxide, sulphoxy) surface species (e.g., Results in  The proportions of elements (C, O, S, Fe and Cu) on the surface of pyrite samples collected just before frother addition at Eh values of −60 and 130 More detailed information on the type of surface species can be extracted from the XPS spectrum by deconvoluting each spectrum into components. Several components are found in the C 1s XPS spectra shown in The results of this spectral deconvolution shown in This study has confirmed that copper activation of pyrite is controlled by the pulp oxidation potential, Eh, and consists in the adsorption of Cu(II) species on the pyrite surface and its reduction to a Cu(I)S species. Xanthate has a high affinity for copper and its adsorption on pyrite increases with Eh values. Both the Cu(I)S and Cu(I)–xanthate species are hydrophobic and therefore responsible for the increase in pyrite flotation close to neutral Eh conditions. With Eh increasing, the pyrite oxidises and forms predominantly iron oxide/hydroxide on its surface with a small amount of sulphoxy species. As these species are hydrophilic, pyrite flotation decreases at Eh values larger than 50 The results obtained in this study indicate that the pulp oxidation potential, Eh, is one of the key factors controlling the flotation of copper-activated pyrite as it affects the adsorption of collector but also the formation of surface oxidation products. In the conditions used in this study, a maximum recovery of copper-activated pyrite was obtained at 35 The financial support for this work from the University of South Australia, the Australian Mineral Industries Research Association, and the Australian Research Council, through the Special Research Centres Scheme, is gratefully appreciated.