Natural apatite has emerged as potentially effective for phosphorus (P) removal from wastewater. The retention capacity of apatite is attributed to a lower activation energy barrier required to form hydroxyapatite (HAP) by crystallization. The aim of our study was to test the P removal potential of four apatites found in North America. Minerals were collected from two geologically different formations: sedimentary apatites from Florida and igneous apatites from Quebec. A granular size ranging from 2.5 to 10mm to prevent clogging in wastewater applications was used. Isotherms (24 and 96h) were drawn after batch tests using the Langmuir model which indicated that sedimentary apatites presented a higher P-affinity (K
                     L=0.009L/g) than igneous apatites (K
                     L≈0.004L/g). The higher density of igneous material probably explained this difference. P-retention capacities were determined to be around 0.3mg P/g apatite (24h). A 30mgP/L synthetic effluent was fed during 39 days to four lab-scale columns. A mixture of sedimentary material (apatite and limestone 50–50%, w/w) showed a complete P-retention during 15 days which then declined to 65% until the end of the 39 days lab scale test period. A limitation in calcium may have limited nucleation processes. The same mixture used in a field scale test showed 60% P-retention from a secondary effluent (30mg COD/L, 10mgPt/L) during 65 days without clogging.Adverse effects of eutrophication due to the presence of anthropogenic phosphorus (P) in surface waters are well-established. Conventional technologies for P-removal from wastewater are physical processes (settling, filtration), chemical precipitation (with aluminium, iron and calcium salts), and biological processes that rely on biomass growth (bacteria, algae, plants) or intracellular bacterial polyphosphates accumulation ( The driving mechanisms in the process of P-crystallization consist essentially in nucleation (precipitation of hydroxyapatite (HAP): Ca For P-removal using natural apatites, adsorption mechanisms are also believed to play a role and the distinction between adsorption and crystallization is not clear ( In this paper, the P-retention potential of three igneous apatites from Quebec, one sedimentary apatite from Florida and one sedimentary limestone was studied. Batch tests were first performed which enabled to draw isotherms and rank the samples according to their P-removal potential. Then, flow-through lab and field scale column tests were conducted which showed the better potential of sedimentary apatites mixed with limestone over igneous apatites. Four apatite-containing materials and a limestone, identified by their suppliers, were tested ( In view of full-scale filters where clogging should be avoided, a granular size of 2.5–10 Particle-size distribution was determined (ASTM D 421-422) to estimate the specific surface area of the 2.5–10 Batch tests were conducted with synthetic solutions (KH P adsorption capacity was modelled using Langmuir isotherms, linearized as Lab scale column tests were carried out using four 100 Field scale tests were carried out using a 6.5 The concentration was fixed at of 30 Orthophosphates were measured using the Quickchem flow injection analysis method # 10-115-01-1-Q derived from the automated ascorbic acid reduction method ( The Ca and P content of the Cargill apatite ( Igneous rocks are characterized by a higher density ( A solubilization batch test (in distiled water) showed no electrical conductivity and pH variation with apatite samples, while dissolution of limestone from Graymont led to an increase in pH (from 8.0 to 9.5) and in conductivity. Langmuir isotherms determined after 24 P-retention capacities calculated from the 24 The low specific surface area of the material used in this study, due to the relatively coarse material, influenced the P-removal efficiency. Furthermore, apatite crystal sizes were relatively small (0.1–0.5 Fluoroapatite presents a pH zero point of charge (pH Another linearization of Langmuir isotherm ( Considering batch test results, only one of the igneous apatite (Niobec) was tested in lab scale column experiments. For increased availability of calcium the Cargill apatite was mixed with Graymont limestone. P-retention by the Niobec apatite was poor and the column seemed to become saturated after 15 days ( Graymont limestone showed a relatively stable retention over time that remained near 50%. Effluent analysis at the outlet of each column showed for Cargill's a significant consumption of Ca Results showed that Graymont limestone favoured P precipitation as it represented a source of Ca In case of P levels of about 15–20 The column was installed downstream of a constructed wetland of a fresh water fish farm wastewater treatment plant. Despite the variable composition of the influent ( During the field scale test, there was a conflicting effect of pH. On one hand a higher pH at the column inlet favore Ca dissolution, but on the other hand it led to a reduction of HAP formation by reducing the available OH The field scale column efficiency was enough to reduce P-level to reach 2 Phosphorus affinity was found to be higher with Cargill sedimentary apatite as substrate, compared to igneous apatites in batch experiments. Sedimentary apatites are believed to favour crystallization of HAP due to intrinsic characteristics, notably their internal porosity. The presence of secondary minerals associated to the gangue would be beneficial by contributing to a source of Ca, which is essential for Ca–P precipitation. Relatively low P-retention capacities were obtained, probably because the available Ca from dissolution rapidly became depleted. Testing pure Cargill material including the gangue would be of interest. With igneous apatites, neither HAP crystallization nor Ca–P precipitation were believed to have occurred considering the higher affinity of P with other metals like Fe, Mg, Al as pointed out in other studies. Crystallography tests could confirm this interpretation. Best pH conditions are conflicting as a low pH would favour Ca dissolution and a high pH would favour HAP crystallization. In small scale wastewater treatment plants, pH fluctuations may be important thus reducing P-retention availability. A source of calcium and hydroxide should be provided to avoid such conflicting operation conditions. Sedimentary and igneous North American apatites showed low and poor retention capacity for P-removal, respectively. Nevertheless, the potential of apatites for crystallization and P-recycling merits attention. Further studies should be conducted with regards to the critical conditions associated to pH, calcium, and orthophosphates concentrations. The authors thank Denis Bouchard for technical support and Dwight Houweling for reviewing an earlier draft of the manuscript. This research was financed by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.