This Short Communication presents a comparison between two automated methodologies to estimate bubble size in industrial flotation equipment (mechanical cells and columns). The studied database includes 106 conditions in flotation machines from 10 to 300 m3, which were sampled by means of the McGill bubble size analyser. The first methodology (conventional image processing) uses circularity, ellipse detection, segmentation and reprocessing of separated objects to estimate the Sauter mean diameter D32. The second methodology evaluates the binary images as trains of pulses, whose spectral bandwidth is correlated with the D32. Both techniques have been compared to a semi-automatic approach, which manually complete the conventional image analysis to obtain the total bubble size distribution. For D32 < 2 mm (spherical regime), the first approach shows better performance than the spectral analysis, with significantly higher precision. For D32 ≥ 2 mm (ellipsoidal regime), the conventional image processing presents significant bias, high dispersion as well as a cliff trend for D32 > 3.5 mm. On the other hand, the spectral method showed a better sensitivity with an approximately linear trend up to 5 mm. Thus, a combination of these two methodologies is suggested for the D32 characterization in industrial flotation machines.Bubble size measurements have been widely studied in flotation since the appearance of instruments to reliably sample and characterize experimental distributions ( From the different sampling techniques, bubble viewers in conjunction with image processing techniques have shown to be able to assess bubble size distributions (BSD) in industrial flotation machines. The recorded bubbles are processed to detect regular and isolated objects in the images, commonly removing overlapped elements or complex clusters ( Although the direct or hierarchical use of the aforementioned techniques has led to significant improvements in the bubble size estimations, several studies have pointed out the possible bias caused by the cluster removal. This work evaluates the performance of two automated techniques to obtain the Bubble size measurements were conducted in the collection zone of industrial mechanical flotation cells (self-aerated and forced-air of 10–300 m The conventional image analysis was performed by means of the Image Processing Toolbox of Matlab 9.2 (The MathWorks, USA). The bubble images were binarized and the holes were filled to distinguish them from the background and to avoid over-segmentation. The individual bubble sizes were sequentially estimated by the following steps, given assigned thresholds for the shape parameters (detection) and goodness-of-fit (axes estimation): Bubble detection by circularity and bubble sizing by a circle-equivalent diameter. The function regionprops.m of Matlab was used for this purpose. Objects not successfully processed by circularity were fitted to an ellipse from the method reported by Watershed segmentation was used to process those elements rejected in the first two steps. The function watershed.m was used in this step. The first two steps were repeated for the segmented objects. Circular Hough Transform was employed for circle detection to the remaining objects. The function imfindcircles.m was used for this purpose. The first two steps were repeated for some isolated objects. The sizes of the characterized objects were finally obtained by multiplying the estimated equivalent diameters (in pixels) by the image resolution (mm/pixel). All the thresholds ( Segmentation techniques can be successfully used for automated image processing under controlled conditions as those obtained from laboratory flotation images. However, industrial measurements are more challenging due to: (i) the wide range of bubble size distributions, (ii) possible turbidity of the process water, (iii) the presence of solids that hindered the image qualities and can distort the bubble shapes, (iv) variable gas hold-up and superficial gas rates, which can increase the chances of bubble clustering or churn-turbulent conditions. Although segmentation is an interesting alternative in bubble sizing, further developments must be made to automate these techniques for all the possible conditions industrially observed in flotation. The binarized images allowed each line to be described as a train of pulses. The pulse widths have shown to be correlated with the bubble size independent of the presence of clusters, given a sufficiently high number of analysed signals (   Five datapoints are highlighted in The results of Bubble size analyses were conducted, in which the McGill bubble size analyser was used for bubble sampling in industrial mechanical cells and columns. More than 100 experimental conditions were studied. Two automated methodologies were employed to estimate the Sauter diameter from recorded images: (i) conventional image processing based on object detection and sizing; (ii) D  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are grateful for the financial support from