We consider chains of particles with fixed ends in planar movement such that each particle has three degrees of freedom: two translational and one rotational. The particles are connected by one normal (longitudinal), one shear (transverse) and one rotational spring with a possibility that stiffness of some springs can be negative. We showed that the necessary condition of stability is that such a chain is allowed no more than three negative stiffness springs. The allowable negative stiffness springs can be arranged in two ways: (i) the chain contains one normal, one shear and one rotational negative stiffness springs or; (ii) the chain contains one normal and two rotational negative stiffness springs. The absolute values of the negative stiffnesses should not exceed certain threshold values that depend upon the stiffnesses and the number of the other (positive) springs. The positions of normal and shear negative stiffness springs do not affect the critical values, however the positions of the negative rotational stiffness springs are found to be important. The modal frequencies reduce when one of the negative stiffnesses tends to the critical value; the smallest frequency tends to zero. Damped chains also exhibit similar decrease of damping frequencies, but the lowest frequency tends to zero while the chain is still stable. At this point the damping bifurcates and produces two brunches: one increases with the increase in the value of negative stiffness, the other decreases. No giant damping is observed.Negative stiffness remains a relatively new concept in mechanics although it has received attention in recent years. The idea of negative stiffness is paradoxical and not obvious: when the applied force reduces the displacement increases. Negative stiffness can sometimes be found in nature. One example is the negative stiffness in hair-bundles in the ear ( One of the most known and well-studied mechanisms of negative stiffness is the post-buckling deformation of tubes. Negative stiffness may emerge in discrete structures composed of other elastic elements such as: arches (the usage of arches in honeycomb structures is described below) ( In addition to the cases mentioned above, the phenomenon of negative stiffness may occur in distributed composite materials which have negative stiffness inclusions. An analysis of the effects of negative stiffness inclusions in composite materials in the case when the interaction between the inclusions can be neglected was conducted by  It was also suggested by Apart from composite materials and structures A number of structures were considered that consist of negative stiffness elastic elements ( In order to gain insight into the conditions of stability of systems containing negative stiffness elements and their effect on damping, The case considered by This paper investigates two-dimensional motion of chains of The structures considered are one-dimensional, which is a simplification allowing the full analysis as opposite to simple continuous situations considered earlier, which were either reduced to the analysis of a coated cylinder and sphere with one phase having a negative modulus, We investigate different combinations of negative stiffness springs and obtain a criterion of stability for each case. We start our stability analysis by considering a simple harmonic motion of a chain of linear oscillators connected in series by uncoupled normal and shear springs without an external time dependent force, that is without excitation. Then we consider masses connected by coupled shear and rotational springs in the presence and absence of a driving force. Finally we study the stability of dynamic system with viscous damping and show the influence of negative stiffness spring on the system's behaviour. The paper is concluded with a discussion of the results. Consider, following Consider a 2D model of a chain of particles (masses) connected to each other by one normal and one shear springs, We use the following notations: Assume that the end particles are fixed: Since shear and normal springs work on different degrees of freedom the system with only shear springs is identical to the system consisting of only normal springs; the latter was studied in The system of differential equations for the chain with normal springs reads: Thus the system of differential equations for the chain with shear springs reads: For both systems of differential equations, The set of equations of motion for the system with normal and shear springs in the matrix form reads: Here Positive definiteness of elastic energy, which is a criterion of stability of the system, is equivalent to positive definiteness of the matrix of stiffness. The matrix of stiffness is a tridiagonal block matrix. It is clear from the set of the equations of motion, This condition was derived from the criterion that all main diagonal minors of the matrix of stiffness should be positive (the Sylvester's criterion). Similarly we can write the condition of stability of the system with only shear springs: Combination of these two conditions, It was further obtained in Acknowledging the fact that only one negative stiffness spring is allowed per degree of freedom and using conditions, Subsequently the allowable values of negative stiffness are It is seen that the critical negative stiffness for normal and shear springs is determined by the number and values of the positive stiffness springs. Positions of the negative stiffness springs do not affect the critical negative stiffness and stability of the system. In addition, the positions of the allowed negative stiffness shear and normal springs are independent. Since the combined system is uncoupled the shear and normal springs may be placed in the same or any other position and the system will remain stable. Now we add a rotational degree of freedom represented in particle To derive the equations of motion for this system we write the Lagrangian: Applying the Euler-Lagrange equation we obtain two sets of the equations of motion: For both systems of the differential equations, These equations are in agreement with Similarly to the previous subsection, we assume that the end masses are fixed: The two sets of the equations of motion in the matrix form are identical to The matrix of stiffness The submatrices read: Using the Schur complement condition for positive definiteness and some algebra (see More detailed analysis is possible if we restrict ourselves to a necessary criterion of stability. In particular we can determine the maximum allowable number of negative stiffness springs in the system. To this end, we construct a quadratic form using the stiffness matrix. We start with a simple case of chain with two masses and three shear and rotational springs in the chain, By constructing a quadratic form based on this matrix it can be shown that if the number of negative stiffness springs exceeds two, the system is not stable as the matrix is not positive definite (see Despite the complexity of the system it is possible to obtain a critical value of negative stiffness in some cases. For instance, when one of the shear spring stiffness is negative (let it be spring number 1), The second inequality in The position of the negative stiffness shear spring is unimportant. But the positions of negative stiffness rotational springs do affect the critical negative stiffness in the case of coupled system. For instance, if a chain consists of two masses connected by three shear and rotational springs with different values of stiffness then the criterion of stability, It is seen, Now we consider the behaviour of the coupled systems in more detail by analysing a chain consisting of two masses connected by three shear and rotational springs, For the following it is convenient to write this system of the equations in dimensionless form. To this end we introduce the dimensionless groups: Subsequently, the equations of motion in the dimensionless form read: These equations of motion with boundary conditions, The general solution to the homogeneous system is a linear combination of normal modes: To analyse the relationship between the first eigenfrequency, The relationships between the first eigenfrequency and spring stiffnesses ( It is important to note that not only the first eigenfrequency The behaviour of the system can also be illustrated through the trajectories of motion. This approach allows visualising the difference in oscillating of the particles (including unbounded response, i.e. instability) at different values of negative spring stiffnesses and at different number of negative stiffness springs. We apply instantaneous unit displacement to the left mass Here we investigate a response of the chain to harmonic excitation with arbitrary driving frequencies considering the system from the previous part (two masses and three shear and rotational springs). Initially all masses are in the state of rest:   Behaviour of a system with normal positive and negative stiffness springs with damping was considered in For the sake of simplicity, we assume that all damping coefficients for translational and rotational motion are the same and equal to Also, similarly to Using For the sake of simplicity we consider a particular case when Since the matrix of stiffness To analyse dependencies between the normalised frequency  In the previous study of Essentially the movement of such a chain is a superposition of the longitudinal movement of the particles controlled by the normal (longitudinal) springs and the movement represented by displacement in the orthogonal direction and rotation (both coupled). Now the maximum allowable number of negative stiffness springs is 3, again independent of the number of particles. Superficially it looks as if one negative stiffness spring is allowed per a degree of freedom of a particle. However, the situation is more complex. While for the normal springs controlling the longitudinal particle movement indeed no more than one negative stiffness spring is allowed, the shear and rotational springs are essentially coupled. As a result, on top of the obvious necessary condition of no more than one shear and one rotational spring, another necessary condition of stability is that no more than two negative stiffness rotational springs are allowed, while all shear springs must have positive stiffness. The restriction that no more than 3 negative stiffnesses is allowed, no matter how many particles the chain contains means that the longer the chain the smaller the allowable concentration (fraction) of the negative stiffness springs that is the negative stiffness elements. If the chain contains Thus the allowable fraction of negative stiffness elements is inversely proportional to the chain length as in the case of the simple chain with only normal springs considered by Another interesting finding concerns the systems with damping. Similarly to what was found for a single longitudinal chains as the value of negative stiffness springs reduces, there is a point (before the critical stiffness is reached) when the damping bifurcates such that simultaneously two types of movement develop: one with higher damping and another with lower damping. Obviously, the movement with lower damping will eventually dominate, so we can conclude that no gigantic increase in damping predicted by Analysing the stability of systems with negative stiffness elements is important for the formulation of criteria of instability of particulate geomaterials in the presence of compressive loading and subsequently the failure criteria ranging, depending upon the scale, from the failure of foundations to catastrophic failures in mining excavations to earthquake generation. The constituents of the particulate materials are rarely spherical (as they are usually modeled); as mentioned in Introduction, rotation of non-spherical particles in the presence of compressive loading leads to the phenomenon of apparent negative stiffness. Such a particulate material can be represented as a discrete system of particles that are connected by bonds some of which have negative stiffness. The criterion of stability of this system is the criterion of stability of the particulate material as a whole, which has a potential to predict the failure processes in the material. The emergence of a low frequency resonance can be used as an indicator of approaching failure and become a basis for a new failure monitoring technique. Materials and structures containing negative stiffness elements were modelled as chains of particles connected by springs whose stiffnesses can also be negative. The particles in the chain are only allowed planar movement such that each particle has three degrees of freedom: two translational and one rotational. The particles are connected by one normal (longitudinal), one shear (transverse) and one rotational springs. The end particles are fixed. We showed that in order to be stable such a chain allows no more than three negative stiffness springs. The concentration of allowable negative stiffness elements (springs) decreases inversely proportional to the chain length. The three allowable negative stiffness springs can be arranged in two ways: (i) the chain contains one normal, one shear and one rotational negative stiffness springs and; (ii) the chain contains one normal and two rotational negative stiffness springs. In the second case no negative stiffness shear springs are allowed. The absolute values of the negative stiffnesses should not exceed certain threshold values that depend upon the stiffnesses and the number of the other (positive) springs. The positions of normal and shear negative stiffness springs do not affect the critical values and stability of the system, however the positions of the negative rotational stiffness springs are found to be important. When stable, the undamped chains with negative stiffness elements undergo oscillations. All mode frequencies reduce when one of the negative stiffnesses tends to the critical value; the smallest frequency tends to zero. Damped chains also exhibit similar decrease of damping frequencies, but the lowest frequency reaches zero while the chain is still stable (the absolute value of the negative stiffness is below the critical value). At this point the damping factor bifurcates and produces two brunches: one increase with the increase in the value of negative stiffness, the other decreases. No giant damping is observed. The authors acknowledge the financial support through Here we derive the criterion of stability of the system with coupled shear and rotational springs. According to Schur complement condition for positive definiteness the matrix of stiffness Conducting matrix multiplication and simple arithmetic operations in the Schur complement we obtain: For positive definiteness all main diagonal minors of the Schur complement should be positive. Computing the determinant of the sum of the matrices Thus, First we consider the case with two masses and three shear and rotational springs in a chain, The quadratic form constructed using the stiffness matrix, We prove that no more than 2 rotational springs are allowed. Assume that we have all three rotational springs with negative stiffness: The rank of the system is smaller than the number of unknowns (i.e. the system has infinitely many solutions), so it has non-trivial solutions. Subsequently, we can always choose a non-zero vector This means that the quadratic form is not positive definite and the system is not stable. Now we consider the situation when there are two shear negative stiffness springs in the system. Let us number the springs and masses in such a way that One can see that there are three independent equations. The component In summary, we have shown that for the system with two masses the number of negative stiffness springs cannot exceed two to ensure that the system is stable. They can be arranged in such a way that either there are one negative stiffness shear and one negative stiffness rotational springs or two negative stiffness rotational springs. Now we examine the maximum number of negative stiffness springs for the arbitrary number of masses The structure of this quadratic form is identical to The number of unknowns is Thus if the number of negative stiffness springs is greater than two the quadratic form is not positive definite and system is unstable. Since the structure of the quadratic form is identical to Thus the number of negative stiffness springs in the system with the arbitrary number of masses should not exceed two to ensure that the system is stable. There can be no more than one negative stiffness shear and rotational springs or two negative stiffness rotational springs in the system for it to be stable.