Background
                  The ideal management of distal femur fractures in the elderly is unclear. Acute arthroplasty has the theoretical advantage of earlier mobilization. We examined the outcomes of patients 70 years and older who underwent open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) vs distal femoral replacement (DFR) for comminuted, intra-articular distal femur fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective review of patients with AO/OTA classification 33C distal femur fractures treated with either ORIF or DFR was performed. Outcomes including all-cause reoperation, length of stay, fracture union, postoperative complications, use of ambulatory device and living situation at 1 year, and mortality were evaluated.
               
                  Results
                  The study cohort included 38 patients: 10 underwent DFR and 28 ORIF. Mean patient age for both cohorts was 82 years. No difference in comorbidities or mechanism of injury was found between groups. The incidence of reoperation was 11% in the ORIF group and 10% in the DFR group. In the ORIF group, the average time to fracture union was 24 weeks, with a nonunion incidence of 18%. Twenty-three percent of ORIF group were wheelchair dependent vs none in the DFR cohort, although not statistically significant. Differences between the groups with respect to all-cause reoperation, living situation or need for ambulatory device at 1 year, and 1-year mortality did not reach statistical significance.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Nearly 1 in 5 patients older than 70 years developed a nonunion after ORIF of an intra-articular distal femur fracture. At 1-year follow-up, all patients in DFR group were ambulatory while 1 in 4 in the ORIF group were wheelchair bound.The ideal management of intra-articular distal femur fractures in the elderly is unclear. Over the past several decades, treatment of these injuries has evolved from the routine use of nonoperative techniques to condylar buttress plates, fixed-angle devices, intramedullary nails, cement augmentation, and recently locked condylar plates The importance of arthroplasty in the management of fractures of the proximal femur has only relatively recently been established. Several randomized controlled trials have demonstrated better outcomes with total hip arthroplasty rather than with internal fixation for displaced femoral neck fractures in elderly patients The majority of the literature regarding the use of distal femoral replacement (DFR) arthroplasty for fracture involves the treatment of nonunion or periprosthetic fractures above total knee arthroplasties After obtaining institutional review board approval, we performed a retrospective review of patients treated for distal femur fractures at our institution from 2007 to 2012. Patients were included if they were aged 70 years or older and had sustained a comminuted, intra-articular (AO/OTA classification 33C) distal femur fracture ( Surgery was performed after each patient was medically optimized and informed consent was obtained. All patients were treated by surgeons trained in trauma or arthroplasty. The decision to proceed with DFR or ORIF was made by the attending surgeon caring for the patient. The indication for ORIF or DFR was obtained by retrospectively reviewing the original operative note. Fractures were treated with ORIF if the fracture pattern was felt to be amenable to operative fixation, specifically if there was sufficient bone stock to permit predictable fracture fixation. Indications given for proceeding with DFR included “concomitant knee arthritis,” “significant fracture comminution,” “inadequate bone stock to achieve fixation,” and “potential for earlier mobilization.” The type of prosthesis used for ORIF or DFR was at the discretion of the treating surgeon. Patients undergoing ORIF were treated with either the Smith and Nephew PERI-LOC locking distal femur plate (Smith and Nephew, Memphis, TN) or the Synthes LCP locking distal femur plate (Synthes, West Chester, PA). Fracture fixation was performed through an anterolateral approach to the distal femur. The intra-articular components of the fractures were reduced under direct visualization, and fixation performed with a combination of independent 3.5-mm screws and the above laterally based locking plates ( Fracture type was determined by reviewing the original injury radiographs. The fractures were classified according to the AO/OTA classification Descriptive statistics of the patient samples were calculated. T tests were conducted for comparisons between groups of continuous variables, chi-square tests for comparisons between groups of unranked categorical variables, and Fisher exact test where appropriate. Significance was set at the A total of 229 patients underwent treatment for 230 distal femur fractures at our institution from 2007 to 2012. One patient died before treatment, and 33 fractures were treated nonoperatively. The remaining 196 fractures were classified according to the AO/OTA system, allowing the exclusion of 61 A-type and B-type fractures as well as 69 periprosthetic fractures. Twenty-eight of these remaining 66 total C-type fractures were then excluded as they occurred in patients younger than 70 years of age, leaving the 38 fractures included in the study. Of these patients, 10 underwent DFR and 28 ORIF ( Demographic information can be found in Mean hospital length of stay was 7.5 days (range, 3-25) in the ORIF group and 7.3 days (range, 4-12) in the DFR group ( Average time to fracture union was 24.2 weeks (range, 9-128). Five (18%) of the patients who underwent ORIF developed a nonunion. Three of these patients went on to undergo revision surgery, 1 requiring an irrigation, debridement, and revision ORIF for an infected nonunion, while the other 2 underwent revision ORIF with bone grafting. One of the patients in the DFR group developed a deep infection requiring a return to the operating room for irrigation and debridement. The overall incidence of secondary surgery was 11% (3/28) in the ORIF group and 10% (1/10) in the DFR group, not reaching statistical significance ( There was no difference between the DFR and ORIF groups with respect to hospital disposition. One (10%) of the DFR patients died before leaving the hospital. The remainder of the DFR patients were discharged to either a rehabilitation facility (1/10; 10%) or a skilled nursing facility (8/10; 80%). In the ORIF group, 2 (7%) were able to be discharged to home, while 4 (14%) were discharged to a rehabilitation facility and 22 (79%) to a skilled nursing facility ( One-year follow-up was available for 29 of the initial 38 patients (76%), 7 of 10 of the DFR cohort, and 22 of 28 of the ORIF cohort. All patients with 1-year follow-up in the DFR group required an ambulatory device, with 43% (3/7) requiring a cane and 57% (4/7) requiring a walker. No patients in the DFR group were wheelchair dependent at 1-year follow-up. In the ORIF cohort, 27% (6/22) of patients were able to ambulate independently at 1 year, while 14% (3/22) required a cane, 36% (8/22) required a walker, and 23% (5/22) were wheelchair dependent. There was no statistical difference between the DFR and ORIF groups in need for an ambulatory device at 1 year ( With respect to living situation, 71% (5/7) of the DFR patients were living at home at 1 year, with the remaining 29% (2/7) living at a nursing facility. In the ORIF group, 82% (18/22) were living at home while 18% (4/22) were living at a nursing facility. There was no difference between the groups with respect to living situation at 1 year ( Intra-articular distal femur fractures present operative challenges for physicians and result in significant morbidity for elderly patients. Prolonged periods of protected weight bearing, limited fixation secondary to poor bone stock, and increased risk of nonunion The outcomes of the patients in the ORIF group are similar to those presented in previous studies of patients undergoing locked plating for distal femur fractures. The 18% nonunion rate we observed in our ORIF group is consistent with the range of 6% to 20% in the existing literature Several small series have examined the use of DFR for the treatment of acute fractures of native distal femurs among a number of other indications A study comparing DFR to ORIF for the treatment of supracondylar femur fractures in the elderly has been previously published Rosen et al also reported on the use of DFR for the treatment of acute, non-periprosthetic femur fractures in 24 patients with a mean age of 76 years, the majority with AO/OTA type C fractures The largest series exploring the use of DFR for acute, non-periprosthetic distal femur fractures included 54 fractures in 52 patients with a mean age of 82 years (range, 55-98) We feel the biggest strength of our study is a homogeneous and stringently defined patient cohort. By limiting the included patients to ambulatory individuals 70 years and older with only AO/OTA classification 33C distal femur fractures, we believe we have created a study population that would widely be considered candidates for either ORIF or DFR. Our study is limited by its retrospective nature and relatively small numbers. The low incidence of distal femur fractures, especially when further restricted to AO/OTA classification 33C fractures in patients 70 years and older, makes this a difficult injury to study in large numbers. Additionally, we concede that our study is likely underpowered and that there might truly be a difference in all-cause reoperation as well as 1-year mobility between the 2 treatment modalities. While our study is limited by small numbers, we do feel our results have important quality of life implications. The relatively high rate of nonunion and 1-year disability found in the ORIF group represent unfortunate outcomes for this vulnerable population. The promise of DFR for the treatment of comminuted, complete articular distal femur fractures is the possibility of earlier mobilization, potentially allowing patients to better avoid the long-term disability associated with these injuries. In light of our study and the existing literature, we feel a well-designed, prospective, randomized controlled trial comparing ORIF and DFR for comminuted, complete articular distal femur fractures in the elderly could potentially help improve outcomes in this population and be an important contribution to a gap in the literature. 