The phase diagram of the quaternary system LiCl–NaCl–KCl–H2O have been predicted with a Pitzer–Simonson–Clegg thermodynamic model by combining the binary and ternary model parameters, which were determined by simulating reliable experimental data. The predicted phase diagram shows a good agreement with the available experiment data from the literature. The other thermodynamic properties (e.g. water activity) of the quaternary and its sub-ternary systems have been investigated by the model and compared with the experimental data in literature. Significant improvements have been made in comparison with assessments.The phase diagram of quaternary system LiCl–NaCl–KCl–H Although some discrete solubility data of the system LiCl–NaCl–KCl–H In this paper, we predicted the phase diagram of the system LiCl–NaCl–KCl–H The binary model parameters The fitted parameters for the binary systems NaCl–H In order to calculate ternary and quaternary phase diagrams, the solubility product based on the mole fraction for each solid phase should be determined in advance. The solubility products were obtained by calculating the component activities of ions and water at the solubility points in each binary system according to Eq. ( In this paper, the solubility product Because the reliability of the water activity data for ternary systems NaCl–KCl–H The obtained parameters are presented in Applying the binary and ternary parameters, we calculated the solubility isotherms of these three ternary systems at 298.15 The phase diagram for the quaternary system LiCl–NaCl–KCl–H Furthermore, we hoped to learn whether the model with the mentioned model parameters can correctly predict the other thermodynamic properties (e.g. water activity) of the quaternary and its sub-ternary systems. We predicted the water activities of these systems with the binary and ternary model parameters and compared the calculated results with the experimental data reported by Guendouzi et al. (1) As shown in (2) Analogous typographical mistakes appear for No. 2 and No. 32 of (3) With the exception of the apparent typographical errors mentioned above, the other experimental values for the water activity reported in the literature (4) The experimental water activities of the quaternary system LiCl–NaCl–KCl–H (1) The values for (2) The osmotic coefficients (3) Some logical errors arise in (4) As shown in the 13th column of (5) We did not examine the accuracy of the experimental data for the water activity in the other three systems NH The binary PSC model parameters were evaluated by fitting the water activities of the binary systems LiCl–H The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from For any mixing-electrolyte solution, the expressions of activity coefficient of the solvent Solvent water Cation And anion  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 