In this chapter the application of pyrolysis technologies for the fractionation of lignocellulosic plant biomass into a range of fuels, chemicals, and materials is considered. The outcome of such fractionation can be manipulated through either the process conditions in the pyrolysis reactor itself and/or the process conditions in the subsequent condensation of liquid products for the separation of gaseous products. Temperature is shown to have the greatest impact on the formation of chemical species in the pyrolysis reactor, affecting both the yields and composition/characteristics of the gaseous, liquid, and solid products. The separation of solid, liquid, and gaseous products downstream from the pyrolysis reactor offers an opportunity for the selective isolation of specific chemical fractions in the liquid condensation train, an approach that may be valuable in a biorefinery context. Apart from the discussion of pyrolysis and separation mechanisms, perspectives are also offered on product applications and the industrial implementation of pyrolysis processes as biorefineries.The pyrolysis reaction has received great interest from the scientific communities, both as a key intermediate stage of various thermochemical processes and as a conversion process to high-quality fuels. Pyrolysis is defined as a controlled process that converts solids with a limited amount of water by the action of heat into a solid residue and volatiles under an inert atmosphere. Depending on the operating conditions and targeted products, the volatiles are further condensed, while the remaining permanent gases may be adequately used. Contemporary pyrolysis processes adopted a wide range of designs to process and valorize inhomogeneous and (un)processed lignocelluloses, thus indicating the flexibility to feedstocks of pyrolysis technology ( The functional groups of the lignocellulose are thermally degraded into lower and heavier molecular weight compounds during pyrolysis process to provide the main reaction products of char, bio-oil, and non-condensable gases. These permanent gases (CO, CO Pyrolysis is thus a complex chemical process, considering the number of components in lignocellulose that participates in the numerous simultaneous reactions occurring during the process. Pyrolysis processes thus require an elaborate strategy to control the yield and quality of complex final products. In addition, the availability of the wide range of (un)processed biomasses as potential feedstocks to pyrolysis has led the scientific community to develop The application of pyrolysis treatment to fractionate lignocellulose and provide multiple streams of products for a biorefinery requires a combination of engineered sections and solutions. Such pyrolysis fractionation of lignocellulose is to be considered in the four main sections of the pyrolysis equipment/process, i.e., the feeding system, heated reactor, gas–liquid–solids separation and condensation chain. Of these process steps, the pyrolysis reactor itself, which is at the heart of the process, and the subsequent separation chain, made up of the heterogeneous separation systems (i.e., solid separation and condensation chain items), of the contemporary pyrolysis process are the most fundamental to any staged process for lignocellulose fractionation. The applications of pyrolysis technology in these various stages for the fractionation of lignocellulose are expanded in dedicated sections below. Numerous pyrolysis reactor types have been designed to convert the large variety of biomass into three classes of products: liquid, solid, and gas. The yields of individual products depend on the reactor configuration and operational conditions. Various approaches have been suggested for the classification of the broad range of these process/equipment designs. The concepts of heat transfer, heat supply, and volatile residence time are critical for the maximization of product yields and/or the control of product compositions and allow for the hot zone classification of pyrolysis processes as slow, intermediate, or fast/flash modes. The distinction between these processes is not always clear and depends on the operating conditions that occur in a particular type of pyrolysis equipment. Bridgwater For the modeling of pyrolysis reactors process Di Blasi Ease of scalability and equipment logistics are a prerequisite for the successful integration of pyrolysis technologies into an industrial biorefinery platform, thus limiting the choice of reactor types. Fast pyrolysis technologies are preferred over other thermal conversion processes as they offer scaling and economic advantages. In addition to heat and electricity generation, the production of higher value products such as liquid biofuels and biochemicals from fast pyrolysis has given preference to this technology for a pyrolysis biorefinery Pyrolysis is a very complex conversion process in which many different chemical reactions occur simultaneously. These reactions result in the formation of various products, The influence of operating conditions on the pyrolysis mechanisms is determined by experimental setups that allow for the separate collection of the char, bio-oil, and gas fractions. Another technique, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) has proven to be effective in providing more information about the thermal behavior of various types of biomass by monitoring the changes in sample mass under controlled heating. For more precise characterization of the released volatiles, TGA can be coupled with an online analyzer (Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy or Mass Spectrometry) or volatile products can be captured and analyzed offline. Although biomass pyrolysis is more commonly performed with high heating rates, TGA tests at lower heating rates (<20°C/min) are very useful to study the thermal stability of the various chemical functions and thus understand the volatiles formation. The main steps of dry biomass conversion when subjected to an increase in temperature under inert atmosphere are illustrated in At temperatures higher than 250°C, some carbon-to-carbon bonds become reactive, and the depolymerization reactions start. The conversion rate significantly increases, and various volatiles are produced. Hemicelluloses depolymerization is usually observed between 250 and 350°C with a maximum mass loss rate at around 290 and 310°C for xylans In competition with biomass depolymerization, a process of char formation occurs. The char consists of benzene rings arranged in a polycyclic structure As illustrated in It is worth noting that the presence of inorganics in the lignocellulose feedstock can significantly alter the yields of various pyrolysis products. Inorganics are known to have a catalytic effect during pyrolysis, which is likely to shift the conversion of individual components to lower temperatures and also to crack more of the volatiles into gas products The influence of the heating rate on the pyrolysis yield is mostly related to differences in the stabilities of the various chemical bonds within the biopolymers that comprise lignocellulose. It is well accepted that an increase in the heating rate will increase the volatiles yield and thus decrease char production. With very fast heating rates (>100°C/s) many types of chemical bonds are broken almost simultaneously, which results in the formation of many volatile compounds. With lower heating rates, when the weakest chemical bonds are converted, many others are still stable, and the structure of the The biomass particle size can significantly modify the pyrolysis mechanisms and product yields through its influence on heat and mass transfer in the biomass material. An increase in the particle size is likely to limit the heat and mass transfer and thus the heating rate of the particle core. Several works have demonstrated that when the particle size increases the yield of char can increase by more than 50%, especially for fine particles (<1 It is generally reported that process pressure will affect the residence time of volatile products, thus having a direct impact on the number of secondary reactions (i.e., recondensation and cracking reactions) and also on the vapor pressure of volatiles. For example, an extended residence time will favor char and gas formation at the expense of bio-oil. The residence time depends on the reactor configuration but can also be adjusted by modifying the inert gas flow through the reactor. Under low pressures, the residence time of highly reactive volatiles is limited and favors the bio-oil yield. Conversely, under pressurized conditions the volatiles will take part in the char-forming reactions, thus increasing the yield of the latter Depending on the biomass nature and process conditions, the three pyrolysis products can be suitable for various applications as fuels, chemicals, and materials. Different analytical methods have been developed to characterize the pyrolysis products. The composition of the char can be studied by elemental analysis and different techniques giving information about structure (BET (Brunauer, Emmett and Teller) surface area, X-Ray The solid residue of pyrolysis is known as char, biochar, or charcoal, and it is a very well-known product that is still used as a source of heat for domestic and industrial applications. As the char formation consists of the production and rearrangement of benzene rings in a polycyclic structure, it is clear that its formation results in a significant increase in carbon content, while the oxygen and hydrogen contents progressively decrease When heated to temperatures between 200 and 300°C (torrefaction), the carbon content of the torrefied biomass is around 60%, and the Higher Heating Value (HHV) of the solid product is between 20–25 Volatile products from the pyrolysis reaction are captured at the end of the process in either bio-oil (condensables) or gas (non-condensables) products. The properties of these products are discussed below, in the context of a lignocellulose biorefinery. Bio-oil is a dark brown liquid generally composed of a complex mixture of hundreds of organic compounds It is worth noting that Among renewable energy sources, biomass appears to be the most promising for the production of liquid fuel, explaining the large number of studies to optimize bio-oil production Finally, a number of valuable chemicals, some of which are mostly produced by the petrochemical industry, can be found in bio-oil. While phenols are often produced from fossil hydrocarbons, bio-oil appears to be a credible alternative source. The conversion of polysaccharides into furans and chiral auxiliaries is also likely to provide chemicals for various applications (medicines, materials, solvent, etc.). The main components of the pyrolysis gas fraction are CO As mentioned in the previous section, the extent to which the volatiles are exposed to primary and secondary reactions in the pyrolysis reactor will determine the yields and properties of the products. The effect of secondary reactions, crudely categorized as cracking reactions and repolymerization reactions, are intimately influenced by the secondary processing of the product stream leaving the reactor. These volatiles may be separated and filtered before their condensation, resulting in the bio-oil, thus requiring heterogeneous separation stages to be applied to volatiles. In the most common case, where fast pyrolysis is implemented to maximize the bio-oil yields, an efficient downstream processing is required to allow for the solid removal from hot gases and the collection of condensed bio-oil. The efficiency of such heterogeneous separation stages depends on the transport phase of the bio-oil. Ongoing discussions on the nature of bio-oil led many researchers to investigate the state of bio-oil produced from the pyrolytic reactor. For years, researchers have accumulated visual evidences for the presence of a brownish varnish, as an active intermediate, and a smoky exhaust that supports the existence of a liquid aerosol. Others have assumed that bio-oil exists exclusively as a vapor. Experimental evidences confirmed the cooccurrence of these two transport states. Based on the fact that the density of liquids is orders of magnitude larger than vapors, Daugaard and Brown Prior to considering separations that can be applied to condensed bio-oil, for the isolation of chemical products, the fractionation of volatiles (bio-oil) can be achieved using efficient downstream filtering and condensation systems. Filtering systems allow for the separation of volatiles from solids, while condensation allows for the continuous separation between condensables and permanent gases. The latter process holds much promise for the fractionation of bio-oil into less complex products that have higher concentrations of the products of interest, as discussed below. The use of a volatiles/solid separation device is motivated by the well-known catalytic effect of char on the volatiles, which directly impacts the yield and composition of liquids and gas through a series of secondary reactions Once freed of the solid particles, the aerosols/vapors stream needs to be condensed to achieve the final and second fractionation stage of the lignocellulosic material. The condensation train was first designed to maximize the recovery of volatiles and/or to control the water content when the pyrolysis oil is considered as a precursor for transportation fuels and chemicals. Due to the complex nature of the transport states of pyrolysis volatiles, researchers used a combination of multiple condensation systems to allow for the complete recovery of the liquids by separation from non-condensable gas. Among these technologies, cooling and precipitator systems are often used. In the case of cooling systems, spray towers and condensing heat exchangers can be further upgraded to efficiently scrub the volatiles and particles from gas. For example, both systems can be jacketed Further investigation dealing with the generation of valuable organic chemicals by separation processes has led research groups to construct and test elaborated condensation chains to continuously condense the pyrolysis aerosols and vapors in specific fractions, named staged-fractional condensation. This investigation has given rise to a better understanding of condensers' operating parameters and also to new elaborated condensation chains combining different cooling systems. A few examples of condensation chain types are summarized in The staged-fractional condensation method is aimed at increasing the quality of specific bio-oil fractions for application as a source of chemicals in a biorefinery. Variation of condenser temperature was initially implemented as a way to control the water content of pyrolysis oil The more recent condensation chains were designed considering the target composition of bio-oil fractions. Cooling/condensation temperature ranges were determined on the basis of dew points of organic groups, thus allowing for the selective and physical separation between organic groups A research group at Twente University has investigated the upgrading of the fast pyrolysis bio-oil through the fractional condensation of volatiles using a serial condenser train The appearance and composition of the resulting liquid pyrolysis products, after the separation of solids from aerosols/vapors, and the fractional condensation of liquids for the separation from gases depend on the type of downstream staged-fractionation adopted and the targeted liquid fraction. Bio-oil as a whole, consisting of all the condensed liquid fractions, is a dark brown liquid with a smoky smell, containing hundreds of oxygenated compounds and hydrocarbons. As shown in The conversion of biomass by torrefaction or pyrolysis to produce renewable energy products for coal substitution represents a large portion of the existing bioenergy projects Fast pyrolysis as a process technology for the production of liquid fuel and chemicals has shown some maturity for industrial implementation, although the majority of process technologies are currently at the pilot/demonstration scale. For more than 60 Pyrolysis is a versatile technology that allows for converting any type of lignocellulosic material (untreated or fractionated) into at least three useful products, with the potential for fractionation into various chemical products. Pyrolysis can be integrated into a biorefinery for many applications, from the conversion of raw biomass into bio-oil or char in the context of a biofuel-driven biorefinery to the valorization of any type of residue of a product-driven biorefinery. However, despite the large number of recent reports on the pyrolysis biorefinery, this complex conversion process still requires much improvement and optimization. As hemicelluloses, cellulose, and lignin are the sources of different pyrolysis products, the variability of the lignocellulosic material is one of the critical parameters to consider, along with the operating conditions detailed in this chapter. The production of renewable solid fuel appears to be a credible alternative for coal substitution. The adjustment of the conversion temperature allows for producing various qualities of charcoal, with higher calorific values obtained with higher pyrolysis temperatures. The production of bio-oil and in particular transportation fuel is more challenging, and the results from recently installed commercial plants will be carefully monitored. In order to improve the bio-oil yield and properties, not only are the pyrolysis operating conditions now considered, but biomass pretreatment and various types of physical, catalytic, and chemical upgrading methods are also needed From the considerations developed in this chapter, it appears that the competitiveness of pyrolysis conversion can still be improved by optimizing the operating conditions. However, it is clear that the integration of the process in a biorefinery context, with better energy efficiency and optimal valorization of the various products, will be a determining step for the production of renewable fuels and chemicals.