Clay minerals are widespread in various types of mineral deposits. When present, they contribute to the high content of certain parameters such as silica, aluminium, and magnesium. This study aimed to find selectivity windows to separate hematite from a clay mineral (kaolinite) to allow reduction of the levels of silica and alumina in iron ore. The collectors used were: etheramine Flotigam EDA (EDA) and the ammonium quaternary salts: dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide (DTAB) and Tomamine Q-14-2 PG (AQ142). The depressant used was corn starch. The separation selectivity was achieved using DTAB in the pH range between 4 and 10. Using the collectors EDA and AQ142, the selectivity was obtained only in the presence of starch, at pH10. Laboratory scale tests showed that as far as the particles size is concerned, better selectivity was achieved with finer particles. Circuit configurations including cleaner and scavenger stages, and pilot scale tests, will be required prior to a possible industrial implementation of the separation.In most of the countries in the world one can observe the increase of industrial segments, like automotive, manufacturing, and civil construction. To maintain this growth, it is necessary to supply the demand of steel, consequently, of iron ore. Clay minerals are widespread in various types of mineral deposits. When present, they contribute to the high content of certain parameters such as silica, aluminium and magnesium. The presence of kaolinite, a clay mineral, has contributed to increase the grade of silica and aluminium in Brazilian and Australian iron ores ( Kaolinite (Al Kaolinite is the most common clay mineral in Brazilians iron ores. Most of the beneficiation plants remove kaolinite (and other aluminosilicates) in the desliming stage. This is a consequence of the size of kaolinite particles. Despite using the desliming stage, the presence of a high Al There is a wide knowledge about separation of quartz from iron ore. Despite the fact that quartz and kaolinite belong to the silicates class, they do not present similar behaviours in an industrial flotation process, probably due to the face-edge structure present only in the kaolinite structure (  In a general scenario there were some advances concerning this issue, but the background in the academic group should be further improved. This study aimed to find selectivity windows, using microflotation experiments, to separate hematite from kaolinite to allow reduction of the levels of silica and alumina in iron ores when kaolinite is present as gangue. Also, laboratory scale tests were done to check if the conditions observed in microflotation could be reproduced in bench scale. Microflotation tests were conducted with the use of a Hallimond tube using pure minerals (kaolinite and hematite) to evaluate the performance of collectors and depressants in the system. The samples were carefully milled, avoiding fines production and contamination, using an agate mortar and pestle. The particles size of the samples was adjusted between 75 The agitation in the Hallimond tube causes further comminution of the already fine kaolinite particles, so an extension was adapted to the apparatus to prevent entrainment. N Throughout this study four amines and four ammonium quaternary salts were tested. This article presents just the results with the collectors that showed selectivity at the microflotation stage. The best collectors were: the etheramine Flotigam EDA (EDA); and the ammonium quaternary salts: dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide (DTAB) and Tomamine Q-14-2 PG (AQ142). EDA and AQ142 are commercial collectors produced by, respectively, Clariant and Pietsch Chemicals. DTAB is a pure reagent produced by Aldrich Chemistry. Gelatinised corn starch was used as depressant. The collectors performance was evaluated at three concentrations: 1 Laboratory scale flotation tests were conducted to verify the reproducibility of the results indicated in the microflotation stage. The sample consisted of a blend of iron ore (90%) and kaolin (10%). These tests were done in a Denver machine using a 900 Both stages, microflotation and laboratory scale, were conducted with distilled water.    The Al Two differences may be observed. Firstly, with the decrease of feed size, the selectivity increases, as shown by the lower contaminants grades in the concentrates of tests using feed size −45 Secondly, the finer size caused a decrease in the mass recovery in all situations, consequently, yielding decreased recovery of Fe. Also, the reject fraction iron grade was still high (approximately 50%), well above the grade acceptable in industrial scale. This high iron content is partially due to the high iron feed grade (61%). Circuit configurations including cleaner and scavenger stages, and pilot scale tests, will be required prior to a possible industrial implementation of the separation. On the other hand, silica grades in the concentrate in the range from 1.0% to 1.5% were achieved, figures compatible with iron ore concentrates specifications. It is important to stress that the kaolinite content in the synthetic ore feeding the laboratory scale flotation tests represents an ultimate condition, being much higher than the content in ores that are processed in actual plant practice. The separation selectivity between kaolinite and hematite was achieved using DTAB at the pH range between 4 and 10. In the presence of the collectors EDA and AQ142, the selectivity was obtained only in the presence of starch, at pH 10. Laboratory scale tests showed that as far as the particles size is concerned, better selectivity was achieved with finer particles. Circuit configurations including cleaner and scavenger stages, and pilot scale tests, will be required prior to a possible industrial implementation of the separation. The authors are grateful to CNPq for the financial support.