In our work, Al-Mg-Si (6061Al -T4) plates of 6 mm thickness were subjected to bobbin tool friction stir welding (BT-FSW) and conventional friction stir welding (C-FSW) for comparison. How the welding process affects the microstructure and mechanical properties was investigated at various rotation rates and welding speeds. The results showed that butt FSW joints with high quality could be produced at the selected parameters. The joint strength rose with enhanced welding speed and was nearly independent of the rotation rate in both the welding processes. The strength of the joints produced with BT-FSW reached the same level as that of the C-FSW. The maximum joint strength of 229 MPa was 93% of the base material (BM), which is superior to the reported results of 60–80% for the T4 condition. The fracture position of most of the joints was in the heat-affected zone (HAZ), which is the lowest hardness zone.6061 Al alloy, which is typical of the 6xxx (Al-Mg-Si) series, has outstanding mechanical properties, good corrosion resistance and weldability, which renders it useful in various applications in many fields such as aerospace, automotive, shipbuilding, and other industries [ Friction stir welding (FSW) [ Bobbin tool friction stir welding (BT-FSW), also called self-support friction stir welding (SS-FSW) [ To date, there have been systemic reports on FSW of 6061Al [ The limited process window and wider softened area of the joint are the main problems currently faced in BT-FSW. Usually, the as-welded joints produced by BT-FSW have lower strength than those of C-FSW. Lafly et al. [ The present work is aimed at illuminating the weldability of 6061-T4 Al alloy subjected to the BT-/C-FSW processes, and identifying the different effects of the two welding processes on the evolution of microstructure and its relationship with the mechanical properties of the welds. The base material (BM) for butt welding was 6.35 mm thick 6061Al-T4 plates (T4 treatment: natural aging after solid solution heat-treatment) with dimensions of 320 mm × 80 mm. The chemical composition of the BM is 1.0 Mg, 0.6 Si, 0.25 Zn, 0.25 Cu, 0.7 Fe, 0.15 Mn, 0.08 Cr, 0.15 Ti, and balance Al (wt%). The welding processes (BT-FSW and C-FSW) were both carried out using a numerically controlled FSW machine (FSW-5LM-020) and the welding was conducted in a parallel direction to the rolling direction of the BM. The tilt angle of the tool was 2.75° and 0° in the C-FSW and BT-FSW processes, respectively. The bobbin tool used in the experiment consisted of symmetrical upper and lower shoulders with a scrolled groove feature 22 mm in diameter, and was connected by a cylindrical pin with a mixed thread 8 mm in diameter and 6 mm in length. The C-FSW tool consisted of a 22 mm diameter concave shoulder and a cylindrical right-threaded pin 8 mm in diameter and 6 mm in length. The figures of the welding tools were presented in Microstructural observations were conducted using optical microscopy (OM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD). OM observation was carried out with the samples prepared by grinding, polishing, and etching with Keller's reagent (NHO An auto testing machine (Leco, LM-247AT) was used for hardness measurement on the cross-section along the centre line across the weld under a load of 300 g, holding for 15 s. Tensile specimens with a gauge 50 mm in length and 10 mm in width were machined perpendicular to the welding direction. Room-temperature tensile tests were conducted at a constant strain rate of 1 × 10 Cross-sectional microstructures of the joints at various rotation rates are presented in The cross-sectional microstructures of the BT-FSW and C-FSW joints at various welding speeds are presented in   To illuminate the evolution of precipitates in the HAZs (fracture position), two typical parameters (BT-600-100 and C-600-100) were selected to conduct a TEM examination of the HAZs. The BT-600-100 joint was characterized by a high density of coarsening rod-shaped precipitates about 200 nm in length ( The precipitation sequence of Al-Mg-Si series alloys during aging is documented as below: supersaturated solid solution → needle-shaped precipitates → The precipitates are dominated by the thermal history in the HAZ during welding. The occurrence of precipitation from matrix in the HAZ was attributed to the thermal cycles it underwent during welding. Liu et al. [ Liu et al. [ However, in our study, the peak temperature during thermal cycles for BT-FSW was higher in the heat source (NZ) than that of C-FSW at a certain rotation rate (600 rpm), which would result in a slower cooling rate in the HAZ after welding. The slower cooling rate allowed more time for precipitation and coarsening of The Vickers' hardness profiles along the centre line of the thickness direction on the cross-section surface of the joints are presented in The changing tendency of the hardness across the joints under different welding speeds is shown in The HAZ underwent intense thermal cycles during the welding process, which led to the precipitation and coarsening of the precipitates in this zone. The coarsening precipitates resulted in the lowest hardness value in the HAZ. The hardness values in the LHZ were independent of the rotation rate ( The rotation rate–tensile strength histogram is presented in The UTS versus welding speed histogram in Lafly [ Esmaily et al. [ Usually, 6000 series Al alloys in the T6 (artificial aging after solid solution heat-treatment) condition present a conventional FSW joint strength efficiency of 70–80% [ The tensile results can be demonstrated with the precipitates evolution in the HAZ. The increasing density and slight coarsening of For all the joints welded at various parameters, the tensile testing joints failed in the HAZ randomly at the advancing side or retreating side, except for samples of BT-600-300 which fractured along the NZ/TMAZ boundary, and typical macrographs showing the failure locations are presented in For precipitation-hardened aluminium alloys (such as 2024, 6061 and 7075 from various series), it has been documented that HAZs are usually the LHZ due to the significant thermal cycles followed by dissolution/coarsening of the precipitates during FSW [   Defect-free joints of 6061-T4 Al alloy plates 6 mm in thickness were successfully welded by both BT-FSW and C-FSW processes but the BT-600-300 joint with BT-FSW has a narrower welding parameter window than that of C-FSW. Both NZs in the two joints were characterized by fine equiaxed recrystallized grain structures with obvious joint line remnants in the centres; in the HAZs, The hardness profiles exhibited a “W” shape along the centre line on the cross-section of both the joints, with the lowest hardness zone located in the HAZ; the lowest hardness remained at the same level for the two welding processes, independent of the rotation rate, and enhanced with increase of the welding speed; the hardness in the NZs increased slightly in the respective processes with increase of the welding speed, although this was not as evident when increasing the rotation rate. The ultimate tensile strength was independent of the rotation rate and enhanced with increase of the welding speed. The maximum UTS (229 MPa) was achieved at the C-600-300 parameter, which was 93% of the base material. The tensile joints mostly fractured in the HAZ, which is the lowest hardness zone. Typical fractographs showed a ductile fracture mode with large dimples on the fracture surface. This work was supported by the