Model scale experiments of scour beneath a submarine pipeline, coupled with erosion testing, have been undertaken using two marine sediments and five artificial sediments having a wide range of grain size. The experiments reveal that for both the marine and artificial sediments the time scale of scour beneath the pipeline depends on the erosion properties of the sediment. For coarser sediments, mobilised mainly in transport along the bed, the rate of scour is found to agree well with the existing empirical formula of Fredsøe et al. (1992). In contrast, for finer sediments that are mobilised mainly through entrainment into suspension and can have relatively high erosion resistance, the rate of scour is different to that predicted using the same empirical formula. To explain this result, theoretical arguments are used to relate the rate of scour beneath a pipeline to the fundamental erosion properties of the sediment; namely the transport rate along the bed and the true erosion rate of the sediment. These arguments lead to two new empirical formulas that may be used to predict the time scale of the scour process beneath subsea pipelines. The first formula is appropriate when the sediment scours predominantly via transport of sediment along the bed, and is consistent with the empirical formula due to Fredsøe et al. (1992). The second formula is appropriate when sediment erodes mainly via entrainment into suspension, as is often the case for fine or ‘cohesive’ sediments. Collectively, the two formulas may be used in practice to make predictions of the rate of scour for pipelines in marine sediments and artificial sediments, provided erosion testing results are available.When a submarine pipeline is placed on a mobile seabed, local erosion of sediment ( For pipelines placed on a uniform sand bed, the mechanisms of scour beneath a pipeline that lead to self-burial have been summarised in detail by In practice, however, pipeline routes cross a range of seabeds comprised of marine sediments. Real marine sediments can have different erosion properties to the uniform sands that are often used in laboratory experiments. These properties include the threshold shear stress ( This expectation is consistent with the experimental findings of Motivated by these earlier findings, the primary aim of this paper is to investigate scour beneath subsea pipelines in marine sediments (which may or may not have similar erosion properties to uniform sand), with a particular emphasis placed on predicting the rate at which scour develops underneath a pipeline in steady currents. This is an important first step towards understanding the more complete scour and self-burial process for marine sediments. To work towards this primary aim, model scale experiments of scour beneath a fixed pipeline in steady currents have been performed using two reconstituted marine sediments sourced from the NWS of Australia and five artificial sediments, which have been sieved to provide relatively uniform grain size distribution. Collectively, the artificial sediments cover a range of grain sizes. The two marine sediments are very different in particle size composition and particle shape to the uniform sands that have commonly been used in previous pipeline scour studies. To supplement the model pipeline experiments, a separate set of erosion tests have also been undertaken and analysed to assess the erosion properties of the two reconstituted marine sediments and the artificial sediments. This testing has been performed both to aid interpretation of the model scour tests and to investigate how erosion testing results may be used in practice to predict the scour rate beneath pipelines. The grading characteristics and physical properties of the marine and artificial sediments used in this study are listed in Throughout the testing program care was taken to ensure that samples were prepared consistently in both pipeline scour experiments and erosion tests. For the silica sands traditional wet pluviation (see Water content measurements conducted before each test are shown in the form of porosity values in Prior to undertaking the model pipeline experiments, erosion testing experiments were performed on each of the sediments to assess their erosion properties using the small recirculating (O-Tube) flume at the University of Western Australia (see To commence an erosion test, a steady current velocity was introduced and increased every 3 The particular erosion test setup and procedure described above were chosen because it had been shown to give threshold shear stress measurements consistent with literature for uniform silica sands (see Compared to other erosion studies ( The apparent erosion rate measurements obtained for each of the sediments are shown in where  Comparing the erosion rate measurements for the different sediments in To quantitatively compare these differences, a trend line has been fitted to the data in where Firstly focusing on the threshold shear stress, where where The two fitting parameters in Eq. To better interpret the measurements of the rate of change in mean sample height ( The relationship between the apparent erosion rate, the transport rate along the bed and the true erosion rate can be obtained for the present experimental setup by performing a simple control volume analysis. To do this, we start by noting that the continuity equation for sediment can be expressed, in one-dimension, as where where It is possible to simplify Eq. ( and To investigate if the apparent erosion rates presented in These observations of the mode of transport were consistent with scans of the erosion profile recorded during the erosion tests. For example, In summary, it appears that SS1, SS2 and CS1 eroded primarily in transport along the bed across the range of shear stresses tested. Consequently, the apparent erosion rate, parameterised by the fitted values in As a check on these conclusions, we have computed the transport rate along the bed for each of the artificial and marine sediments using the relation in Eq. ( where the porosity has been calculated based on the soil properties listed in where Beginning with Pipeline scour experiments were performed in the small recirculating (O-Tube) flume under steady current conditions. (Note this is the same flume as that used in for the erosion tests in In total, 25 experiments were performed, as listed in Image analysis was used to extract the scour depth (measured vertically beneath the pipeline and denoted by In each of the experiments, scour started immediately after the target velocity within the O-tube was introduced. Scour profiles for the artificial sands at different stages in the scouring process are illustrated in In contrast to the silica sands and the coarsest carbonate sediment, it can be seen in Similar results to those presented in   where which is defined in terms of the same equilibrium scour depth and essentially the same time scale as Eq. (  The results for the finer artificial sediments (CS2 and CS3) in To compare the rates of scour, Also plotted in The data in The results in To explain the reason for these results, in this section we investigate the rate of scour theoretically for sediments that exhibit transport along the bed and entrainment into suspension, respectively. In each case, we aim to relate the scour rate to the apparent erosion rate measured in erosion tests. Assuming that sediment moves along the bed only (via bedload transport or sheet flow with minimal suspension), the sediment budget for a control volume drawn beneath a pipeline (as shown in where Hence, equating Eqs. ( Eq. Using Eq. where To investigate Eq. ( We now look to confirm if Eq. ( If we now introduce the dimensionless transport rate from Eq. ( where where the constant where Eq. The analysis in the previous section assumed that the sediment was transported along the bed. If this is not the case then the seabed at the start of scour will erode everywhere that the shear stress exceeds the threshold shear stress. Furthermore, the maximum change in bed level will occur at the location where erosion is a maximum, such that where ( Equating Eq. ( Finally, making use of Eq. ( where, again, Eq. To test the relationship in Eq. ( where  In this paper, we have reported erosion testing and experimental results of scour beneath a model pipeline in two marine sediments and a range of artificial sediments. It has been observed that for both the marine sediments and the artificial sediments the scour profile and the rate of scour are dependent on the erosion properties of the underlying sediment. Specifically, for marine and artificial sediments which are mobilised mainly in transport along the bed and have a transport rate consistent with classical transport formulas, the existing empirical scour formula due to To understand the disparity in the time scale of scour, theoretical arguments have been used to relate the time scale of scour to the apparent erosion rate which may be measured in erosion testing. These arguments have led to two different relationships, depending on whether the sediment is mobilised via transport along the bed only, or via entrainment into suspension. In the former case, it has been shown that the time scale of the scour process may be estimated according to In contrast, for the finer sediments (which may or may not be ‘cohesive’) the time scale of the scour process has been shown to be a function of the true erosion rate, such that Both Eqs. ( An obvious limitation of Eqs. ( In terms of the functional form of the resulting relationships between time scale and apparent erosion rate, it is interesting to note that when Eq. ( Finally, we note that the analysis in this paper has been focused on vertical scour beneath a fixed pipeline. In practice, scour is three-dimensional, with scour propagating along the pipeline. Further work is needed to extend the present analysis to this more complicated but realistic scenario. However, we note that the method proposed by The following conclusions have been formed based on this study: The erosion properties of sediment have been found to have a significant effect on the scour hole shape and the rate of scour beneath a model pipeline both in artificial sediments and marine sediments. For artificial and marine sediments that were observed to move predominantly in transport along the bed in erosion testing ( For sediments that were ‘cohesive’ and observed to move predominantly via entrainment into suspension in erosion testing ( Based on control volume arguments, two new empirical formulas have been developed to predict the time scale of scour in terms of the apparent erosion rate measured via erosion testing. The first of these formulas (Eq. Both of the two new formulas may be used provided erosion testing results are available. For sediment that erodes due to transport along the bed as well as entrainment into suspension, the use of Eqs. ( This research forms part of the activities of the Centre of Offshore Foundation Systems (COFS), supported as a node of the