The feasibility of developing a submicron-size layer on nitriding steel using pulsed bipolar plasma electrolytic techniques was investigated. Plasma electrolysis was performed in duty cycle of 80% and process duration of 600s, with an electrolyte composition of 85.8wt% urea, 12wt% water and 2.2wt% sodium carbonate. It was found that this technique reduces the grain size in both compound and diffusion layers. The average grain size of about 110nm was observed in the white layer. The presence of Fe3O4 phase in low frequencies was confirmed by X-ray studies. γ′-Fe4N rather than ε-Fe2-3N was found to be the dominant phase at higher frequencies. The results suggest that the size of the cavities formed on the surface is reduced to 300nm. Characterization of the corrosion behavior of the layer by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy technique revealed that the capacitive properties of the surface layer (Cc
                     ) in samples processed at high frequencies were reduced. Hence, it showed better corrosion resistance compared to the samples processed at low frequencies.Coating processes involving plasma processing have been used for more than a century Carbonitriding is a thermo-chemical process in which carbon and nitrogen free radicals diffuse into base metals at sub-critical temperatures. In a typical PEC/N process, an electrolyte containing carbon-rich and nitrogen-rich materials such as urea Different types of power sources can be used to generate plasma electrolysis. They can be categorized into (a) DC sources, (b) Pulsed DC sources, (c) Unbalanced AC sources and (d) Bipolar pulsed sources The purpose of this study is to demonstrate the feasibility of using bipolar DC power source in urea aqueous solutions. The use of urea in plasma electrolysis leads to the diffusion of carbon and nitrogen into the steel surface. Therefore, this process can be classified as PEC/N. Moreover, the effects of frequency and voltage parameters on the final properties of as-treated steel, the characteristics of produced layer and finally, the feasibility of producing a submicron-size surface layer using bipolar DC power source are discussed. In this study, nitriding steel (DIN1.8509) with a cylindrical shape, 20 Workpieces were polished to a mirror finish using emery paper and then degreased with analytical grade ethanol and dried under nitrogen stream. The ratio of workpiece surface area to auxiliary electrode surface area was kept constant at, approximately, one to sixty. The power source used in this investigation consisted of two transformers which were connected to a control system. This control system had the capability of producing pulsed bipolar regime. The schematic of the regime produced by the control system is shown in The electrolyte consisted of 85.8 The surface morphology and the number and size of the pores in the surface layer can influence the corrosion and abrasion properties The surface morphology of the samples C1, C2 and C3 are shown in For the C3-process, the Increasing the pulse frequency resulted in an increase in the number of current peaks and discharges ( The power discharge can be obtained from the following equation: However, although the surface area of each discharge affects the discharge properties, discharges cannot be analyzed without considering the effective surface area. Hence, instead of Eq. With the drop in current peak, according to Eq. Based on Eq. In In samples A1, B1 and C1, some low intensity peaks of Fe Grain size in white layer and diffusion layer is reduced to submicron size, according to   For evaluating the corrosion properties of the samples, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) technique can be used In this method, EIS spectra of such a coated system are modeled using the equivalent circuits. The obtained circuit parameters are related to the dielectric characteristics as well as the microstructures of the substrate and the coating Bode curves of EIS spectra for formed layer in samples B1, B2 and B3 are shown in The parameter of In this model, the parameters As it is shown in The steel (DIN1.8509) surface was processed using pulsed bipolar plasma electrolytic carbonitriding technique. Layer properties were studied using various methods. Important obtained results are as follows: Carbonitriding process can be performed using pulsed bipolar plasma electrolytic technique. Using this technique, the grain size in compound and diffusion layer, a submicron layer was established. Average grain size at white layer and diffusion layer are about 110 Fe Upon increasing the frequency up to 5000 With increasing frequency, the number of peak currents increases and average peak current decreases. By reducing the current, the power discharge decreases and finer pores are formed. Increasing the frequency in pulsed bipolar plasma technique reduces the grain size of white layer. Optimal conditions for reduction of grain size in white layer were obtained in samples with lower frequencies. With increasing frequency, the parameters