This study investigates the biooxidation of a refractory gold concentrate using a mixed culture of acidophilic mesophiles, moderate thermophiles and extreme thermophiles and their effect on the subsequent cyanidation and gold recovery. The experiments with high % solids using mixed mesophiles showed better oxidation potential compared to moderate thermophiles and extreme thermophiles. However, the extreme thermophiles performed better than mesophiles and moderate thermophiles during the biooxidation with <5% solids (w/v). The biooxidized residues obtained from the experiments with extremophiles, gave a maximum gold recovery of 92% after cyanidation. The NaCN consumption during cyanidation of the biooxidized residues obtained from experiments with extremophiles was lower than bioresidues obtained from experiments with mesophiles and moderate thermophiles. The highest consumption of NaCN of 17.5kg/ton was from the experiment with 10% solids (w/v) using mesophiles. X-ray diffraction studies and chemical analysis of the biooxidized residues confirms the precipitation of jarosites at high redox potential which produces some ferricyanide, thereby explaining the reason for high cyanide consumption during cyanidation.Biooxidation of refractory gold-bearing arsenopyrite/pyrite concentrates as a pretreatment step prior to cyanidation have already proved to be an economically viable and competitive process with reduced environmental impact and lower capital costs ( The oxidation of sulfides follows two different pathways, like the polysulfide pathway and the thiosulfate pathway ( The oxidation of pyrite via ferric ion as non-contact bioleaching can be derived from the overall reaction summarizing Eqs. However the overall reaction based on the primary oxidant is shown in Eq. It has also been reported in the literature that a number of reduced sulfur species may serve as intermediates during sulfide oxidation. The consumption of cyanide per tonne of residue during cyanidation of biooxidized residues has been observed to be relatively high due to the presence of cyanicides in the residue ( This present study deals with the investigation of the oxidation capacity of selected mesophilic, moderately thermophilic and extremely thermophilic mixed microbial cultures during the biooxidation of a refractory gold concentrate in shake flasks and the effect of bioleached residues on cyanide consumption and gold recovery via cyanidation. Previous studies regarding the cyanidation of the bioleach residues have not determined the exact reason for the increase in the consumption of cyanide. This study aims to characterize the precipitate following biooxidation through XRD analysis and analyses the cyanide compounds (WAD cyanide, free cyanide, thiocyanate, strong metal cyanide) during cyanidation, thereby providing reasons for the increased cyanide consumption. The concentrate used in the present study was a flotation concentrate of refractory gold with a high content of pyrite from Agnes, South Africa and obtained from the flotation plant operated by GeoBiotics, LLC. The chemical and mineralogical compositions of the concentrate are shown in XRD analysis of the concentrate identified pyrite (FeS The microbial cultures used in this present study were mixed culture of mesophilic, moderately thermophilic and extremely thermophilic microorganisms respectively. The microbial cultures were supplied by the Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen (DSMZ, Germany) as pure cultures. Mixed cultures were prepared from the pure strains. The mixed mesophilic culture (MESM1) comprised of All the microbial cultures were grown and sub-cultured on the concentrate prior to its use as an inoculum for the present study. The mesophilic, moderately thermophilic and extremely thermophilic microorganisms were grown at 30 The complete chemical analysis of the concentrate was conducted by the Acme Analytical Laboratories Ltd., Canada (ISO 9001:2000). Analyses for gold and silver were carried out by cupellation (Fire Assay), while the carbon, sulfur and sulfate content was analyzed by a Leco Analyzer. The remaining elemental analysis was carried out by Inductively Coupled Plasma Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-ES) and X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry (XRF) ( Biooxidation experiments were carried out in 500 On the completion of the biooxidation tests the biooxidized pulp were harvested and filtered for the solid–liquid separation. The filter cakes were washed with water acidified to pH 2.0 by H Cyanide leaching of the biooxidized residues as well as the untreated concentrate was carried out for the gold extraction. All the cyanidation tests were carried out in 100 The pH and the redox potential of the experimental solution samples were measured by the Orion 420A Solid particles from the samples were removed by centrifugation at 2000 Cyanide concentration during the cyanidation tests was analyzed by drawing pulp samples at 3 CN Free cyanide (CN The biooxidation of sulfidic concentrates was found to be very high with mesophilic mixed culture MESM1, moderately thermophilic mixed culture MODM and extremely thermophilic mixed culture EXTM ( The biooxidation tests conducted with 20% solids (w/v) with MESM1 mixed culture resulted in an iron dissolution rate of 32.3 A decreasing trend in the microbial growth rate was observed with the increasing % solids. The highest microbial growth rate was observed in the experiment with 5% solids (w/v) with mixed culture EXTM but the lowest microbial growth was also observed with the same EXTM mixed culture with 20% solids (w/v). The cells yield of EXTM mixed culture decreased from 3.04 It has been stated that even in CSTR operations the limitation of % solids is around 20% due to inefficient gas transfer in the system together with microbial cell damage due to the high shear force caused by the impellers ( The observation in the present study shows that in all the experiments with different % solids the oxidation of sulfides has a positive correlation with the iron dissolution rate. Mineralogical analysis using XRD was carried out to determine the source of sulfates in both the residues obtained, one from experiments with 10% solids (w/v) using mesophilic mixed culture MESM1 and other from the control experiment. The control experiment residues showed the presence of arsenopyrite, which was not found in the biooxidized residue using MESM1 culture. On the other hand some pyrite was also observed in the biooxidized residue due to the incomplete oxidation of pyrite ( The other mineralogical phase observed in the biooxidized residue was jarosite which was the source of the sulfate in the oxidized concentrate. No jarosite was observed in the control experiment as no iron oxidation occurred in that system. The gold recovery calculated on the biooxidized residues obtained from the experiment with 5% solids (w/v) using extreme thermophiles was above 90%, but when using mesophiles and moderate thermophiles it was below 90%. The gold recovery from the concentrate without any pretreatment via biooxidation was below 35%. The variation in the gold recovery by cyanidation versus the amount of sulfide biooxidation in the experiments is shown in The highest NaCN consumption recorded was 17.5 The cyanide consumption of leach residues from the sulfur-oxidizer It has been reported that thiosulfate is formed due to the reaction of pyrite with ferric ion (Eq. The changes in the concentrations of free cyanide, thiocyanate and weak acid dissociable cyanide during the cyanidation of the biooxidized residue with the highest NaCN consumption is shown in Considering the above results, the presence of metal cyanide compounds and especially the strong iron cyanide complexes appear to be the cause of high cyanide consumption. Therefore, it can be deduced that the cyanide consumption emanated from the ferric ion in the jarosite whereas the source of the iron-cyanide complexes was thought to be ferric sulfate ( It is possible that the jarosite has deteriorated during the conditioning with lime (at pH 11–12) of biooxidized residues. However, in such a case, a second iron-rich solid phase would be formed ( Biooxidation of refractory gold concentrates carried out at high % solids using mesophilic cultures resulted in a better oxidation performance compared to moderate and extreme thermophilic mixed cultures. However, extremophiles performed better oxidation at 5% solids (w/v). Arsenopyrite was biooxidized more readily than pyrite due to its lower electrochemical potential, but both the iron and arsenic % extraction decreased with increasing % solids. The growth yield of microorganisms also appeared to decrease with increasing % solids. The gold recovery was strongly related to the extent of sulfide biooxidation, with the highest recovery of 92.4% obtained from biooxidized residues using extremophiles EXTM. The consumption of NaCN during cyanidation ranged from 5.2 to 17.5 This work was fully funded by