Cut-off grade strategy (COGS) is a concept that directly influences the financial, technical, economical, and environmental issues in relation to the exploitation of a mineral resource. Despite the simple definition of cut-off grade, the COGS problem is one of the complex and complicated problems in the mine planning process. From the optimization point of view, the COGS with an objective of maximizing the present value of future cash flows is a non-linear and a non-convex problem that even in its deterministic form can be solved using approximate optimization methods. This optimization problem will also be more complex and complicated under uncertainty conditions. This paper proposes an uncertainty based multi-criteria ranking system to investigate the problem of COGS selection considering metal price and geological uncertainties. The proposed system aims at selection of the best COGS among technically feasible alternative COGSs under uncertainty circumstances. Our developed system is based on integrating metal price and geological uncertainties as well as operating flexibility to close the mine early. We incorporate this operating flexibility into the proposed system using a Monte Carlo based real options (RO) valuation model. For this purpose, in addition to the expected value, other risk criteria are considered to rank the alternatives. These risk criteria include abilities of strategies in producing extra profits, minimizing losses, and achieving the predefined goals of the production. In this study, the technically possible COGSs are generated using the Lane comprehensive algorithm. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed system, we utilize data of an Iranian gold mine. Results show that the proposed system outperforms conventional methods in the sense that it shows significantly lower average mis-ranking than the other methods and also selects a strategy with a higher value. The sensitivity analysis of the proposed system relative to the gold price shows that the system is highly dependent on the parameters of the stochastic process used to model the evolution of the metal price. Therefore, special consideration should be given in estimating stochastic process parameters. The goal of an open pit mine planning is to find an optimum plan resulting in the highest Net Present Value (NPV) while meeting several technical and operational constraints. Hence, once the geologic block model is built, a mine planner performs the planning by answering the three following questions ( Describing the solution of the above-mentioned questions, as discussed thoroughly in the literature ( Traditionally, a constant price trend and a grade tonnage curve estimated from the kriged grades are used in open pit mine planning. But the real situation is much more complex, where mining investments are often associated with diverse sources of both endogenous and exogenous uncertainties. Recently, much research has tried to address the issue of geological and market related uncertainties in the mining industry where their adverse effects could cause substantial losses of millions of dollars ( In this respect, some outstanding work has been done incorporating geological uncertainty in long term mine planning using simulation based optimization and stochastic programming methods ( Despite the usefulness of these methods, they suffer from some important shortcomings. These shortcomings include making subjective judgments in the decision making process, considering constant market conditions, and the weakness of the conventional DCF approach in valuing managerial flexibilities inherent in the mineral industry. Although the RO valuation is able to value managerial and operating flexibilities, like conventional methods, it does not necessarily prescribe the best alternative among the available alternatives and the results are often interpreted subjectively. Recently, according to the new developments in the simulation based RO valuation, researchers have attempted to develop multi-criteria ranking systems with the aims of minimum subjective judgments, sound quantification of uncertainties and valuation of management flexibilities for appraisal of investments in minerals industry ( One of the earliest studies on incorporating uncertainties in calculation of the COGS is the work by The contribution of this paper is to propose a multi-criteria ranking system to select an optimum COGS, incorporating geological and metal price uncertainties while considering the operating flexibility to abandon the mine early under adverse economic conditions. In this regard, the Lane comprehensive algorithm ( In this paper to enhance the decision making process under uncertainty, a multi-criteria ranking system is proposed for selection of the cut-off grade strategy for an open pit mining operation, while integrating geological and market uncertainties and the operating flexibility to close the mine early. This selection system is based on multiple value statistics and cash flow characteristics incorporating a value of management flexibility in reacting to the new information. There are many stochastic processes that can be used in quantifying market uncertainty of commodity prices. The most commonly used processes are the Geometric Brownian Motion (GBM) as shown in Eq. As assumed by During the past two decades, conditional simulation has been used as a complementary tool for modeling of geological uncertainty in the strategic mine planning and design ( Several conditional simulation algorithms are available in the literature. This research employs the well published Sequential Gaussian Simulation (SGS) to generate in-situ ore-body realizations. Therefore, Datamine software that benefits the GSLIB codes for SGS is used to generate equally probable realizations of the in-situ ore-body ( The Lane's original model based on Bellman dynamic programming was published on 1964, and then it was extended to a more comprehensive model in 1989, which considered the effects of economic parameters variations on the COGS. The Lane's model results in making the best use of capacities of mining operation to maximize the present value. Many researchers have used this model as the basis for their work ( As in Generally, the value of an option can be estimated using either analytical or numerical methods. Analytical methods are only suitable for valuing simple options as the one developed by Monte Carlo simulation was originally proposed by  The immediate exercise value of But at any early exercise time After the regression, the optimal obtained coefficients aj are used to estimate the expected continuation value  In this study, the operating flexibility to close the mine early is integrated into the value estimate of the COGS taking into account the geological and metal price uncertainties. In order to evaluate the mining operations under the flexible operating mode, it is assumed that the mining operation status can be changed at some certain discrete dates per year with a time step of Δ Then, recursively starting from the last time step towards the first period at any period Let The parameters of these functions are estimated at each time period by regressing the sum of the discounted value of cash flows beyond time At any time Keep the mine open if Close the mine if Multi-criteria ranking system is an effective tool enhancing the role of objective interpretations against subjective interpretations when a decision making problem exists. In this paper, based on the available information at the initial planning time, the following aspects are considered to select the best exploitation strategy. Upside potential that indicates the ability of alternative strategies to gain possibly more profit than those expected if outcomes were favorable. Downside risk that reflects the difference between strategies in minimizing negative cash flows risk throughout the mine life time. Statistics of the estimated operation values which includes the average, lower and upper limits at a certain confidence level. Probability of completion, which is the probability that the mine will operate as planned throughout its planned life. For simplicity, these criteria are considered to have equal weight in this paper while different weight can be acquired based on the mining company policies. The method of calculating every individual corresponding indicator is explained in details as follows. The upside potential measures the ability of a strategy to obtain possibly more profit than those expected if outcomes were favorable. Therefore, the upside potential indicator (UPI) for a mine design Considering the uncertainties inherent in the minerals industry, there is a probability of producing negative cash flows during some periods of the mine life time, even if we expect positive value at the mine design time. The downside risk indicator (DRI) accounts for such probabilities and reflects the difference between designs in minimizing risk of negative cash flows throughout the mine life. The expected negative cash flows DCF The DRI value for a design could be negative or positive. A greater DRI for design indicates higher capability of minimizing negative cash flow risks. The overall DRI for design The value statistics indicator (VSI) accounts for the overall expected present value of future cash flows as well as the confidence limits estimated at a specified confidence level. As with the above described indicators, the performance of each mine design is compared to the average of all designs and an indicator is assigned to reflect whether the performance of each design is above or below that average. The indicator related to the expected value for a design The upper limit indicator (  The value statistics indicator (VSI) for each design is then calculated by summing up the indicators corresponding to the expected value, the upper, and the lower limits of expected value, as follows ( Insurance options such as the early abandonment of mines that limit further losses may lead to uncompleted production plans which can result in economic and social inconveniences. Therefore, the relative abilities of various mine designs to sustain unfavorable economic conditions and perform as planned throughout the anticipated project life are the criteria expressed by the probability of completion indicator (PCI). The PCI for a mine design A positive PCI indicator means that design To demonstrate the applicability of the proposed system in selection of a COGS under geological and price uncertainties, the proposed ranking system was applied to an Iranian gold mine which is extracted by the open pit mining method. In order to verify the efficiency of the proposed method with actual data of the uncertain variables, only a part of an actual gold reserve with available production blast holes data is used for analysis purposes. It is assumed that the actual grade of an ore block equals the average grade of the blast holes measured within that block. This part of the gold reserve was a low grade zone that was extracted during the last three years of the mining operation between 2006 and 2010. The block model and geostatistical realizations of the desired part of the mining reserve were produced, employing the exploration phase drill holes data using Datamine In order to assess the efficiency of the proposed ranking system, the mining exploitation strategies will be also ranked according to the following three ranking methods along with the proposed multi-criteria ranking system. the expected value estimated by the RO valuation the expected value estimated by the conventional DCF valuation method the NPV based indicator, summation of the defined indicators except the PCI since the conventional DCF method cannot consider the managerial flexibilities. Different alternative strategies could be generated in a number of ways according to the objectives of the mining company and economical and social conditions. One way, which is applied in this study, is to use the Lane's algorithm considering different possible realizations of the in-situ ore-body and metal price paths. Therefore, 300 independent technically feasible COGSs were derived using independent combinations of 10 realizations of the in-situ ore-body with 30 realizations of gold price paths. The price paths were generated by Monte Carlo simulation using GBM stochastic process, while the geostatistical simulation was employed to generate the realizations of the in-situ ore-body. In order to select the best strategy incorporating gold price and geological uncertainties, the generated strategies were valued using two different valuation techniques. The first one is the LSM RO valuation in which operating flexibility to close the mine early was integrated in valuation of strategies. Despite the high price condition from 2006 to 2010, the reason for considering the operating flexibility to close the mine early was the lower quality of the gold grade in the considered zone of the reserve. The second technique is the conventional DCF valuation method, in which the operating flexibility to close the mine early is ignored. In the RO valuation, the first five terms of the Laguerre polynomials were used to estimate the expected value of the mining continuation value conditional on the time and simulated realization values. To integrate the gold price and geological uncertainties, 20,000 independent scenarios were produced by combining 20,000 stochastically simulated price paths using Eq. An illustrative example of the four realizations of the in-situ ore-body is shown in As explained before, the proposed multi-criteria ranking system evaluates the strategies based on their TRI values which are calculated using the four measures of UPI, DRI, PCI and VSI. As the operating flexibilities cannot be valued by the DCF valuation method, the PCI has the same value for the all strategies. Therefore, the term PCI was not considered in calculation of the TRI using the DCF valuation method. Evaluating the 300 alternative COGSs by the LSM RO and the DCF valuation models, the first 10 high rank strategies based on the four ranking methods are listed in It is obvious from To assess the efficiency of the ranking systems under uncertainty the alternative COGSs values were calculated using the actual data of the gold price and grade tonnage curve. Using the actual tonnage grade curve and actual gold market data between 2006 and 2010, all of the strategies were valued and ranked according to their PV at the beginning of 2006. In this respect, the 10 best strategies based on their PV are listed in Comparing the results in To have a comparison of overall performance of the ranking systems, a term of average mis-ranking (amr) was calculated. The amr is defined as the average value of the absolute differences of alternative ranks in a specified ranking system and their corresponding actual rank. The amr can be calculated using the following formula: Evaluating COGSs based on the RO expected values reduced the amr from 72.15 in the NPV analysis to 45.96. This amr has been reduced further to 31.82 when using the RO valuation based indicator that ranks COGSs using multiple risk criteria while considering the flexibility to close the mine early. The results of The estimated distribution function of cash flows is usually assumed to be approximately symmetrical around the expected value when no operating flexibility is considered in the valuation. Therefore, integrating multi-criteria ranking systems without considering the operating flexibility to react to the new information will not necessarily assure improvement in the decision making process. As is shown in On the contrary, using the RO valuation instead of the conventional DCF technique can improve the economic based decision process. The results show that integrating multiple risk criteria with the flexibility to revise the originally taken decisions regarding the early closure of the mine can significantly change the decision and improve the selection process. However, in addition to the higher value of the selected alternative and lower mis-rank of the proposed system overall performance, the RO valuation used by the proposed system estimates the values of the strategies better than the DCF model. Some of the results on the ranking systems performance are in agreement with the results of the research published recently by The COGS 138, as the best strategy selected by our proposed ranking system, is illustrated graphically in A sensitivity analysis was performed to measure the dependency of the proposed system on the estimated parameters of the GBM stochastic process. Therefore, 30 COGS alternatives were generated and used to analyze the sensitivity of the proposed system to the drift and volatility of the GBM process. In this respect, the amr of the RO based multi-criteria ranking system was calculated relative to the actual gold prices from 2006 to 2010 and actual grade tonnage curve. To consider the stochastic nature of the generated price paths this analysis was repeated five times, and the results are shown in  In justification of the stated reason, two other hypothetical gold price trends were also considered as depicted in As Therefore, according to the results, for a gold mining operation if the market condition is expected to be improved in the future; considering higher drift and volatility for the GBM process may result in improvement of the decision process and vice versa. Nevertheless, it is impossible to exactly know whether the price will be increased or decreased or both in the future. Hence, considering the high sensitivity of the valuation results and proposed ranking method to the estimated parameters of the chosen stochastic process, it is recommended that a professional econometrician be retained to parameterize metal price processes for any valuation exercise. Finally it should be mentioned that the results of this study are specific to the case study discussed herein and the data fed into the valuation model. Different results might be obtained if other economic condition or other operating flexibilities were considered in valuation. Therefore, the results cannot be generalized to prefer the proposed methods over the other methods, and more investigation is needed. Cut-off grade is a geological/technical concept that embodies important economic aspects of the mining venture and plays an influential role in the optimality of mine planning and design. In this paper, a multi-criteria ranking system was proposed for selection of COGS cut-off grade strategy (COGS) for an open pit mining operation under metal price and geological uncertainties. The proposed ranking system is based on the multiple risk and cash flow characteristics measures of each COGS. In the proposed system, alternative COGSs were valuated using a simulation based real option (RO) valuation model. The RO valuation benefits the proposed system with the valuation of operating flexibilities inherent in the mineral industry and consequently offers better evaluation of different alternatives. Hence in this study, to avoid unwanted losses in unfavorable market conditions, the insuring operating flexibility to close the mine early was considered in the valuation. In this study, the Lane's comprehensive algorithm was applied to generate the technically feasible COGSs while metal prices and geological uncertainties were resolved using stochastic processes and geostatistical simulation, respectively. To explore the advantages of the proposed system, it was applied to select the COGS under uncertainties for an Iranian gold mine along with three other ranking methods including the RO valuation expected value, the Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) valuation expected value and the DCF based multiple criteria ranking system. Comparing the performance of the ranking methods with the actual rank of alternatives calculated using actual values of uncertain variables revealed that the average mis-rank of the proposed system is lower than the other three ranking methods. The results also suggest that selection procedure may be improved when incorporating uncertainty and operating flexibility. It was seen that under the uncertainty conditions, the selected COGS would not necessarily have a declining trend as described by