Formation of multi-layer coating by plasma nitriding and hard chromium electroplating on the surface of H11 hot work tool steel was investigated. Specimens were coated via a triple process containing plasma nitriding, hard chromium electroplating and plasma nitriding. Surface composition has been studied by X-ray diffraction analysis. The surface morphology and elemental analysis was examined by using scanning electron microscopy. Wear tests were conducted by the use of pin-on-disk method, a cemented tungsten carbide pin and 1000 gF load. Polarization corrosion tests were carried out in distilled water solution containing 3% NaCl. The improvement in hardness distribution after third step is discussed in considering the forward and backward diffusion of nitrogen in the chromium interlayer. Also, the formed phases in the hybrid coating were determined to be CrN + Cr2N + Cr + Fe2–3N + Fe4N. Wear results showed that although the multi-layer coated specimens have higher wear resistance in comparison with the reference specimen, their wear resistance is less than that of two and one layer coated specimens due to micro-ploughing and removal of hard surface nitrides from the surface. By increasing the third step time and temperature, the wear resistance of specimens increases due to higher diffusion of nitrogen in the chromium layer. But polarization results showed that triple coated specimens have the lowest corrosion rate.Hard chromium electroplating is a common coating method that is used for coating the surfaces of industrial components. In this electrolytic process, baths containing the hexavalent chromium ion, Cr A typical hot work tool steel bar (AISI H11: 0.3% C, 0.33% Mn, 0.25% Si, 3.5% Cr, 1.1% Mo, 0.28 V, 0.14% Ni, 0.005% P, 0.007% S) were used in this investigation. Specimens were sectioned and machined to the dimension of 20 mm diameter and 10 mm height for corrosion tests and 50 mm diameter and 10 mm height for wear tests. All of the specimens with a hardness of 32 Rockwell-C were ground and polished using 600 up to 1200 SiC grit and 0.5 μm alumina powder, respectively. The resulting surface roughness ( Three steps of coating were applied on the specimens, namely plasma nitriding, hard chromium electroplating and plasma nitriding. The nitriding was performed with a 10 kHz frequency and 60% duty cycle plasma. The following processing parameters were applied to the specimens: a temperature of 550 ± 5 °C, a nitriding time of 5 h, a total pressure of 500 ± 100 Pa and a gas mixture of 25 vol. % H Microstructures, surface morphology and the distribution of the elements were studied by SEM/EDS (Vega II XMU/Tescan). The phases were determined by X-ray diffraction analysis using Cu K Specimens were immersed in a 3% NaCl solution for potentio-dynamic polarization studies. A three-electrode cell configuration was employed for the measurements consisting of a saturated calomel reference electrode (SCE), a platinum auxiliary electrode and a working electrode (specimen). All potentials in this study are referred to SCE. The measurements were carried out using an Autolab computer controlled measuring system. Wear tests were performed using a pin-on-disk test (ASTM G-99-95 A) in which a cemented tungsten carbide pin of 5 mm in diameter with spherical tip of 2.5 mm in radius slides against the disks (specimens). Other typical conditions were as: wear load, 1000 gF; sliding speed, 98 rpm (0.06 m/s); wear track diameter, 12 mm; temperature, 23 °C; and relative humidity, 46%. The friction coefficient was achieved for a total sliding distance of 1000 m (16,667 s). The weight loss of wear specimens was measured using a Sartorius digital scale at each 100 m sliding. The friction force was measured by a machine built-in load cell and the signals delivered from the load cell were transferred to the friction coefficients by a personal computer. In SEM images obtained from the investigated steel after first step plasma nitriding (at a gas mixture of 25 vol. % H After third step nitriding, although some nitride particles are formed on the surface of all specimens, but the surface cracks has not been covered in 5 h plasma nitriding. By increasing the process time up to 10 h, the surface begins to get covered by nitrides. It was not possible to observe the final nitride layer above the chromium layer in the cross section of the specimens, because the last nitride layer was very thin and after cutting the specimens it was removed. Thus, the coating was mechanically broken and some parts of the broken surface coating were studied by SEM. In Typical XRD patterns obtained from the specimens are shown in In  It could be seen from It can be seen in Also,  The results of corrosion tests are illustrated in Also, by nitriding the chromium layer, the surface cracks of this layer could be covered by iron and chromium nitrides. So, corrosive solution could not reach the base metal. Surface crack density of various specimens is shown in These cracks have an important role in wear and corrosion resistance. By comparing the data provided in Corrosion curves ( From the present work it can be concluded that the substrate coating has a crucial influence on the surface properties of the specimens. In the case of investigated Cr plating and plasma nitriding processes, the surface cracks of chromium layer could be covered by the surface nitrides By 10 h nitriding (third step) on the surface of hard chromium layer (second layer), the cracks of this layer are more or less covered. The phases formed after third step coating, are chromium and iron nitrides (CrN + Cr The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support by the