The single-aliquot regenerative-dose (SAR) protocol with optically stimulated luminenscence (OSL) was applied to measure the equivalent dose (ED) of ancient Chinese bricks ranging in age from 180 to 1600 years. In the protocol, sensitivity changes can be corrected by using OSL response to a fixed test dose during measurement. For comparative study between OSL and TL, thermoluminescence (TL) measurement procedures were also applied to determine the paleodose of the bricks. Both results of OSL and TL are in agreement with the known ages of the bricks, and the paleodose ratios(EDOSL/ EDTL) are between 0.96 and 1.21, mean value 
                        1.08
                        ±
                        0.02
                     . The annual doses of the bricks, estimated by the paleodoses and the known ages, range from 5.07 to 6.79mGy/a, comparable with the measured annual dose values of the bricks. Therefore, it is concluded that the SAR protocol is a rapid and effective OSL technique to authenticate Chinese bricks.Based on thermoluminescence, the OSL method, first presented by Huntley et al. (1985) for dating sediments was developed and widely applied in geochronology and archaeology, and became an irreplaceable method in dating inorganic mineral accumulating dose over the last few tens of thousands of years. OSL was also applied to measure accident irradiation doses. Recently, In this work, the OSL signal of the fine-grain sample was used to measure its equivalent dose. The present paper discussed the measured results of Chinese bricks, ranging from 180a to 1600a, by using OSL and TL dating techniques. These bricks were provided by Shanghai Museum of China, and were derived from buildings in different areas, the buildings ranged in age from 180 to 1600 years, and their annual doses were measured by Shanghai Museum using An automated Risø reader, model Risø TL/OSL DA-15, was used for OSL/TL measurements. In the case of OSL, samples were optically stimulated using blue light emitted by a diode array The equivalent doses were measured using the SAR OSL protocol, so the result of one disc is single-aliquot equivalent dose. Five discs of each brick sample were measured, and then the average value was worked out. In SAR OSL protocol, a fixed test does was applied to correct any sensitivity changes, The test dose was usually 10–20% of the natural dose, and 30–50% in few samples with weak OSL signals. Due to the instability of the electrons in shallow traps, a pre-heat process was applied to remove these electrons in sample before each measurement, after that the OSL signal could be used to dating the samples. The mean lifetime of the traps associated with TL peak can be estimated by using TL trap parameters; The measurement procedures are as follows: The sensitivity corrected OSL growth curve of CPB9-XC9 sample is shown in Seven sample discs were divided into three groups, the first group (3 samples) for measuring the natural TL (N), another group (2 samples) to be exposed to an additional beta dose From Ages of samples could be worked out using the equivalent doses ED and the annual doses of these bricks measured by Shanghai Museum. The age (=ED/AD) values were listed in For authentication, we do not measure annual dose, but use typical annual dose 5.5 Both the OSL and TL results for some bricks are older than the known ages, it suggests that the bricks may be significantly earlier than buildings, i.e. the bricks were late-used or re-used. From The work described in this paper was funded by the Research Fund of City University of Hong Kong (Project No. 7001104). The samples and the information were provided by Shanghai Museum. Ms. M.M. Lau of CityU and Prof. Daling Luo of ZSU provided considerable assistance.