The fundamental requirement of the tile adhesive mortar is its adherence and durability. The properties of adhesives are affected by the chemical and mineralogical composition of the aggregates. The aggregates are obtained from the leading 10 companies that sell adhesives. First, chemical compositions of aggregates are determined from chemical analysis by XRF. Then, exact mineral compositions of aggregates determined from the chemical compositions by using CIPW norms. Aggregate size and granulometry is determined by microscope analysis. Ten different groups of dry-mixed adhesive samples are prepared for testing from the 10 different aggregate mixtures that are obtained from producing companies. Dry, wet, hot and freezing–thawing adhesive strengths are determined according to European EN 1348 and EN 12004 standards. The mineral and chemical composition of aggregate type that gives the highest adhesive strength is determined. It is found that the highest pull-out adhesive strength was obtained on samples those aggregates have high content (80–95%) of SiO2 and with small amount (0.5–3.4%) of CaCO3.The tile adhesives are used for ceramic tiles in the past, but their use for tiles made of natural stones is increasing in building construction. Cementitious adhesives are the most common adhesives among other types and in this study cementitious adhesives are tested according to the specifications of European standards EN 1348 A large portion of adhesive volume is made up of aggregate and the properties of aggregate greatly affect the durability and performance of adhesive mortar. Aggregates are not truly inert and their chemical and physical properties influence the performance of the adhesive. All natural aggregates are produced by fragmentation of a large mass of rock by natural processes of weathering and abrasion or artificially by crushing. Thus many properties of the aggregate depend entirely on the properties of the original rock mass. These properties are chemical and mineral composition, petrological character, specific gravity, hardness, mechanical strength, physical and chemical stability, pore structure and colour, the other properties that effect the quality of the adhesive mortar are particle shape and size of the aggregate, and its surface texture and absorption From the petrological aspect, the aggregates, whether crushed and naturally reduced in size, can be divided into several groups of rocks having common characteristics. The classification of BS 812: Part 1 Basalt (andesite, basalt, diabase, Epidiorite, spilite) Granite (gneiss, granite, granodiorite, granulite, pegmatite, Quartz–diorite, syenite) Limestone (Dolomite, limestone, marble) Schist (Phyllite, schist, slate, all severely sheared rocks) Flint (chert, flint) Gritstone (including fragmental volcanic rocks) Porphyry (aplite, dacite, felsite, granophyre, keratophyre, microgranite, porphyry, rhyolite, trachyte) Gabbro (basic diorite, basic gneiss, gabbro, hornblende rock, norite, peridotite, picrite, serpentinite) Hornfels Quartzite (ganister, quartzitic sandstones) BS 812: Part 102 (1989) Tile adhesive mortars are composed of cement, aggregate as filler and organic additives. Organic additives like cellulose ether and redispersible powder (e.g., latex polymer and polyvinyl alcohol) improve workability properties and strength of adhesive Cellulose ether retains the water in the thin mortar layer between wall and tile. This mortar water is used in a later stage for the hydration and harden the Portland cement. Cement hydration is an important process: the cement constituents react with water and form cement hydrates. These cement hydrates mutually intergrowths and the entire mass develops increasing cohesive strength. Drying of the mortar causes the cement hydration to stop. On the other hand, the cellulose ether and the redispersible powder form polymer films, upon drying. Especially, the redispersible powder forms strong and flexible films throughout the mortar structure increasing significantly final adhesion strength properties Optimizing the formulation or enhancing the system’s components continuously improves adhesive mortar properties. The physical properties of the resultant mortars are improved using empirical approaches by comparing numerous formulations with each other. An extended understanding of the mechanisms active during mortar evolution is required in order to further improve these properties at the present. Many of these mechanisms leave characteristic marks on the mortar microstructures. Therefore, the microstructure represents a major key to an improved understanding of the highly complex system of polymer-modified mortars First, chemical compositions of aggregates are determined from chemical analysis by X-ray fluorescence method. Then, exact mineral compositions of aggregates are determined from the chemical compositions by using computerized CIPW norms Ten samples of adhesive mortars are prepared with only difference in the aggregate type being used in making cementitious adhesives. The amount of other ingredients such as Portland cement and organic additives were kept constant. Also the amount and size range of the aggregates were also same in all tests. Only the aggregate type is changed. First 10 dry mixtures are prepared made of three components; Mixture of hydraulic binding agents as Portland cement, aggregates and organic additives. The amount of aggregates used were 60% by weight, the remaining was mainly cement with relatively small portions of additives. The exact ratio of cement and additives is not given due to sponsoring company’s request. The dry adhesive is mixed with water just before use. Thin bed method is used for installing tiles onto a plane surface of the substrate with an adhesive. The adhesive is usually applied with a trowel to obtain a layer and then combed with a notched trowel to achieve the right thickness and planarity. The same Portland cement and additives are used in all 10 samples. The percentage quantities of the constituents were same for all test samples. The only changing parameter was aggregate type used in making adhesives so the influence of aggregate type can be determined. The aggregates for the test samples are obtained from the companies that produce ceramic adhesive mortars. Therefore, 10 different test samples were tested to determine which aggregate type would give the best performance. The same aggregate size range 100–400 μm is used for making all ceramic adhesive mortars. Portland cement (28 day strength is 42.5 N/mm Size (30 The storage conditions were: Dry (28 d, 23 °C, 50% RH) Wet (7 d, 23 °C, 50% RH Heat (14 d, 23 °C, 50% RH Freeze/thaw {7 d, 23 °C, 50% RH Dry-mixed adhesives produced from the 10 different aggregate mixtures are named with symbols: EM1, EM2, …, EM10. The specifications laid down in European standard. CEN were Initial tensile adhesion strength ⩾0.5 N/mm Tensile adhesion strength after water immersion ⩾0.5 N/mm Tensile adhesion strength after heat ageing ⩾0.5 N/mm Tensile adhesion strength after freeze–thaw cycles ⩾0.5 N/mm Open time: tensile adhesion strength ⩾0.5 N/mm The results of pullout (adhesive) mortar strength tests carried out according to the standards A minimum amount of dispersion powder should be used to produce an economic adhesive mortar. Since the cost of chemicals contributes the biggest cost item. Therefore, a minimum amount of dispersion powder is used for adhesive samples. Only EM2 and EM3 test samples are passed the pull-out (adhesive strength) strength requirement of ⩾0.5 N/mm Sample EM3 has the highest tensile strength in dry and wet condition, so according to the strength criteria EM3 is the ideal one followed by Sample EM2. EM2 has the highest strength under heated conditions followed by EM3; the difference is very small only 0.01 N/mm Again, freezing-thaw strength of EM3 is the third highest after EM10 and EM8 the strength value being 1.03 N/mm Both test samples of EM3 and EM2 have high SiO EM1 has the third highest strength in wet condition, after EM3 and EM2 and has CaO (0.5%) and SiO CIPW norms of the aggregates are given in The mineral compositions of EM1, EM2, EM3, EM5 and EM6 are compared and it is found that EM3 sample is different from EM1 and EM5 since it has diopside but does not have hypersthene. Similarly EM2 sample has diopside and does not have hypersthene compared to EM6. The pyroxenes can be divided into several groups, the most common of which can be represented as part of the chemical system CaSiO A meaningful relationship is found between strength and mineralogical composition that was similar to the relationship between strength and chemical analysis. So, high percentage of quartz and the presence of calcium were effective in giving high adhesive strength. The Kale group is greatly acknowledged for laboratory assistance.