This paper analyses the fuel injection characteristics of bioethanol–diesel fuel and bioethanol–biodiesel blends considered as fuel for diesel engines. Attention is focused on the injection characteristics which significantly influence the engine characteristics and subsequently the exhaust emissions. In this context the following injection characteristics have been investigated experimentally: fuelling, injection timing, injection delay, injection duration, mean injection rate, and injection pressure. The tested fuels were neat mineral diesel fuel, neat biodiesel made from rapeseed oil, bioethanol/diesel fuel and bioethanol/biodiesel blends up to 15% (v/v) bioethanol with an increment of 5%. The fuels blends were experimentally investigated in a fuel injection M system at rated condition (FL, 1100rpm), peak torque (FL, 850rpm), and maximum pump speed (1100rpm) for different partial loads (PL 75% and PL 50%), at ambient temperature.
                  It has been proven that for all operating regimens tested, the addition of bioethanol to biodiesel reduces fuelling, injection timing, injection duration, mean injection rate and maximum injection pressure and increases injection delay compared to pure biodiesel. Meanwhile, increasing bioethanol in diesel fuel shows no significant variations or a slightly increase in fuelling, injection timing, injection duration, and mean injection rate and a decrease in injection delay and maximum injection pressure, compared to pure diesel fuel.
                  The influence of bioethanol in biodiesel is much more significant that in diesel fuel; it has a beneficial effect on biodiesel injection characteristics because bioethanol addition brings them nearer to the diesel fuel one and it is expected to decrease biodiesel NO
                        x
                      emissions.Nowadays, the necessity of finding alternative fuels to replace progressively those produced from petroleum is generally accepted. The most common biofuels today are bioethanol and biodiesel. Ethanol can be produced from biomass by fermentation of sugar, by converting the starch content of biomass feedstocks into alcohol (bioethanol) or by hydration of ethylene which is obtained from petroleum and other sources. Biodiesel is produced by the transesterification of vegetable oil or animal fat feedstock, and it is the mostly used biofuel which can substitute diesel fuel totally or partially in a diesel engine. Ethanol usually replaces gasoline in petrol engines and biodiesel makes the same for diesel engines, but diesel fuel blended with low concentrations of ethanol can also run a diesel engine. An important advantage of biofuels is related to their oxygen content, which it is not present in fossil fuels like diesel. The oxygen presence in biodiesel and ethanol represents a potential in reducing particulate emissions Nowadays, many investigations are focused on the influence of biodiesel and their blends with mineral diesel on engine performance and exhaust emissions, showing a slight decrease in engine power and an increase in NO In case of ethanol–diesel blends, PM in exhaust also decreased substantially and a slight decrease was observed in NO Fuel injection characteristics depend on both, the type of injection system and fuel properties One of the main problems of blending two different fuels is that their chemical composition can lead to their separation. If a blend of various fuels separates after some time period it means that the concentration of each fuel injected into the cylinder may vary over the time. Because the engine management is optimized for a specific fuel, the engine characteristics will vary with respect to time. In a previous research, the authors demonstrated that bioethanol–biodiesel blends remain stable from −18 In case of ethanol–diesel fuel blends, the nonpolar hydrocarbons present in diesel fuel has no affinity with the polar ethanol, leading to phase separation In the effort to achieve the reduction of engine emissions and fuel consumption, while keeping other engine performances at an acceptable level, the injection system plays an important role. It is also possible to predict to some extent the engine characteristics on the basis of injection characteristics. Some important injection characteristics are injection pressure, injection duration, injection timing and fuelling. In general, mean injection pressure has to be as high as possible while keeping the maximal injection pressure at a low level and the injection timing influences the harmful NO In this paper, the most important injection characteristics of bioethanol–diesel fuel and bioethanol–biodiesel blends are analyzed and compared to those of pure diesel fuel. Fuel injection characteristics properties like fuelling, injection timing, injection delay, injection duration, mean injection rate and pressure are tested at rated condition, which means full load (FL) and pump speed (1100 Injection characteristics of eight samples were determined. The tested samples were neat mineral diesel fuel (D100), 5% bioethanol/diesel fuel blend (v/v) (E5D95), 10% bioethanol/diesel fuel blend (v/v) (E10D90), 15% bioethanol/diesel fuel blend (v/v) (E15D85), neat biodiesel (B100), 5% bioethanol/biodiesel blend (v/v) (E5B95), 10% bioethanol/biodiesel blend (v/v) (E10B90), and 15% bioethanol/biodiesel blend (v/v) (E15B85). The fuel properties have a noticeable influence on the response of the injection system. For this reason, in a previous study, we determined experimentally the most important physical and chemical properties of pure diesel fuel, bioethanol–diesel fuel blends, pure biodiesel, and bioethanol–biodiesel blends and their influence on engine characteristics was also presented Bioethanol (from Carlo Erba Company, Milano – Italy) was produced from the fermentation of sugars and its main properties are shown in The tested pure fuels are conforming to their respective standards for properties limitation; diesel fuel is conforming to European standard EN 590, pure biodiesel is conforming to EN 14214, and bioethanol satisfies ISO 9001 specifications. The measurement of sound velocity in fuel is based on the principle of pressure wave propagation on a specified length of the high pressure (HP) tube, instrumented by two piezoelectric based pressure transducers, located at both ends of the tube. A small plunger-type pump was used to induce a pressure wave which was registered by both transducers and simultaneously acquired by a measuring system (NI 9234 placed in NI 9163). No amplifiers were used. The sound velocity was measured at different pressures up to 700 The eight samples were tested in a mechanically controlled fuel injection M system, which consist of a plunger-in-barrel assembly, a high pressure (HP) tube, and an injector. The scheme of the experimentally investigated system, which includes the transducers for pressure, needle lift and injection timing determination, is shown in The injection M system was mounted on Fiedman-Maier type 12H100_h test bed for a conventional fuel injection pump. The test bench and fuel injection system were instrumented in order to measure basic parameters characteristics of system operation. A diaphragm-type pressure transducer (AVL 31DP 1200E) was applied at the high pressure pipe inflow just behind the injection pipe. Its special-purpose four-element strain gage (full-bridge configuration) was connected to the National Instrument module bridge amplifier (SCXI-1520). A piezoelectric-type pressure transducer (Kistler 6227) with charge amplifier Kistler was applied for the measurement of pressure traces within the high pressure tube just ahead of the injector. Its very high frequency response enabled the accurate dynamic measurement of pressure variation. A specially designed variable-inductance sensor was applied for needle lift pickup. An iron core was placed within two inductance coils and attached to the injector needle. The coils formed two legs of Wheatstone bridge which was excited by an alternating current of 6 A computer-aided measuring system was used to acquire electric signals from the applied sensors. The system incorporates a personal computer (Pentium III 600 LabVIEW software was used to build the computer applications for data acquisition, data analysis, and control algorithms. These applications were used to control the operation of the multifunction card (data acquisition, DC voltage output) and for data logging and postprocessing. The following parameters (variables) were measured: Pressure Pressure Needle lift Fuelling. It should be noted that throughout this paper it is assumed that the pump load is not determined by the fuelling but by the rack position. This means that at a single operating regime the use of various fuels will cause the fuelling to be slightly different. An operating regime is defined by load (rack position) and pump speed. For each regime, the pressure at the first monitoring point of the fuel injection system As an example, The experiments were performed for neat diesel D100, neat biodiesel B100, and their blends with bioethanol up to 15% at different operating regimes, at ambient temperature (20 Experimental results at rated condition (FL, 1100 The influence of bioethanol in the biodiesel and diesel fuels at peak torque condition is similar to that obtained at rated condition. From To get a better understanding of the influence of bioethanol content in the diesel and biodiesel fuels on injection characteristics, the most important injection characteristics of E05D95, E10D90, E15D85, B100, E05B95, E10B90, E15B85 are compared to those of neat D100. Throughout this paper, the term The comparison of relative fuelling at various operating regimes is presented in Fuelling variation is caused by various densities and viscosities of the samples. The higher fuelling of B100 is a consequence of its higher bulk modulus and its higher kinematic viscosity. Injection timing and injection duration are directly related to fuelling. Next sections will show how those physical properties modify these injection characteristics. Injection timing or start of injection is a very important parameter that significantly influences all engines characteristics According to In case of bioethanol–diesel fuel blends, the low tested bioethanol concentration leads to no significant variations or a slightly increase in injection timing, which can be caused by the lower viscosity of bioethanol compared to that of diesel fuel Due to the fact that injection timing is advanced for biodiesel with respect to diesel fuel According to a previous study When using bioethanol–biodiesel fuel blends, the already mentioned retarded injection timing with respect to the pure biodiesel, means that the injection delay (time interval between the start of delivery and the start of injection) becomes gradually higher (see Due to the higher density, viscosity and bulk modulus of biodiesel compared to those of diesel fuel, the injection delay changes, but the addition of bioethanol decreases that difference, bringing injection delay close to that of diesel fuel. A previous study, based on testing a high pressure injection system (common rail system), revealed a shorter injection delay for increasing ethanol in biodiesel when using a blend containing 20% anhydrous ethanol and 80% biodiesel by volume In general, the diagrams of At tested partial loads, the injection duration of all tested fuels is higher than that of D100 ( At tested full load operating regimes, the content of 10% bioethanol or less in the biodiesel gives the injection duration very close to that obtained with D100. It seems that at partial loads higher content of bioethanol in biodiesel is needed to obtain the fuel injection duration of D100. Mean injection rates at various regimes are shown in In all cases tested the influence of bioethanol addition on mean injection rate is more evident in biodiesel than in diesel fuel. With higher content of bioethanol in biodiesel, the mean injection rate decreases. However, even by using E15B85 blend the mean injection rate is higher than that of D100. Experimental results of In all cases tested, the influence of bioethanol addition on maximum pressure In the present study, fuel injection characteristics of bioethanol–diesel fuel and bioethanol–biodiesel blends have been experimentally studied with the aim of finding the variations in those parameters compared to their respective pure fuel values (diesel fuel or biodiesel), and to determine their possible commercial usage which would lead to cleaner emissions and lower dependence on petroleum products. The main conclusions, related to the influence of various concentrations up to 15% bioethanol in diesel fuel and in biodiesel on the main characteristics of an in-line injection system, are summarized as follows: For all injection characteristics studied, the influence of bioethanol in biodiesel is much more significant that in diesel fuel, and it has a beneficial effect from the point of view of biodiesel injection characteristics because bioethanol addition brings them nearer to these of diesel fuel. It seems that the E15B85 blend gives the best results because in most operating regimes its injection characteristics are the closest to those of diesel fuel or they are even better. B100 shows the highest fuelling at all operating conditions tested. Biodiesel fuelling decreases by bioethanol addition. Bioethanol addition does not modify substantially diesel fuel fuelling or increases it just slightly. Fuelling variation is a consequence of various densities and viscosities of tested fuels. The higher bulk modulus and kinematic viscosity of biodiesel leads to increase fuelling. Injection timing and consequently injection delay are significantly influenced by the type of injection system (in-line or common rail injection system). When using a low pressure injection system (no common rail), injection timing of biodiesel is retarded by bioethanol addition and injection delay increases due to lower density of bioethanol. The variation in injection timing caused by bioethanol addition is expected to decrease biodiesel NO An increment of bioethanol concentration in biodiesel leads to a decrement in injection duration, meanwhile the duration does not change or slightly increases when bioethanol is added to diesel fuel. In general, mean injection rate varies almost negligible when bioethanol is added to diesel fuel because higher fuelling is compensated by longer injection duration. For biodiesel blends, the lower fuelling has more influence than the shorter injection duration caused by bioethanol addition which leads to a decrease in mean injection rate. In most cases studied, bioethanol addition in biodiesel decreases maximum injection pressure more than bioethanol addition in diesel fuel. In case of bioethanol–biodiesel blends it is expected that bioethanol offers a possibility to reduce NO Based on the injection characteristics tested, blends up to 15% bioethanol in diesel fuel and 15% bioethanol in biodiesel can be recommended as fuel for diesel engines, provided that further engine performance tests support this conclusion. This research was supported by the European Community’s Sixth Framework Programme in the scope of the Civitas II Mobilis Project. Authors are also grateful for the Provision of a Research Mobility Grant to E. Torres-Jimenez from the “Junta de Andalucía”, Spain IAC09-II-5387.