Low grade nickel ores containing large amounts of serpentine minerals have historically been difficult to process efficiently. The Mt Keith ore was no exception with recoveries in the first five years of operation averaging just 60%.
                  In this research, the factors limiting performance have been identified and a new process has been devised that raises recovery significantly. The process exploits the particle size dependence of nickel sulphide flotation and the different ways that pH change and pulp density influence the response of coarse and fine particles.
                  Implementation of the new process at Mt Keith has raised nickel recovery by 10%. In turn, nickel production has increased by over 6000 t.p.a. and the net present value (NPV) of the operation has increased by over A$300 m. These outcomes illustrate the large commercial benefits that can be gained by understanding particle size effects in flotation.In 1994, WMC Resources Ltd. commenced mining of low grade, nickel sulphide ore from its Mt Keith deposit using large scale mining and processing methods. The operation currently treats over 11 Mt.p.a. of ore, typically assaying 0.58% Ni. The remaining reserve is 289 Mt assaying 0.52% Ni, which is sufficient for over 25 years of production at current rates. The ore at Mt Keith is characterized by its mineralogical diversity and metallurgical complexity. The predominant nickel sulphides are pentlandite and millerite, together with smaller amounts of violarite and heazlewoodite. A significant amount of each of these sulphides occurs as blebs coarser than 100 μm, but the remainder occurs either as fine (40–60 μm) or ultrafine (< The host rock is mostly serpentinised ultramafics, the predominant mineral being lizardite together with significant quantities of antigorite and chrysotile. The difficulty of dispersing and efficiently rejecting such minerals is well documented ( Attempts to float the ore without some form of size separation invariably give disappointing results. Pulps tend to be viscous and difficult to disperse, necessitating the use of low pulp densities (15–20% solids), high power inputs for agitation and large reagent additions. In turn, capital and operating costs are high. At the time of the mine development, the technical solution that provided the best business case was to deslime the ore at nominally 5 μm to remove about 15% of the mass ( Following commissioning, production at the concentrator ramped up rapidly, meeting or exceeding throughput and concentrate quality targets ( In 1998, a specialist team was formed to raise recovery. The Mt Keith concentrator has two parallel modules for grinding. These modules comprise a semi-autogenous (SAG) mill and a ball mill, both mills being closed with cyclones. The product from grinding is pumped to two parallel modules for desliming ahead of flotation.  To pinpoint the factors limiting flotation performance, a diagnostic approach similar to that described by  Recovery was 59.9% to a concentrate assaying 20.9% Ni and having an Fe The mean Another characteristic to emerge from size analyses was the tendency for grinding to produce large amounts of ultrafines. This tendency to produce ultrafines could have been brought about by the breakage characteristics of the ore, or by the machine characteristics of the grinding circuit, or by both. The tendency for SAG-ball mill circuits of the type installed at Mt Keith to produce particularly large amounts of − Conversely, many laboratory data showed a similar trend which suggested an ore characteristic. Some of the non-sulphides, such as pyroaurite and lizardite, are known to grind readily whereas others, such as antigorite and magnesite, are known to be difficult to grind. In the event, the influence of equipment selection and operation on feed size distribution was never fully resolved. The clear implication from the data, however, was that strategies for floating ultrafines, on the one hand, and coarse particles, on the other hand, would ultimately have to be developed for recovery to be optimized. Nickel mineralogy and liberation data for a typical feed sample are shown in Nickel iron sulphides (mostly pentlandite) accounted for 82.5% of the nickel and nickel sulphides (mostly millerite) accounted for 8.3% of the nickel. The rest of the nickel was unaccounted for, presumably due to nickel in solid solution in gangue minerals, or in sulphide grains too fine (< Liberation was not high, only 66% of all the nickel bearing particles appearing liberated.  Below 15 μm and above 60 μm recovery fell sharply. The response at fine size was expected because of the large amount of nickel in the slimes fraction and the flotation of this fraction in only a single stage of column flotation ( The decrease at coarse sizes was sharper than expected. Given the large amount of nickel at coarse sizes in the feed ( The poor response at coarse sizes raised the issue of whether the primary grind was too coarse. A review of production data indicated that reducing the primary grind size was uneconomic because of the impact on throughput, but highlighted that a single  Nickel losses by size and by liberation class in both the sands and the slimes tailings are presented in For the sands tailings, most of the nickel was present in low grade composites with a sulphide content by volume of less than 30%. A small but significant amount was also present in fine particles that were well liberated. For the slimes tailings, most of the nickel was present in fine particles that were either well liberated or which contained large amounts of gangue. Consistent with the data in Prior to 1998, extensive test programs had been completed by both Company and external R&D providers using the feed to sands flotation. Variables tested included the effect of xanthate chain length, of collector and frother type, of copper sulphate, of nitrogen conditioning, of agitation energy, of acid and of various dispersants including carboxymethylcellulose, proprietary antistatic agents and polyethylene oxide/polypropylene oxide polymers. These tests were reviewed in detail with the assessment being that only two variables showed consistent and discernable effects. These were the use of high agitation energies and the use of acid. The issue of agitation energy was a complex and long standing one. Many researchers had noted that raising impeller speeds in batch cells to maximum levels, typically 1500 or 1800 r.p.m., brought about an improved response. Both laboratory and pilot plant results were sufficiently encouraging to warrant the installation of high intensity conditioners ahead of the sands flotation circuit in the original flowsheet. Plant operating data quickly revealed, however, that these conditioners produced no recovery advantage and the units were decommissioned soon after start-up ( After careful assessment of all the available data, the practical use of high agitation energies in the Mt Keith context was considered problematic and was not pursued further by the recovery improvement team. The other variable, which was pursued, was the use of acid. About 60,000 t of acid was available annually from the Kalgoorlie smelter which equated to a maximum addition rate of about 7 kg/t for sands feed. Acid added at such a rate, however, only lowered the pH of the sands momentarily, presumably due to the dissolution of acid soluble minerals such as brucite and pyroaurite, and was insufficient to bring about a change in flotation response. An important finding was that the effect of acid was more sustained and the improvement in flotation response more pronounced if all of the acid was added to the underflow from the first stage of cyclones in the desliming circuit. This fraction was coarse, a typical In turn, the concept emerged of floating the underflow from the first stage cyclones in one of the rougher–scavenger modules and the underflow from the second stage cyclones in the other such module. Separating the streams in this way also revealed the different ways in which pulp density influences the response of coarse and fine particles.  After many similar tests for a range of ore types, no doubt remained that acid added during scavenger flotation significantly improved recovery without an unacceptable impact on concentrate quality. Typically an extra 3% nickel was floated and the additional rougher concentrate assayed about 4.5% Ni. The mechanism by which sulphuric acid brought about the effect was not investigated and remains a subject of debate. There is no real doubt that acid can promote the genuine flotation of sulphides, presumably by promoting the formation of a hydrophobic sulphur entity, or by removal of hydroxide oxidation products, or both. It has been suggested ( The effect of raising pulp density was to improve the coarse particle response significantly. The implication was that the components that raised the viscosity, mostly the fibrous material, largely reported to the overflow of the first cyclone stage and that the underflow behaved much more like a conventional pulp. Even when the underflow from the second stage of cycloning needed to be diluted to less than 15% solids for flotation, the underflow from the first stage could be floated at over 40% solids without difficulty. In the plant this brought about a significant increase in residence time for coarse particle flotation, as well as an improvement in rate similar to that in Size-by-size and mineralogical analysis confirmed that the change in rate was brought about by increased flotability of coarse, low grade composites.  The presence of significant quantities of low grade composites was confirmed by repeated cleaning of the froth product from the last few minutes of flotation. The maximum grades achieved were 2% Ni and 3% S. From microprobe analyses of Mt Keith sulphides, it can be calculated that the maximum sulphide content was 10% by mass and 17% by volume. Consistent with this calculation, mineralogical analyses showed particles in the cleaned concentrate to contain 8% to 20% sulphide by cross-sectional area. For such poor quality composites to have been recovered, both the chemical and physical conditions for flotation must have been favourable. We presume that the addition of acid brought about strong hydrophobicity of the sulphides and that raising the density reduced “drop-back.” At high density, water flow to the concentrate did increase, but concentrate grade was not greatly affected because the feed was deslimed. No difficulties were experienced maintaining a stable froth. A small but important additional advantage of floating at high density was that less acid was required to bring about the pH change. This reduction was presumably the result of less dissolved carbonate in the pulp when less process water was used for dilution. The fine nickel particles in the stream from the second stage underflow floated readily, provided the pulp density was less than about 20% solids. This requirement was not difficult to achieve because the cyclone underflow typically contained only about 13% of the ore at a density of about 25% solids and one entire module of rougher–scavenger capacity was available for flotation.  The effect of pulp density on the flotation response was pronounced. Above a threshold value, pulps became viscous, air dispersion in the cell deteriorated and both recovery and grade declined sharply. A typical photomicrograph of the pulp in a viscous state is shown in The data in The requirement for the two fractions to be floated at different densities precluded the use of a separate conditioning approach of the type described by The need for such treatment for difficult to concentrate ores had been recognized in a more general context by To confirm the benefit of floating the two deslime cyclone underflows separately, a series of so-called nodal tests was completed. For these tests, the underflows were sampled in the plant before and after they were combined and then floated in the laboratory. The combined underflow (sands flotation feed) was sampled after reagents had been added and was floated as received. The first deslime cyclone underflow was floated at high density in the presence of acid and the second deslime underflow was floated at low density with collector and frother alone. Parallel surveys were completed to determine the mass flowrate of each of the streams. Floating the underflows separately consistently brought about an improvement ( For all of the tests in  separation of the deslime circuit underflows; flotation of the first stage underflow in one rougher-scavenger module; flotation of the second stage underflow in the other rougher–scavenger module, and the installation of an acid storage and delivery system. In principle, the concept of directing the underflows from the two stages of cyclones down different modules was straight-forward. In practice, several complex issues needed to be resolved involving pump capacities, slurry transport hydraulics, downstream impacts and piping configurations for module shut-downs. As issues arose they were addressed systematically with numerous valuable ideas emerging from maintenance, site operations and engineering personnel. The cost of the modifications ultimately selected was A$2.2 million. Installation of an acid storage and delivery system added a further A$2 million raising the total cost of the project to $4.2 million. The modified circuit was straight-forward to commission and robust to operate. Circuit modifications were completed in September of 1999. Almost immediately a marked improvement in recovery was evident. Production data for the 14 months As expected, the recovery of MgO also increased slightly which, in turn, contributed to a decrease in concentrate grade from 20.9% to 18.9% Ni. The step change in recovery was of sufficient magnitude for it to be evident in yearly production data. When comparing production data the possibility of contributions to a change in recovery from other sources, such as changes in ore type or feed size distribution, inevitably arises. To avoid any such contributions in the analysis, production and monthly composite data were examined in detail to identify periods before and after the project when the flotation feed was the same. Two months that met this criterion were October 1997 and January 2000. The feed size distribution, mineralogy and liberation were the same and the milling rate was similar. The size-by-size response for the data in  In keeping with the mineralogy of the sands tailings before the project began ( The financial benefits from the project were substantial and immediate. The improved recovery increased nickel production by over 6000 t.p.a. for a small increase (A$0.10/t of ore) in operating cost. At the nickel price at the time, the project paid for itself within a month. At longer term nickel prices, the increase in NPV was over A$300 million. This work provides a striking example of the influence of particle size in flotation. For Mt Keith ore, there seems no real option but to treat different size fractions of flotation feed under conditions that optimize both the physics and chemistry of flotation for each. While it might be tempting to regard this ore as an exception, technical studies by WMC Resources Ltd. suggest that the approach of floating coarse and fine particles separately has more general application. By comparison with conventional flotation, the flotation of coarse, low grade composites is particularly strong. Testing of a range of nickel and copper ores has shown that this improvement not only raises recovery, but also allows the primary grind to be coarsened which, in turn, increases throughput. WMC Resources Ltd. is currently working to use the approach to add value to all of its operations. The approach has already increased recovery at the Leinster nickel concentrator by over 5% and is currently being implemented at the Kambalda nickel concentrator. It has also shown benefits in bench tests using ore from the Yakabindie nickel deposit and from the Olympic Dam copper–uranium mine. A key issue that remains for nickel flotation is the poor response at sizes below about 10 μm. Liberated pentlandite is known to float poorly at such sizes, even in relatively clean systems comprising simple mixtures with quartz ( Three approaches, either separately or in combination, are likely to be needed to address the issue of poor flotability of nickel ultrafines. The first is a reduction in the amount of such ultrafines in the flotation feed by making grinding and classification as efficient as possible. The pilot plant data of The second approach is the flotation of the nickel sulphides as soon as they reach an appropriate size. We believe this to be the rationale behind the use of the “unit cell” ( The final approach is to change the chemistry and physics of flotation to improve the behaviour of the ultrafines. WMC Resources Ltd. currently has programs in both areas, with the work on the chemistry showing particular promise. Using a new patented process for removing oxidation products from the surfaces of sulphides, the flotation of ultrafine nickel minerals has been raised markedly in both bench and plant scale tests. For the flotation of ultrafines, the importance of entrainment cannot be over-emphasized. If concentrate grade and Fe For Mt Keith, this constraint is particularly severe. With an MgO assay of 40% and only a few percent sulphides in the feed, water recovery to slimes concentrate has to be less than 0.5% for the isolation of significant amounts of concentrate for flash smelting (usually < Treatment of slimes concentrate from Mt Keith and other similar deposits is a key business opportunity for WMC Resources Ltd. and forms part of the rationale for the recently released Company growth strategy involving concentrate leaching. Other key drivers are the treatment of ores containing large amounts of talc and with sulphide contents as low as 0.7%. Finally, we note that the principles of separating particles by size for either separate conditioning or separate flotation have been known for a long time. The issue arises then why such techniques have so seldom been utilized. One suggestion (  The introduction of a circuit with separate flotation of separate size regions, more advanced in concept than a simple sand–slime float, has raised nickel recovery at Mt Keith by 10%, from 60% to 70%. The efficiency of coarse particle flotation is improved significantly by floating at high density (> The efficiency of fine particle flotation is improved significantly by floating at low density (< Mineralogical analysis indicates that slightly less than half the extra nickel recovered is present in liberated and higher quality (> Using the new circuit, recovery is now limited primarily by the difficulty of floating and separating nickel in ultrafine (− In the longer term, the flotation of nickel slimes to give a low grade (6–10% Ni) concentrate for hydrometallurgical treatment seems likely. The outcomes of this work illustrate in the clearest manner possible the vital importance of particle size to flotation performance. A large number of people contributed to the success of this project and the authors would like to thank all concerned for their contributions. They are particularly indebted to Mr. A. Dundas, Mr. R. Watsford and Mr. D. Lenartowicz (now with View Resources) for their encouragement and support of the team. The permission of WMC Resources Ltd. to publish this paper is gratefully acknowledged.