To study bubble interaction with non-hydrophobic particles an imaging technique has been developed to quantify particle pick up at a pendant bubble by measuring the bubble–particle attachment angle (BPA) made by the particle bed on the bubble. The technique was verified by correlating pick up mass against BPA. Pick up of alumina was shown to correlate with difference in alumina and bubble zeta potential supporting an electrostatic model of interaction with non-hydrophobic particles. Pick up also correlated with contact angle (Washburn method) indicating the electrostatic force is sufficient to establish a solid–air interface.Flotation achieves separation primarily through attachment of hydrophobic particles to air bubbles. There is, however, some evidence that particles can attach through non-hydrophobic interactions such as electrostatic attraction driven by opposite charge of bubble and particle. Uddin et al. did not quantify the pickup. The main purpose of this technical note is to modify the setup of Uddin et al. to measure the mass of attached particles both directly and from the angle formed by the particle bed on the bubble. A secondary purpose is to determine if particles held electrostatically have an associated contact angle. A specially designed 800 The bubble/particle contact procedure was: invert spoon, generate a bubble using a syringe, expose to the stirred suspension for 45 The spoon was removed and the contents emptied into a funnel lined with filter paper (Whatman 540, Hardened Ashless). After twelve-hours drying at room temperature, the filter paper was removed and weighed (Sartorius four-digit balance). The weight of particles captured by the bubble was calculated (i.e., total weight minus weight from blank minus weight of filter paper). The experiments were run at room temperature (20–22 An image of bubble/particle attachment ( The KrussTensiometer K12 instrument employing the Washburn equation (Eq.   The revised setup of In this case the system analyzed was possible non-hydrophobic particle attachment via electrostatic interaction. The variation with pH in the mass of alumina picked up matched the difference in zeta potential between the bubble and particle, supporting the electrostatic model. The correlation of pick up mass with contact angle indicates that the electrostatic force of interaction is sufficient to establish contact (creation of a solid-air interface) with a particle otherwise considered hydrophilic. Quantification of particle pickup using the bubble/particle attachment angle has been demonstrated. In a study of non-hydrophobic particle–bubble interaction, pick up of alumina was shown to correlate with the difference in zeta potential with the bubble supporting an electrostatic model. Pick up also correlated with contact angle indicating that the electrostatic force of interaction can establish contact. This work was sponsored by Vale Inco, Teck Resources, Barrick Gold, Xstrata Process Support, Shell Canada, SGS Lakefield, COREM and Flottec through the Chair in Mineral Processing under the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Collaborative Research and Development program.