Introduction
                  Ginestet introduced the first external device used to fix the mandible in 1936. In 1949, Morris introduced a biphasic fixation device. This “Joe Hall Morris fixation” design led to use of a self-crafted external fixator based on pins connected by a breathing tube filled with dental resin. The objective of this study was to present our surgical results with this device through a 65-patient series.
               
                  Methods
                  This retrospective study included all the patients who benefited from the self-crafted mandibular external fixator at our Oral and Maxillofacial department from 1995 to 2019. Sixty-five patients were allocated into two groups. There were 39 patients in the temporary stabilisation (TS) group and 26 in the bone healing (BH) group. Functional criteria were investigated, including mouth opening limitations and occlusal abnormalities. Aesthetic evaluation focused on skin healing, evaluated by both surgeon and patient.
               
                  Results
                  Twenty-three patients exhibited spontaneous bone healing during their immobilisation period and two patients developed a pseudoarthrosis in the BH group. Most TS group patients benefited from secondary management by bone graft, bone free flap, or distraction osteogenesis. Few complications were noted with our technique during the study period.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Our self-crafted external fixation with Joe Hall Morris fixation style is a valuable option for external stabilisation of the lower third of the face.Traumas of the lower third of the face represent up to 50% of facial traumas, and their epidemiology is fully described Albin Lambotte, at the beginning of the twentieth century, initially developed the external fixator for trauma management of the limbs. Malgaigne and Rigaud had already reported its first use on long bones in 1870. Gustave Ginestet transposed the technique to the maxillofacial skeleton and successively developed three different devices between 1934 and 1948 In our experience, external fixation remains a good technique for management of complex traumas of the lower third of the face. Nevertheless, commercial devices are currently too expensive, and their high cost limits their use in routine practice. The “Joe Hall Morris fixation” design led to use of a self-crafted external fixator based on pins connected by a breathing tube filled with dental resin The purpose of this study was to present our surgical results with a self-crafted external fixator in complex mandibular fractures through a 65-patient retrospective study. This retrospective study included all patients who benefited from our self-crafted mandibular external fixator at the Oral and Maxillofacial Department of Lille University Hospital from 1995 to 2019. Owing to heterogeneity of the indications, patients were split into two groups depending on the fixation objective: obtain complete bone healing (BH group) or allow temporary stabilisation (TS group). The surgical technique has been described previously Fracture locations, whether or not comminuted, the bone defect location and length, and the immobilisation duration were recorded for patients from both groups. Functional and aesthetic results were studied in the BH group. Functional outcomes were investigated through mouth opening limitations. It was measured 2 Primary complications included lack of bone healing in patients with initially no bone defect, infections around the pins, ankyloglossia in cases of quad-cortical pining, or injury to teeth roots, inferior alveolar nerve, parotid gland, or facial artery. We included 65 patients in our study. Fifty-five of them were male. Patient age was 16–69 (mean 39) years in the BH group and 15–82 (mean 48.5) years in the TS group. There were 39 patients in the TS group and 26 patients in the BH group. Immobilisation lasted from 10 Among BH group patients, 23 presented spontaneous bone healing during their immobilisation period, and two patients developed pseudoarthrosis. In both cases, a second intervention consisting of ORIF was performed, which led to complete bone healing. Another patient had her external device removed 10 Among TS group patients, two with pathological fracture (one following ORN and one following tumour evolution) and one patient with a ballistic injury healed spontaneously, without any secondary procedure, after immobilisation of 3, 5, and 11 We noted few complications with our technique during the study period. No damage to teeth roots, inferior alveolar nerve, parotid gland, or facial artery were reported. However, all patients presented local skin inflammation during the fixation period, as expected with transcutaneous fixation. We introduced local care and antibiotic therapy (amoxicillin-clavulanic acid) for 5 On functional assessment, seven patients experienced postoperative mouth opening limitations that resolved after physiotherapy. Regarding aesthetic results, none of the 26 evaluated patients complained or showed unacceptable scarring results due to transcutaneous pins after evaluation by the surgical team. Owing to its low morbidity with acceptable aesthetic and functional sequelae and also its low cost, our self-crafted external fixator seems to be an effective therapeutic alternative for management of complex mandibular traumas Historically, the external fixator was the gold standard in management of complex mandibular fractures or bone defects The first element to discuss is the stabilisation objective: is it to obtain complete bone healing or to wait until secondary reconstruction? Considering the objective of complete bone healing, the literature is extensive In patients with large bone defects, the aim of our technique is to maintain the best patient anatomy before they can benefit from optimal secondary reconstructive surgical procedure and to reduce pain. In these cases, temporary stabilisation cannot be contested. According to Midis et al. Another advantage of closed reduction and external fixation is its capacity to prevent bone fragments from devascularisation. Even if it does not offer the same rigidity as ORIF, external fixation presents the advantage of preserving bone periosteum, and, hence, vascularisation of the fragments. Indeed, the role of periosteal vascularisation in the bone healing process is essential, as demonstrated by IIizarov Technical evolution of ORIF led its results to be equivalent or superior to those of external stabilisation in several cases. It allows better stabilisation of the bone fragments and thus improves the bone healing process Commercial external devices and the Joe Hall Morris style external fixator have the same indications and results Finally, the economic aspect is important in our medical practice, and our device is advantageous in this respect. The total cost is However, to evaluate the cost of a technique, other parameters such as duration of intervention and length of the hospitalisation must be included owing to their high impact on global cost of patient care Other points to discuss are morbidity of the technique and its functional and aesthetic outcomes. Postoperative care was limited and local inflammation around the pins was easily managed without any major consequences Management of complex traumas of the lower third of the face remains challenging. Although ORIF is the gold standard for such patients, it is not the answer in all cases, and closed reduction with external fixation should be maintained in our therapeutic arsenal. However, considering the limited number of patients that would benefit from that technique, its cost must be reasonable and the necessary equipment must be present in all maxillofacial surgery departments and trauma centres. Hence, in our opinion, the self-crafted Joe Hall Morris fixation style external fixation device is a valuable option for external stabilisation of the lower third of the face. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.