Legume–cereal intercropping is increasingly being appreciated in dryland areas, where severe climatic conditions and intensive agricultural practices, generally dominated by continuous cereal cultivation, determine depletion of soil nutrient resources and decline of soil fertility. This research aimed to assess whether and to what extent a newly introduced legume-based intercropping system is able to ameliorate the biological fertility status of an arable soil in a way that is still noticeable during the succeeding durum wheat cropping season in terms of changes in bacterial community structure, soil C and N pools, and crop yield. A field experiment was carried out under rainfed conditions in Southern Italy on a sandy clay loam soil cultivated with durum wheat following in the rotation a recently established grain legume (pea, faba bean)–barley intercropping. Soil chemical, biochemical and eco-physiological variables together with compositional shifts in the bacterial community structure by LH-PCR fingerprinting were determined at four sampling times during the durum wheat cropping season. Soil fertility was estimated by using a revised version of the biological fertility index. Results showed that even though the microbial biomass was significantly altered, the preceding legume intercrops stimulated C-related functional variables thus leading to an increased release of mineral N, which was larger in crop treatments succeeding pea-based than faba bean-based intercropping. The increased N made available in soil enabled the succeeding durum wheat to achieve an adequate grain yield with a reduced N-fertilizer use. Soil type and environmental conditions rather than crop treatments were major determinants of bacterial community structure. The biological fertility status was not varied, suggesting that in intensively managed rainfed areas long-term crop rotations with intercropped legumes are needed to consistently ameliorate it.Intercropping can be referred to as an ancient and traditional cropping system, but it has recently shown a serious potential to contribute to modern and sustainable agriculture. It represents the practice of cultivating two or more crops simultaneously in the same field for a considerable part of their life cycles ( In a sustainable perspective, the agro-ecological role of intercropped legumes becomes of paramount importance for sustaining the productivity of cropping systems in low-input agricultural systems. This can be particularly appreciated in Mediterranean dry-prone areas where cereal (mainly barley and durum wheat) monoculture leads to a general depletion of soil N, which in turn affects grain yield, nutrient use efficiency and maintenance of soil fertility ( Changes in soil fertility in response to differing management systems are currently assessed by monitoring a wide range of soil physico-chemical and biological properties, which can also be combined in multiparametric indices ( Given these premises, the specific purposes of the research were: (i) to assess any lasting effect of grain legumes–barley intercropping on C and N dynamics and on residual N made available in soil to the succeeding durum wheat for biomass production and grain yield; (ii) to validate the use of a modified class limits range for estimating the index of biological fertility (IBF); (iii) to verify whether compositional changes had occurred in the genetic structure of soil bacterial community as determined by the newly introduced intercropping system. To achieve these aims, a number of soil chemical (pH, EC The plant species studied were grain pea ( The field plots with legume–barley intercrops (IC) in a two-year rotation with durum wheat (DW) were established at the agricultural experimental center of the Regional Agency for Agriculture “ARSSA” (San Marco Argentano, Cosenza, Italy; 39°38′N, 16°13′E, 100 m above the sea level) on an arable soil that had been continuously cultivated with durum wheat for 10 years since the current experiment started in the 2010/2011 cropping season. The study area shows a typical Mediterranean climate, characterized by mild and rainy winters, relatively warm and dry summers and, generally, extended periods of sunshine throughout most of the year. Historical climatic data (averages over the 1995–2009 period) show that mean annual rainfall and air temperature for the area are, respectively, 709 mm and 16.1 °C. The coldest month is February (mean temperature 3.0 °C) and the hottest one is August (mean temperature 33.4 °C). Soil thermal and moisture regimes are thermic and xeric, respectively. The soil evolves over the alluvial deposits from the nearest river Follone and is classified as Haplic Cambisol (Calcaric, Eutric) ( In the 2010/2011 cropping season, twenty-seven field plots (3 × 10 m each) were arranged in a randomized complete block design, with three replications, to compare the following nine IC treatments: grain legumes (pea, faba bean) and barley grown as either sole crop (P100, F100, B100, B100f) or intercropping in either an additive (P100B50, F100B50) or a replacement design (P50B50, F50B50). Field plots without plants were taken as a control treatment (Bare soil). In the following 2011/2012 cropping season the twenty-seven field plots (with the exception of the Bare soil) were cultivated with durum wheat (DW). This paper takes into account the cropping season 2011/2012 during which DW field plots have been identified by the preceding IC treatments (P100, P100B50, P50B50, B100, F100, F100B50, F50B50, B100f) plus the Bare control soil. DW following barley sole crop was further split in two distinct treatments: unfertilized (B100) and fertilized (B100f) field plots, which received an additional amount of 46 kg N ha To determine aboveground biomass and grain yield, durum wheat plants were harvested at maturity (June 19, 2012) by destructive sampling in each plot from an area of 1 m Soil samples were collected at the following stages: pre-sowing (November 21, 2011), DW heading or ear emergence (May 2, 2012), DW harvest (June 19, 2012), and post-harvest (September 12, 2012). Three individual soil cores (approx 300 g each) consisting of bulk soil and soil particles loosely adhering to the root systems were taken at a 15-cm-depth from central rows of each plot so as to minimize any border effect, and then thoroughly mixed in a clean sampling bag to form a unique composite sample per field plot. A composite soil sample from unplanted field plots was considered as reference (Bare soil). Thus, three composite soil samples were collected per treatment and sampling time. Care was taken to keep the field equipment sterile and prevent cross-contamination of soil samples during and after collection. A representative amount (approx 20 g) of each soil sample was stored below 0 °C in the field and then immediately processed for DNA extraction on return to the laboratory. Field moist samples were stored at 4 °C before being partially air-dried, sieved at < 2-mm particle size, and promptly (within 24 h) processed for biochemical analysis, or stored again at 4 °C for a maximum of seven days before chemical characterization. Soil chemical properties (i.e. pH, EC Total bacterial community DNA was extracted from 2 g of freshly collected soil by using a direct extraction method ( Soil chemical and biochemical data, reported as mean values ( Crop data evidenced that grain yield was higher in DW after legume-based IC combinations than in DW after barley, except where additional N-fertilizer was supplied ( During the 2011/2012 cropping season, either the soil pH or EC were significantly influenced only by the time factor ( The two-way ANOVA showed that time was the main factor that affected the variability of all the considered chemical and biochemical variables ( Soil organic carbon (C It is worth noting that all the three following C-related biochemical variables (i.e. R The two-way ANOVA showed that time was the only factor affecting the variability of MBC and MBC/C Either the The two-way ANOVA showed that the total soil nitrogen content (N The two-way ANOVA also showed that the two main factors (time and preceding crop) and their interaction statistically influenced either inorganic-N form (namely NH Both time and its interaction with the preceding crop significantly affected the extractable organic N (EON) ( Finally, significant ( Principal component analysis (PCA) of chemical and biochemical soil variables monitored during the 2011/2012 cropping season was able to factorize the variation of the dataset into six most significant components (Factor 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6) according to the “eigenvalue > 1.0” criterion. Taken all together these six principal components explained approximately 84.2% of the total variance of the dataset ( Since the first two PC taken together accounted for as much as half of the total explained variance (approx 49%), we focused on these two to represent loadings and scores in a PCA ordination biplot. The DW treatments following the legume-based IC were well separated from each other (especially pea-based treatments along the PC1) and they could be broadly clustered in two main groups along the PC2 axis ( According to the fertility class rating system proposed by LH-PCR averaged profiles of soil samples taken at pre-sowing stage showed that the soil bacterial community structure was still affected by the preceding crops, regardless of the preceding IC treatment ( Apart from noticeable time-dependent fluctuations neither pH nor EC were affected by the differing cropping systems. This finding cannot be considered particularly surprising as either variable originates as a result of the underlying soil formation process and any their variation is therefore expected to arise over the very long term. The lasting effect of a combination of a recently established grain legume–barley intercropping system on the fertility status of a sandy clay loam soil during the succeeding cultivation of durum wheat was clearly appreciable. This finding was especially noticeable in terms of significantly higher total organic C and N pools, which were also functionally linked to C dynamics and soluble N forms release. The increase in soil organic resources is in line with what had already been observed at the harvest stage in pea- and faba bean-cultivated plots before the 2011/2012 growing season started ( Taken together, these results suggest that the increase in easily mineralizable N-containing rhizodeposits entering the soil from grain legume roots could have stimulated the mineralization of crop residues as also indicated by the increased C dynamics and related functional variables, i.e. R To summarize, over the short term decaying legume crop residues lead to an increase of the available N pool in soil. However, in arable soils where the soil fertility level is far from being adequate, or if organic amendments or crop residues are not continuously being incorporated into soil, this effect contributes only partially to the N supply for the succeeding cereal and might not persist over a longer period. Thereupon, H1 is only partially confirmed and the residual N made available in soil from decaying legume residues can benefit the succeeding durum wheat (and save N-fertilizer use) provided prolonged intercropping is adopted. Moreover, both pea-barley combinations (either additive or replacement design) enabled a better yield performance of the succeeding durum wheat than faba bean-based intercropping due to a larger release of mineral N (H2 uneven action of the intercrops). In brief, in continuous cereal cultivation the exploitation of available soil N could properly be faced by using rotational approaches with intercropped legumes, provided they are grown for several years before any preceding crop effect can become clearly appreciable, especially under low fertility levels. Our newly proposed class rating system provided estimates of the biological fertility status that were lower than otherwise assessed, but more consistent with what observed in the field plots. The newly proposed narrower class limits are able to discriminate soil fertility conditions more accurately. In fact, according to the original criterion for ranking the IBF within different fertility classes ( Bacterial community fingerprinting by LH-PCR clearly showed that the cropping treatment had only a minor role on shaping the bacterial community composition. Any crop-induced effect on soil bacterial community seemed fairly transient in soil and did not extend over the following cropping season. In fact, at the pre-sowing stage the residual effect as due to the preceding legume-based intercropping system was still noticeable. Whereas, at the harvest stage of the succeeding durum wheat any appreciable difference among treatments was greatly reduced. Noticeable differences on bacterial community composition as due to intercropped legumes have been reported elsewhere, even though different community fingerprinting methodologies were used, such as phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) profiling ( In brief, no compositional changes in the genetic structure of soil bacterial community were observed in response to the newly introduced intercropping system. Therefore, H4 was not confirmed. However, it cannot be excluded that changes in less abundant and species-specific bacterial groups could have remained undetected. This constitutes the main aim of ongoing research. Our findings demonstrate that under rainfed crop conditions a recently established legume–barley intercropping was able to significantly affect either the soil C and N pools or the microbial activity in a way that it was still noticeable during the following cropping season with durum wheat. This was especially true for total C and N pools, which were increased soon after the legume-based intercropping season. The temperature–moisture regimes typical of a Mediterranean dryland area stimulate the mineralization process of plant-derived C-substrates, especially N-enriched compounds entering the soil from decaying legume root tissues. The result is therefore an increased initial supply of soluble N forms (especially nitrate) that meets the N-demand of the following durum wheat and allows a comparable grain yield with a reduced N-fertilizer use. This effect might not persist over a longer period, and any residual N made available in soil from decaying legume residues can benefit the succeeding durum wheat (and save N-fertilizer use) provided prolonged intercropping is adopted. It is also interesting to note how the largest release of available soil N was observed following pea-based intercropping, proving that in a crop rotation pea-based combinations (either in additive or replacement design) are more beneficial than faba bean-based combinations to the succeeding cereal. Moreover, no consistent relationship was found between the bacterial community structure and changes of functional properties in soil; thus confirming the resilience of the soil bacterial community, at least at higher taxa level, to the newly introduced cropping systems. Revised class limits rating the five fertility levels provide a more reliable estimate of the IBF and a more accurate distinction among soil fertility conditions. To sum up, the results indicate that in intensively managed rainfed areas any decisive improvement in the soil fertility status cannot be rapidly or easily achieved, unless crop rotations with intercropped legumes are adopted for several years. Authors thank “ARSSA” (Regione Calabria) for providing either site access or field and technical assistance. The EU research programme Legume Futures (LF) was financially supported under the 7th Framework Programme (FP7-KBBE-2009-3, proposal no. 245216). The A. Scalise's PhD grant was co-financed by the The following are the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at