Rubidium was recovered from lithium-containing solution from processing zinnwaldite, (KAl(Fe,Li)(Si3Al)O10F2), concentrate after Li2CO3 crystallization as a mixture of rubidium and potassium alums (RbAl(SO4)2.12H2O and KAl(SO4)2.12H2O). The course of individual reactions aiming at rubidium alum separation from carbonated solutions containing potassium as a main contaminant was studied on synthetic solutions. Before the alum precipitation, the original carbonated solution was converted to sulphate solution. Rubidium recovery efficiency at least 95% was achieved if the amount of the precipitation agent (Al2(SO4)3) ranged between 3.5 and 4.0 multiples of stoichiometric amount related to rubidium concentration in the processed solution. Under such conditions, precipitates obtained contain between 4.10 and 3.62% Rb and from 6.02 to 6.25% K and consist of on average 24% rubidium alum and 75% potassium alum.Rubidium or its compounds have certain uses for which they are either uniquely qualified or better suited than caesium or caesium compounds having similar properties and being readily available and cheaper. Rubidium carbonate is used as an additive to special glasses, in which it reduces electrical conductivity and improves stability and durability. These types of glasses, which constitute the leading market for rubidium, are utilized in fibre optics and telecommunication systems and in night-vision devices ( Rubidium forms no minerals of its own, but it occurs in recoverable quantities in certain zoned pegmatites where it is contained in a few lithium and caesium minerals. Lepidolite, (KLi Although rubidium is more abundant than lithium and caesium, it is much more difficult to extract than other alkali metals. In the literature, there is very little information on rubidium extraction from minerals. Published works provide only general description of the traditional processes used for the recovery of rubidium from ores without any experimental results ( The alums are separated one from another and purified by repeated fractional crystallization to obtain pure rubidium alum. The purified rubidium alum is treated with Ba(OH) Rubidium could be also obtained from mixed alkali metal carbonates that are a by-product of the abandoned extraction of lithium from lepidolite in the USA. After a partial separation of potassium, the remaining dissolved carbonates are converted to chlorides. After precipitation of less soluble dicesium hexachlorostannate, rubidium is precipitated as dirubidium hexachlorostannate. The purified rubidium chlorostannate may be decomposed to separate rubidium and tin chlorides by pyrolytic, electrolytic or chemical methods. Rubidium compounds can also be separated from other alkali metal compounds by solvent and ion exchange. In all processes, the main difficulty is separating rubidium from potassium ( The data on mine production, metal production and overall consumption of rubidium are not available. World consumption in 1979 was estimated to be ca. 2 The aim of this study was to establish conditions for rubidium recovery from solutions containing Li and Rb originating from zinnwaldite processing as the example. Before alum precipitation, carbonated solution was converted to sulphate solution by addition of stoichiometric amount of H The course of individual reactions aiming at rubidium separation from carbonated solutions containing potassium as a main contaminant was studied on synthetic solutions. Rubidium was separated from leach liquor originating from processing zinnwaldite concentrate using the limestone method, which is based on sintering of the concentrate with CaCO Zinnwaldite concentrate containing on average 1.21% Li, 0.84% Rb was prepared from wastes (0.21% Li, 0.20% Rb) using dry magnetic separation. The wastes were mined from the landfill of wastes in Cínovec area. The typical content of main elements present in the concentrate was 30.53% Si, 13.27% Al, 10.97% K, 5.87% Fe, 0.63% Ca, 0.30% Na, < 0.01% Cs. According to the results of XRD analysis, zinnwaldite concentrate consisted of two main phases: dominant zinnwaldite, KAl(Fe,Li)(Si Carbonated synthetic solution was prepared by dissolving of accurately weighed chemicals in distilled water. Average concentrations of elements are given in Following chemicals were used in this study: Rb Synthetic solution and mother liquor from processing zinnwaldite concentrate were converted to sulphate solutions by addition of stoichiometric amount of diluted H Composition of solutions was determined by the AAS method using GBC analyser Avanta 932 plus, (GBC Scientific Equipment, Australia). Decomposition of solid samples was performed by acid dissolution. Phase compositions of solid phases were characterized by XRD using a diffractometer X'Pert PRO (PANalytical, The Netherlands). Thermogravimetric analysis of synthesized alums was carried out using the thermobalance Stanton-Redcroft TG-750 (Stanton-Redcroft, Great Britain). Conversion of carbonated synthetic solution and mother liquor, respectively, to sulphate solutions resulted in significantly decreasing potassium concentration from 98 to 50 Results of alum precipitation from synthetic sulphate solution are expressed as the dependencies of rubidium and potassium contents in precipitated alums and rubidium recovery on the amount of added precipitation agent. Used amounts of Al Experiments performed with synthetic solution showed that maximum precipitation efficiency of rubidium was achieved using approximately four times excess of stoichiometric amount of Al Based on results obtained, rubidium was precipitated from the mother liquor originated from the treatment of zinnwaldite concentrate. The amount of the precipitated agent corresponded to 3.5 and 4.0 multiples of stoichiometric amount of Al According to the XRD analysis precipitates obtained from the mother liquor originating from the treatment of the zinnwaldite concentrate ( Investigations on the recovery of rubidium from a solution containing Li and Rb with the solution from processing zinnwaldite concentrate as the example have been performed. Rubidium can be efficiently isolated from the mother liquor after Li This study was supported by the research grant no.