Accurate and precise determination of the redox state of iron (Fe) in spinels presents a significant challenge due to their refractory nature. The resultant extreme conditions needed to obtain complete dissolution generally oxidize some of the Fe(II) initially present and thus prevent the use of colorimetric methods for Fe(II) measurements. To overcome this challenge we developed a hybrid oxidimetric/colorimetric approach, using Ag(I) as the oxidimetric reagent for determination of Fe(II) and 1,10-phenanthroline as the colorimetric reagent for determination of total Fe. This approach, which allows determination of Fe(II) and total Fe on the same sample, was tested on a series of four geochemical reference materials and then applied to the analysis of Fe(Ni) spinel crystals isolated from simulated high-level-waste (HLW) glass and of several reagent magnetites. Results for the reference materials were in excellent agreement with recommended values, with the exception of USGS BIR-1, for which higher Fe(II) values and lower total Fe values were obtained. The Fe(Ni) spinels showed Fe(II) values at the detection limit (ca. 0.03 wt% Fe) and total Fe values higher than obtained by ICP-AES analysis after decomposition by lithium metaborate/tetraborate fusion. For the magnetite samples, total Fe values were in agreement with reference results, but a wide range in Fe(II) values was obtained indicating various degrees of conversion to maghemite. Formal comparisons of accuracy and precision were made with 13 existing methods. Accuracy for Fe(II) and total Fe was at or near the top of the group. Precision varied with the parameter used to measure it but was generally in the middle to upper part of the group for Fe(II) while that for total Fe ranged from the bottom of the group to near the top.Quantitative determination of ferrous iron [Fe(II)] in minerals and related solid materials represents one of the most challenging procedures in analytical chemistry. Despite recent advances in and improved availability of spectroscopic methods such as Mössbauer and X-ray absorption near-edge (XANES), the majority of Fe(II) determinations continue to be made using wet-chemical methods due to their better precision, lower detection limits, and lower cost. The chief difficulty in wet-chemical analysis arises from maintaining the Fe(II) titer during digestion and before its assay, whether by oxidimetry or colorimetry. Both of these approaches have a rich literature (see reviews by Refs. As determination of mean Fe oxidation state is usually the parameter of interest, a value for Fe(II) must be balanced by one for Fe(III), which is usually obtained by subtraction of the Fe(II) value from that obtained for total Fe on a separate sample analyzed by other methods optimized for total elemental analysis. With the development of colorimetric methods for determination of total Fe in aqueous solutions that rely on complexation of Fe(II) by a chromophore such as 1,10-orthophenanthroline (phen) have come several methods for non-refractory minerals that allow determination of Fe(II) and total Fe on the same sample digest At the same time, however, methods that rely on oxidimetry (i.e., the change in quantity of an aqueous oxidant present during the decomposition of the sample) offer generally better precision and lower detection limits than those based on colorimetry. The strength of these methods often rests on the stability of the oxidant during the digestion, and as a result a temperature limit may be encountered or a specific mixture of acids may be required which, in turn, constrains the methods to non-refractory samples. In the present work, we set out to explore possible ways of determining Fe(II) and total Fe in refractory Fe spinels, some of which (i.e., the spinel crystals isolated from the HLW glass) also contained Ni and Cr. Analysis of representative samples by Mössbauer spectroscopy suggested that the Fe(II) contents were below detection by that technique, and thus a wet-chemical approach was needed. As sample quantities were limited, a method that combined these two analyses on a single sample was desired. We started by modifying a colorimetric method A set of four geochemical reference materials, as well as several iron reagents, were tested. The reference materials were a granite (G-2) and a basalt (BIR-1) from the U.S. Geological Survey, and two magnetite ores (OREAS 700 and OREAS 701) from Ore Research & Exploration Pty., Ltd., Victoria, Australia. The iron reagents were two high-purity magnetites (Alfa-Aesar 12962, Aldrich 518158), a nano-sized magnetite powder (Aldrich 637106), and an in-house-synthesized magnetite. This magnetite was prepared following the method of Hydrofluoric acid (HF, 48%, Sigma–Aldrich 30107), sulfuric acid (H Samples were digested in translucent 7-ml polyfluoroallomer (PFA) vials with gas-tight caps (Savillex, Eden Prairie, MN, No. 200-007-20). Vials were incubated in the dark in a sand bath that was heated to 98 °C and located inside a N Two analytical procedures were tested. The first was a modification of the colorimetric method of The modified colorimetric method, an early version of which was described in Matyáš et al. To determine the concentrations of ferrous and total Fe in the diluted digestates, two further dilutions were made. One-ml aliquots of the diluted digestate were placed in separate 15-ml amber bottles, and diluted either with 9 mL of 1% trisodium citrate (for ferrous Fe determination) or 9 mL of a 1% trisodium citrate-1% NH An argentometric method with potentiometric determination based on that of      Quantities of reagents and samples are best determined by gravimetry, and require determination of the densities of the AgF–HF, NH A number of modifications were made to the method of However, even with these changes, and careful sparging of all reagents with N Having established a way to digest the spinels and measure their total Fe content we turned our attention to finding a way to assay the Fe(II) content reliably. Clearly, the only option was to measure the Fe(II) by oxidimetry, but the challenge was to find an oxidant that was stable in neat 48% HF at near-boiling temperatures for extended periods of time. Methods involving vanadate (e.g., The Ag(I)/Ag(m) couple, however, avoids this differential complexation issue. Ag(I) is readily soluble in HF and forms only a very weak complex with fluoride (log K = −0.32, Smith and Martell, 1989), whereas Ag(m) is insoluble in HF, and by virtue of being a solid does not form any fluoride complexes. Further, the formal reduction potential of the Ag(I)/Ag(m) couple (+0.79 V) is the same in concentrated HF as it is in water whereas that of the Fe(III)/Fe(II) couple is more than 0.4 V lower in concentrated HF making Fe(II) susceptible to oxidation by Ag(I) under those conditions. These features had been appreciated and a method published for analysis of Fe(II) in silicate minerals by Ag(I) by Ref. During the course of the testing of the hybrid oxidi-colorimetric method, several improvements were made to Ungethüm's original approach. We conducted all work with Ag(I) solutions in the dark, or under reduced lighting, to avoid the potential for photoreduction (and a resultant high Fe(II) titer). We substituted AgF for the AgClO When applied to analysis of the standard reference materials in two separate 6-replicate runs, the new hybrid oxidi-colorimetric method yielded precise results in excellent agreement with published values for all but one sample ( As for the high values for Fe(II) obtained with BIR-1, we think it likely that the values we measured are real, and that most of the previous analyses have not measured this Fe(II) due to issues associated with the formation of the (MgFe)-fluoride precipitates. In those instances, the precipitates likely contained Fe(II) as well as Mg and Fe(III). In the present instance, the ability of Ag(I) to react with Fe(II) as soon as it is released from the oxide matrix eliminates this concern. Due to the significant Cu content of the magnetite ore reference standards, Fe(II) values obtained for OREAS-700 and OREAS-701 were adjusted downward by the reported Cu concentrations for these two standards. Monovalent Cu is oxidized by Ag(I) in the same way as Fe(II). To demonstrate applicability of the method to the analysis of spinel samples, a set of five samples of Fe(Ni) spinel crystals ( The results of these analyses showed levels of Fe(II) at the detection limit for the spinel crystals, consistent with the earlier Mössbauer results, and values of total Fe slightly, but consistently, higher than those obtained by separate elemental analysis ( The accuracy of the hybrid method was formally assessed by calculation of four parameters that compare the measured and reference data. Thus, the assessment of accuracy depends not only on the quality of the measurements made by the hybrid method, but also on the quality of the measurements contributing to the reference value. The first and simplest parameter, The values for these four parameters are listed in For Fe(II) measurements, the method accuracy was excellent for three of the four SRMs with mean differences of 0.02 wt%, an RD of 0.4% and a | For total-Fe measurements, we calculated accuracy parameters for the five spinel samples as well as for the SRMs since we had an independent set of total-Fe data for the spinels that we could use as a reference. As for Fe(II), the results showed good accuracy for three of the SRMs and considerably poorer accuracy for BIR-1. In this instance, however, the formation of MgFe(III) fluoride complexes may have been responsible for the lower total Fe results with BIR-1 obtained by the hybrid method. Accuracy for the spinel samples was roughly comparable to that for the four SRMs with RD values of 3.9% and | Formal assessment of precision of the hybrid method involved calculation of three parameters, the standard deviation (SD), the relative standard deviation (RSD), and the 95% confidence interval. As these calculations did not require reference data, all of the samples analyzed were included in the assessment. The results ( As discussed by Ref. To compare the performance of the hybrid method with that of comparable existing methods for silicates and refractory materials, assessments of accuracy and precision identical to those described in Section In terms of accuracy ( For total-Fe accuracy, the hybrid method performed very well with RD and | In terms of precision ( One method not included in our analysis was the iodine monochloride method of Hey Overall, the main strengths of the hybrid method relative to the existing methods are the high accuracy for Fe(II) and total Fe, and the ability to analyze refractory spinels. This is achieved with somewhat poorer, though still adequate, precision. Only one existing method, that of The hybrid oxidi-colorimetric method resolves most of the problems associated with Fe(II) and total Fe analysis of Fe-bearing spinels. Although the time for digestion is quite lengthy, results obtained for a series of geochemical reference materials, including two magnetite ores, as well as for reagent magnetites, are consistent with expectations. Anomalous values for a Mg-rich basalt (BIR-1), however, yielded higher Fe(II) and lower total Fe values than expected. These results can be attributed to the formation of MgFe(III)-fluoride precipitates that were not completely re-dissolved by boric acid after digestion, and by the likely presence of Fe(II) in similar precipitates analyzed by other groups that was not counted in the Fe(II) titers they obtained. The presence of Ag(I) in the digestate ensures that all Fe(II) is reacted upon dissolution of the oxide matrix, and the “noble” stability of Ag(m) in concentrated HF maintains the Fe(II) titer for at least 48 h at near-boiling temperatures. Provided that evaporation of the digestate does not occur, it is likely that much longer digestions are possible, if needed, for highly recalcitrant samples. Because of its very high accuracy for Fe(II), we expect this method to be fully applicable to non-refractory samples as well, and thus of wide utility in the wet-chemical determination of iron redox states. This project has been supported by the U.S. Department of Energy's Waste Treatment and Immobilization Plant Federal Project Office under the direction of Dr. Albert A. Kruger. Pacific Northwest National Laboratory is operated by Battelle for the The following are the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at