This paper provides a detailed analysis of the separation of valuable cenospheres from different fly ash feeds using the Inverted Reflux Classifier (IRC). Even though the IRC was found to be effective in recovering cenospheres [A. Kiani, J. Zhou, K.P. Galvin, Upgrading of positively buoyant particles using an Inverted Reflux Classifier, Advance Powder Technology. 26 (2015a) 119–125], the separation performance can vary depending on the cenospheres and fly ash properties. A typical fly ash feed sample was characterised in terms of surface morphology, elemental composition, density and size distribution, providing more detail of the fly ash feed properties and their possible effects on the separation performance. The separation of cenospheres from three different fly ash feeds (Feed 1, Feed 2 and Feed 3) with the cenosphere concentrations at about 0.51wt.%, 0.85wt.% and 1.14wt.%, respectively, was then examined using the IRC. Under the same operating conditions, about 64wt.% and 93wt.% of the cenospheres were recovered from the fly ash Feeds 2 and 3, respectively. For the fly ash Feed 1, only 49wt.% of cenospheres was recovered despite the fact that the feed rate was lower. The results support the proposition that by increasing the cenosphere concentrations in the fly ash feed, the positively buoyant particles are more likely to form streaming structures and can be separated much more effectively from the negatively buoyant fly ash particles [A. Kiani, J. Zhou, K.P. Galvin, Enhanced recovery and concentration of positively buoyant cenospheres from negatively buoyant fly ash particles using the Inverted Reflux Classifier, Minerals Engineering, 79 (2015b) 1–9]. Moreover, the separation of cenosphere particles in Feed 3 was further promoted by the presence of larger particles, achieving a recovery of about 93wt.% and grade of 80wt.% at a high solids throughput of 4.9t/(m2
                     h).Cenospheres are one of the most valuable components found in fly ash waste. Therefore, the separation of the cenospheres from the fly ash is desirable. However, the combination of recovery and concentration of valuable positively buoyant cenospheres in fly ash is challenging. Both the cenospheres (i.e. the particles of density less than water) and dense fly ash (i.e. the silicate aluminate particles) consist of silica and alumina, providing the same surface properties. Hence flotation is an ineffective method for their separation. Considering the densities of cenospheres and dense fly ash to be 800 Enhanced wet gravity separation provides a more appropriate approach to separate the fine positively buoyant cenospheres from the negatively buoyant fly ash. In our previous study A schematic representation of the Inverted Reflux Classifier (IRC) is shown in As part of the feed analysis, a novel approach was adopted to quantify the density distribution of the feed. A Reflux Classifier (RC) with parallel inclined channels located above a liquid fluidised bed was used to fractionate the fly ash feed into different flow fractions with a narrow range of density. Note that this mode is very different to the IRC arrangement adopted in this study for recovering and concentrating the cenospheres on a continuous basis. The inclined section consisted of 23 stainless steel plates forming 24 channels with perpendicular spacing of 1.77 Fly ash samples with different cenosphere concentrations ranging from 0.51 to 1.14 As shown in At the end of each experiment, representative samples were taken from all streams for analysis. It should be noted that Tailings 1 and Tailings 2 streams were combined, and then a sample of the combined stream was taken and analysed in order to determine the composition of the underflow tailings in the process. To maintain consistent feed across the program of work, the steady state samples of the product and the tailings were taken over the same time period, insuring that the re-constituted feed maintained the same particle size distribution and grade. The samples were not returned after processing because of the tendency for caking following drying. Excess water was removed from the tailings in order to maintain the pulp density of the reconstituted feed, by drawing the water from the zone between the portions that had either settled or floated. Standard sink–float funnels of 1 A subsample from each stream was obtained for measuring the particles size distributions, using a Mastersizer 3000. This equipment measures the volume-based size distributions of particles in a wet condition. A sieve shaker was also used to measure the mass-based size distributions of particles in a dry condition. It is noted that for the particles with constant density over their size range, these two size distributions should be the same. The cenospheres volume-based size distributions were reconciled using the material-balance method proposed by Galvin et al., The density of the particles was also measured using a gas pycnometry method. The measured density of particles using this method can be completely different from that measured by the water pycnometry method depending on the pore structure of the particles. The pycnometer measures the occupied volume of the particles and then calculates the density. The gas pycnometer measures the volume of the particles including the volume of the pores while in water pycnometry, the water may not penetrate into the pores due to the trapped air, and hence a larger volume of particles will be measured. Therefore the density measured by the water pycnometer is equal or smaller than that measured by the gas pycnometer. The density of a fly ash sample was measured to be 1895 A novel approach was adopted to quantify the density distribution of the feed. The Reflux Classifier (RC) was used in its traditional form under batch conditions to elutriate the fly ash feed into several overflow fractions. A sample of the feed was added to the RC. Different fluidization water rates were used to generate the flow fractions in an increasing trend. At the lowest fluidization rate, cenospheres and very low density fly ash particles were carried up through the lower vertical section and then through the inclined channels, reporting to the overflow. This process was continued until there were negligible particles reporting to the overflow. By increasing the fluidization rate, a second flow fraction of higher density was produced. This approach was repeated several more times. On completion the remaining particles in the vessel was used to form the densest flow fraction. The sink–float test was then applied to Overflow 1 in order to separate cenospheres from the fine fly ash particles. These overflow samples (Overflow 1 to 13) were then fractionated based on their size using a sieve shaker. Each size fraction obtained from each flow fraction was placed in a gas pycnometer in order to measure the average density. A data set characterising a typical feed is presented in this section, followed by the results obtained using the IRC, obtained using different feeds. As the errors in product grade data were found to be negligible, the error bars were only reported for the recoveries. These error bars show the difference between the results obtained using the raw experimental data and those obtained using the mass-balanced data. The performance of the IRC at a high feed solids concentration with and without fluidisation water is also reported. A Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) was used to examine the surface morphology of the particles in a fly ash sample. There were three main components observed. Another component in the fly ash is unburned carbon, black irregular particles, exhibiting porosity as shown in The last component observed in the fly ash is the white dense silicate–aluminate particles. Energy-dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) analysis was also carried out to show the chemical characterisation of each component in the fly ash sample.   The volume-based size distribution measured by the laser scattering method (Malvern Mastersizer 3000) and the mass-based distribution generated from sieving should be identical if there is no size-dependence in the density distributions of the particles. The cumulative size distributions of the cenospheres based on the mass and volume measurements are shown in The cenosphere particles were then divided into three different density intervals (+ As shown in The separation of cenospheres from three different fly ash feeds (Run 1, Run 2 and Run 3) is examined in this section. The average density and size of the cenospheres and fly ash in different fly ash feeds (Run 1, Run 2 and Run 3) are shown in Kiani et al., For Feeds 2 and 3, the operating conditions were the same. The feed solids concentration was around 40 As shown in The operating conditions used for Feeds 2 and 3 in the IRC were virtually the same, and therefore the higher recovery obtained from Run 3 reflected the effects of two important factors. Firstly, the slightly higher concentration of cenospheres in Feed 3 and hence the further development of the bulk streaming effects may lead to a stronger separation. Moreover, the larger cenosphere particle size in Feed 3 may lead to a stronger separation due to a stronger terminal settling velocity.  In this section, the results obtained from a series of experiments at high solid concentrations are reported. In Runs 4–7, a very concentrated feed slurry with about 50  A typical fly ash feed sample was characterised in several ways. SEM images revealed that the cenospheres, unburned carbon and dense aluminate–silicate particles were the three main components of the fly ash. The elemental composition of these three components was measured by the EDS method, showing the same chemical compositions for cenospheres and fly ash. Furthermore, a double fractionation test was conducted on a fly ash feed sample, providing more detail on the size and density of particles in the feed. The recovery and concentration of valuable cenospheres from different fly ash feeds were then investigated in the Inverted Reflux Classifier. For all fly ash feeds, the separation performance was promoted using inclined settling in the IRC. However at higher cenospheres concentrations, the bulk streaming motion developed led to further improvement in the separation process. The obtained product grades for different fly ash feeds again proved that the only important factor controlling the product grades was the difference between the product and fluidisation water fluxes. For the feed with around 1.14 The authors of this paper would like to acknowledge the financial supports from the