Calcium phosphate (CaP) ceramics are widely used in bone tissue engineering due to their good osteoconductivity. The mechanical properties of CaP can be modified by the addition of small volume fractions of biodegradable polymers such as polycaprolactone (PCL). Nevertheless, it is also important to evaluate how the polymer content influences cell–material or cell–cell interactions because of potential consequences for bone regeneration and vascularization. In this study we assessed the general biocompatibilty of Ca-deficient hydroxyapatite (CDHA)–PCL disks containing nominally 11 and 24% polycaprolactone using human umbilical vein endothelial cells and human primary osteoblasts. Confocal microscopy showed that both CDHA–PCL variants supported the growth of both cell types. In terms of the endothelial cells grown on CDHA–PCL nanocomposites with 24% PCL, an increased expression of the endothelial marker vWF compared to CDHA–PCL with 11% PCL was observed in real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis. In addition to monocultures, co-cultures of outgrowth endothelial cells, derived from peripheral blood, and primary osteoblasts were assessed as an example of a more complex test system for bone regeneration and vascularization. Constructs based on CDHA with different PCL contents were investigated with regard to the formation of microvessel-like structures induced by the co-culture process using confocal microscopy and quantitative image analysis. Furthermore, the osteogenic differentiation of the co-culture was assessed. As a result, more pre-vascular structures were observed after 1week on the CDHA–PCL disks with 24% PCL, whereas after 4weeks of culture the extent of microvessel-like structure formation was slightly higher on the CDHA with 11% PCL. In contrast to this, variation of PCL content had no effect on the osteogenic differentiation in the co-culture.Since nutrients and oxygen are essential for the survival of tissue-engineered implants in vivo, any deficiency of blood supply caused by slow and inadequate vascularization remains a significant problem in tissue engineering. Prevascularization, the inclusion of endothelial cells (EC) or vascular structures into tissue constructs might be a potential method to facilitate the vascularization of large-sized constructs by linking the construct to the blood supply of the adjacent tissue By including polymers such as polycaprolactone, the physical and chemical properties of calcium phosphate in scaffolding material can be modified and could thus potentially exert effects on cell–material and cell–cell interactions. In complex tissues such as bone the material properties influence a variety of different cell types and may have consequences on osteogenic differentiation or endothelial cell growth, or may influence the formation of angiogenic structures. To analyse those effects, complex cell culture systems, such as co-cultures consisting of endothelial cells and primary osteoblasts, seem to be useful to simulate the dynamic processes during vascularization as it would occur in the physiological situation in vivo We have recently established co-culture systems based on outgrowth endothelial cells (OEC) In this paper we report cell interactions with novel Ca-deficient hydroxyapatite–poly(caprolactone) (CDHA–PCL) nanocomposites with low contents of the polymer phase containing nominally 11 and 24 vol.% PCL. The materials were fabricated by one-step synthesis of CDHA–PCL composite powder followed by high-pressure consolidation at room temperature HUVECs were isolated and cultured as described previously OEC were isolated according to an established protocol Primary osteoblasts were isolated as previously described according to a standard protocol CDHA–PCL disks (10.7 The disks were placed into 24-well cell culture plates. Before seeding cells, the CDHA–PCL disks were treated with 70% ethanol and washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; Invitrogen GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) three times. Disks were transferred to new 24-well plates to be pre-neutralized in pure M199 medium without serum or supplements at 37 HUVECs or pOB, respectively, were seeded onto the CDHA–PCL disks. In total, 100,000 cells in 1 Some 100,000 pOB in 1 pOB cultured on CDHA–PCL disks for 1 and 2 HUVECs in monoculture (1 and 2 The microscopic images were analysed using the software ImageJ 1.42 Statistical analysis was performed with MS-Excel (Student’s The total mRNA was isolated from the monoculture and co-culture samples with TRIzol® Reagent (Invitrogen, GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) according to the standard protocol of the manufacturer. The isolated RNA was dissolved in 20 To synthesize cDNA, 1 The synthesized cDNA was diluted 1:100 in aqua dest. to a final concentration of 0.5 OEC and pOB were co-cultured for 4 An essential feature of the biomaterials used in the construction of bio-engineered tissues is the biocompatibility of such materials. In this study, we used HUVECs to test the biocompatibility of 11 and 24% CDHA–PCL disks to endothelial cells. HUVECs cultured on CDHA–PCL disks for 1 and 2 Primary osteoblasts grown in monoculture on CDHA–PCL disks for 1 and 2 To gain insight into the expression of endothelial and osteogenic markers in the co-cultures grown on either CDHA-PCH with 11 or 24% polycaprolactone, qRT-PCR studies were performed. The total mRNAs were isolated from OEC-pOB co-culture samples after 1 and 4 To further assess the osteogenic differentiation in the co-cultures depending on the PCL content of CDHA–PCL, we determined the ALP activity after 4 In order to study the effect of polymer content in the CDHA–PCL disks on the formation of pre-vascular structures, three donors of OEC and pOB were co-cultured on CDHA–PCL disks for 1 and 4 After 4 In order to quantify the development of the pre-vascular network on CDHA with 11 or 24% PCL, morphometric analysis of the vascular structures for different donors of OEC was performed after 1 and 4 In this study we evaluated CDHA–PCL nanocomposite disks containing nominally 11 or 24% polymer as scaffolding materials for bone tissue engineering. We investigated the general biocompatibility of the two material variants to EC and pOB, as well as the influence of polymer content on the cell growth and functionality of individual cell types. Furthermore, the effect of polymer content on the formation of microvessel-like structures in a complex co-culture system consisting of OEC and pOB was evaluated by confocal microscopy and image quantification. In recent years, co-culture systems have become of scientific interest as advanced in vitro models aiming to analyse mechanisms of vascularization in close approximation to complex physiological processes, as reviewed in Refs. In contrast to cells grown on CDHA with 24% PCL, the endothelial cells grown on the CDHA with 11% PCL seem to be slower in forming such structures, resulting in the improved formation of vascular structures on CDHA with 11% PCL at the later time point (4 In terms of the general biocompatibility towards osteogenic cells grown on CDHA–PCL, calcein–AM staining showed an equal distribution of human primary osteoblasts on both variants of CDHA with PCL. In addition, we investigated the influence of the PCL content on the differentiation of osteoblasts in monocultures with time. On both variants of CDHA–PCL primary osteoblasts showed the up-regulation of several osteogenic markers with culture time, although this finding was only statistically significant in the case of CDHA with 11% PCL. Up-regulation over a time frame of 4 Several reports from the literature have reported good biocompatibility and osteoconductivity of CDHA in combination with mesenchymal stem cells In conclusion, in this study we provide evidence that the PCL content in CDHA–PCL nanocomposites influences more than just the material properties, such as compression strength. We demonstrate that the PCL also influences the formation of pre-vascular structures by OEC, a process which seems to be controlled by inter-endothelial communication as well as by the close interaction of endothelial cells with osteogenic cells, as presented in this and many other studies. In addition, this study further highlights the potential of co-culture models as in vitro models to study cell–material interaction especially with regard to complex processes such as angiogenesis. The authors thank B. Pavic for her excellent technical assistance. The research was partially supported by