This paper presents preliminary quantitative results on the chemical and structural alterations of modified montmorillonite samples. The chemical composition analysis of the acid activated samples reveals that the decolouring capacity of the activated product reaches its maximum value of 210 when the total dissolving rate of the octahedral cations reaches about 30%. And, along with the dissolving of the cations the crystalline degree of the activated montmorillonite represented by the b-axis order degree of montmorillonite decreases to some extent. Structural alterations were also observed on the Na-modified and the organically modified samples. The d(001)
                      of the Na-modified sample changes to 12.65 Å from 15.49 Å of the natural sample, and the d(001)
                      of the organically modified sample expands to 16.54 Å from 12.65 Å when treated with tetramethylammonium and to 23.11 Å when treated with octadecyltrimethylammonium.Generally the properties of natural Ca-montmorillonite can be enhanced or modified by alkaline activation, acid activation and organic modification, due to the substitution of the exchangeable cations in the inter-layered area or partially dissolving of the cations in the octahedral area. In fact, the properties of the modified montmorillonite are related to its modified chemical composition and structural parameters. It has been reported that the structure and cation exchange capacity of natural Ca-montmorillonite can be modified by reaction with Na The raw Ca-bentonite material from Xuanhua Bentonite deposit (Hebei, China) was purified and treated with sulphuric acid first, and then the chemical composition and structural parameters of the acid activated samples were analyzed to evaluate the chemical and structural alterations. The bentonite sample from Laixi Bentonite deposit (Shandong, China) was purified and then treated with sodium carbonate and quaternary ammoniums, and then the The raw Ca-montmorillonite sample from Xuanhua Bentonite deposit (Hebei, China) was purified to about 95% from the feed purity of 75–80% before acid treatments and the raw Ca-bentonite sample from Laixi Bentonite deposit (Shandong, China) was purified to 90–93% from a feed purity of 60–65% before Na Sulphuric acid was used as the acid activation agent, and rapeseed oil and standard acid activated clay with decoloring capacity of 114 were used for the decolouring capacity measurements of the activated products. Sodium carbonate was used for Na-modification and quaternary ammonium salts (tetramethylammonium and octadecyltrimethylammonium) were used for organic treatments of the bentonite samples. The acid modified montmorillonite was prepared by reaction with sulphuric acid under a The structural parameters of the modified montmorillonite samples were detected by X-ray diffraction analysis (D/Max-3B). The Dissolving ratios of the octahedral cations in the activated samples with different decolouring capacity were analyzed ( It was noticed that the increase of the decolouring capacity associates with the decrease of crystalline degree of the activated samples due to the removal of the cations both in the inter-layered area and in the octahedral area. Results ( The purified Ca-montmorillonite sample from Laixi Bentonite Deposit (Shandong, China) was treated by Na The above-mentioned Na-modified montmorillonite from Laixi deposit was further treated with different quaternary ammonium compounds. It was found that the organically modified samples by different modifiers reveal different It has been found that the properties of the modified montmorillonite samples are in close relation with the alteration of their chemical compositions and structural parameters from the natural montmorillonite samples. And, it will be of great importance to create quantitative relationships between the various properties and the chemical composition and structural parameters of the modified montmorillonite samples in order to control and predict the properties of the modified products. This work was completed with the financial support of Qingdao Municipal Science and Technology Commission, Shandong, China.