Modified iron–carbon with polytetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE) was firstly investigated as heterogeneous electro-Fenton (EF) catalyst for 2,4-dichlorophenol (2,4-DCP) degradation in near neutral pH condition. The catalyst was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and X-ray diffraction (XRD), and the effects of some important operating parameters such as current intensity and pH on the 2,4-DCP degradation were investigated. After the catalyst modification with 20% PTFE, the degradation performance maintained well with much lower iron leaching, and at current intensity 100 mA, initial pH 6.7, catalyst loading 6 g/L, the degradation efficiency of 2,4-DCP could exceed 95% within 120 min treatment. Two-stage pseudo first-order kinetics of 2,4-DCP degradation was observed, including a slow anodic oxidation stage (first-stage) and much faster heterogeneous EF oxidation (second-stage), in which the automatic drop of pH in the first-stage initiated the Fe2+ release from micro-electrolysis and thus benefited to the subsequent EF reaction. Aromatic intermediates such as 3,5-dichlorocatechol, 4,6-dichlororesorcinol and 2-chlorohydroquinone were detected by GC–MS. Oxalic acid, acetic acid, formic acid and Cl− were quantiﬁed by ion chromatograph. Based on these analysis as well as the detection of H2O2 and OH, a possible mechanism and degradation pathway for 2,4-DCP were proposed. This work demonstrated that such a heterogeneous EF using cheap modified Fe–C catalyst was promising for organic wastewater treatment in initial neutral pH condition.2,4-dichlorophenol (2,4-DCP) is extensively used in many industries such as herbicides, pharmaceuticals, preservatives, paper making and coloring textiles ( Electrochemical oxidation process can be generally divided into two categories: direct oxidation and indirect oxidation ( In addition, electro-oxidation of organics can be also achieved by indirect oxidation through in-situ production of some active species, including hydrogen peroxide (H Generally adding homogeneous iron sources into the solution directly is the most simple and effective way for Fenton reaction (Eq. In the past few years, iron–carbon (Fe–C) micro-electrolysis has been widely used in wastewater treatment, including dyes ( Anodic oxidation: Cathodic reduction: The formed Fe Since Fenton reaction is usually favorable in acidic condition but some kinds of wastewaters are neutral, it is crucial to develop a catalyst which is suitable for electro-Fenton in neutral pH condition. In the present work, industrial Fe–C particles were modified and then used as heterogeneous electro-Fenton catalysts, using 2,4-DCP as the target contaminant to test degradation and mineralization efficiency. In order to reduce the leaching of iron ions, for the first time, PTFE was used to modify the surface characteristics of Fe–C particles. It was proved that these modified Fe–C particles could achieve a good treatment performance in initially neutral pH condition since in this system the acidification of the organics by anodic oxidation provided a favorable condition for the subsequent electro-Fenton process. The degraded aromatic intermediates, generated carboxylic acids and released inorganic ions were detected and quantiﬁed by several chromatographic techniques. Iron leaching, final pH, H Fe–C catalyst was purchased from Weifang Hua Yun Environmental Protection Technology Co., Ltd. Carbon black was purchased from Jilin Carbon Plant. 2,4-DCP (Xiya reagents with purity > 98%) was used as the target pollutant. Anhydrous sodium sulfate (Na Fe–C catalysts with particle size of 0.5–1.0 cm were dipped into pure ethanol and ultrasonicly treated for 30 min, then filtered and washed two times with ethanol. Fe–C (20 g) were dipped into different concentration of PTFE solution (0%, 10%, 20% and 30%). After 1 h dipping, Fe–C particles were separated from the solution by vacuum filtration, then they were added into a three-neck flask and dried 2 h at 100 °C with N The ADE was prepared according to the following procedure. After stirred for 20 s, the mixture of 1.5 mL distilled water, 1.5 mL PTFE (mass fraction 60%) and 0.27 g carbon black was pasted uniformly onto one side of multi-dimensional carbon cloth (8 × 5 cm The experiments were performed in a 0.3 L undivided cell using HOSSONI HB17300SL DC as power supply ( For a morphology characterization of Fe–C catalyst, a field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE–SEM, LEO1530VP) was used. The surface elemental composition of the samples was determined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Perkin–Elmer, a RBD upgraded PHI-5000C ESCA system, Physical Electronics, USA) with Mg Kα radiation (hν = 1253.6 eV). X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out using a Philips-12045 B/3 diffractometer to identify the sample structure at the scan rate of 1.2°/min. A high performance liquid chromatograph (HPLC FL2200-2) was used to determine 2,4-DCP concentration. The mobile phase was composed of methanol/water/acetic acid (v/v/v) at 60: 38: 2. The chromatograph was equipped with a Beckman ODS C18 column (5 μm, ∅4.6 mm × 25 cm) at a flow rate of 1.0 mL min Carboxylic acids and Cl Hydroxyl radicals were trapped with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and quantiﬁed by HPLC ( Since H   The surface element of the Fe–C catalyst was studied by XPS analysis. It could be seen that not only C and O elements but also iron element were observed ( Due to its excellent characteristics, such as corrosion resistance, chemical stability, thermo stability and water tightness, PTFE can be a good material to adapt most kinds of complex electrochemical conditions. In order to reduce the iron leaching of original Fe–C catalyst, PTFE was used to modify the surface of Fe–C catalyst in the present work. The effects of PTFE percentage on 2,4-DCP degradation, mineralization and iron leaching were investigated, and the results are presented in The influence of different Fe–C catalyst loading on 2,4-DCP degradation, mineralization and iron leaching efficiency were investigated, and the results are presented in So, Fe–C catalyst loading of 6 g/L was selected as the best condition for 2,4-DCP degradation. The current intensity determines the anodic oxidation and the formation of H These results indicated that a relatively high current (100 mA) was more efficient for mineralization. Further fitting the curves of 2,4-DCP degradation indicated that they followed a two-stage reaction in such a heterogeneous EF system, and every stage followed a pseudo first-order kinetics ( This degradation behavior might be related to the different roles of anodic oxidation (AO–H It is well known that pH can remarkably affect Fenton reaction and Fe–C micro-electrolysis process. In the case of pH 9, the degradation of 2,4-DCP was very slow and degradation efficiency was just 21.3%. In the EF system, the initial pH was important, because the ferric species would precipitate as ferric hydroxides at alkali condition, which made it more difficult to establish a good redox system between H  To explore the reactive oxidizing species, the productions of H To further confirm the oxidation mechanism, 150 mL of 0.2% DMSO was used to trap the generated As shown in  To check the application feasibility of this heterogeneous EF process for wastewater treatment in near neutral condition, 120 mg/L 2,4-DCP was spiked to two kinds of real wastewaters, one was from a chemical industry plant and the other from an oil treatment factory, with an original TOC of about 81 and 277 mg/L, respectively. The removal of 2,4-DCP and TOC was conducted under the optimized conditions as disclosed above (I = 100 mA, pH 6.7, 20% PTFE modified Fe–C 6 g/L). As shown in This work investigated the feasibility of the modified iron–carbon with PTFE as heterogeneous electro-Fenton catalyst for 2,4-dichlorophenol degradation in near neutral pH condition. Characterized by SEM, XPS and XRD, the catalyst modification with 20% PTFE performed the best with relatively high degradation performance and lower iron leaching. The degradation of 2,4-DCP in this system was found following a two-stage pseudo first-order kinetics, and the second stage was more efficient due to the drop of pH in the first-stage favored the subsequent EF reaction. The degradation aromatic intermediates, organic acids such as oxalic acid, acetic acid and formic acid as well as active species such as H The authors thank Schematic diagram of heterogeneous electro-Fenton reactor, SEM of carbon cloth and the prepared ADE, the H Supplementary data related to this article can be found at