To elucidate the coal component liberation mechanisms upon typical impact breakage, the coal was selected from the Shangwan mine in China. Thereafter, mineral liberation analysis was adopted as the main method for investigating phase interface characteristics, classification characteristics of the various classes of comminuted products, and changes in the mineral area and length gradients upon mechanical impact breakage. The results indicate that the grain sizes of the comminuted products decreased in the following order: slag product >classifier product >bag product. Moreover, the disseminated grain size, dissemination mode, and original cleavages had a direct influence on the recovery rate of the completely liberated phase. The coal, which formed the main component of the samples, exhibited the highest cumulative mass recovery (CMR) in classified products and was most easily liberated. Furthermore, the kaolinite-bearing coal and pyrite were moderately liberated, the quartz and kaolinite were difficult to liberate, and the illite was extremely difficult to liberate. Under mechanical impact breakage, intragranular and intergranular fractures mainly occurred in particles, with the changes in the mineral boundary and mineral area corresponding to varying fracture modes. To a certain extent, the particle comminution could be quantified by the changes in the slope of the equivalent circle diameter–-CMR curve. It was determined that the main cause of the increased liberation degree is the generation of the completely liberated phase of the component of interest. Furthermore, by adopting the liberation factor for quantification of the mineral liberation, the calculation model for coal component liberation was obtained.Mineral liberation is a key step in mineral processing, in which the energy consumption of the crushing process accounts for 75% of the energy consumption of the entire concentrator At present, major research techniques and methods used in the investigation of the liberation and mineralogical characteristics of mineral particles include mineral liberation analysis (MLA), X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) Based on the above review, MLA provides an effective means of quantifying the liberation characteristics of minerals, and it is the most extensively applied technique in the relevant research. However, its application has mainly been limited to the analysis of metallic and non-metallic minerals; few studies have reported on the application of MLA in the investigation of coal liberation and the quantitative characterization of comminution mechanisms. Therefore, this study investigated the classification of the liberation mechanisms of coal and minerals upon mechanical impact breakage, as well as the influences of different fracture modes on the mineral liberation, with the aim of providing technical and theoretical support for future quantitative research on the multi-component liberation mechanisms of coal. The samples used in this study were obtained from coals mined from the Shangwan coal mine of the Shendong mining area in China (henceforth referred to as SW).   Equipment The experimental equipment used in the study was a mechanical impact breakage system, developed and designed in-house at the Xi'an University of Science and Technology, which consisted of a grinder, classifier, and bag dust collector. The samples were comminuted upon impact with the rotor-driven parts and subsequently classified according to the grain size and density. The samples were comminuted upon impact with the rotor-driven parts and subsequently classified according to the grain size and density. The resultant classified products were the slag product (SP), classifier product (CP), and bag product (BP). Methods The Mineral Liberation Analyzer 250 (FEI, USA), obtained from the Oil Sands and Coal Interfacial Engineering Facility of the University of Alberta, Canada, was used to study the liberation characteristics of each coal component. The MLA is an automated mineralogy tool used for process mineralogy, which incorporates the technologies of Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Energy Dispersive X-ray Analysis (EDAX/BRUKER). MLA software controls the SEM and use images and x-rays to characteristic minerals, particles and rocks. The characterization parameters were as follows: Free surface ( The dissemination and liberation degrees of the minerals were quantitatively characterized based on the free surface calculated on the area% of the minerals of interest Phase specific surface area ( The Equivalent circle diameter ( The grain size measurements in the MLA were performed based on the equivalent circle diameter ( Mean Phase Equivalent Circle Diameter ( Implement point x-ray analysis to efficiently and effectively analyze mineral phases within a particle. The Mean Phase Boundary length gradient and area gradient of mineral of interest The boundary length gradient of the mineral of interest was defined as the difference in the boundary lengths of the same mineral between different classified products, while the area gradient was defined as the difference in the areas of the same mineral between different classified products. Here, Mix the coal sample in a glass vial to homogeneous and it can be mounted in a 30 mm diameter sample block, and then grinding and polishing to obtain a high quality polished sections. The prepared samples were used to analyse the dissemination characteristics and mineral components of raw coal.  Analysis of grain size distributions The liberation characteristics of each component in coal were further analyzed by sampling the classified products under mechanical impact comminution. In this particular example grain size was calculated by equivalent circle and it is based on the measured 2D surface. And the particle size is calculated by the Eq. Analysis of phase interface liberation characteristics  The maximum recovery rate for the completely liberated phase of kaolinite-bearing coal was 52.36% in the BP. Particles containing binary or greater phases were mainly distributed in the SP, indicating that kaolinite-bearing coal particles with smaller grain sizes were more readily liberated; that is, the kaolinite-bearing coal was moderately liberated. The highest recovery rates of pyrite were achieved in the CP and BP, with For the kaolinite, the liberation degree increased sequentially from the SP to BP, with a maximum recovery rate of the completely liberated phase of 27.47% in the BP. Moreover, two-phase particles accounted for the highest content in the SP and an The recovery rates of the completely liberated phase of the quartz were higher in the CP and BP at 29.45% and 29.31%, respectively. Moreover, the two-phase particle contents were relatively high in all three products, at 43.96%, 49.94%, and 49.93%, respectively, indicating a high degree of difficulty in achieving liberation. Owing to the generally low liberation degree, the illite was mainly disseminated in binary or greater phase particles. The completely liberated phase was mainly distributed in the SP and BP, with recovery rates of 20.1% and 17.29%, respectively. This demonstrates that, upon strong impact, liberation first occurred in the easily liberated illite particles, while the other particles could only be liberated when a certain grain size was achieved, indicating an extremely high degree of difficulty in achieving liberation. The dissemination characteristics of the mica were similar to those of the illite, with the maximum recovery rate of the completely liberated phase reaching a maximum of 58.81% in the BP. Particles containing binary or greater phases were mainly distributed in the CP, indicating that a certain degree of liberation could be achieved in the mica and its associated minerals when the particle grain size was decreased to a certain extent through impact breakage; that is, the mica was moderately liberated. The above analysis demonstrates that the liberation of the coal and main disseminated minerals was influenced by the disseminated grain size, dissemination pattern and density, hardness, and original cleavages of the various associated minerals. The four levels of mineral liberation in the comminuted-classified products generated upon impact breakage were defined as follows: easily liberated (>80% of  Analysis of fracture modes Further analysis was performed on the fracture modes of the coal and major minerals (kaolinite-bearing coal, quartz, siderite, calcite, kaolinite, and illite) under impact breakage. For the kaolinite-bearing coal, | For the quartz, | The phase interface change patterns of the pyrite were as follows: For the calcite, the phase interface change patterns were as follows: | The phase interface change patterns of the illite were as follows: | For the kaolinite, the disseminated particles in the coal had a smaller disseminated grain size, exhibited a multiphase distribution (  Coal was selected as the mineral of interest for the MLA owing to its high contents in the samples, while the other minerals were regarded as disseminated minerals. Under impact breakage, intergranular and intragranular fractures will occur in the component of interest. For the dissemination mode in For the dissemination mode in Under the dissemination mode in  When performing measurements in MLA, the particle diameter can be calculated by converting the area derived from the measured pixels into an equivalent circle value: When intragranular fracture occurs in components A and B, resulting in the generation of multiple liberated single particles A If intragranular component liberation occurs during the comminution process and single particles of the component of interest are not generated, the liberation degree If both intergranular and intragranular fractures occur, the mineral liberation model proposed by Stamboliadis During the comminution process, regardless of whether intergranular or intragranular fracture occurs, smaller particles with different volume fractions will be produced under the critical diameter The liberation degrees of minerals are influenced by the disseminated grain size, dissemination pattern and density, hardness, and original cleavages of the various associated minerals. Under mechanical impact breakage, intragranular and intergranular fractures mainly occur in the particles, with the changes in the mineral boundary length and area corresponding to different fracture modes. The gradient of the mean phase The liberation degree cannot be characterized by the changes in the By adopting the interface liberation factor to characterize the liberation of microscopic components, where Financial support for this research, supported by Provincial Natural Science Foundation research project of Shaanxi (No. 2018JQ5017), China coal industry association 2017 annual science and technology research guidance project (Grant No. MTKJ 2017-306), and