This study reports the effect of particle mass compositions on the bed expansion behaviour of a binary solid liquid fluidised bed (SLFB) system. Experiments were performed comprising equal density (2230kgm−3) spherical glass beads particles of diameter 3, 5 and 8mm and water as fluidising medium with different particle mass ratios varying from 0.17 to 6.0. In the expanded bed, both segregated and intermixed zones were observed depending on the different particle diameter combinations. In a completely segregated SLFB, the bottom monosized layer exhibited a negative deviation ∼23% whereas a positive deviation ∼25% was found in the top monosized layer when compared with the corresponding pure monosized system. A small mixing zone spanning approximately two particle diameters thick was observed to exist even in a completely segregated SLFB for higher diameter ratio cases. A slight decrease in the mixing zone height was noted with increasing liquid superficial velocity. For lower diameter ratio cases, a relatively lager mixing zone height was observed which increased with increasing liquid superficial velocity. The bed expansion ratio was noted to decrease with increasing solid mass ratio however it increased with increase in the fluidising velocity ratio following a reasonable power law trend. The expanded bed height of the binary mixture was not entirely additive of its corresponding mono-component bed heights and both positive and negative deviations were observed. Finally, a two-dimensional (2D) Eulerian-Eulerian (E-E) model incorporating the kinetic theory of granular flow (KTGF) was used to quantify the binary system hydrodynamics. The model predicted expanded bed height agreed with experimental measurements within ±6% deviation. Presence of a mixing zone was also confirmed by the CFD model and simulated particle phase volume fraction distribution qualitatively agreed with the experimental visualisations.drag coefficient, [–] drag coefficient under terminal rise conditions, [–] coefficient of friction between solids, [–] constant in Eq. constant in Eq. constant in Eq. diameter ratio of larger to smaller solids, d diameter of solid particle, [m] column diameter, [m] solid-solid interaction restitution coefficient, [–] solid-wall interaction restitution coefficient, [–] momentum exchange term, [N] gravitational acceleration, [m s radial distribution function, [–] axial bed height, [m] intermixed zone height of binary particle, [m] packed bed height, [m] bed expansion ratio, (h turbulent kinetic energy, [m solid mass, [g] mass ratio of larger to smaller solids, M Richardson-Zaki index, [–] static pressure, [Pa] solid pressure, [Pa] production of turbulent kinetic energy, [m solid particle Reynolds number, [–] terminal settling velocity of particle, [m s minimum Fluidisation velocity, [m s liquid superficial velocity, [m s liquid-solid momentum exchange force, [N] solid-solid momentum exchange force, [N] energy dissipation rate per unit mass, [m bed voidage, [–] solid volume fraction, [–] Granular temperature, [m bulk viscosity of solid, [kg m viscosity of liquid, [kg m solid viscosity, [kg m turbulent viscosity, [kg m effective viscosity of solid, [kg m effective viscosity of liquid, [kg m liquid density, [kg m solid density, [kg m solid mixture density along the axial direction, [kg m liquid solid Infinite medium solid particle 1 (smaller) solid particle 2 (larger) two dimensional three dimensional complete segregation computational fluid dynamics Eulerian-Eulerian approach fluidised bed kinetic theory of granular flow no segregation not given partial segregation solid-liquid fluidised bed Solid liquid fluidised bed (SLFB) systems are widely used in the chemical, mineral processing, biochemical and food industries involving variety of applications such as water treatment, sedimentation, separation of minerals, ion exchange, adsorption, crystallization, etc., due to efficient contact between the solid and liquid phase The hydrodynamics of solid-liquid fluidised bed is inherently complex due to interactions between the fluid and particle phase, particle-particle phase, and particle-wall. These interactions introduce further complexities when more than one solid phase is present in the system, more specifically when the solid phases differ in diameter and/or density as well as shape. In almost every industrial application, a particle size distribution often exists which indeed raises a requirement to investigate the fluidisation behaviour in the multi-particle system. Simplest of these SLFB systems is the binary particle system where three different characteristics are generally reported e.g. complete segregation (CS), partial segregation (PS) and no segregation (NS). These characteristics apparently depend on the terminal settling velocity of the particles. When a binary mixture is fluidised, solids having higher terminal settling velocity tend to settle at the bottom of the fluidised bed whereas solids with lower terminal settling velocity fill the upper section of the bed with a transition zone in between. The volume fractions of both solid phases change continuously in the transition zone. A widely used hypothetical notion in binary SLFB systems is that total bed height is additive, i.e. bed height equals to the sum of heights of the two individual component beds fluidised at the same liquid superficial velocity bed expansion behaviour for the mono and binary components SLFB under similar operating conditions and effect of solid loading patterns on the final bed expansion behaviour. effect of different solid mass ratios on the bed hydrodynamics. effect of liquid superficial velocity on the bed expansion for different solid mass loadings. bed expansion behaviour and spatial distribution of individual phase volume fraction at different superficial velocity using a CFD model. Kennedy and Bretton Asif Numerical modelling of SLFB system provides comprehensive details of many parameters such as local phase volume fractions as well as their spatial distributions, energy dissipation rate which are otherwise difficult to obtain directly from the experiment. In some of the initial numerical studies in this area, Syamlal and O’Brien Cheng and Zhu  The schematic of the 3D SLFB setup comprising a cylindrical transparent acrylic column with an inner diameter of 50 The expansion behaviour of mono and binary component SLFBs was modelled using Eulerian-Eulerian approach implemented in the finite volume CFD code ANSYS Fluent (version 15.0). In E-E approach (Ding and Gidaspow  The bed expansion behaviour of the monoparticle system is presented in  The effect of solid loading pattern on the fluidisation behaviour was also simulated using the CFD model described in Section All three binary mixtures described in This behaviour is presented in  In  Bed expansion for both binary and combined SLFB are shown in Previous experimental studies reported that for both unequal size and density ratios binary bed height almost equals to the arithmetic addition of two mono SLFB systems The details of these experimental observations are presented in The binary bed expansion behaviour for the experimental conditions used in this study was also investigated computationally. For further validation of the developed CFD model, a binary-combined case (d Also compared in The expansion behaviour of binary solid particles in the mixing zone for three different binary mixtures (    The effect of solid mass ratio on the bed expansion behaviour is described in For the three binary mixtures presented in  For the binary solid mixture, V It can be observed that coefficient C  Two more CFD simulation cases for high superficial velocity cases (0.156 and 0.170 m s In this study, both experiments and CFD simulations were carried out for uniform density single and binary particle solid-liquid fluidised bed utilizing different diameter (d It was demonstrated both experimentally and computationally that the effect of solid loading pattern on the final expanded bed height of the binary SLFB was insignificant. However, the loading pattern has substantial effect in the computational time required to reach a quasi-steady state which can be significantly reduced by packing binary solids in the decreasing order of particle size from bottom of the bed. The final bed height of the binary mixture at completely fluidised state was shown to be not necessarily equal to the sum of the expanded bed heights of the individual monoparticle system and both positive and negative deviations were possible. Both particle diameter and solid mass ratios attributed to these deviations. Positive deviations occurred when diameter ratio d Three different bed characteristics were observed in the binary system – nearly segregated, partially segregated and no segregation (complete mixing). Nearly segregated phase was observed when particle diameter ratio was highest (d The effect of increasing solid mass ratio on the bed expansion behaviour showed power law type declining trend. The pre-factors of these models were found be dependent on the liquid superficial velocity whereas the exponents were found to be dependent on the diameter ratio of the binary system. Effect of superficial velocity on the overall bed expansion and the mixing zone height was also investigated in non-dimensional form and similar power law type models were proposed. These models showed increasing expansion behaviour of the bed as well as the mixing zone height with rise in the superficial velocity. It was observed that pre-factors of these models followed inverse relationship with the particle diameter ratio whereas the reverse effect was noted for the exponent parameters. The CFD simulations predicted the binary systems bed expansion behaviour reasonably well (deviation ∼6%) when compared with the experimental measurement. The spatial distributions of individual phase volume fractions at different liquid superficial velocity were quantified; and although the results could not be directly validated, the predicted intermixed/segregated zone height compared well with the measurements. One of the authors, Md. Shakhaoath Khan, would like to acknowledge the scholarship support provided by See