Contrary to common perception bone is a dynamic organ flexibly adapting to changes in mechanical loading by shifting the delicate balance between bone formation and bone resorption carried out by osteoblasts and osteoclasts, respectively. In the past decades numerous studies demonstrating production of reactive oxygen or nitrogen intermediates, effects of different antioxidants, and involvement of prototypical redox control mechanisms (Nrf2–Keap1, Steap4, FoxO, PAMM, caspase-2) have proven the central role of redox regulation in the bone. Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation (PARylation), a NAD-dependent protein modification carried out by poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) enzymes recently emerged as a new regulatory mechanism fine-tuning osteoblast differentiation and mineralization. Interestingly PARylation does not simply serve as a signaling mechanism during osteoblast differentiation but also couples it to osteoblast death. Even more strikingly, the poly(ADP-ribose) polymer likely released from succumbed cells at the terminal stage of differentiation is incorporated into the bone matrix representing the first structural role of this versatile biopolymer. Moreover, this new paradigm explains why and how osteodifferentiation and death of cells entering this pathway are closely coupled to each other. Here we review the role of reactive oxygen and nitrogen intermediates as well as PARylation in osteoblast and osteoclast differentiation, function, and cell death.Bone is often stereotyped as a simple organ fulfilling mainly mechanical functions Quite remarkably a rather limited number of cell types appear to be sufficient to control all these diverse roles of the bones ( Bone tissue is broken down by osteoclasts, multinucleated cells of hemopoietic origin Many reactive species have been assigned regulatory roles in osteoblast differentiation, function, or death Depending on the amount, intra-/extracellular location of production and their chemical nature, reactive species may also have detrimental effects on the bone. Evidence supporting this statement is also substantial. For example, in various pathological conditions such as osteoarthritis As for the role of reactive nitrogen species (RNS) in bone biology, nitric oxide and peroxynitrite are also recognized as important regulators of bone metabolism Osteoclasts are multinucleated cells derived from the fusion of monocytes and macrophages. Their primary function is to mediate bone resorption   Exposure of RAW264.7 macrophages to RANKL lowered Nrf2/Keap1 ratio and led to a lack of increase in the expression of Nrf2-dependent enzymes, thus favoring ROS signaling. Overexpression of Nrf2 enhanced RANKL-induced elevation in the level of antioxidant enzymes and suppressed OC differentiation. On the contrary, overexpression of Keap1 and knockdown of Nrf2 suppressed expression of antioxidant enzymes, leading to increased osteoclastogenesis Data from Nrf2     Reactive nitrogen species (nitric oxide and peroxynitrite) may also be involved in OC regulation Production of various ROS/RNS species by different bone cells (detailed above) may trigger signaling events and may also cause damage in these cells as well as in neighboring cells PARylation is a reversible protein modification carried out by some members of the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) family (also known as the ADPRT family) The role of PARylation in osteodifferentiation is indicated by observations that PARP inhibitors or PARP-1 silencing inhibited the osteodifferentiation process (both mineralization and marker gene expression). The question arises as to whether H What are the molecular events acting downstream of H The above detailed observations also revealed a rather strong interrelationship between osteodifferentiation and cell death. A peculiar feature of the osteodifferentiation process is that it is accompanied by massive cell death. In fact it is estimated that more than 80% of cells undergoing osteodifferentiation commit cell suicide Compared to the role of PARylation in osteoblasts much less is known about what this biopolymer may do in osteoclasts. From the three publications available on Pubmed it seems that PARylation acts a transcriptional repressor in differentiating OCs. For example, it has been shown that silencing PARP-1 in OC precursors resulted in enhanced expression of OC marker genes TRACP and matrix metalloproteinase-9 Data summarized in this review clearly point toward a central role of redox signaling in bone biology with reactive oxygen and nitrogen species regulating differentiation, vital functions, and death of both osteoblasts and osteoclasts. Recently a new pathway of “hydrogen peroxide production–DNA breakage–PARP activation–metabolic dysfunction and cell death” has been described to accompany osteoblast differentiation. The most interesting new development in this field has been the identification of poly(ADP-ribose) as a structural element in the bone matrix. PARylation can no longer be considered as a transient signaling event often described in various oxidative stress situations as the deposition of its product, poly(ADP-ribose) in the bone matrix has changed our view of this biopolymer. However, several open questions remain to keep PAR and bone enthusiasts busy in the next couple of years. These include the role of PAR degradation, the mode of PAR release (protein-bound or “naked” polymer, cell disruption versus regulated PAR release), and the role of the polymer in the bone matrix and in mineralization. Moreover, it remains to be seen whether or not animals deficient in PARP1 have any detectable abnormality in their bone structure and bone metabolism. Finally, probably the most intriguing question is if, similar to the mineralization of the bone matrix, the polymer is also detectable in various soft tissue mineralization processes. Authors declare no conflict of interest. This research was supported by the