Background
                  The primary objective was to calculate and to apply the numeric value of the distance from the pectoralis major tendon insertion to the superior aspect of the humeral head (PMTD) without any radiation exposure or equipment through basic data such as age, sex, height, and weight of Asian populations.
               
                  Methods
                  We analyzed shoulder magnetic resonance images of 260 patients (107 men and 153 women; average age, 59.8 years). The superior border of the pectoralis major was identified on the transverse section and cross-referenced with the coronal section. Measurements were made inferiorly from the corresponding transverse section to the top of the humeral head superiorly in coronal view. Correlation analysis was performed between variables including the patient's age, sex, height, weight, and body mass index and the PMTD by multiple linear regression analysis.
               
                  Results
                  The mean PMTD was 52 mm, with an average of 55 mm for men and 49 mm for women. Sex and height were significantly correlated with PMTD. The PMTD increased to a consistent level proportionally to height, and the difference in PMTD between men and women was 3.45 mm. An equation to estimate PMTD using these findings is as follows: PMTD (in mm) = 23 + (height [cm] × 0.17) + 3.45 (the last number is added for men). This equation had a prediction error of 0.3 mm.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Our study demonstrated that PMTD is a useful and reliable reference for optimal humeral height during hemiarthroplasty for proximal humerus fractures in Asian populations.Shoulder hemiarthroplasty is a recognized treatment for 4-part fractures, 3-part fractures with poor bone quality, fracture-dislocations, and large impaction fractures of the proximal humerus. Various approaches to overcome this problem caused by loss of anatomic landmarks have been attempted. Preoperative templating with a full-length radiograph of the uninjured humerus has been suggested as a way to determine the height of the fracture stem. Several previous studies have reported a mean distance from the pectoralis major tendon insertion to the superior aspect of the humeral head (PMTD) of 56-57.73 mm In this study, we verified our hypothesis that the PMTD is a reliable reference to achieve optimal humeral height during hemiarthroplasty for proximal humeral fractures in Asian populations. Magnetic resonance images of the shoulders of adult patients were procured from a consecutive cohort of 412 scans acquired with a 1.5T magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) system (Siemens Magnetom Avanto System; Siemens Medical, Erlangen, Germany). We cooperated closely with the department of radiology for precise measurements of this study; slice thickness of images was obtained as 3.6 mm when patients were undergoing MRI. We excluded 51 scans that showed an abnormal shape of the proximal humerus because of post-traumatic lesions or humeral head necrosis or any severe degenerative change, and an additional 101 scans were deemed not to have adequate imaging quality for confident measurements. Among the 260 patients whose shoulder images were selected, 107 were men and 153 were women; average age was 59.8 years (range, 18-84 years). Average height was 168.0 cm (range, 142.0-181.4 cm), average weight was 68.7 kg (range, 37.0-91.0 kg), and body mass index (BMI) was 24.3 (range, 15.0-32.9) ( All examinations were read by 2 shoulder surgeons. The superior border of the pectoralis major tendon on the humerus was first identified on the transverse section and cross-referenced with the coronal section. On the coronal view, measurements were made inferiorly from the corresponding transverse section to the top point of the humeral head superiorly ( SPSS Statistics (version 22.0; IBM, Armonk, NY, USA) was used for analysis and modeling of the data. Correlation analysis was performed between variables including the patient's age, sex, height, weight, and BMI and the PMTD, with a significance level set at The mean PMTD was 52 mm (range, 39-62 mm); it was 55 mm (range, 47-62 mm) for men and 49 mm (range, 39-59 mm) for women. Two measurement scores showed a Cronbach α value of 0.893 (intraobserver reliability) and 0.94 (interobserver reliability), indicating consistency between the 4 measurements by the 2 surgeons in reliability analysis. Through the multiple linear regression model, only sex and height had a significant association ( A consistent association between height and PMTD was found ( This study demonstrated that PMTD is significantly correlated with sex and height, and the PMTD value was much lower than in the prior studies of Westerners. Through statistically validated figures, when the equation derived from these results was applied, the prediction error was 0.3 mm, and the difference between the observed PMTD and the predicted PMTD was distributed into acceptable range. To statistically validate this regression model and derived equations, PMTD has been advocated as a way to determine the height of a prosthesis. Gerber et al Other authors have also reported that PMTD is not constant and is related to humeral length. Hasan et al To date, all authors who have reported the use of PMTD as a reference for shoulder hemiarthroplasty to treat severe proximal humerus fractures dealt only with Westerners and found a mean PMTD value of 56-57.73 mm. Several researchers have argued that lengthening of >10 mm or shortening of 15 mm in shoulder hemiarthroplasty for acute proximal humerus fractures has a negative impact on the functional results. Our study had the following limitations. Unlike prior cadaveric studies, measurements obtained from MRI are indirect. The MRI measurements were taken with 2 perpendicular sections, both of which were 3.6 mm in width, making a degree of variability. However, there is no significant difference between the measurements of computerized values by MRI and actual measurements using a caliper. Our study demonstrated that PMTD is a useful and reliable reference for optimal humeral height during hemiarthroplasty for proximal humerus fractures. Support was received from the National Research Foundation of Korea, funded by the Republic of Korea's government (grant numbers 2014R1A5A2010008 and 2013R1A1A1076068). The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.