Cemented paste backfill (CPB) has been widely used to prevent and mitigate hazards produced during the excavation of underground stopes. In practice, the strength of CPB is often an essential parameter for successful stope design. We propose an intelligent technique in this study for predicting the unconfined compressive strength (UCS) of CPB. This intelligent technique is a combination of the artificial neural network (ANN) and particle swarm optimization (PSO). The ANN was used for non-linear relationships modelling and PSO was used for the ANN architecture-tuning. Inputs of the ANN were selected to be the tailings type, the cement-tailings ratio, the solids content, and the curing time. A total of 396 CPB specimens under different combination of influencing variables were tested for the preparation of the dataset. The results showed that PSO was efficient for the ANN architecture-tuning. Also, comparison of the predicted UCS values with experimental values showed that the optimum ANN model was very accurate at predicting CPB strength.Cemented paste backfill (CPB) is a mine composite material produced with filtered tailings, hydraulic binders and mixing water and it has many operational, environmental and financial benefits. Given safety regulations and environmental concerns, CPB provides ground support for mining operations, reduces ore dilution and allows safe disposal of tailings. Moreover, the surface subsidence can be minimized, thereby rehabilitation costs are reduced. The advantages of CPB are dependent on its ability to remain stable during the extraction of adjacent stopes. In practice, the unconfined compressive strength (UCS) is usually utilised to estimate the mechanical stability of CPB as UCS tests are simple, economical and have been successfully correlated with accepted stability over many years of experience. Many researchers have studied the effects of influencing variables on the UCS of CPB, such as the tailings type, the binder content and the curing time One method that may be useful for the UCS estimation of CPB specimens is the utilisation of non-destructive methods such as ultrasonic pulse velocity (UPV) and electrical resistivity (ER) tests. Previous researchers Another method is predicting the UCS of CPB directly from its influencing variables using the artificial neural network (ANN) approach, which has been widely used to model non-linear relationships between inputs and outputs in construction and building materials The main objective of this study is to propose an intelligent technique based on the ANN and PSO approaches for predicting the UCS of CPB under the combined effect of four important influencing variables. The PSO-ANN method is a new technique for predicting the UCS of CPB, and there are no studies so far being published in the literature. Also, the combined effect of the tailings type, the cement-tailings ratio, the solids content and the curing time on the UCS of CPB has not been studied using the PSO-ANN method. This study is thus the pioneer work in the application of the ANN and PSO approaches for CPB strength prediction, which is of great significance to the engineering application of CPB. Three types of tailings were used for the specimen preparation. The grain size distribution was determined using a laser diffraction particle size analyser (Malvern Mastersizer 2000) and the mineralogy of the tailings was determined using X-ray diffraction (XRD; Bruker AXS D8 Advance Diffractometer) as shown in The UCS value was obtained according to ASTM C 39 The ANN is a computational paradigm that maps inputs to outputs using a directed set of interconnected neurons. Each neuron is a basic computation unit that performs All neurons are connected in a layered architecture, where the mapping between inputs and outputs is conducted using the following formula: The ANN was trained using the dataset collected from UCS tests. Inputs of the ANN were the tailing type, the cement-tailings ratio, the solids content, and the curing time while the output was the UCS value. The whole dataset was divided into two parts: the training set (80%) and the testing set (20%). 10-fold cross validation was used as the validation method. The architecture of the ANN was first tuned by PSO before its application based on the mean squared error (MSE), which is defined as: PSO is a powerful optimization technique for finding a global optimum in a multi-dimensional searching space In this study, the number of hidden layers (Num_hidden) and the number of neurons (Num_neuron) in each hidden layer were tuned using PSO. Based on trial tuning and experience, the tuning ranges for the Num_hidden and the Num_neuron were 1–4 and 1–40, respectively. The swarm size and the maximum iteration were chosen to be 300 as recommended in   The ANN model with the optimum architecture was trained using the whole training set to construct the optimum ANN model. The performance of the optimum ANN model was evaluated on the training and testing sets using the MSE and the correlation coefficient ( The UCS values predicted by the optimum ANN model versus the experimental values in both training and testing sets are shown in The primary strength of this study is the verification of the PSO-ANN method for the prediction of CPB strength. Advantages of the PSO-ANN method over conventional UCS tests include low-cost, less time-consuming and non-destructive, which will become more evident when a multi-national dataset is available. Even compared with other non-destructive tests, such as UPV and ER, the PSO-ANN still has several advantages: (1) The PSO-ANN method requires no mechanical tests as the prediction is made directly from the influencing variables of CPB; (2) A general model can be easily built and updated using a more comprehensive dataset, indicating the generalisation capability of the PSO-ANN method might be better than empirical equations found between the UCS and UPV results The omission of other influencing variables of the CPB strength, such as binder type, sulphur content and temperature, is a clear limitation of the current study. More UCS tests are currently being performed to investigate other influencing variables. A further limitation is that the trained ANN model cannot predict the long-term strength of CPB. Longer curing periods (up to 360 days) are being investigated, particularly for CPB specimens produced with sulphide tailings. A final limitation is that tailings physico-chemical characteristics are not used as the ANN inputs. More than ten different tailings are being studied in the hope that the generalisation capability of the trained ANN model can be improved once the physico-chemical characteristics are used as inputs. In this paper, modelling of the UCS value of CPB specimens was undertaken using an intelligent technique based on the ANN and PSO. A dataset obtained from 396 CPB tests was used for the construction of ANN models. Four important influencing variables, including the tailings type, the cement-tailings ratio, the solids content, and the curing time, were selected as the ANN inputs. The architecture of ANN was tuned using PSO. The results show that PSO was efficient in the ANN architecture-tuning. The optimum ANN architecture for UCS prediction was two hidden layers with 14 and 2 neurons in the first and second hidden layers respectively. The correlation coefficient between the predicted and experimental UCS values in the testing set was 0.979, indicating that the optimum ANN model was very accurate at predicting CPB strength. The presented PSO-ANN method could be used for a fast estimation of CPB strength during the utilisation of tailings with similar physico-chemical characteristics. Also, optimization of influencing variables could be conducted for increased CPB strength. This study was financially supported by the 12th Five Years Key Programs for None. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 