Searching for naturally occurring minerals/ores which can only be crushed down and sieved before they are used as oxygen carrier materials (OCM) is one of the main quests of the chemical looping combustion (CLC) community. Three cheap iron and manganese based minerals directly taken from the mining industry are investigated in this study. These minerals are Sinai manganese mineral (Egypt), Guizhou iron mineral (China) and Kryvbas iron mineral (Ukraine). Samples are studied with respect to oxygen capacity and redox kinetics by isothermal hydrogen and methane redox cycling experiments (800–1000°C) and are compared to ilmenite as a widely used state-of-the-art reference. As one of the goals of this benchmarking is to spot minerals which are needless of pre-treatment and activation, no thermal treatment on the samples was performed prior to testing. Degradation issues have also been studied and investigated by SEM. Both Sinai manganese mineral and Kryvbas iron mineral perform well in respect to oxygen capacity and redox kinetics. However the post characterisation demonstrates that cation diffusion is much higher for Fe-based systems compared to the Fe–Mn system which shows much less swelling after 200 cycles.Large-scale combustion based power generation with inherent CO When coal is used as fuel, CLC can reach electrical net efficiency of 41.7% LHV In the project “MINERAL SCOUT” ( In order to find promising oxygen carrier material candidates several natural mineral resources were investigated. The main criteria used for selection of the candidates were; theoretical oxygen capacity, availability and non-toxicity. All materials used in this study were milling in order to obtain powder. The powders were sieved to retain particles size in the range of 125–180 Three iron and manganese based minerals directly taken from the mining industry are investigated in this study. The first material system is Sinai-A, Sinai Manganese Ore grade A (low grade Reduction–oxidation (redox) cycles testing on the materials were performed as a screening test to select the most promising materials for CLC purposes. This was performed in a Pre- and post-characterisation was performed on the samples prior to and after the redox cycling. The sieved materials were embedded in epoxy resin and materialographic cross sections were made using diamond based grinding and polishing products. Field-emission gun scanning electron microscopy (FEG-SEM) characterisation was performed on a The redox cycles for the four minerals of study are presented in The oxygen capacity of the samples without any pre-treatment is summarized in The kinetics is also evaluated using the derivative of reduction The samples differ strongly in their composition, affecting the changes in morphology that take place during the redox cycle experiments. The as-received and sieved Sinai-A ore sample is inhomogeneous, with grains varying both in morphology and composition, as shown in SEM pre- and post-characterisation results for Ilmenite sample are presented in The as-received and sieved Guizhou ore sample is inhomogeneous, as shown in The Kryvbas ore sample is mostly composed of iron oxide grains with fine Fe and Si oxide particles loosely attached at the surface. Only a few grains with diverging composition are present in Considering two distinguished scenarios for operation and start-up of the CLC unit, the necessity of OCMs needless of prior activation becomes more important. When it comes to the start-up scenario activating the OCM in the CLC in large scale is not an option, therefore utilizing the materials which are functional from the very first cycle as a start-up material are more efficient and cost saving. Two general tendencies can be inferred from the post characterisation observations. Firstly, Fe tends to diffuse to the surface of the grains upon redox cycling when this element is present in mixed compounds; and secondly, the treatment induces the formation of a high level of porosity in grains with single composition, either iron oxide or manganese oxide. Accumulation of iron rich phases on the OCM’s surface after several redox cycles is a well known phenomenon Redox cycles with methane show high reactivity and fast reduction for these minerals; the highest is found for Kryvbas at 1000 In Fe-based systems with low Mn content (in the range 20–40%) a dual phase will be formed combining saturated hematite with Mn (ca.10%) and Bixbyite (containing close to 50:50 Fe:Mn). Bixbyite is more easily reduced than hematite, so in the case of fast redox, the Bixbyite phase should be most active at lower temperatures while Hematite will be most active at higher temperatures where Bixbyite will not be re-oxidized but rather exist as a Hausmannite phase. The results obtained from the studied materials conclude a very clear relation between reactivity and increased surface area. The mechanical strength though deteriorates when the surface area increases excessively, such as of Kryvbas case were the Fe-rich material has nearly decomposed. One should of course keep in mind that TGA cycling gives deep reduction compared to faster and shorter cycling under CLC reactor test condition where the micro structure is not affected to the same degree. But in our case a clear trend is seen that high Mn or Fe content seems to make the materials more porous and reactive but at the expense of reducing strength. Based on the results presented in this article, one therefore can conclude that mixed system of Fe–Mn demonstrate sufficient reactivity while a seeming possibility of less swelling. This is in agreement with literature, where reduced cation diffusion is documented when moving from pure Fe to 2:1 mixture of Fe:Mn The experiments in this study are performed in a way to reflect the inlet and outlet conditions of the fuel reactor. Four ores has been investigated in this study and compared. The best materials found are Kryvbas and Sinai-A, which demonstrate better reaction rates and higher capacity than ilmenite. Kryvbas’ fast reaction rate is reflected in the very fine microstructure found after the cycle test, but this increased porosity and fine-structure gives weaker material in the long run. The Sinai-A ore is expected to release oxygen more easily due to its Mn content and a higher degree of gas conversion should be achieved with less oxygen demand. The mixed phases found in this ore are less porous than the Mn and Fe rich phases and might therefore have a longer expected life time. In agreement with literature This study was performed as part of the Mineral SCOUT project “Minerals for Sustainable cost and energy efficient chemical looping combustion technology”, the grant application no. 230478 funded by the FENCO-Net. Authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Ewelina Ksepko from Institute for Chemical Processing of Coal (ICHPW, Poland) for providing the Kryvbas mineral, Mr. Alaa Murad (SINTEF, Norway) and Mr. Ibrahim Ahmed Ibrahim (El-Waleed, Egypt) for providing the SINAI mineral, Dr. Xing Wen (SINTEF, Norway) for providing the Guizhou mineral, and Mr. Kai.Holthe-Seim (Kronos (Titania As), Norway) for providing the ilmenite mineral used in this study.