The corrosive tendency of desalinated water is commonly controlled by dosing acid to water flowing through a packed bed of limestone as to make it slightly supersaturated with respect to calcium carbonate. Acidification is achieved by dosage of either carbonic acid or sulfuric acid. Design models for re-mineralization in packed bed contactors are well established. Reduction of the carbon dioxide consumption required for re-mineralization, may be achieved by partial replacement with sulfuric acid, while maintaining the regulation stipulating a ratio of 1.3 to 2.0 between the equivalent alkalinity and calcium concentrations. The objective of this work was to extend the established kinetic model based on a single acid dissolution to the case of dissolution by a mixture of carbon dioxide and sulfuric acid. The derived model predicts the molar ratio of bicarbonate to calcium, in the product water, as a function of the molar ratio between the two acids. Experimental and predicted dissolution profiles are shown to be in very good agreement.In re-mineralization process bicarbonate alkalinity and calcium hardness are added to desalinated water. Re-mineralization processes are of three types: direct dosage of chemicals containing calcium, mixing desalinated water with fresh water sources and dissolution of calcium minerals. The main advantages of direct chemical dosage are simplicity, low capital cost, small footprint and flexibility over a wide range of water qualities. The drawbacks are high operational costs and enrichment of the desalinated water with unwanted ions. Mixing desalinated water with a fresh water source is considered cost effective. This practice is acceptable only when the source water is of high quality and is pretreated for both microbial and chemical concerns. The blend must meet all applicable quality standards [ The most commonly used re-mineralization process consists of dissolution of calcium carbonate species is by flow of acidified desalinated water through a packed bed of millimeters size limestone grains. The limestone used for re-mineralization is almost pure calcite. Acidification is achieved by dosing of either carbon dioxide (CO The use of sulfuric acid provides higher dissolution rates than with carbon dioxide, enabling smaller footprint of the limestone contactor. This advantage is not realized because the overall reaction between limestone and sulfuric acid yields a lower ratio of calcium to bicarbonate than specified in both the Israeli and Cyprus post-treatment regulations. These regulations require calcium ion content between 80 and 120 mg/L as CaCO Reliable models for design of packed bed limestone contactors are described in publications authored by Yamauchi et al. [ The objective of this work was to extend the kinetic dissolution model developed by Yamauchi et al. and Letterman et al. to a mixture of CO Dissolution of calcite pellets in a packed bed was shown by Yamauchi et al. [ Integration of Eq. Hence, the variation in concentrations of all species is related by: When an acid such as H The only difference is in the equilibrium concentration of calcium in the presence of different acids. Equilibrium conditions depend on the flow velocity and initial water characteristics (pH, acid content, calcium, alkalinity, total dissolved solids, and temperature). The equilibrium concentrations for CO The equilibrium concentrations for H The full derivations of the above Eqs. are presented elsewhere [ The overall dissolution reaction of calcite using both CO According to Markham and Kobe [ As in the case applying each acid alone, the equilibrium calcium and bicarbonate concentrations, obtained from a given combined initial acid concentrations of [CO The total carbon is given by: Converting the total carbon balance to calcium and sulfate results show that: Substituting the carbonates to calcium gives the relation between [ A second relation between [ A schematics of the experimental system is displayed in The limestone dissolution path, along the packed bed, was followed by measuring the calcium, alkalinity, pH, and temperature. Calcium was determined using EDTA titrimetric method (Standard Methods 2340C). Total alkalinity was measured using ASTM D1067 method. The reliability of the kinetic model described by Eq. Initially, the mass transfer coefficients of the dissolved ions, generated from each acid, was determined experimentally at various concentrations of the acid. As shown in The good fit between experimental and calculated (Eq. Once the acids were mixed, the MTC was determined as before ( To predict the concentration profiles when both acids were dosed, the first step was to calculate the concentrations of calcium and bicarbonate (Eq. Next, the concentrations of the calcium and bicarbonate were calculated with the MTC of CO Once the [ In the second scenario, [ As seen in With increasing acid concentrations, higher concentrations of dissolved calcium and bicarbonate ions are obtained ( Experimental data confirm the reliability of the derived kinetic model for dosing a mixture of carbon dioxide and sulfuric acid to desalinated water flowing through a packed bed of limestone. The feasibility of gaining the economic benefits rendered by partial replacement of CO