The aim of this work is to evaluate the effects of several factors that affect the selective sorting of fine particles in a two-rotating-disks-type tribo-aero-electrostatic separator. The experiments are carried out on a synthetic mixture composed of 50% Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS) and 50% Polystyrene (PS) particles of size 500 to 1000 μm. The six factors under study are: the high voltage, the rotation speed of the disks, the duration of the tribo-charging process, the duration of the separation, the fluidisation air flow rate, and the initial mass of the granular mixture to be processed. The performance of the separator is evaluated by setting up a measurement system that enables the continuous and simultaneous recording of the charges and the masses of the separated products. The conclusions of this study will serve at the optimum design of an industrial electrostatic separator for the recycling of micronized plastics from waste electric and electronic equipment.Numerous research studies have been made on the electrostatic separation of granular insulating materials The classic electrostatic separation technologies for granular mixtures of plastic wastes involve the pre-charging of the product using a tribo-charging device, such as a fluidized bed, a rotating drum, a cyclone, a ventilator, or a vibratory feeder Many works have been published on the optimization of such tribo-electrostatic separation technologies. The researches carried out in several American, Japanese, European, Canadian and Algerian laboratories, have largely proved the efficiency of tribo-electrostatic separators in the selective sorting of mm-size granules They have also pointed out the problems that still have to be solved prior to industrial application of the electrostatic separation of finely-grinded wastes. The main difficulty is to control the trajectories of the particles, which are strongly affected by the aerodynamic forces The aim of this paper is to evaluate the effects of several factors that affect the selective sorting of fine particles in a two-rotating-disks-type tribo-aero-electrostatic separator. The performances of this separator are evaluated by setting up measurement systems that enable the simultaneous recording of the charges and masses of separated products. The novel two-rotating-disks-type tribo-aero-electrostatic separator ( Up to 750 g of micronized materials can be introduced in the fluidized bed generated inside the separation chamber of dimensions 160 × 160 × 240 mm, made of transparent PMMA walls ( The tribo-electrisation of the materials inside a fluidized bed is due to the multiple particle-to-particle and particle–wall collisions. The electric field is generated between two rotating disk electrodes (stainless steel; diameter: 220 mm; thickness: 2 mm) that are distanced at a variable interval ranging from 40 to 120 mm. The disks are connected to reversible (positive or negative) high voltage power supplies, and entrained at variable speed by electric motors. The products are recovered in two collecting boxes. For each experiment, a sample containing 100 g of Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS) and 100 g of Polystyrene (PS) is used. The average diameter of the particles of the mixture ranged between 500 μm and 1000 μm ( The process is multifactorial, and the experimental study was carried out by considering all possible factors: the high voltage The equipment used in the laboratory consisted of two electronic balances with the upper limit 2 kg, with a resolution of 0.1 g, 2 F cages connected with two electrometers Keithley 6514, a data acquisition card GPIB, and the software LabVIEW 6. Each experiment involved the following steps: Introduce the ABS/PS mixture in the separation chamber, Switch on the measuring devices: the electronic scales and the electrometers to which are connected the Faraday cages Switch on the electrical equipment: the air blower, the electric motors, and the high voltage power supplies. Start the data acquisition software LabVIEW 6. Turn off the electrical equipment. Stop the data acquisition. Clean the electrostatic separator. A set of six experiments is performed, at a constant distance between the disks electrodes: 120 mm ( A first experiment is performed for a duration of The duration of the second experiment is The effect of the duration of the tribo-charging process In the fourth experiment, the fluidisation air flow rate The control variable under investigation in the fifth experiment is the rotation speed of the disks Finally, in the sixth experiment, the high voltage The results of the first set of experiments are given in The larger the initial mass in the fluidized bed, the larger are also the quantities of products collected in a unit of time ( The variation of mass, charge and charge/mass ratio is slightly different for the PS product collected during the tribo-aero-electrostatic separation process of the 200 g, 300 g and 400 g samples of the granular mixtures under study ( The duration of the pre-charging has little effect on the outcome of the separation ( The fluidisation air flow rate drastically influences the conditions of particle charging and hence the rate at which the products are separated ( The rotational speed of the disk electrodes does not significantly influences the outcome of the separation ( As expected, the separation is faster at higher levels of the voltages applied to the electrodes ( The experiments reported in this paper demonstrate that disk-type tribo-aero-electrostatic separator presented in this paper may be an effective solution for the recycling of micronized plastics mixtures, obtained from WEEE. The duration of the pre-charging and – beyond a certain threshold – the rotational speed of the disk electrodes, do not affect the outcome of the separation. The factors that have a significant effect on the separation process are: the applied high-voltage, the fluidisation air flow rate, and the mass of the product to be separated. Further research work will focus on process optimization and its possible applications in food industry. This work was partly supported by a grant-in-aid of the