Extraction of minerals from fresh and dried macroalgae kelp (Saccharina japonica) was investigated to get better biomass resource for biorefinery. At a solid to liquid ratio of 1:6 (w/v), 2h extraction, and 30°C, inorganic extraction efficiency (Einorg
                     ) and total efficiency (Etot
                     ) using water were respectively 76.88 and 50.82% for fresh biomass while those of dried biomass were 72.99 and 65.79%. For fresh biomass extraction using ethanol, Einorg
                      (74.19%) and Etot
                      (42.21%) were much higher than for dried biomass with 7.29% Einorg
                      and 1.21% Etot
                     . With 10% ethanol, Einorg
                      were similar for both materials, however, higher ratio of inorganic to organic extraction efficiency (rE
                     ) (5.48) were obtained for fresh biomass compared to lower rE
                      (2.02) for dried biomass. The rE
                      for fresh biomass was higher (13.80) than that for dried biomass (1.32) using water at 1:4 solid to liquid ratio, suggesting that fresh kelp is better feedstock for bioenergy production.Due to the scarcity of resources and energy depletion, there is the need to look out for possible alternative feedstocks for bioproducts and energy production Since macroalgae uptake and accumulate several elements found in seawater over their whole body, they tend to have relatively higher mineral contents as compared to land based biomass or feedstocks Many products with functional properties including polysaccharides, proteins, poly unsaturated fatty acids, pigments, polyphenols, minerals, plant growth hormones, and others have been extracted from macroalgae over the past decades Some studies have shown that the presence of higher inorganic metal content of macroalgae has been found to produce a significant catalytic effect on pyrolysis which in turn affects the product yield and bio-oil properties Removal of such inorganics from macroalgae would enhance the process of the conversion of such biomass into bioenergy whiles the recovered inorganics may be used as a valuable bioproducts or chemical. It is therefore important to understand which extraction conditions and the state of raw seaweed, either fresh or dried, are better for the removal of inorganics to make substrates more suitable for bioenergy production. A broad spectrum of solid-liquid extraction techniques including Soxhlet extraction, maceration, percolation, turbo-extraction (high-speed mixing), sonication, supercritical fluid extraction, microwave-assisted extraction, and pressurized solvent extraction could be used. However, some of the solid-liquid extraction methods are often time-consuming and employ relatively large quantities of polluting solvents According to our knowledge, no study has reported on or compared the inorganic minerals recovery from fresh and dried macroalgae feedstocks. The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of extraction conditions including solid to liquid ratio, temperature, and time as well as solvent and additive concentrations on the inorganic and organic minerals extraction efficiency from fresh and dried alga EtOH (Ethanol, 98%) and sodium chloride (99.5%) were purchased from Samchun Pure Chemicals Co. (Pyeongtaek, South Korea) whilst glacial AA (acetic acid, 99.5%) was purchased from J.T. Baker (Phillipsburg, USA). Fresh seaweed, Blades of fresh Extraction of resources from FFS and DFS materials was achieved using a batch system of extraction. Supplementary Fig. S1 shows the block flow diagram of the entire extraction process. Five grams of FFS or DFS materials were weighed into separate 75 To investigate the effect of agitation time for extraction, the following time intervals were set; 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 6 and 12 The elemental compositions of CHONS of FFS, FR, DFS, and DR were analyzed using Elemental analyzer (Model EA1108, Fisons, Italy). The percentage of oxygen was calculated from the result of the summation of percentages of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and sulfur, subtracted from 100 according to ASTM D3176 The extraction efficiency ( The ratio of the extraction efficiency of inorganic materials to that of organic materials after extraction ( Each treatment during extraction was replicated three times. The results were expressed as the mean value A general study conducted on the extraction showed that the extraction efficiency for FFS-water extraction increased from time 0 With FFS-EtOH extraction, an optimum yield occurred at 0.5 Comparing the ash amount in the remaining residues after extraction as shown in It was observed that excessive dehydration of water (which forms about 90% of the wet mass of seaweed) by EtOH was the reason for the mineral extraction during the FFS-EtOH extraction. The dehydration process caused denaturation of the cell wall, thus they were raptured and the remaining unextracted crystals in the FR after extraction formed lumps as revealed by the SEM image in The drying of During the water extraction of FFS, the In the case of DFS, the  The entire Considering the formation of gel film that continually blocked the filter membrane when water was used as a solvent and also the cost of EtOH for extraction, an EtOH-water mixture was investigated for extraction. From Although the When AA was added, the extraction efficiency increased significantly from 0 to 2% AA during the FFS-extraction. The An optimum The ratio ( For FFS-EtOH extraction, the Previous investigations have shown that the presence of higher inorganic compounds mostly in marine biomass sources often has the tendency to inhibit the successful conversion of such resources into bioenergy and other bioproducts The overall assessment of mineral extraction from fresh and dried kelp seaweed biomass based on the efficiency of recovery of inorganic minerals is summarized in Though for the FFS–extraction, 2% AA additive concentration resulted in the highest Furthermore, as compared to FFS, the drying of algal biomass is very energy intensive. Typically, a study by Milledge and Heaven Minerals extraction from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: