J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2004;13:366-8 The reported incidence of olecranon nonunion varies from 1% to 7%. Predisposing factors include comminution, inadequate fixation, distraction, infection, soft-tissue interposition, and premature mobilization. Although different methods of treating olecranon nonunion have been described, they all require the provision of adequate rigid internal fixation. We describe a new method that uses a locked intramedullary nail and review the literature with regard to other treatment options. A 30-year-old right hand–dominant woman was involved in a severe motor vehicle accident in 1990, while working as a secretary in Oman. She sustained a comminuted fracture of the left acetabulum, a compound fracture of the left patella, and a fracture-dislocation of the left elbow. The elbow fracture was treated with tension-band wiring and bone grafting. Six weeks later, the wound began draining. The metal fixation was removed and further surgery with bone grafting was performed 10 weeks after the original injury ( In September 1990 the patient was noted to have an infected olecranon nonunion with two draining sinuses and a range of motion of only 35°. Examination of the shoulder, wrist, and hand was normal. All metal was removed, and Unfortunately, pain and limited function persisted, and further surgery with plating and bone grafting was performed in 1998. The olecranon once more failed to unite with the proximal screws, becoming loose ( The surgical technique involved exposing the proximal ulna and olecranon through the previous scar. The olecranon nonunion was identified, and the fibrous tissue at the fracture site was excised by coring out by use of the precision bone graft equipment. A core of bone one size larger was taken from the iliac crest and packed into the nonunion site. A modified fibular rod was inserted into the proximal olecranon, through the bone graft, and into the ulna. The fibular rod had a jig for the locking screws, and this was used to achieve proximal and distal locking on both sides of the nonunion site. The wound was closed with absorbable sutures. Four months postoperatively, the elbow was pain-free with a range of motion of 40° to 120°. This was maintained at 12 and 18 months with radiologic evidence of bony union ( Although a rare complication, olecranon nonunion typically causes pain and functional disability and can be a challenging problem to treat. If the proximal fragment comprises less than 50% of the olecranon surface, excising the fragment and reattaching the triceps tendon to the remaining olecranon can provide good function and stability. Simple tension-band wiring can be effective and provides dynamic compression. In the case presented, several traditional methods of treating olecranon nonunion had been unsuccessful, and the patient had lived for 10 years with pain, weakness, and disability of the left elbow. Bone grafting and fixation with a locked intramedullary nail resulted in bony union. Although accepted as a treatment option for nonunion of other long bones, the use of a locked intramedullary nail for olecranon nonunion has not been previously described. We believe it may be a useful addition to the surgical armamentarium in the management of this challenging complication.