Vitamin K is a multi-functional nutrient and various tissues modify their function in response to vitamin K bioavailability mainly through post-translational modification of vitamin K-dependent (VKD) proteins. In this review, we discuss five clinical topics of vitamin K nutrition and vitamin K-dependent Gla-containing proteins. Although the physiological roles of these VKD proteins need further elucidation, study of these proteins may open new avenues for therapy in the clinical field. The topics discussed in the review are focused on des-gamma-carboxyprothrombin (DCP) in relation to the pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma, osteocalcin (OC) and undercarboxylated OC (ucOC) in relation to bone fractures and insulin sensitivity, matrix Gla protein (MGP) in relation to vascular calcification, and growth arrest-specific protein-6 (Gas6) in relation to inflammation and platelet aggregation. Finally, interaction among vitamins were discussed.Dietary intake of vitamin K Supplementation of vitamin K Aging Bone turnover Changes in enzymatic activities including gene polymorphisms of VKORC1 and GGCX Warfarin use Vitamin K is a vitamin known to activate not only blood coagulation factors, but also tissue-specific vitamin K-dependent (VKD) proteins through post-translational modification of γ carboxylation, which converts Glu residues to Gla. Insufficient γ carboxylated VKD proteins are tissue-specific sensitive markers for vitamin K insufficiency. Vitamin K actions are also accomplished via the binding to the nuclear receptor, SXR. However, until now, useful markers for vitamin K function through nuclear receptors have not been available in clinical settings. Therefore, vitamin K functions are evaluated by the measurements of tissue-specific VKD proteins in human studies. One of the typical VKD proteins, osteocalcin (OC), is considered to be a bone-specific protein and the function of OC was believed to be protein accretion, which may stabilize bone hydroxyapatite. The role of OC has been expanded and it has been shown to be a bone-derived hormone, which regulates energy expenditure. Breakthroughs regarding the function of vitamin K-dependent proteins in immunology, inflammation and atherosclerosis have now been achieved. As a result, several VKD proteins have been independently well characterized. However, there is a lack of knowledge regarding common features of VKD proteins and of vitamin K nutrition. In this review, the main functions of each vitamin K-dependent protein are summarized and possible new biological actions are discussed. Genetic absence or gene mutations of VKD proteins, dietary vitamin K inadequacy, and vitamin K deficiency induced by chronic anti-coagulant therapy are all linked to age-associated conditions. For example, bone fragility after menopause is linked to OC, arterial calcification connected to cardiovascular disease involves matrix Gla protein (MGP)  Hepatic VKD proteins are essential for survival because bleeding is an immediate threat. Vitamin K preferentially accumulates in the liver and subsequently vitamin K is transported to extra-hepatic tissues Using such sensitive markers in a depletion-repletion study, Booth et al. Des-γ-carboxyprothrombin (DCP) is known as a marker of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) Since DCP is associated with HCC growth and metastasis, it is reasonable to expect that vitamin K supplementation may have a beneficial effect on HCC. Another possible role of vitamin K in suppression of HCC has been reported. Overexpression of SXR in vitamin K In fact, an open label randomized study regarding vitamin K In conclusion, vitamin K deficiency or insufficiency induces production of DCP in patients with HCC and this biomarker is useful to monitor HCC growth and metastasis. However, vitamin K nutrition in the assessment of blood levels of DCP will be required. Although the intervention of vitamin K failed to show beneficial effects in patients with HCC, further clarification of the role of vitamin K on the progression of HCC may be necessary. OC is a bone-specific vitamin K-dependent protein and is synthesized by osteoblasts during the latter phase of bone calcification Since serum levels of vitamin K A second possible explanation is the change in the enzymatic activity of γ–carboxylase as age advances. The metabolic vitamin K cycle involves VKORC1 and GGCX. These two key enzymes in the vitamin K cycle are critically responsible for the biological activity of vitamin K. Thus, it is possible that aging might influence enzymatic activities. However, the mechanistic details that may be involved in aging have not yet been elucidated. These two key enzymes are known to have functionally relevant gene polymorphisms and the efficiency of the vitamin K cycle depends on these gene polymorphisms. Therefore, it can be hypothesized that functionally relevant polymorphisms of these enzymes modulate the inverse relationship between dietary vitamin K intake and serum ucOC γ-carboxylated Gla residues are responsible for the specific affinity of OC to the hydroxyapatite (HAP) molecule In 1985, Hart et al. first reported low serum vitamin K Recently, it has been reported that vitamin K binds to the xenobiotic nuclear receptor (SXR/PXR) leading to enhanced expression of several components of the bone matrix There are several reports regarding vitamin K intervention trials on bone markers, bone mineral density (BMD) and fractures.  The reported data are also inconsistent in regard to the effect of vitamin K on bone fractures, as shown in It has been reported that vitamin K Vitamin K intake has large demographic differences Since many epidemiological studies indicated that vitamin K deficiency in bone was connected to the incidence of bone fracture in humans, it is reasonable to expect that patients treated with warfarin might have a higher susceptibility to bone fractures. However, divergent results have been reported regarding warfarin use and low BMD or fracture risk. Binkley et al. reported long-term warfarin treatment altered neither serum bone turnover markers, urinary excretion of calcium nor BMD despite an increase in ucOC in male rhesus monkeys Ducy et al. generated OC Recombinant ucOC from bacteria was used to evaluate the effects of ucOC on islet β-cell and adipocyte gene expression. Physiological concentration of ucOC (picomolar) increased expression of insulin genes and β-cell proliferation, whereas nanomolar amounts of ucOC induced adiponectin expression, an adipokine that enhances insulin sensitivity, and genes regulating energy expenditure in white and brown adipocytes, respectively In 1999, Sakamoto et al. reported that a low vitamin K diet induced glucose intolerance in rats In a rodent model, it has been clearly shown there is a close relationship between OC or vitamin K levels and glucose and fat metabolism. In humans, a similar relationship has been partly demonstrated. In In many cross-sectional studies, OC was clearly correlated with glycemic control or the size of body fat mass. If the OC de-carboxylation process is responsible for improvement of glucose intolerance or of fat mass in humans, vitamin K treatment or inhibition of de-carboxylation of OC may have negative effects on glucose or fat metabolism. In the intervention studies listed in In addition to these intervention studies, the effects of warfarin treatment on glucose metabolism should also be investigated. Since warfarin does not affect bone turnover, warfarin effects are probably limited to the carboxylation process in OC. If the rodent model is applicable to humans, it is expected that warfarin treatment may have a beneficial effect on glucose metabolism because warfarin treatment markedly increases serum ucOC. However, until now, there is no available data investigating the beneficial effects of warfarin on glucose metabolism. In the treatment of osteoporosis, Schafer et al. In summary, the relationship between ucOC and glucose or fat metabolism in humans is fundamentally the same as rodents. However, the molecular specificity may be different between rodents and humans because both tOC and ucOC are associated with glucose and fat metabolism in humans, while ucOC was the candidate molecule in rodents. Although vitamin K administration reduced ucOC, the increase in cOC or tOC A significant relationship between undercarboxylated VKDs and tissue calcification has been observed in MGP knockout mice Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) in humans is defined as a dystrophic and progressive mineralization of elastic fibers in cutaneous, ocular and vascular tissues. This autosomal recessive multisystem disorder derives from a loss-of-function mutation in the human ABCC6 (the large ATP-binding cassette (ABC) gene subfamily C6) gene. This mutation was found by positional cloning analysis Vascular calcification is commonly observed in elderly people and in patients with chronic hemodialysis, and morbidity is associated with vascular accident through atherosclerosis. Although the complete pathogenesis of vascular calcification is not yet understood, multifactorial processes are certainly involved in mineral apposition. Currently, the efficacy of compounds such as bisphosphonates, phosphate binders, selective vitamin D receptor activators or calcium sensing receptor modulators Gas6 is the newest member of the family of vitamin K-dependent proteins Gas6 is a growth-potentiating factor of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and one of the Gas6 receptors, Axl, was cloned from rat carotid artery after mechanical damage. Both Gas6 and Axl increased their expression in the damaged vessels In general, vitamin K-dependent proteins such as MGP and Gas6 are essential for the prevention of vascular calcification through γ-carboxylation of these molecules. Gas6 may enhance platelet aggregation in vessels leading to vascular embolism. Warfarin is used to prevent embolism, although it carries a greater risk of bleeding, fracture and vascular calcification through inhibition of activation of prothrombin, OC, MGP and Gas6, respectively. Warfarin inhibition of carboxylation of the Gas6 molecule may reduce hyper-aggregation of platelets. Newly developed anti-coagulant drugs, such as dabigatran, a direct thrombin inhibitor, and rivaroxaban, a direct factor-Xa inhibitor, offer alternative treatments to warfarin Gas6 was originally found in growth-arrested fibroblasts suggesting a role in protection from apoptosis. Gas6 expression is observed in many types of cells such as immune cells, endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, and adipocytes According to the Framingham Offspring Cohort study, pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6, intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), and tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (TNFR2) were negatively correlated with serum levels of vitamin K The roles of vitamin K and/or VKD proteins on vascular health and inflammation need further clarification. One possible explanation for these controversies may depend on the lack of information on vitamin K sufficiency and Gas6 measurements. A strong relationship between the K vitamins and sphingolipids in the brain was recognized 40 years ago. Among the K vitamins, MK-4 was identified as the principal vitamin K in brain. Certain sphingolipids in the brain are highly correlated with MK-4 content suggesting that MK-4 plays an important role on sphingolipids construction. A link between sphingolipid metabolism and Alzheimer's disease Vitamins D and K are thought to be highly synergistic as they both affect production and activation of osteocalcin molecule in bone. Namely, vitamin D enhances gene expression of osteocalcin Since vitamin K is considered to be a pleiotropic nutrient, the functions of various tissues and systems are modified by changes in vitamin K bioavailability. In this review, we indicated five clinical topics, which need further elucidation, but may open new therapeutic avenues in the clinical field: DCP (PIVKA II) is associated with the progression and metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and the measurement of DCP is useful to monitor the recurrence of HCC. Although vitamin K administration failed to inhibit the recurrence of HCC, the role of vitamin K nutrition on the occurrence of HCC has not yet been fully investigated. OC or ucOC are markers for bone formation and vitamin K insufficiency in bone, respectively. Poor vitamin K nutrition undoubtedly deteriorates bone health. Vitamin K administration seemed to prevent incident fractures, but the data are still insufficient to prove it. Vitamin K action through SXR nuclear receptor activation needs more clarification in patients. OC and ucOC are both related to insulin secretion and sensitivity as well as secretion of fat cell cytokines in humans and rodents. Although the molecular specificity between humans (tOC) and rodents (ucOC) was different, the loop between the bone, pancreas, and fat tissue may be of central interest in the near future. The biological effects of OC may extend not only to bone, but also to energy expenditure. MGP is a potent inhibitor of vascular calcification. The measurement of ucMGP is useful as a surrogate marker for vascular calcification. Gas6, and its receptor complex, may be a marker for vascular occlusion in the heart and central nervous system. Whether vitamin K administration can prevent vascular disease or not is still under investigation. A larger scale prospective study will be required to reach a definitive conclusion. The role of ucGas6 is still completely unknown. Numerous studies have shown that warfarin can prevent embolism. However, the studies indicated that warfarin treatment was associated with an increased risk of vascular calcification, fractures and bleeding. Recent development of anti-coagulants such as dabigatran or rivaroxaban has shown that they prevent embolism. A comparative study between warfarin and dabigatran clearly showed the benefits of dabigatran in terms of prevention of stroke and drug-induced bleeding. Gas6, one of the VKD proteins, plays a role in inflammation, homeostasis of cultured cells, vascular diseases such as thromboembolic disease, cancer growth and signal transduction in the brain. However, there have been no tools to investigate the direct relationship between vitamin K nutrition and the function of Gas6 because we could not measure ucGas6. Both vitamin K and D play an important role on bone mineralization and vascular calcification. It may be important to keep sufficient levels of these two vitamins regarding bone and vascular health. Masataka Shiraki received an honorarium for a lecture from Eisai Pharmaceutical Co., which is a vitamin K vendor.