In this study, the nanosized arsenic sulphide As4S4 particles have been prepared by mechanical activation in a planetary mill. The bulk and surface properties of the milled particles were characterized by XRD and XPS methods as well as by surface area and particle size distribution measurements. For assessment of arsenic sulphide biological activity, the viability tests of multiple myeloma cancer cells have been applied. The obtained results show the arsenic sulphide nanoparticles properly milled and modified by mechanical activation can be valuated as a potential drug for cancer treatment.Over the years, arsenic compounds have found application in the manufacture of cosmetics, foods, glass, insecticides, pigments, pyrotechnics, metallurgy as well as in medicine In 1878, the anticancer activity of arsenic compounds was reported from Boston hospital where the effect of Fowler´s solution (1% As Mechanochemistry concerns with a broad spectrum of solids having applications in chemistry, agriculture, minerals engineering and materials science It is aim of this paper to examine the changes in solid state properties and anticancer effect of As The investigation was carried out with arsenic sulphide sample (98% As In order to obtain the pure arsenic sulphide the washing procedure according to The high-energy milling of arsenic sulphide samples was performed in a The XRD measurements were performed by employing an X-ray diffractometer Rigaku Miniflex (Rigaku, Japan). The following measuring conditions were applied: 2Θ range 0–40°, Co radiation, scan speed: 2° 2 theta/min, scan step 0.2 theta 2 theta. The specific surface area was determined by the low temperature nitrogen adsorption method in a Gemini 2360 sorption apparatus (Micromeritics, USA). The particle size distribution was measured by the method of photon cross correlation spectroscopy on particle sizer Nanophox (Sympatec, Germany). The XPS spectra were collected using a Suspensions of the arsenic sulphide nanoparticles for testing their biological activity have been prepared by filtration of wet milled samples through 0.22 The comminution of As The size distribution of arsenic sulphide nanoparticles is given in  Milled arsenic sulphide was acid washed several times to remove soluble arsenic oxide and zinc compounds on its surface (spectra with number 3). The procedure of washing is especially important for anticancer effect evaluation of the purified arsenic sulphide in order to discriminate between sulphide and oxide species. There are undoubtedly the relatively highest CPS values for As3d peak at binding energy 40.8  In the present study cytotoxic effect of arsenic sulphide nanoparticles is demonstrated. For evaluation of arsenic sulphide activity two multiple myeloma cell lines, OPM 1 and RPMI-LR5, were selected (multiple myeloma is a cancer of plasma cells which are an important part of the immune system that produce antibodies to help fight inflection and disease). The analysis of multiple myeloma cell survival after treatment with serial dilutions of arsenic sulphide samples allowed to determine the IC There is a general trend in decrease of IC Study of transmembrane mitochondrial potential MTP of both types of multiple myeloma cells has been performed. Stable values of MTP for RPMI-LR5 cells treated for 6 hours with equimolar concentration of arsenic sulphide samples was observed ( The observed biological activity of arsenic sulphide As In cancer therapy various tumors have to be eliminated. Solid tumors have high permeability to nanoparticles due to the increase of capillary pore size. These can range from 100 to 800 Changes in the specific surface area (0.21–7.7 The work was supported by the