The kinetics of ilmenite dissolution in hydrochloric acid is investigated with data previously published in literature. Based on this, a leaching mechanism is proposed. The factors that influence changes in the rate-controlling step as leaching progresses are also explained. Finally, the proposed leaching mechanism is used to explain the results of some experiments.The aim of this paper is to investigate the kinetics of ilmenite dissolution in hydrochloric acid. This is done through a literature study that allows the proposal of a mechanism for ilmenite leaching. The proposed mechanism is used to explain the results of certain experiments. The ilmenite leaching reaction can be described by the following chemical reaction:   Both The rate of ilmenite dissolution increases rapidly as the leach temperature rises. This was found by both  The initial acid-to-ilmenite mole ratio seems to influence whether both iron and titanium goes into solution or whether only iron goes into solution. In the experiments conducted by The addition of certain additives to the leach solution can either increase or decrease the rate of ilmenite dissolution. The information presented in the previous section suggests that under certain conditions, the rate of the dissolution of ilmenite could be chemically controlled. Under other conditions, it could be controlled by the diffusion of the reacting species and the resulting products to or away from the reaction interface or it can be controlled by the diffusion of these species through a product layer on the surface of the particles. A mechanism for ilmenite leaching in hydrochloric acid will now be proposed that will clarify under what conditions each of these rate-determining steps operate. Initially, as predicted by the chemical reaction equation, when ilmenite comes into contact with the hydrochloric acid leach solution, both iron and titanium go into solution. At this point, the rate is controlled by the rate of the chemical reaction. The next step in the chain of events will be determined by the titanium species that form in solution. Ti(IV) polymerises in hydrochloric acid solutions. The next critical event that influences the rate of the reaction is the eventual formation of the solid species TiOCl Any additives that are added to the leach solution can influence the titanium species in solution and consequently the rate-determining step. By stabilising soluble species of iron and titanium, the rate of dissolution can be maintained. On the other hand, the rate of dissolution can decrease significantly if the additives promote the formation of solid species of iron and titanium that precipitate from solution to form a product layer on the surfaces of the particles. The final event that can influence the leach reaction is a significant reduction in the hydrogen ion concentration. This will occur when a low initial acid-to-ilmenite mole ratio is used in a batch leach test. The decrease in acid concentration and the resultant rise in pH can lead to the formation of a TiO Selected experiments were conducted to evaluate the proposed mechanism. A waste stream, containing mainly ilmenite that is produced during the production of crude ilmenite for smelting was used for the purpose of the investigation. The chemical composition of the material is presented in The leach experiments were conducted in a 1-L batch fluidised leach column, fitted with a reflux condenser. The premixed acid solution (6 M HCl, unless stated otherwise) was introduced into the reactor and heated up to the required temperature with a heating mantle. The ilmenite sample was then introduced. This was taken as the start of the experiment. Solution samples were taken at regular intervals for analysis. After 8 h, the experiment was ended and the leach residue was separated from the spent liquor through filtration and washed until the pH of the wash solution was neutral. The residue was then split into two. One part was analysed by ICP to determine the chemical composition, and the other was analysed with a Malvern Mastersizer to determine its particle size distribution.  This result fits in with the proposed mechanism as higher initial acid-to-ilmenite mole ratios will delay the polymerisation of titanium and this will allow much more titanium to dissolve from the ilmenite. The formation of a product layer is also enhanced when low initial acid-to-ilmenite mole ratios are used; consequently, very little titanium dissolved when a ratio of 4:1 was used.  This result also supports the proposed mechanism. At low initial acid-to-ilmenite mole ratios, the Ti(IV) rapidly polymerises and precipitates inside the pores of the particles. This allows the particles to retain their shape and prevents the formation of TiOCl The rate-determining step during the dissolution of ilmenite is dependent on the titanium species in solution. This is regulated by the leach conditions at any point in time. The changes in the rate-controlling step can be predicted by tracking the changes in leach conditions as the leach reaction progresses. The proposed mechanism could explain the reported experimental results as well as previously published results by other authors.