The internal cycles of carbon, silica, nitrogen, and phosphorus in the South and North Basins of Lake Baikal were quantified in the frame of a multidisciplinary collaboration. Fluxes of particulate organic matter from the epilimnion to the deep water were quantified with integrating sediment traps deployed at 200- to 250-m water depth and compared with fluxes measured in near-bottom traps to reveal mineralization in the water column. Sedimentation rates were determined with dated sediment cores to calculate mass accumulation rates of elements in the sediment. Advective and turbulent transport of dissolved nutrients in the water column was based on a set of monitoring data, which included temperature and current data, as well as hydrochemical data of the water column. Diffusive fluxes from the sediment to the overlying water column were determined by applying different porewater sampling techniques. The combination of these data resulted in consistent internal budgets for carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus in Lake Baikal: the new production in the South Basin was 1730 mmol C m−2 year−1 and the mass accumulation rate in the sediment 220 mmol C m−2 year−1, whereas in the more secluded North Basin, new production was only 1220 mmol C m−2 year−1 and mass accumulation rate 125 mmol C m−2 year−1. Fluxes of particle-bound nitrogen, phosphorus, and biogenic silica were by about 30% smaller in the North Basin than in the South Basin. Export fluxes of nitrogen from the surface zone to the deep water were 150 mmol N and 100 mmol N m−2 year−1. Denitrification rates in the sediment were estimated from mass-loss calculation to 38 and 53 mmol N m−2 year−1 for the South and North Basin, respectively, corresponding to 25% and 52% of the total nitrogen input to the hypolimnion. Nitrogen (19 and 13 mmol m−2 year−1) was finally buried in the sediments of the South and North Basins; 10.1 and 3.5 mmol P m−2 year−1, and 1830 and 1400 mmol Si m−2 year−1 were transferred to the deep water in the South and North Basin where 28% and 70% P, and 64% and 54% Si were retained in the sediments. A diatom bloom occurred during our sampling period of 2 years, which usually occurs only every 3 to 5 years. Accordingly, Si flux data from sediment traps were increased by an estimated 50% compared with the long-term average illustrating the necessity of several years of field measurements to compensate for the natural dynamics of Lake Baikal.Lake Baikal is one of the world's great ancient lakes and home to a unique variety of more than 1000 endemic species ranging from diatoms, sponges to salmonid fish, and the Baikal freshwater seal ( The age of Lake Baikal is estimated to be between 30 to 40 million years, the surface area is 31,500 km In recent years, different studies have been published on the water budget, distribution of major elements, characterization of suspended particulate matter, and sediments of Lake Baikal. Partly published in Russian, these papers were reviewed by Individual flux rate estimates are based on: (a) sediment trap data from 200- to 250-m depth and the lake bottom; (b) bulk sediment composition of radiometric-dated sediment cores; (c) estimates on advective and turbulent water exchange between surface and deep water, based on chemical profiles of the water column, water current, and temperature data; (d) sediment porewater profiles of nitrate, ammonium, phosphate, and silica; and (e) the estimation of aerobic mineralization rates of organic carbon in the surface sediments via O Three mooring strings with sediment traps were deployed between 2001 and 2002 ( In the summers of 2001, 2002, and 2003, a number of short cores were withdrawn with a modified gravity corer ( Mass accumulation rates (MAR) for C Porosity ( Two dialysis samplers ( Porewater samples were conserved with 0.2% chloroform and analyzed at EAWAG, Switzerland, for NO The efficient deep-water renewal in Lake Baikal, and with it the transport of dissolved substances between the surface and the deep waters, is due to strong turbulent mixing and the episodic advective transport of surface water to the deep water. These two processes are shortly described below and represented in Vertical diffusivity ( The top 250–300 m of the surface waters of Lake Baikal are convectively mixed twice every year, usually in December/January and in June ( This knowledge about the turbulent and advective transport was used to derive the simple budget presented in Eq. There are two approaches for establishing budgets of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and silica in a deep lake. The first is the application of a one-box model to the lake basin, which results in the assumption of a balance between the external input of an element In the second case, we consider a hypolimnion mass balance in order to establish lake internal element budgets. Observations from sediment traps and sediment cores allow a budget of the particulate matter fluxes, and a two box-model is used as sketched in The two other processes contributing to the fluxes of dissolved components in the hypolimnion are related (i) to the sum of advective and turbulent transport, Thus, it is an independent way of quantifying the degradation of organic carbon, which is indicated by the star (*). We assume total oxic mineralization and Redfield composition for the settling organic material in the water column (O Some of the biogenic material collected in sediment traps is lost during exposition due to dissolution or mineralization. For the sediment traps at 200–250 m depth, this was corrected with the factor Gross sedimentation can be related to the sum of net sedimentation plus diffusion from the porewater to the lake bottom water, leading to a correction factor The probable loss of silica from the sediment traps is due to dissolution of diatom frustules rather than microbial degradation, although certain diatom species are more susceptible to dissolution processes than others (e.g., Fluxes of nutrients and oxygen were calculated from chemical concentration gradients in sediments using data either measured with ion-selective electrodes in sediment cores, or collected with diffusion plates and filtration. As these samples were collected with a minimum of force exerted on the sediment particles, we consider the obtained results to be more reliable than those based on squeezed and centrifuged samples. Concentrations obtained by the latter techniques tended to be higher and, thus, resulted in systematically higher fluxes. This may be an artefact caused by the strong physical perturbation of the sediment. Therefore, data from samples gathered by diffusion plates and filtration are presented separately and in more detail, while all other data are given as mean values with standard deviations in NO NH The diffusive flux of dissolved Si from the surface sediment into the overlaying water column is driven by the concentration gradient of Si across the sediment–water interface. The concentration gradient is maintained through continuous dissolution of siliceous biogenic matter in the surface sediment, which mainly originates from settled diatoms. Fluxes from diffusion plates and porewater filtration ranged from −110 to −347 mmol m For the period between 1994 and 2003, 38 flux rate estimates for phosphate were calculated for various sites of the lake basin ( Average fluxes of O Eq. The calculated turbulent fluxes of O The NO Phosphate gradients reported by The average concentration gradients measured by Four master cores were selected, representative for the Continent Ridge in the North Basin with low sedimentation rates, the small underwater hill Posolskoe High in the vicinity of the Selenga delta, Vydrino Shoulder in the South Basin, and the deepest point in the South Basin ( For the first time, flux rate estimates based on sediment trap measurements are available for Lake Baikal, and results from the North Basin can be compared with results from two sites of the South Basin, the central South Basin mooring, and the Neutrino mooring 3.5 km off shore in the South Basin ( Particle fluxes in Lake Baikal are preferentially governed by settling of particles from the epilimnion into the deep hypolimnion of the lake. No significant difference in the composition of the trap material between upper and lower traps was observed. It consists mainly of diatoms, organic debris, and lithogenic particles. Increased values of particle fluxes in traps above the sediment are due to the existence of a benthic boundary layer (BBL) with enhanced particle concentration and increased turbulence at the sediment–water interface ( The net mass accumulation rate of settled material from bottom sediment traps was 127 g m The balance of particulate organic carbon in the South Basin is shown in The total of the advective and turbulent O The release of carbon from the sediment, which is calculated by the difference between gross sedimentation and net sedimentation, of 1000 mmol m In the North Basin mass accumulation rates, weight of settling particles, sediment porewater fluxes as well as transport processes in the water column of carbon were systematically 25–50% smaller than in the South Basin. The net mass accumulation rates in the bottom sediment traps and in the sediment were only 94 and 68 g m O The export of particulate organic-bound N to the deep water of the South Basin, N-fluxes in the North Basin were about one-third smaller than in the south. From the sediment traps, we estimated fluxes The internal mass balance including our estimates for denitrification rates can now be compared with published external mass balances for the South Basin. For the quantification of the nitrogen budget, A critical evaluation of available data by Sedimentation and turbulent transport of P in the North Basin was again significantly smaller than fluxes in the South Basin. P contents in the sediment traps of all depths were about the same, while 45% of both, C and N, disappeared between surface and bottom traps. Net sedimentation was about the same in both basins. Therefore, the sediments in the North Basin are trapping P more effectively than in the South Basin. This again is most probably linked to the deeper oxygen penetration depths and the higher concentration of iron/manganese crusts in the sediments of the North Basin ( The degradation pathway of organic material does not apply for silica, which undergoes mainly abiotic dissolution, and, thus, silica may not be affected noticeably in the sediment traps during storage time. The biological cycles in Lake Baikal are dominated by the growth and mineralization of diatoms, and the sediment consists mainly of diatom frustules and silty clay ( The data on Si-fluxes in Lake Baikal show a considerable unbalance with respect to this element. There are two major points which need further discussion. First, our model cannot explain the observation of Second, the upward transport of Si from the deep water to the epilimnion, Combinations of four entirely different and independent methods in a multidisciplinary collaboration of physicists, biogeochemists, and sedimentologists revealed a coherent picture of nutrient budgets of Lake Baikal. In spite of the enormous size of the lake, it was possible to present consistent budgets for carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and silica for the North and South Basins that agreed reasonably well with estimates given in the Russian literature. Fluxes for the South Basin with its large tributaries and sedimentation regions, mainly the Selenga Delta, could be clearly differentiated from those of the North Basin, which has less nutrients, lower water temperatures, and longer ice coverage. O We are very grateful to the captain and crew of Vereshagin and the organization by Hedi Oberhänsli. Many thanks to Michael Schurter for indispensable support on all expedition issues, Sandra Windlin for the help and company during the expedition 2003, Ruth Stierli for her careful work in the lab, and Wisi Zwyssig for dealing with the sediments, René Gächter for discussions and suggestions for the manuscript, Burchan for his good humor. Valentina Domysheva provided concentration profiles of silica, nitrate, phosphate, and oxygen. The work of Lorenzo Spadini and an anonymous reviewer who helped to improve this manuscript is gratefully acknowledged. This work was partially financed by BBW grant no. 00454. This work was funded by the EU-project CONTINENT (High-resolution CONTINENTal paleoclimate record in the Lake Baikal: A key-site for Eurasian teleconnections to the North Atlantic Ocean and monsoonal system; EVK2-CT-2000-00057). Raw data for Concentrations of NO Concentration data of NO For the calculation of the vertical turbulent fluxes, an estimate of the turbulent diffusion coefficient at 400-m depth, Raw data for