In industrial SAG mills availability is of prime importance due to its direct impact on the economics of the process. The main single factor influencing the availability is the liner condition. The common method to determine the liner wear profile has been two dimensional and the weight estimation has been performed assuming a uniform wear profile. In this study, a method was proposed and tested to determine the wear rate accurately through building the 3-D model of liners after any given operating time. This was made possible by frequent profile measurements and using a commercial mechanical software. A specially designed liner wear profile measuring device enabled fast and accurate measurements inside the mill during the mill shut-down periods. Application of the proposed method in a 9.75×4.88m SAG mill indicated that the liner wear profile along the liner length is non-uniform and the highest wear occurs between 1.25m and 2.75m of the mill length. The liners of the first half of the mill from the feed end showed more wear (19.1g/t) compared to that of the second half (17.1g/t). Due to the non-uniform wear profile, the liner removal time calculated based on the lifter heights could be very different. The difference between removal times could be up to 1.3-fold. It was found that a first order kinetics model could well be used to describe the loss of liner weight over time (R
                     2
                     =0.94). Based on the proposed method, for any given operating hours, a 3-D model of the liner could be obtained.The use of large AG/SAG mills in the mineral industry has been on rise due to a significant reduction in capital and operating costs and increase in the plants throughputs. The availability of these mills plays an important role in the economics of the operation. One of the main reasons of mill down time is the time required to change worn or broken liners. This not only reduces the production rate but imposes also a high liner and replacement costs. Liner wear influences the behavior of the mill load which in turn alters the mill performance. The knowledge of the liner wear rate and profile facilitate the estimation of the liner life and also provides useful information on how to reduce any defects by modifying the original design. Maximizing the liner life has been one of the main goals of both manufacturer and mill operators. There is no generalized solution and operating conditions determine the type of remedial measures. The change in the abrasiveness of the ore and other operating parameters could impose such a significant impact on the liner life that all measures taken on the liner to extend its life may not end in fruitful results. It is common to monitor the wear profile of the liners and make modification based on the final profile to arrive at a smooth profile when the liners are changed. In this approach the distribution of metal on the liner is modified to take into account the different wear rate over the entire length of the liner. This also results in a lower metal scrap which is a significant factor in liner cost. Various approaches have been proposed and implemented to increase the liner life such as increasing lifter height ( The common method to determine the wear profile has been two dimensional and the weight estimation has been performed assuming a uniform wear profile ( This research project was initiated to develop a method to measure and model the liner wear profile in three dimensions at any given operating time with the aim of increasing the mean liner life time. The basic idea is to assume a uniform wear profile for a liner and measure the profile at one cross section. After placing the measuring device, which usually consists of needles, on the liner the length of the needles are marked on the paper. The cross section is obtained by converting the marks on the paper to the numbers showing the length of each needle. Then the wear rate is calculated by comparing the profiles at different time intervals with the original profile ( For the proposed method a device to measure the cross section accurately and a 3-D modeling software were needed. In designing this device the accuracy, the low weight, and the ease of use, and operability only by one person were considered. Since the time of mill scheduled shut-down is rather short, it was necessary that the measurement could be performed as quickly as possible. A measuring device was designed and constructed with aluminum with the dimensions of 30 The distances between holes were different which were based on the preliminary study of the liner wear profile of the SAG mills. In parts of the liner where the slope of changes was high the holes were placed closer to increase the accuracy of the profile logging while in the parts with a low slope of change the holes were more apart. Inside the main body of the device a specific rubber was inserted with holes aligned with the holes of the body. Inside each hole a 290 To build the 3-D liner model, a mechanical software called Solidsworks With modeling the outer surface of the liner over its life span, the surface changes due to wear could be calculated and wear pattern could also be obtained. The 3-D modeling of the liner over time can provide the weight and the volume at each stage from which wear rate could be determined. The liner life estimation or the liner changed out time at this stage is obtainable. By marking the cracked or broken liners in the model, over time the trend of crack initiation or broken liners could be determined. Since the weight of the mill due to wear decreases, this model could be useful in the interpretation of the bearing pressure – a control parameter in the operation of the mill. The objective of using this parameter is to keep the charge level constant. The base level on which the legs of the measuring device are placed is of importance because during the whole measuring period it should remain constant, i.e., a fixed base height should be available. At the time of measurement the legs of the device were placed on the plate of the adjacent liners. Since due to wear over time the height of the plates decreases, an appropriate adjustment applied to the measured values. This was made possible by measuring the thickness of a completely worn liner at six points along the liner length. Based on the operating hours a base value was added to the height measurements depending on the position of the profile. Advantages of the proposed wear profile determination method over the current methods are as follows: 3-D modeling of liners with non-uniform wear profiles. More accurate wear rate estimation due to the use of more than one profile measurements along the liner. No need for the assumption of a uniform wear profile. Accurate weight, volume and surface area calculation at each stage. Access to the trend of broken or defective liners over time. Determination of the accurate liner profile at a given operating hour. The Sarcheshmeh new concentration plant started its operation in 2005. This plant has a 9.75 The SAG mill inside shell has been covered with two series each consisting of 60 rail type liners. The liners are cast chrome–molybdenum steel with a Brinnell hardness between 325 and 375. The lifter height is 152 The average liner replacement time for each piece at the Sarcheshmeh – mostly due to the lack of experience and proper equipment – at the best it has been 1.5–2 The scheduled shut-down period of the SAG mill at the Sarcheshmeh was weekly, which provided a good opportunity to perform a regular measurement and monitoring of the liners. To this the unscheduled shut-down time should also be added. The monitoring and liner measurement was not limited only to the shell liners and other liners were also visually examined. After shutting-down the mill and taking out the feed chute of the mill, the mill was washed by a high pressure water to remove the pulp from the liners and make them viable for the examination and taking pictures. In the next step, the overall appearance of the liners was studied and the numbers of cracked or broken liners were recorded and photographed. In order to evaluate all liners the mill had to be slowly rotated and the whole procedure to be repeated. The initial study revealed that measuring six cross sections on one liner would suffice to obtain an accurate model. The time needed to perform six cross sections measurements and transfer the values of the needles was between 20 and 25 A typical shape of a worn liner after 5384 In order to quantify the non uniformity of the liner wear profile, the profile of a liner after 4475 The evolution of the wear profile over the life time of the liner is shown in Based on the mill manufacturer’s recommendation, when the lifter height reaches one third of the original height (i.e., 50.7 It is interesting to note that the liner removal time could vary by 130% based on the position of the lifter height measurement. It seems that the appropriate approach is to take the average of the six lifter height measurements and report it as the representative height of the lifter. If the appearance of the liners with one third of the original height is taken as the removal time, the liner expected life time based on the average profile (5 and 6) will be equal to 4030 In this study, the liner profile measurement was performed both on the first and second halves of the mill from the feed end. Since all measurements were taken at the same time for both sections, the comparison of the wear rate seems to be legitimate. The normalized liner mass (i.e., mass of the worn liner divided by the original mass of the liner) for both sections over the liner life time is shown in The shape of the liners of both sections along the mill length after 5384 The weight of the liners was accurately measured when they were removed from the mill. Based on the throughput, and operating hours the wear rate was calculated for both the first and second halves liners. The scrap metal which could be an important criterion was also calculated. Using the 3-D model of liners which were obtained by the liner profile measurement and the liner model building software, the wear rate was also calculated. The comparative results of measured and simulated wear rate and percent scrap metal are shown in The surface and weight of liners could be calculated using the data obtained from profiles measurement over time. The relative liner mass and surface over operation time for the second half of the mill is shown in To study the kinetics of liner wear it was found that a first order kinetics model could well be used to describe the data. The relationship is in the form of: Upon integration and rearranging: To determine the rate constant and also to examine the validity of the first order kinetics model, the normalized liner mass (i.e., mass at time In order to determine the error associate with this method of liner wear measurement, from each half of the mill four liners were randomly selected and removed from the mill. Since during the operation of the mill at several times the liner profiles were measured and each time the liner on which measurements were based was different, it was necessary to determine the associated error. The wear profile of each liner was measured accurately out of the mill. In theory the profiles of four liners should be similar because of the mill symmetry. The average profile along with the standard deviations (shown as error bars) for profile no. 3 is shown in The overall average error of profile measurement was then calculated to be 6.3%.  A new method was proposed to build 3-D models of the liners using a specially designed measuring device and a commercial mechanical software. The proposed method could provide the liner wear profile and liner weight at any given operating time with a good accuracy (±2.5%). It was found that at the Sarcheshmeh new concentration plant the wear profile of the SAG mill along the liner length is not uniform. The difference in wear at specific location on the liner width could be up to 56%. Due to the non-uniform wear profile, the liner removal time calculated based on the lifter heights could be very different. The difference between removal times could be up to 1.3-fold. It was concluded that the middle part of the mill could provide more realistic liner life time. The wear rate of the first half of the SAG mill liners was found to be higher than that of the second half. The wear rate of these two sections were, 19.1 and 17.1 The highest wear was found to be between 1.25 The comparison of the measured and modeled scrap metal of liners after the entire working period indicated a relative error of only 2.5%. It was found that a first order kinetics model could well be used to describe the loss of liner weight over time ( Based on the proposed method, for any given operating hours, a 3-D profile of the liner could be obtained. This ability could significantly decreases the liner cost due to on time removal time. The relative error of profile measurement was found to be 6.3%. The authors thank National Iranian Copper Industries Company (N.I.C.I.Co.) for supporting this research. Special appreciation is also extended to the operating, maintenance, metallurgy and R&D personnel for their continued help. N.I.C.I.Co.’s permission to publish this article is greatly appreciated. The helps received from H. Mahmoudabadi, A. Eilkhany and A. Noori are gratefully acknowledged.