Octagonal masonry columns have been broadly used in outstanding architectural heritage due to their aesthetical appearance and to support high loads. Nowadays, concrete-filled steel tubular (CFST) columns have been utilised to carry such high load. However, a recent trend in the construction of the CFST columns is to use the high strength concrete (HSC) to increase the usable floor spaces in different buildings due to the global limited land areas. Therefore, this paper combines the architectural demand of the octagonal column shape with the advantages of the CFST columns by investigating numerically, by means of finite element (FE) modelling, the octagonal CFST short columns. Accordingly, validated FE models for the octagonal CFST short columns are employed to perform parametric studies to widen the available knowledge about their behaviour. The paper is mainly devoted for investigating large diameter columns using extensive series of diameter-to-thickness (D/t) ratios ranging from 40 to 200, most of which filled with HSC up to 100MPa. The ultimate strengths, based on available experiments in literature and current FE investigation, are compared with the existing design models. This comparison indicates that the existing design models are conservative and their accuracy is affected by the D/t ratios. Therefore, a new design model is suggested based on the existing provisions by taking the D/t ratios of the columns into account. This suggested design model is validated by using the existing experimental results and is found to give excellent results. The important factors that affect the strength and behaviour of the octagonal CFST short columns filled with HSCs are additionally discussed in detail, with new conclusions added to literature for the first time.The field of architectural engineering extensively contributes in the choice of the main structural system in different projects. This is because the system to be built not only should have structural efficiency, material availability, low cost, ease of construction methods, and man power, but also should guarantee that the architectural requirements of the building and its aesthetical appearance are taken into consideration One of the most effective steel-concrete member is CFST column. This column composes of an empty steel tube filled with concrete, at which both elements sustain together the applied axial load. A CFST column has been extensively used in civil engineering projects around the world Experimental studies on octagonal CFST short columns have been initiated by Tomii et al. From the above discussion, it can be recognised that several open points for the structural performance of the octagonal short CFST columns still call for additional research. Accordingly, this paper addresses, by means of FE analyses, the axial compressive strength and behaviour of large diameter octagonal short CFST columns filled with HSC. This is based on the two main facts that: (1) the above investigations based on small diameter columns cannot display the mechanical behaviour of the large diameter ones used in practice The main objectives of the current paper are summarised as: The paper provides wider range of The ultimate strengths obtained numerically are, then, compared with the three available design strengths by Yu et al. Based on the comparative results in the previous point, a new design model is suggested to obtain better predictions for the octagonal large diameter CFST short columns over the full range of the investigated The paper extends to discuss the main factors (i.e. the An emphasis is given, at the end, to the combined effect of the The novelty of the FE model is to develop the Python Script for the simulation of octagonal CFST columns. Although full-scale physical tests provides an accurate insight into the structural characteristic of octagonal CFST columns, the experiments are quite expensive and time consuming, and they are less flexible to conduct the parametric study. Therefore, the systematic development of FE modelling can be utilised for an accurate complementary investigation. This section provides the details of the FE modelling utilised for replicating the experiments reported by Tomii et al. The analysis of the CFST columns requires creating the individual components, assigning individual material properties, generating different mesh sizes, assembling components, defining analysis steps and also applying loads, constraints and boundary conditions based on geometric and material properties. The simulations are generally conducted in the same way multiple times for the verification as well as the parametric studies. The load levels, concrete stress-strain data, steel stress-strain data, constraints and interactions change every time in the analysis. Accordingly, a python script, supported by Abaqus The eight-node reduced integration linear solid elements with three translation degrees of freedom, C3D8R, were utilised for meshing octagonal concrete core. The thin-walled steel tube used in octagonal CFST short columns buckles locally outwards with the restraints provided by the filled concrete. The solid elements were effectively found to capture the outer buckling of the thin-walled steel tubes subjected uniform axial loading It is widely known that the bond between the inner surface of the steel tube and the concrete core results from the chemical adhesion, frictional resistance and physical interlocking of the concrete and steel surfaces at the micro scale On that basis, the surface-to-surface contact interactions were employed, in this investigation, on the deformable surfaces of the steel tube and concrete core The loading end plates were not included in the current FE models. Instead, the rigid body tie constraints with tie nodes were utilised for applying the loads and boundary conditions. The reference points situated on the bottom and top levels of columns were assigned to control the displacement-controlled loads and degrees of freedom. The degree of freedom at the bottom reference point was fully restrained in translations and rotations while the top reference point was allowed to displace in the loading direction. This represents the clamped end conditions typical to that suggested previously by Tao el al. The confinement effect, which increases the compressive strength, ultimate strain and ductility of concrete in octagonal CFST columns, is considered in the FE model. Patel et al. Liang and Fragomeni On the other hand, the concrete compressive strength varies with the column size, concrete quality and loading rate. It can be recognised from literature that the compressive strength of standard concrete cylinders may not present the actual compressive strength of the concrete in real CFST columns. Experimental results indicated that the compressive strength of concrete varied from The strain The equations for determining the lateral confining pressure on the concrete core for octagonal CFST short column are proposed by Patel et al. Two linear segments AB and BC of the stress versus strain curve of confined concrete, depicted in The structural steel is generally utilised in the construction of CFST columns. The stress versus strain response of steel is characterised by a typical yield plateau. An idealised three-line stress versus strain behaviour was used in modelling of structural steel as presented in A FE model for simulating the structural performance of the axially-loaded octagonal short CFST columns reported by Tomii et al. The yield stress of the steel tubes for specimens OST1 and OST3 is recorded as 311 The axial load versus axial strain curves of the octagonal CFST columns obtained from the FE modelling are compared with the experimental results given by Tomii et al. The computational and experimental axial load versus axial strain responses of the axially-loaded octagonal CFST short columns OST1-A, OST1-B, OST2-A, OST2-B, OST3-A, OST3-B, OST4-A and OST4-B are depicted in The verified FE model, shown above, was used to conduct the parametric studies for the octagonal short CFST columns. It total, the programme is composed of seventy two FE models. The lengths of the columns were assumed three times the cross-sectional depths of the columns ( It should be noted that the current concrete constitutive law is applicable to HSC since the FE models were validated in this paper by using the experimental tests of the octagonal CFST columns Within each group, three subgroups are considered with respect to the cross-sectional width (  To the authors' knowledge, there are no design strengths existing in international design specifications for the octagonal CFST short columns. Accordingly, in this section, the ultimate FE strengths ( Yu According to Ding et al. The strengths ( It can be recognised by reviewing the design equations of Refs. The comparison between the experimental and FE strengths with the above three design models is given in  Eurocode 4 The design equation given by DBJ/T13-51-2010 The design procedures reported in ACI-318-11 The ultimate capacity of octagonal CFST columns obtained from the design standards are compared with the large diameter experimental data This section presents the individual influence of the The effect of the depth-to-thickness ( On the other hand, the Von-Mises stress distribution of the steel tube is also shown in The effect of the concrete compressive strengths (  In the above two sub-sections, the individual effect of Just for the sake of briefness, the values of The FE analysis is conducted to compare the axial load-strain curves of octagonal steel tubular column and CFST column. Column C30 given in The current paper provides an extensive FE investigation on the large diameter octagonal CFST short columns, to address the lack of their behaviour in literature. The paper mainly investigates the effect of the HSC and the The verification of the FE modelling showed that the confined concrete model suggested by Patel et al. The design models by Yu et al. The results showed that the design model by Ding et al. A new design model, given herein by Eq. Despite that design strength obtained from the Eurocode 4 As confirmed by the current results, the widely known fact that increasing the value of The results indicated that using HSC becomes economical by increasing the The FE model presented in this paper provides the benchmark numerical results for the design of octagonal CFST columns. Further experimental study on octagonal CFST columns with high strength concrete and steel is needed. This research study is supported by both