Nearly a decade has elapsed since the first edition of Poirier's The new edition retains the original structure. Following a very succinct summary of thermodynamic relationships there are chapters on elasticity, lattice vibrations, equations of state, melting, transport properties and, finally, Earth models. The chapters on equations of state, melting and Earth models have been expanded, and 250 new references have been added. The result is a more satisfying book that contains much up-to-date information. The book's principal strength lies in the clear presentation of elementary, mostly classical, theories of mineral processes. Enough references are given to follow most topics to greater depth. Many concepts are illuminated by examples taken from mineral physics research, rather than the usual simple crystals routinely used in solid state texts. Although the separate presentation of elasticity, lattice vibrations and equations of state does little to illuminate the unifying — and simplifying — thermodynamic connections, it works quite well as a source of background information for the non-specialist interested in reading the high pressure geophysics literature. One finds here a rather complete discussion of the phenomenological equations of state, systematics, e.g. Birch's law, and anharmonic properties, such as several Gruneisen parameters, that connect material properties with geophysical observations. The scope of the book allows for just a brief discussion of the highly successful and important applications of first-principles theory. This section could have been greatly improved by a brief discussion of the connection between Thomas–Fermi theory, which the book discusses in some detail, to the density functional theory that is the foundation of most of the practical first-principles computations. The chapter on melting has very useful discussions of classical theories of melting as well as semiempirical melting laws. Although melting in simple substances is emphasized, melting in multi-component systems is briefly discussed in the introductory section. A useful comparative discussion of the theoretical melting models provides some food for thought for beginners. The difficulties associated with measuring high pressure melting temperatures are well illustrated by reviews of extant data on melting of the lower mantle minerals MgSiO The chapter on Earth models introduces the reader to the fundamentals of Earth structure, heat sources and transport, the geotherm and compositional models of the mantle, core and core–mantle boundary. The chapter can be read independently of the earlier ones since it makes little explicit use of the materials physics developed there. Although some might wish for a development that brings together the different physics strands more fully, on reading this chapter one is rewarded with brief but up-to-date discussions of the emerging complexity of the Earth's fine structure and the difficulty of its interpretation. The book should be accessible to most advanced undergraduate geophysics students who have some upper division background in thermodynamics and statistical physics. It is well suited as a reference for a senior or beginning graduate course on compositional earth models. Its organization and extensive bibliography also makes it an excellent reference for professional geophysicists. There are few typos, the writing is clear, and the price is fair. I heartily recommend it as a succinct and unique introductory textbook dedicated to the exciting field at the intersection of condensed-matter physics and global Earth science.