In the present work, pure copper was subjected to equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) followed by cold rolling (CR). Then, combined effects of ECAP and CR on the microstructure and texture variations as well as on the mechanical properties were investigated.
                  Adding CR to ECAP process not only lessened the grain size but also decreased the heterogeneity of grain distribution throughout the workpiece. Consequently, both the strength and ductility improved significantly. Grain refinement and internal stress augmentation contributed mainly to the strength enhancement, while an increase in the microstrain enhanced the ductility of workpiece. After rolling, the texture of ECAPed specimen changed into the typical rolling texture with a minor effect of simple shear texture.Nanograin and ultrafine-grain materials processed by severe plastic deformation (SPD) methods have been the subject of intense study in the last few decades Although ECAP provides an opportunity for producing reasonably large fully-dense bulk samples with exceptional mechanical properties, it has still remained in laboratory scale. Saturation in grain refinement, ascribed to processes related to dynamic recovery The aim of the present work was to introduce a combined new technique, called ECAP+CR, to attain a more homogeneous structure for industrial applications. The microstructure, texture and mechanical properties of large samples fabricated by ECAP+CR were compared with the ones produced by ECAP process. A rod of commercially pure Cu (99.96%) having a diameter of 40 The ECAP process was performed at room temperature using a pressing speed of 5 Two types of samples were fabricated: the first one was subjected to four ECAP passes with rotation by 90° (Route B Previous experiments showed that the strain distribution within transverse cross-section was not homogeneous and the strain value decreased by moving from the upper surfaces towards the lower ones due to existence of dead zone The microstructures of The tensile tests were carried out at room temperature and a strain rate of X-ray diffraction measurements were performed using a Scintag XDS2000. Cu Kα including For texture examinations, after electrochemistry erosion, all samples were cut in size of 10×10   The average size of coherent domains, dislocation densities and microstrains is summarized in   After the tensile testing, the fractured surfaces of samples were investigated. The typical micrographs are shown in The most important ideal orientations in simple shear can be conveniently described in terms of different texture fibers, namely the {1  The variations of microstructure, texture and mechanical properties of pure copper subjected to ECAP and post-rolling were investigated. The following conclusions can be drawn from the present study: Employing cold rolling decreased the mean grain size of the ECAPed sample. It, moreover, lessened the grain size discrepancy between the upper and lower surfaces, resulting in a more homogeneous structure. Post-rolling not only enhanced the strength but also decreased the mechanical heterogeneity throughout the ECAPed specimen. Grain refinement and internal stress augmentation contributed greatly to the strength enhancement resulting from post-rolling. On the other hand, enhancing the internal stresses, activating cross-slip of dissociated dislocations, and reducing the restoration temperature improved the ductility of workpiece. By conducting ECAP, the (1