The effect of powder mixing on thermoelectric properties was studied in n-type Bi2Te2.85Se0.15 compounds and p-type Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3 compounds. The figure-of-merit of the n- and p-type sintered compounds was strongly affected by carrier mobility. The use of coarse powders (200–300μm) was beneficial to improve the crystallographic orientation of sintered compound. However, voids in the compound decreased the carrier mobility. As the fine powders (below 45μm) were blended with coarse powders up to about 30%, the carrier mobility was increased due to the reduction of the voids. The addition of fine powders over 30% degraded the carrier mobility due to the decrease of crystallographic orientation and the increase of particle boundary. When the fine powder content was 20%, the n- and p-type compounds exhibited the maximum figure-of-merit of 2.31×10−3
                     K−1 and 2.89×10−3
                     K−1, respectively.Single crystal and unidirectionally solidified Bi Recently, there has been growing interest in powder metallurgy which can obtain an enhanced mechanical property. The bending strength of sintered compounds is 3–5 times higher than single crystal It is possible that the figure-of-merit can be effectively improved through formation of crystallographic texture in powder metallurgy, because Bi In order to fabricate the n-type 0.06 The thermoelectric properties of the sintered compounds were measured at room temperature. The Seebeck coefficient For the analysis of the crystallographic orientation, an X-ray diffractometer with an attached goniometer was used (Rigaku Rint 2500, Cu target). Schulz reflection method was used to obtain (0 The fracture surfaces of the n-type sintered compounds are shown in The relative densities of the n- and p-type sintered compounds are shown in  The carrier concentration can be changed by plastic deformation and oxidation in the Bi The electrical resistivities of the n- and p-type sintered compounds are given in Contrary to the Seebeck coefficient which is only dependent upon the carrier concentration, the electrical resistivity depends upon both the carrier concentration and mobility as shown in Eq. To evaluate the crystallographic orientation of the sintered compounds, the samples were prepared in the plane normal to the pressing direction, and then pole figure analysis was carried out toward (0 The thermal conductivities of the n- and p-type sintered compounds are shown in Contribution of the The figure-of-merit is defined as Eq.  The coarse powder of 200–300 This work was supported by INHA UNIVERSITY Research Grant.