CSIRO researchers have been involved in the development of predictive metallurgical indices as a tool in the hydro- and geometallurgy fields. Rapid, small-scale, cost effective tests and protocols have been developed for comparative ranking of attributes relevant to leach performance, e.g. leach index (relative indication of leach performance), recovery, impurity deportment, reagent consumption and mineralogy of samples for their relative ranking. Results from these tests can be used for plant design or process optimisation to maximise the commercial value of an ore body and to minimise the social and environmental impact of mining operations. The motivation for development of these tests includes the reduction in use of traditional mineralogical tools, be they for reasons of accessibility, cost, speed or scale-up for processing of large sample numbers. Mineralogical analysis remains essential for validating leach results in the development of test protocols and as a means of quality control. This paper presents an accurate, robust statistical method for QEMSCAN data analysis that has been developed for use in conjunction with the geometallurgical leach tests.Geometallurgical information generally consists of large sets of data points and may include information different from what is obtained traditionally from sample characterisation. In the hydrogeometallurgical area specifically, CSIRO researchers have been involved in the development of rapid, small-scale, cost-effective predictive indices for the comparative ranking of attributes relevant to leach performance, including work in the AMIRA International P843A Geometallurgical Mapping and Mine Modelling (GeM Diagnostic leaching typically involves the use of selected reagents and leach conditions which target specific forms of, or the minerals associated with the valuable element. The abundance of that mineral form or association is then determined by analysis of that element in the leach solution and of the remaining abundance in the leach residue. Diagnostic leach tests typically involve the successive application of reagents (usually from least to most aggressive) to the residues of previous leach steps, intended to target specific minerals or host phases containing the element of interest. Variants of the diagnostic leaching methodology have been applied to several different ore types, in particular gold ( Validation of the diagnostic or selective leach is necessary to confirm whether the intended mineral leached according to theoretical predictions. However, despite the implementation and use of these leaching techniques, there is an absence in the literature of detailed and robust mineralogical characterisation data to support the proposed methodologies. This may be because of some of the issues associated with data analysis using these techniques. In the gold and copper literature especially, reagent specific mineral solubility information has often been based on leach tests conducted on mostly single or pure mineral samples only, with relatively straightforward characterisation by X-ray diffraction (XRD) ( Rapid scanning electron microscope-based energy dispersive spectrometer (SEM-EDS) systems such as the FEI Quantitative Evaluation of Minerals by SCANning (QEMSCAN) electron microscope and Mineral Liberation Analyser (MLA) have a wide range of uses in the minerals industry, particularly in the field of process mineralogy. The ability to quantify modal mineral abundances in the sample down to approximately 0.01 For the hydrogeometallurgical characterisation of samples, mineralogical analysis could be used initially to verify and calibrate leach recoveries. Thereafter, the leaches could be conducted without further mineralogical analysis. Automated mineralogical techniques such as the QEMSCAN and MLA are capable of producing highly reproducible, quantitative mineralogical results as well as quantifying mineral abundances at low levels and can be used in the leach verification and calibration stage. QEMSCAN data are normalised to 100% (unless mass flow data is entered) and therefore mineral abundances in residues may increase because of mass loss from the dissolution of certain minerals. This makes direct interpretation of mineral abundance changes based on the QEMSCAN data challenging. Furthermore, such a technique would also require the ability to distinguish significant mineralogical changes from background and sampling error. To address these difficulties, in this paper, a robust statistical methodology is proposed for QEMSCAN analysis, data processing and interpretation of data from leach tests. The methodology is illustrated using results from sulfuric acid, cyanide and aqua regia leaches (commonly used in diagnostic and selective leaching) of a composite copper-containing sample. A composite sample was created from several flotation concentrates containing mainly sulfide minerals, as well as an iron-oxide and silicate-rich filler material. The concentrates were selected such that the final composite contained copper oxides, secondary copper sulfides (chalcocite and covellite) and primary copper sulfides (chalcopyrite and bornite). The material was ball milled to a Leach residues were riffle split, mixed with graphite powder and de-agglomerated with a fine brush. This mixture was then set in EPOFIX 2 pack epoxy resin, allowed to harden and polished and coated with a thin film of carbon. Sulfuric acid (5%) and sodium cyanide (5%) leaches were conducted for 24 Filtered leach solutions were submitted for multi-elemental analysis by ICP-OES. Free acid titrations were also conducted on final samples from acid leach tests. Head samples and leach residues were dissolved by a standard four acid digest before multi-elemental analysis by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES, Varian VISTA-PRO). QEMSCAN mounts were prepared and analysed for the head composite sample (six mounts) and sulfuric acid (six mounts), sodium cyanide (three mounts) and aqua regia (two mounts) leach residues. The Species Identification Profile (SIP) used for the characterisation work in this study has been developed using the composite sample produced for this work, as well as other copper mineral samples as references. The SIP file is used to classify the elemental compositions of each pixel, as a mineral or phase ( Both QEMSCAN and quantitative XRD (QXRD) are commonly used as mineralogical analytical tools. QEMSCAN was used in preference to QXRD in this analysis as (i) the micronising which is commonly used in QXRD preparation has been found to affect bornite crystallinity (unpublished work), (ii) commonly-used internal standards such as fluorite and corundum tend to exhibit peak overlaps with bornite or chalcocite and (iii) QXRD has a detection limit of approximately 1–2 The main limitations of the QEMSCAN are that (i) it cannot be used to characterise very fine material (e.g. These unique features of the QEMSCAN technique result in the presence of several phases in QEMSCAN data which are not strictly mineral or phase names, and appear vague in terms of their definition e.g. in the SIP determined for this project, “copper other” is defined as any pixel containing copper but not classified as a more defined copper mineral/phase (no exact copper grade has been assigned to this phase). These phases are, however, necessary to facilitate the accounting for all pixels in the image, particularly in the leach residues where the stoichiometry of minerals is altered by selective removal of certain elements and products with variable stoichiometry are formed. Provided the phases of interest are identified in the QEMSCAN SIP file, and that the same SIP file is used to process all the samples, these data are adequate for use in quantifying mineralogical changes occurring in the various leach tests. If the mass percentage that falls into the “copper other” category is high, this does add a degree of uncertainty to the overall analysis and interpretation. Further SIP development, where specific mineral interfaces or edges of minerals are recognized, characterized, and grouped accordingly could be beneficial. However, optimizing the SIP file using residue data may not add significant value as leached minerals would exist as “shells” or skeletons (including amorphous phases). Given that we are interested in changes in minerals, this could complicate the head sample analysis by introducing several additional phases which are not minerals. For a comparison of mineralogical data between head and leach residues, a mineral present in the head material that is insoluble in any of the leach reagents must be identified. In the sample used in this study, quartz will not react under the leach conditions used and quartz has therefore been used to normalise the mineral abundances in the leach residue data to facilitate comparison. Data are normalised by dividing the residue data by the average quartz value in the head sample (the leaching of silicates is expected to be minimal over the timeframes investigated with amorphous or precipitated silica expected to be insignificant). The sum of the normalised leach residue data should be less than 100%. The normalised data were then averaged for each mineral and a percentage change in abundance calculated by comparing the normalised average to the average value for the head sample: At least two sample mounts would be required to derive the background variance and standard deviation data for each leach step requiring interpretation. The larger the number of mounts analysed, the more precise the mean and variance calculations, and therefore the smaller the magnitude of the mineralogical change that can be detected. A sample calculation for the determination of the copper mineral change in the sulfuric acid leach is presented in The summarised results of the QEMSCAN mineralogical investigation and statistical analysis of the head sample and leach residues are presented for all minerals in The analysis highlights the low abundances of copper minerals in the head sample. With the exception of chalcopyrite and “copper other” (unclassified, mixed X-ray spectra that contain any amount of copper), the copper minerals and many other minerals of interest for interpretation of the leach performance in this sample are present at less than 1.2 According to the literature ( According to the QEMSCAN results, the sulfuric acid leach dissolves the copper oxides/carbonates (99%) and sulfates (100%) but also has the undesired effect of removing 92% and 70% of the chalcocite and bornite, respectively. The 30% increase in covellite abundance is most likely from chalcocite oxidation ( Most sulfides are destroyed by the aqua reqia leaches while the silicate minerals show varying degrees of dissolution. (Note that enargite is removed in the cyanide and aqua regia leaches but only to a confidence of 95–98% and has therefore not been reported in The summary of the copper deportment calculated from the QEMSCAN mineralogical data is presented in The sulfuric acid leach kinetics were found to be rapid, with total copper recoveries reaching close to the final maximum value of 31% obtained at 24 These leach recoveries imply that the copper oxide content in the ore is 31% and therefore, the sulfide content is 69%. The secondary copper sulfide and bornite content is 42% (cyanide minus sulfuric acid leach) with 15% being chalcopyrite (aqua regia minus cyanide leach).  The differences in values occur for a number of reasons. The complex mineral phase transitions of the copper sulfide minerals during leaching skew the deportment determinations for these minerals. For example, the formation of covellite from the leaching of chalcocite in sulfuric acid implies that the actual copper recovered in solution is not consistent with the assumptions made in the deportment calculations. Furthermore, some copper minerals have been found to be more susceptible to leaching than predicted. For example, the 42% allocation to “Secondary copper sulfides and bornite” determined from leaching, overestimates the abundance of these phases significantly compared with the 27% estimate from QEMSCAN data. This effect is the result of the lack of mineral selectivity in the cyanide leach, where significant (∼15%) but unintended leaching of chalcopyrite occurs. This effect has also resulted in very low chalcopyrite abundance as determined from the leach tests when compared with the QEMSCAN data. Further tests conducted with reduced leach times under less aggressive conditions to determine whether these conditions had any effect on recoveries showed similar results. Mineral liberation also affects the leach calculations (locked or unliberated particles are not exposed to the leach solution). The percentage mineral locking can be determined by using the QEMSCAN, however, this provides only an estimation (as mentioned previously, it is not advisable to mill material extremely fine for QEMSCAN analysis as the resolution of finely ground or intergrown minerals can often not be resolved because of the “boundary phase” issue). A limitation in the QEMSCAN analysis in our parallel leaching procedure is that relative deportment data in the QEMSCAN analysis sums to 100%; if any of the phases or groupings are over- or underestimated, this will change the allocation to other phases/groupings. Furthermore, individual copper minerals are not presented separately in the leach results as is done for the QEMSCAN data. Despite the problems with the comparability between the deportment calculations from the QEMSCAN and leaching data, the mineralogical characterisation data which show unintended leaching of secondary copper sulfide minerals and chalcopyrite in sulfuric acid and sodium cyanide, respectively, imply that these differences could be reduced significantly by improving the mineralogical selectivity of the leach reagents and conditions. These differences are of noteworthy importance as a number of commercial laboratories use standard sulfuric acid and cyanide leaches for copper deportment analysis. A copper-bearing ore material has been subjected to partial leaching using sulfuric acid and cyanide as leach reagents. The mineralogical effects of these leach tests were evaluated using modal mineral abundance data acquired using a QEMSCAN instrument. We presented a methodology for transforming the data, comparing minerals leached between ore and residue despite mass loss in the leaching process, and a statistical methodology for determining the magnitude, direction and significance of changes in mineral abundance after leaching. A summary of the methodology is as follows: Conduct leach tests on the selected sample suite. Prepare and analyse at least two QEMSCAN mounts for each head and leach residue sample. An identical SIP file setup is required for all samples analysed. Normalise QEMSCAN data with respect to a mineral that remains unchanged during leaching. Calculate the mean abundances for each mineral in the head and residue samples, and the change in abundance (absolute and/or relative). Calculate a Choose a confidence level at which the mean is significant and determine the All differences with associated From this test work, it was apparent that the leach tests as described in literature and used commercially are not as selective as claimed. For many years, much of the standard industry practice has been to apply conventional diagnostic leaching procedures without calibration and confirmation by mineralogical characterisation test work. This further highlights the need for the use of a robust and statistically sound mineralogical analysis to calibrate and confirm leach results before their application to a large number of samples.