Impact rockburst test on sandstone samples with a central hole is carried out under true triaxial static loads and vertical dynamic load conditions, and rock fragments after the test are collected. The fragments of sandstone generated from strain rockburst test and uniaxial compression test are also collected. The fragments are weighed and the length, width and thickness of each piece of fragments are measured respectively. The fragment quantities with coarse, medium, fine and micro grains in different size ranges, mass and particles distributions are also analyzed. Then, the fractal dimension of fragments is calculated by the methods of size-frequency, mass-frequency and length-to-thickness ratio-frequency. It is found that the crushing degree of impact rockburst fragments is higher, accompanied with blocky characteristics observably. The mass percentage of small grains, including fine and micro grains, in impact rockburst test is higher than those in strain rockburst test and uniaxial compression test. Energy dissipation from rockburst tests is more than that from uniaxial compression test, as the quantity of micro grains generated does.Under deep mining conditions, high in situ stresses, high water pressure, and high temperature combined with disturbance of mining engineering can lead to more and more engineering disasters ( From the mechanical state of rockburst occurrence, rockburst can be basically divided into strain rockburst and impact rockburst. Strain rockburst is caused by excavation of deep rock mass under static action, and impact rockburst is triggered by combined static and dynamic actions of deep rock mass after excavation ( Understanding rockburst mechanism is a long-term goal for many scholars in the world. Many theories such as energy theory ( This paper analyzes the fragmentation characteristics of the sandstone fragments from impact rockburst test in State Key Laboratory for Geomechanics and Deep Underground Engineering, China University of Mining and Technology (Beijing). Besides, the comparison test is also made on the sandstone fragments from strain rockburst test and uniaxial compression test. The impact rockburst test system can independently provide static loads in three directions, one dynamic load in one direction, or multiple loads in multiple directions at the same time. So the impact rockbursts induced by dynamic disturbance, such as blasting, roof collapse and fault slip, can be simulated in the laboratory. The test system is shown in The system consists of main stand, servo-controller, hydraulic power and image acquisition system, as shown in The specimen dimensions are 110 mm × 110 mm × 110 mm and the diameter of the hole is 50 mm. The loading process is illustrated as follows: firstly, the static stresses were applied on the specimen to simulate the in situ stresses state as shown in Firstly, the fragments of sandstone from impact rockburst test were screened by sieves with diameters of 0.075 mm, 0.25 mm, 0.5 mm, 1 mm, 2 mm, 5 mm and 10 mm, respectively. Secondly, the mass of fragments passing through different sieves was measured. And then the length, width and thickness of fragments passing through sieves with diameters more than 5 mm were measured by a vernier caliper. In order to unify the measuring standard, the largest value was chosen as the length, and the least value as the thickness. According to the fragments classification of rockburst test proposed by The results of fragments classification show that 50.02% of total fragments mass (2.57 g) is of medium grain, 47.51% is in fine grain (2.44 g), and 2.47% of micro grain (0.13 g). Note that there are no fragments with coarse grains. In order to better understand fragments characteristics, a comparison of sandstone fragments from impact rockburst test, strain rockburst test and uniaxial compression test was made. In strain rockburst test, one surface of the specimen was unloaded suddenly from a true triaxial stress state. That could simulate the strain rockburst induced by excavation. The conventional uniaxial compression test was conducted to obtain rock strength. The mass of different grain groups in 3 tests was counted up and its percentage was calculated. The results are shown in From To study the size characteristics of sandstone fragments, the length, width and thickness of fragments passing through sieves with diameter greater than 5 mm were measured. And then the length-to-width ratio, length-to-thickness ratio and width-to-thickness ratio were calculated. The ratios distributions are presented in According to the size classification of fragments proposed by Any complex morphology, such as fracture surface of materials, could be quantitatively described by fractal theory. In this paper, we selected the size-frequency, mass-frequency and length-to-thickness ratio-frequency to analyze the fractal characteristics of fragments. For the measurable medium and coarse grains, the fragments were assumed as cuboid and their volume can be calculated using the measured length, width and thickness. Then the fragments were converted into cubes with the equivalent side length. For the fine and micro grains which are difficult to be measured, we screened them and assumed the sieving diameter as the equivalent side length. Then, we counted up the grains' number by sampling statistical methods and therefore the fractal dimension can be calculated according to the following formula: By the statistical method, the relationship between Note that the correlation between the mass Length-to-thickness ratio of fragments can be calculated by the length, width and thickness measured. The relationship between The fractal dimension of fragments from impact rockburst test, strain rockburst test and uniaxial compression test were calculated by the above-mentioned methods, and are shown in  In this paper, the size and mass of fragments from impact rockburst test, strain rockburst test and uniaxial compression test were measured. Based on these results, the fractal dimension of fragments was calculated. The fragmentation characteristics can be summarized as follows: (1) From the results of size characteristic analysis, it can be concluded that blocky characteristics of fragments from impact rockburst test is more obvious than that from strain rockburst test and uniaxial compression test. (2) The distribution of fragment mass shows that the mass proportion of small grains including fine and micro grains from impact rockburst test is greater than that from strain rockburst test and uniaxial compression test. (3) From the fractal dimension results, it can be obtained that the energy consumption at rock failure of impact rockburst test is between those of strain rockburst test and uniaxial compression test. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.