The effect of impeller speed and cell volume on batch coal flotation performance in a self-aerating flotation machine is studied in the present investigation. Factorial designed experiments are carried out to establish the relationships between the manipulated variables (impeller speed, and cell volume, and their interactions) with the separation indicators (yield, ash, combustible recovery and entrained water recovery). Correlation coefficient values are used to select the best fit model, and an analysis of variance to identify the statistically significant components of the model. The results indicated that both the impeller speed and cell volume significantly influence the performance of coal flotation. Further, the influence of these variables and their significance is discussed by flotation rate constant.It is a general practice to design the coal flotation circuit based on kinetics results derived from laboratory scale batch flotation. Usually, laboratory and plant flotation results are different; the collective evidence suggests that different machine sizes and designs can produce similar flotation performance when the operating variables have been appropriately adjusted Self-aerating laboratory flotation machines are commonly used for batch tests. There are mainly two types of design parameters that influence the self-aerated flotation machine performance. The first design parameter is the impeller geometry, which includes size, shape, and number of rotor and stator blades Entrainment is considered the leading factor for deteriorating the quality of the concentrate. Several authors have shown that entrainment is closely related to water recovery The present investigation aims to evaluate the effect of impeller speed and cell volume on the coal flotation performance. The influence of impeller speed and cell volume on yield, ash, combustible recovery, and entrained water recovery were statistically analysed using the factorial design of experiments. The degree of entrainment prevailing for different cell volumes at different impeller speeds is also discussed. The metallurgical coal sample (−500 µm) from Jharia (Coalfield of India) is used in the present work. First, the sample is mixed thoroughly, and then it is split into different sub-samples using coning quartering sampling method. The proximate analysis of the sample on the as received basis indicates 42.3% fixed carbon, 20.4% volatile matter, 2.7% moisture, and 34.7% ash. A representative sub-sample is subjected to size distribution analysis, followed by size by size proximate analysis. Size analysis results are shown in Batch flotation experiments are performed in a self-aerated laboratory flotation machine using three different cell volumes (2 L, 4 L and 6 L), along with three different impeller speeds, 1200, 1500, 1800 rpm. Dimensions of the three cells are illustrated in Froth products and tailings after each flotation test are weighted and then filtered and dried. The loss in weight of froth product after drying mostly gives the weight of entrained water, more so because the size-by-size moisture content in feed varies in the range of 2.0–3.2%. Dried froth and tailings are subjected to proximate analysis. The data obtained are used to calculate combustible recovery (Eq. Factorial design of experiments is performed to analyse the significance of the main and interactive effect of impeller speed and cell volume on flotation performance. The factorial experimental design is used to generate the predictive mathematical models that describe the system’s behaviour and to determine the optimum operating conditions. Cell volume and impeller speed are the independent variables chosen for manipulation, considering yield, ash, combustible recovery, entrained water recovery as the process response variable. The data analysis and model evaluation based on analysis of variance (ANOVA) is performed using design expert 11 software (by Stat Ease Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA). The degree of entrainment is calculated by evaluating the ‘entrainment factor’ according to Warren’s method In the self-aerated flotation machine used in the experimental work, the air is introduced through the impeller system from the atmosphere into the cell. The airflow rate is measured through a rotameter (range 0–20 L/min) connected to the air inlet. By dividing the values of the airflow rate with the cross-sectional area of the three different cells, the superficial gas velocity is estimated, and it is graphically shown in Experiments were carried out with a single replication, and the average value of the results are considered for the manuscript and analysis. It is also found that the standard deviation during the replication of the result values was varied at below 5%. Flotation rate constant is a kinetic parameter that reflects the flotation performance, and it indicates the rate of removal of combustibles by bubbles in a flotation cell Performance of any flotation system can be assessed on the quality and quantity of the froth products. Many researchers have evaluated the flotation performance using yield, ash, combustible recovery, the degree of entrainment, the rate constant, flotation kinetics and other parameters  Further, the kinetics is studied through time-ash relationship, and the results are shown in  Entrainment of water by different cells with time at three different impeller speeds is shown in  Generally, metallurgical clean coal yield in India commercially viable is about 40% minimum with an ash content of 14–15%. Yield values which are > 40% are circled in Further to understand the kinetics of the coal flotation at different levels of impeller speeds and cell volumes, the results are analysed and discussed in terms of flotation rate constant by using modified Kelsall model developed by Jowett which incorporates the influence of ultimate recovery parameter It is noticeable from the batch flotation studies that the yield and the ash content obtained in the froth product changes with time for different impeller speeds and cell volumes. Particle size could also be one of the factors that influence the flotation rate. In this study, the effect of flotation rate is evaluated for a wide range of particle sizes (<500 µm), which includes a relative amount of coarse, intermediate and fine sizes of coal particles. However, if the flotation was carried out for different particle sizes, the results might differ. As reported by Morris The effect of impeller speed and cell volume on the yield, ash, combustible recovery and entrained water recovery is evaluated using a three-level two-factor full factorial experimental design approach. The first analysis is conducted to determine what type of model fit the results best. The analysis is presented in Analysis of variance (ANOVA) with an alpha level of 0.05 was conducted to determine the significance level of the factors, impeller speed and cell volume, and their interaction effect on all the responses; the results are compiled in Further to understand the interactional effects of the studied variables on the studied responses, 3-D surface plots are drawn. The degree of entrainment affects the quality of the froth product. The operating conditions of the process are always of great importance in mechanical entrainment of high ash particles in the froth product Froth depth could be one of the factors that can control entrainment to some degree without affecting the froth recovery In this investigation, the effect of cell volume and impeller speed on batch coal flotation performance is studied under identical process parameters in a self-aerating laboratory flotation machine. Experimental results conclude that the flotation performance changes significantly with a change in the impeller speed and cell volume. The lower values of yield and combustible recovery to the froth product in the 2 L cell are reported at higher impeller speeds, whereas the lower value of these indicators reported for the 6 L cell at a lower impeller speed. The ash content and the entrained water recovery to the froth product increase with an increase in the impeller speed for all the three cells. The maximum rate constant for fast floating particles of 0.53 s The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are thankful to the management of