Chalcopyrite leaching in acidic ferric sulfate media at ambient temperature exhibits slow kinetics due to the formation of passivation layers on chalcopyrite surfaces. In this study, we investigated the use of potassium iodide to assist chalcopyrite leaching and proposed mechanisms by which iodide enhanced the leaching efficiency. The effect of ferric concentration, temperature and iodide concentration on chalcopyrite leaching was studied by factorial experimental design and statistical analysis of data using the analysis of variance (ANOVA) method. The addition of 0.5 g/L of potassium iodide to the leaching media containing Fe(III) resulted in the production of I2 and led to an increase of copper extraction by 47% at 50 °C. Controlled potential experiments highlighted an optimal potential window for leaching at 700–800 mV, thus suggesting that tri-iodide might play a significant role in leaching enhancement. Mineral liberation analysis (MLA) highlighted that elemental sulfur was the surface product generated from the oxidation of chalcopyrite. The rate parameters in the presence of KI were significantly higher, especially at lower temperature, and consistent with those observed for the H2SO4-I2 leaching media. The addition of potassium iodide into the leaching media led to a decrease of activation energy from 81.4 to 33.8 kJ/mol.The application of hydrometallurgical processes to treat chalcopyrite ore/concentrate has economic and environmental advantages over conventional pyrometallurgical processes ( The challenge of chalcopyrite leaching in acid ferric sulfate media at ambient temperature is its slow kinetics, which has been attributed to the formation of insoluble secondary products on chalcopyrite surfaces, also referred as passivation. Even though a consensus on the nature of the passivation has not been reached, polysulfides, metal-deficient sulfides, jarosite and elemental sulfur have been reported to be the main candidates responsible for the passivation ( To enhance chalcopyrite leaching efficiency, several possible improvements of the sulfate-based processes have been proposed in the last decade ( In this study, we investigated an alternative method for the leaching of chalcopyrite in acidic ferric sulfate media. This method involves the addition of potassium iodide into the ferric sulfate leaching solution ( All chemicals used in the experiments (H The chemical characterization of the sample was performed by alkali fusion method ( The initial experimental tests were arranged in two 2 Prior to the leaching experiments, the chalcopyrite concentrates were washed at room temperature for 30 min first by acetone (S/L ratio 1:5) to remove the organic impurities and then by 1 M H The phase composition of the chalcopyrite concentrate was determined by XRD by using a Rigaku RINT UtimaIII X-ray diffactometer with Cu Kα radiation (k = 1.5406 A°) operated at 40 kV and 20 mA emission condition. The chalcopyrite concentrate before and after leaching was also analyzed by the mineral liberation analysis (MLA), performed by a MLA650 (FEI Co., Ltd.) operating at 25 kV while X-ray mapping was performed by the GXMAP method ( The chemical composition of the chalcopyrite concentrate determined by ICP-AES is shown in The effects of iodide concentration, ferric concentration and temperature on chalcopyrite leaching were investigated by the factorial experimental design and statistical analysis of the experimental data. The magnitudes of increase in the copper extraction resulting from the increase in temperature, ferric concentration and iodide concentration are shown in The MLA analysis was carried out on the unleached chalcopyrite sample and on the residue leached under the best leaching conditions from the factorial experiments (12 g/L Fe(III), 0.5 g/L KI, 50 °C). Results confirmed the accumulation of about 25% of sulfur on the chalcopyrite surface over a 24-h leaching period ( Without KI, leaching slowed down after 2 h ( To explain the higher leaching rate in the presence of KI is due to a two-step cyclic process that involves the synergistic effect between ferric and iodide. In this two-step cyclic process, the iodide is oxidized by ferric to iodine according to Eq. Thermodynamically, ferric is a stronger oxidizing agent than iodine. Thus, a possible explanation for the higher copper extraction and leaching rate in the presence of iodide is the faster kinetics associated with the oxidation of chalcopyrite by iodine. Regardless of oxidizing chalcopyrite directly or indirectly through the oxidation of iodine, the ferric ion is the final electron acceptor in chalcopyrite leaching. This statement is supported by the redox potential measurements. As expected, the redox potentials without ferric did not vary. The low amount of copper extracted in these two tests could be attributed to the dissolution of copper oxide on chalcopyrite surface and the oxidation of chalcopyrite by the oxygen dissolved in the leaching solution. In spite of the aforementioned considerations about redox potential, it must be noted that the Eh measured in the bulk of the leaching medium might actually differ from the potential at the mineral surface, namely mixed potential ( Controlled potential leaching experiments were performed to confirm the key role of the in-situ generated iodine in enhanced leaching. Although the previous considerations about bulk redox potential and mixed potential remains valid, the bulk potential might still provide some useful information in terms of speciation of iodine and iron species in solution. Results of controlled-potential leaching in the potential range 600–900 mV (vs SHE) are shown in The formation of tri-iodide in the presence of I Electrochemical experiments and advanced measurement of iodide species in solution will be required to elucidate the actual role of iodine species in ferric leaching. If leaching is controlled by the chemical reaction on the mineral surface, denoted by A(aq) + bB(s) → products, a linear relationship is obtained plotting the metal dissolution function f(x) against the time as in Eq. In Eq. The slope of the resulting line is the apparent rate constant of diffusion controlled leaching, as in Eq. Leaching tests to investigate the kinetics were performed by varying temperature and particle size, with and without KI. Under all investigated conditions, the best fitting was obtained using the ash-diffusion (product layer diffusion) equation of the shrinking-core model. It must be noted that fitting was actually attempted using also other expressions such as mixed reaction-diffusion control ( The effect of particle size on Cu dissolution is shown in Previous works described the ferric leaching of chalcopyrite as an electrochemically controlled reaction despite the good fitting with the shrinking-core model ( Leaching of chalcopyrite with and without KI also exhibited a strong dependence on temperature. Increasing temperature in the range 30–75 °C produced a significant increase of Cu dissolution ( The activation energies (E The role of iodide in assisting chalcopyrite leaching in acidic ferric sulfate media was investigated by a factorial experimental design and statistical analysis of data by ANOVA. The experimental results showed that the copper extraction increased from 12.3% when all factors were at the lowest levels (25 °C, 6 g/L Fe(III)) without KI to 86.4% when factors were at the highest level (50 °C, 12 g/L Fe(III), 0.5 g/L KI) over 24 h. Among the three factors investigated, iodide was found to have the most pronounced effect on chalcopyrite leaching, as manifested by 47% increase in the copper extraction in the presence of 0.5 g/L of KI. To explain the faster leaching rate in the presence of KI, a two-step cyclic process was proposed. This process involves the oxidation of iodide to iodine by ferric and the subsequent oxidation of chalcopyrite by iodine. The optimal leaching potential window between 700 and 800 mV suggested that tri-iodide ion might also play some role in leaching enhancement. Electrochemical experiments and advanced iodine measurements are required to confirm this possibility. Leaching kinetics could be described using the shrinking-core model with an insoluble porous product layer on the surface. Adding KI to the H The authors express their gratitude to JX Nippon Mining and Metals Corporation (JAPAN) for providing the chalcopyrite samples and for performing the MLA analyses. Part of this work was performed as a component of the activities of the Research Institute of the Sustainable Future Society, Waseda Research Institute for Science and Engineering, Waseda University.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at