High-alumina fly ash is an alumina-rich mineral resource that can potentially replace low-grade bauxite. While a wide range of different traditional processes are available for extracting alumina from high-alumina fly ash, these processes have many disadvantages. Northeastern University has recently proposed a new electrotransformation processing technique for transforming AlCl3 into Al2O3 in the process of extracting Al2O3 from high-alumina fly ash by the hydrochloric acid method. The feasibility of this new electrotransformation method was studied in this paper. The effects of the current intensity, electrotransformation time, initial electrotransformation temperature and initial HCl concentration on the electrotransformation process and roasting products were investigated. The results show that the pH of the electrolyte increases with increasing current strength, electrolytic time, initial electrotransformation temperature and HCl initial concentration, and its value tends to be 3.2. Under these conditions, XRD and SEM examinations confirm that the roasting products are Al2O3 sheets with a cubic crystal system. An examination of the grain size shows that the grain sizes are uniform. Elemental content examinations show that the Cl contents of the obtained products are <0.08%. These results confirm that the new electrotransformation method is feasible for industrial use.With the rapid development of the alumina industry, the alumina production capacity and output in China have been growing at high speeds. As of 2016, the production capacity and output of alumina in China were as high as 74.96 million tons and 62.50 million tons, accounting for 53.73% and 50.36% of the total global production capacity and output of alumina, respectively ( Fly ash, which is a by-product of high-temperature combustion of coal in thermal power plants, is one of the most complex and abundant industrial solid wastes in China ( The utilization of high-alumina fly ash is of great strategic importance to human health and to the ecological balance of sustainable development. The utilization of high value-added products such as alumina extracted from high-alumina fly ash ( The recovery of alumina from high-alumina fly ash using a variety of alternative hydro- and pyrometallurgical routes such as the sintering method, the acid and alkali joint method and the hydrochloric acid leaching method ( In view of the problems in the treatment process of high-alumina fly ash by the hydrochloric acid method and based on the inspiration from the chlor-alkali industry, Northeastern University has proposed a new method namely, electrotransformation. In this process, CO Laboratory tests were carried out with a pure material system. The main reagents in this study were AlCl The following experimental and testing equipment were used in this electrolytic conversion study: a custom organic glass instrument was used as an electrolytic cell; adjustable dc voltage and stabilized current were provided by RXN-3010D power supply; the water temperature of the thermostatic water bath was controlled using a DGL-2002 trough; a JA2003 electronic balance was used to measure the quantity; a PHSJ-3F type precise pH meter was used for pH measurements; X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed using a PW3040/60 type, Model: X'Pert Pro MPD diffractometer; scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed using a jeousm-380lv type scanner; a DHG-9143B5 electric thermostatic drying oven was used for drying of the substances; and a 10–12 muffle furnace was used for calcinations. Analytical pure grade AlCl The experimental procedure was carried out as follows: first, the same volume and a 100 g/L AlCl Cathodic reaction: Anodic reaction: Overall reaction: Roasting reaction: Note: y = 2× in the above Eqs. This work studied the feasibility of the new electrotransformation method. At the same time, the effects of the electrochemical parameters on the electrotransformation process and on the roasting products were also studied in this paper. Electrically transformed products were roasted at 850 °C for 2 h. The test results of the products are described in the next section. The specific electrotransformation conditions of the tests are given in The effects of different electrochemical parameters (namely, the current strength, electrolytic time, electrolytic temperature, and initial HCl concentration) on the pH of the electrolyte and on the phase, morphology, particle size, and chlorine contents of the roasting products were examined in this study by measuring the solution pH during the electrotransformation process, and by X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), laser particle size analysis, and quantitative elemental analysis of roasting products. At the same time, the full chemical analysis of the roasting products was also performed. The national standard for metallurgical grade alumina in China and the full chemical analysis of roasting products are shown in As seen from pH is one of the important electrolytic parameters in the electrical conversion process. On the one hand, the pH of the electrolyte can reflect its acid-base properties; on the other hand, it can also indicate the pH range of the other substances that begin to precipitate in the electrolytic process. The pH of the electrolyte was analyzed during the electrotransformation process. The effects of the electrotransformation process parameters on the solution pH were investigated as described below. The test results are shown in Note that “a, b, c, d, e” are the pH values at which Al(OH) The changes in the solution pH in the cathode side of the cell during the electrotransformation process are plotted in For a given substance, each constituent phase has its own particular crystal structure such as the crystal cell shape, crystal cell size, lattice type, and primitive structure. The crystallinity of the material, the grain size and other such properties have a strong influence on the physical, chemical, optical, electrical and thermodynamic properties of the materials. Therefore, X-ray diffraction is considered to be an important tool in this field. Here, the influences of different electrolytic process parameters on the phases of the roasting products are examined.  The influences of the electrotransformation process parameters (namely, the current strength, electrotransformation time, initial electrotransformation temperature and the HCl initial concentration) on the morphology of the roasting products are discussed and studied. The Al The results in The particle size characterization of alumina is also crucial. The particle size is one of the most important physical characteristics of alumina products. The particle size is one of the indicators that determine whether the alumina is of metallurgical grade. To further understand the change in the particle size, here, the influences of the electrotransformation process parameters (namely, the current strength, electrotransformation time, initial electrotransformation temperature, HCl initial concentration) on the granularity of the roasting products are examined. The particle size distributions of Al  Chlorine is one of the main impurities in roasting products, and chlorine content is affected by the electrochemical conditions. In the experiments, the purity of the alumina products can be characterized by detecting the impurity elements contents. The lower the impurity chlorine content corresponds to the higher the purity of the alumina products. Thus, the influence of the different electrochemical parameters on the chlorine content of the roasting products was examined. The results of the quantitative analysis of the roasting products are shown in The data presented in The main results of this study of the products obtained under the different electrochemical conditions (namely, the current intensity, electrotransformation time, initial electrotransformation temperature and the HCl initial concentration) are as follows: The pH of the electrolyte increases with the increasing current strength, electrotransformation time, initial electrotransformation temperature and HCl initial concentration, and it tends to be 3.2. It is observed from the phase analysis and the morphological analysis of the roasting products that under the different electrotransformation conditions, the roasting products are always found as alumina flakes with the cubic crystal system and even particle size. These electrolytic parameters have no significant effect on the phase, morphology and particle size of the alumina products. According to the elemental content analysis, several electrochemical parameters have a certain effect on the chlorine contents in the alumina products. With decreasing current intensity, decreasing electrotransformation time, increasing initial electrotransformation temperature and increasing HCl initial concentration, the chlorine contents in the roasting products increase. Among them, the effects of HCl initial concentration on the chlorine contents in the roasting products are relatively obvious. And the chlorine contents are <0.08% for all of the roasting products. The above experimental results show that the preparation of alumina by the new electrotransformation method is feasible. This study was financially supported by the