The uranium stripping results from a loaded tertiary amine (Alamine®336) by sulfuric acid solution and the uranium peroxide precipitation from the pregnant strip solution (PSS) are presented. The following steps were investigated: (i) uranium stripping; (ii) sulfate content reduction from the PSS and (iii) uranium peroxide precipitation. The experiments were carried out in batch as well as in continuous scale. In the stripping stage, a PSS containing 96g/L of U3O8 was obtained, using a 4.0mol/L H2SO4 stripping solution in six mixer-settler stages. The sulfate content reduction from the PSS was carried out by the addition of lime up to pH 3.0. After sulfate excess removal, uranium precipitation was carried out by H2O2 and MgO/Mg(OH)2 powder addition. A calcining product assaying 99.7% U3O8 was obtained.Uranium concentrate production in Brazil is under Indústrias Nucleares do Brasil SA (INB) responsibility. The INB mining and milling facilities, called Uranium Concentrate Plant (UCP), is located in the neighborhood of Caetité city, Bahia State. In the UCP process, the uranium stripping is carried out by sodium chloride (NaCl) solution, and all aqueous effluent is recirculated after lime treatment up to pH 9. As the chloride ion is not removed in this treatment, its content in the liquor has increased, causing a drop in the uranium extraction efficiency. This study intended to replace the NaCl solution used in the UCP uranium stripping step. For that, the uranium stripping from a loaded Alamine The loaded organic solution containing 8.0 The batch experiments of uranium stripping, sulfate content reduction from the PSS and uranium peroxide precipitation were all carried out in beakers under mechanical agitation at room temperature (24–27 The continuous stripping experiments were carried out in a countercurrent system using polycarbonate mixer-settlers cells, with mixers of 300 The H The results obtained indicated that the increase on uranium stripping distribution coefficient reduces significantly above 3.5 The continuous experiment was carried out using 4 In order to reduce the sulfate content to avoid final product contamination before the uranium peroxide (UO One can see that uranium content in precipitate increases significantly as the CaSO The literature of uranium peroxide precipitation suggests a reaction pH range of 2.5–4.0 ( The H The major advantage of uranium stripping from loaded Alamine