Rock drilling and cutting is essential in the mining industry. Rock characterisation and classification methods have been proposed to assess drilling or cutting performance. Several attempts have been made to assess drilling performance by correlating different rock properties with the drilling rate. For instance, rock texture, grain size, Unconfined Compressive Strength (UCS), Mohs hardness and rock mass structural parameters have been used to build a number of drillability indices. Through tool-rock interaction laws, it was found that Specific Energy ( The intrinsic specific energy ( A literature survey indicates that there are very few studies on effect of cutting parameters on the intrinsic specific energy value. To investigate the magnitude of the intrinsic specific energy and its relation with the geometry of the cutting and peak strength of rock, cutting experiments with a single PDC were carried out on different rock types at different back-rake angles, i.e. Rock cutting induces two modes of failure in the rock depending on the depth of cut, Lin and Zhou A series of uniaxial compressive tests and cutting tests using a single PDC (Polycrystalline Diamond Compact) cutter were carried out. Uniaxial compressive tests were conducted at The University of Adelaide and cutting tests were performed at the Australian Resource Research Centre (ARRC) CSIRO-Perth facilities. The experimental work details are summarised in Rock types including limestone (Tuffeau), sandstone (Mountain Gold, Hawkesbury), phyllite (Brukunga) and basalt (Mantina) were investigated. The rocks were sourced from several mines and quarries in France and Australia. To study the stress-strain characteristics of the rocks under uniaxial compressive tests, in total 26 samples were prepared from coring rock blocks listed in Axial and lateral deformations induced by axial load on the rock samples were measured locally by either: i) a pair of axial and lateral strain gauges (FLA-30–11 and FLA-10–11 manufactured by Tokyo Sokki Kenkyujo Co.) attached directly to the surface of the rocks in axial and lateral directions, respectively, or ii) direct-contact axial and lateral extensometers (632.12F20-series manufactured by MTS Systems Co.). In addition, the axial deformation was measured externally by a pair of LVDTs (Linear variable displacement transducers). Local measurement devices are free from bedding errors Axial deformation feedback signal was used to control the axial loading keeping a constant axial deformation rate equal to 0.04 In total 45 PDC cutting tests were carried out on the rocks to investigate the magnitude of the intrinsic specific energy, A consistent cut was applied to the lateral surface of the rock samples by means of a rectangular cutter (sharp cutter) of width Each cutting run was performed strictly over a fresh surface on the rock. Furthermore, the formation of a deep U-type groove due to successive cuts over a same spot was not allowed, so the effect of sidewall friction (cutter-groove), that may cause an additional increase in The failure pattern of the rock samples at the end of the compressive tests consisted predominantly of a single-shear plane, although additional minor axial cracks also were noticed in the specimens. In pre-peak regime, the threshold stresses for fracture damage associated with crack closure (  The intrinsic specific energy,    A series of cutting tests using a single PDC (Polycrystalline Diamond Compact) cutter at three different back-rake angles and uniaxial compressive tests were carried out on different rock types including limestone, sandstones, phyllite and basalt to quantify the intrinsic specific energy and strain energy. The experiment results show that, in general, the magnitude of intrinsic specific energy, i.e. the energy to cut unit volume of rock, is increased as the inclination of the cutter increases from 15° to 30° and 45°, i.e. the back-rake angle, from 15° to 30° and 45°, leads to a higher demand of the energy to cut the same amount of rock. The intrinsic specific energy from PDC was found to correlate well with the UCS of rock when the back-rake angle of the cutting is 15°. The work has been supported by the Deep Exploration Technologies Cooperative Research Centre whose activities are funded by the