The adsorption of Si(OH)4 molecules and the SiO(OH)3
                     − anion on kaolinite surfaces was studied using density functional theory (DFT) calculations to investigate the dispersion mechanism of sodium silicate on kaolinite particles. The calculated results demonstrate that Si(OH)4 and SiO(OH)3
                     − primarily adsorb on kaolinite Al-terminated (001) surfaces. Both Si(OH)4 and SiO(OH)3
                     − bond with the Al-terminated surface by hybridization of the O2p orbital and H1s orbital. The unbonded O atom of SiO(OH)3
                     − is notably active. The SiO(OH)3
                     − anion can add more electrons and form a stronger electrostatic interaction with the Al surface. The adsorption of SiO(OH)3
                     − is more stable than the adsorption of Si(OH)4. After adsorption of sodium silicate, the surfaces of kaolinite can become more hydrophilic and carry more negative charge. Therefore, the adsorption of silicate species makes the fine particles of kaolinite disperse in aqueous solution more easily.Flotation as a method of mineral separation is widely used to separate fine particle minerals based on the differences in mineral surface properties. Due to the slime coating Previous studies Sodium silicate (Na Calculation based on the first-principles method can predict the adsorption structure and subsequently investigate the adsorption mechanism of adsorbates. Chen et al. The primitive unit cell of kaolinite was optimized using the CASTEP program package To study the interaction mechanism of Si(OH) Based on the preferential adsorption models of adsorbates on kaolinite surfaces by Monte Carlo calculation, GGA-PBE was used to optimize the adsorption models further. The cutoff energy and convergence thresholds were the same for primitive unit cell optimization. In all GGA-PBE calculations for adsorption models, the DFT-D correction was adopted, and all of the cell parameters were fixed. According to the Monte Carlo simulation, the active adsorption sites of adsorbates on kaolinite surfaces are shown in The stability of adsorbate on the surface can be represented by the adsorption energy. Negative values mean that the adsorbate can be adsorbed on the surface. The adsorption energies of adsorbates on kaolinite surfaces were calculated as: where The adsorption configurations of Si(OH) The most stable adsorption configurations of all species through the optimization test are presented in   The bonding of O(surf) 2p and H(mole) 1s in the range of −10–0 The DOS of O(anion) 2p orbital near the Fermi level is very active, as shown in  The interaction between sodium silicate hydrolysis components (the Si(OH)