In this study, the influences of important factors on smithsonite flotation are investigated. Dosages of sulphidizing agent and collector, desliming prior to flotation and the use of sodium hydroxide instead of sodium carbonate as the pH regulator are essential to the effective recovery of smithsonite in cationic flotation. The appropriate temperature for flotation was found to be 30–40°C. Sodium hexametaphosphate (SH) and sodium silicate had the greatest selectivity between smithsonite–calcite and smithsonite–quartz, respectively. The results of oleic acid flotation showed that the grade and recovery of zinc were relatively low in comparison with the sulphidization-cationic flotation method. Despite using sodium silicate and SH as depressants in oleic acid flotation, flotation was not selective. Flotation using mixed collectors (Armac C+Potassium Amyl xanthate) showed promising results. The ratio of the mixed collectors and the sequence of addition of mixed collectors were important criteria in attaining true mixed collector flotation.The most common flotation technique used commercially for the treatment of zinc oxide minerals is sulphidization with Na After sulphidization the mineral surface becomes less hydrophilic due to the presence of the chemisorbed sulphide ion, and in our case, floats more efficiently. Under these conditions, collector consumption may also be reduced significantly ( Flotation using carboxylic acid is applicable for oxide zinc ore if the gangue is silica or clay minerals ( The mole ratio of anionic/cationic collectors has a significant effect on smithsonite flotation ( In smithsonite flotation, the optimum ratio of the mixed collectors was KAX (Potassium amyl xanthate): DDA (Dodecylamine), 3:1 at pH 11.5 in the presence of 2000 The effect of depressing agents on the flotation of oxidized zinc minerals containing 17% Zn was studied by The interaction between sodium hexametaphosphate and Ca ion in the flotation pulp has been investigated by Carboxylic acid is used in smithsonite separation from silica or clay minerals ( In cationic flotation of calamine using sodium sulphide The adjustment of pH in the flotation tube affects the hydration of solid surfaces, excess of load density and the zeta potential. It also influences the ionization or solubility of surface agents, the concentration of both aggregated and non-aggregated inorganic ions in the liquid phase, as well as the electrochemical and oxidation–reduction potentials ( Temperature influence on mineral flotation has been investigated extensively ( Desliming is essential for successful flotation of smithsonite. The syphon and hydrocyclone desliming methods have been tested in the laboratory. The effect of dispersion degree on the floatability of an oxidized zinc ore has been investigated ( The effects of various dispersants such as sodium hexametaphosphate, sodium tripolyphosphate and sodium silicate have been investigated, in order to decrease the effect of a large number of slimes and fines ( The objective of the present study is to investigate the influence of cationic, anionic, and mixed collectors. The effects of important factors such as pH regulator type, temperature, desliming, and depressants have also been investigated on the separation of zinc-oxidized minerals from Angooran mining tailing and the range and optimum values of these parameters have been reported. Zinc oxide mineral samples were collected from the Angooran zinc mine, Iran. XRF chemical analysis of ore samples indicated that the sample contained: 15.8% ZnO, 23.75% SiO The reagents used in the study are shown in In the cationic flotation, sodium sulphide at a specific dosage was added to the pulp as a sulphidization reagent. NaOH was then added to the pulp to adjust the pH to 11 and was conditioned for 10 The maximum flotation recovery was found to be 92% using Armac C, after sulphidization at a pH of about 11 in single mineral flotation tests ( The zinc recovery curves for bench flotation in terms of the quantity of Armac C and Na The grade and recovery of smithsonite in the concentrate and tailing, in terms of the quantity of Armac C and Na  The influence of the pH adjusting reagent on zinc oxide flotation is shown in These outcomes show that in aqueous solutions, equilibria between reagents and metallic ions for various reactions such as hydrolysis, dissociation, precipitation and complexing will determine the concentrations of different chemical species. Under a given condition of concentration and pH, a given species will usually be dominant for the system. The dominant species diagram can be used to identify the effective reagent species for the flotation process. However, it should be kept in mind that even species that exist in smaller amounts can play a major role in affecting flotation ( The dominant species diagram for Na It can be seen from the diagrams that in Na  According to these findings, it can be concluded that the appropriate temperature for the flotation of smithsonite should be 30–40 A major problem in processing the zinc flotation tailings is the large amount of fines and slimes increasing the reagent consumption, causing the so-called slime coating phenomenon, hindering selectivity, and in some cases, rendering the process unfeasible. To preclude this, de-sliming and the use of different reagents such as flocculants, coagulants, dispersants, and depressants can be utilized ( Desliming is essential for successful flotation of smithsonite. Siphon and hydrocyclone desliming methods were tested in the laboratory. The results show that zinc loss in removed slimes is higher and the grade and its recovery in the concentrate are lower by siphon desliming rather than when hydrocyclone desliming is used ( The influence of slime can be seen from In previous microflotation investigations it was found that smithsonite, quartz and calcite can be floated with Armac C at a pH of 11. Therefore, for selective cationic flotation of smithsonite from associated gangues, the use of sodium hexametaphosphate and sodium silicate as depressants for calcite and quartz have been suggested (  As shown in The flotation recovery and Zn, CaO, and SiO Smithsonite flotation recovery using the Hallimond tube was determined as 90% with oleic acid at a pH of around 9 ( The optimum amount of oleic acid as an anionic collector was 300 It has been shown that sodium silicate and SH can successfully depress calcite in single calcite flotation with oleic acid at a pH of 9 ( The impact of SH on the grades of Zn, CaO, and SiO These results endorse that SH can depress smithsonite, quartz, and calcite in oleic acid flotation and SH is not effective for selective flotation. These findings confirm the results of  The experiments have been done based on the hypothesis ( The mixed collector ratio of Armac C: KAX was varied as 1:1, 2:1, 4:1, and 8:1. It is important to take into account that Armac C was added first. The zinc grade-recovery curves of the bench flotation using mixed collectors depend on the mixture ratio as shown in The results show that the highest recovery for a concentration ratio of 1:1 is 80%. The zinc grade varied from 19.2% to 31%. The optimum mixture ratio of the mixed collector was Armac C: KAX, 8:1 at a pH of 11 with 64% recovery and 31% zinc grade. However, the Zn grade with Armac C is enhanced in the presence of KAX while increasing the hydrophobicity by its co-adsorption in the form Armac C–KAX complex. The presence of KAX increases the adsorption of Armac C, apart from its co-adsorption, due to a decrease in the adjacent surface alkyl ammonium electrostatic head–head repulsion and thereby increasing the hydrophobic tail–tail bonds. Regarding the sequence of addition, Armac C may adsorb “strong spots”, defined as sites which are fully sulphidized and have a fairly high negative charge, covering major areas of the smithsonite surface. KAX may absorb on the Armac C’s positive charged head sites depending on the sequence of addition (  Experiments in cationic flotation showed that the dosages of sodium sulphide and Armac C, pulp temperature, desliming, type of pH regulator and depressant are crucial factors affecting the recovery of smithsonite. Due to the lower degree of liberation, the dosage of sodium sulphide and Armac C were very high. It is appropriate to set the pulp temperature between 30 and 40 Oleic acid flotation of smithsonite did not yield good results. By using sodium hexametaphosphate in oleic acid flotation, the grade of CaO was decreased while smithsonite was depressed, and the grade of zinc also fell steeply. The grades of CaO and SiO The flotation results using mixed collectors (Armac C