The impact of salts on partially hydrolyzed polyacrylamide (HPAM) is of great interest in mineral processing, considering that the use of seawater seems to be the only sustainable solution in regions with severe aridity. Here the conformation and transport of an HPAM chain in several saline solutions are studied by means of molecular dynamics simulations. Results indicate that the electrostatic repulsion between anionic acrylate units causes the polymer to adopt diverse and complex expanded tertiary conformations, however in the presence of cations this repulsion is shielded causing the polymer to fold into balled-up conformations. The structure assumed by the HPAM chain depends slightly on the type of cation and much on intramolecular crosslinking. Cations influence the ordering of water structure and orientation of water dipoles reducing the mobility of water, ions, and HPAM. These results are expected to contribute to a better understanding of particle flocculation for sustainable water management.Partially hydrolyzed polyacrylamide (HPAM) is the most widely used water-soluble non-toxic polymer in water treatment ( HPAM is a polymer made of There is extensive experimental and computational literature on flocculation with HPAM; the latter is approached often macroscopically (see for instance the work of Here we study the adsorption of monovalent alkali metal cations (Li The behavior of a single HPAM chain in concentrated aqueous salt solutions was studied by molecular dynamics simulations with the The SPC/E water model was used to describe the water. For the ions, the 12–6 Lennard-Jones parameters from Li and Merz ( The initial configuration of the system of interest was obtained from a sequence of preparation steps. First, an HPAM molecule was prepared with 54 non-ionized acrylamide monomers and 18 ionized acrylate monomers, with each acrylate followed by three acrylamide monomers, equivalent to a 25% ionization. Then, the molecule was embedded in a cubic box with a length of 7.2 nm and periodic boundaries in all directions. Calculations in smaller cubic boxes (5.0 nm in length) and larger cubic boxes (9.1 nm in length) led to the same averages with decaying fluctuations as the size of the box increased. The HPAM chain has a pKa of 3.5–4, meaning that the degree of ionization (ratio between ionized to ionizable groups) was 100% at pH 7. Salt was then uniformly distributed at random positions while maintaining a separation distance of at least 0.8 nm between atoms to yield a salt concentration of 0.66 M, which is similar to the ionic strength of seawater. When the interaction is in pure water, sufficient sodium cations are added to the box to electroneutralize the charge on the HPAM chain. Finally, 11,000 to 12,000 water molecules were added to the system from an independent simulation in a box of equivalent size at a temperature of 300 K. This simulation was conducted with the water solvation routine of Gromacs, which expressly avoids overlapping with the other components of the system. The integration step in all simulations was 2 fs and data was registered every 1 ps. The control of temperature and pressure was attained by a coupling to the Berendsen thermostat and barostat ( The initial configuration was relaxed in a simulation run to minimize strong repulsion forces. Then, the system was simulated in an In this work, we report results for a chain of HPAM of 72 monomers which are independent of the chain size, this size was selected after studying several smaller and larger chains with the same degree of ionization. Adsorption of cations on an HPAM chain is studied through the partial radial distribution functions (RDF) for the cations of different salt solutions and the oxygen of the acrylate ions along the HPAM chain. These functions are described as     The molecular dynamics simulation results are also used here to infer the molecular conformation of a flexible chain of aqueous HPAM as a function of the various cations considered in this study at a high concentration of 0.66 M. The electrostatic repulsion between anionic acrylate units of the HPAM chain causes the polymer to adopt diverse and complex expanded tertiary conformations. However, in the presence of cations, the repulsion is shielded, causing the polymer to fold into compact structures, adopting balled-up conformations. The structure assumed by the HPAM polymer depends somewhat on the cation involved and greatly on intramolecular crosslinking. The extended structures enhance the viscosity of polymer solutions but may be too ionic for some applications. The following sections describe the interactions and their corresponding occurrences, as shown by the HPAM polymer in aqueous salt solutions.  Another important interaction is between the anionic acrylate units of the HPAM chain that are mediated by water molecules ( The presence of cations such as Li The distribution of lifetime values is measured in order to compare the stability of all the interactions or bridges between charged HPAM groups in the presence of cations at a high concentration of 0.66 M ( Here, we use the radius of gyration to determine the conformation of the HPAM chain in water and in the presence of monovalent and divalent cations at a high concentration of 0.66 M ( The mean square displacement (MSD) of the center of mass of a single HPAM chain is calculated in water and in aqueous solutions of monovalent and divalent cations (0.66 M); an average of 1750 time origins is considered. MSD curves exhibit a ballistic transport regime at short time and a diffusive long-time limit from which diffusion coefficients are estimated ( Additionally, the effect of saltwater cations at a high concentration of 0.66 M on the orientation of water molecules in the first layer at the O Adsorption of monovalent alkali metal and divalent alkaline-earth metal cations on a flexible chain of HPAM in aqueous solutions was studied by using molecular dynamics simulations. Adsorption of monovalent cations follows the series Li The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We thank Centro CRHIAM Project Conicyt/Fondap/15130015 for financial support and the Southern GPU-cluster (SGPU-C) UDEC funded by FONDEQUIP EQM150134 for computational support. GRQ thanks Universidad de Concepción and CONICYT-Chile for graduate student fellowships.