Water recovery is one of the key parameters in flotation modelling for the purposes of plant design and process control, as it determines the circulating flow and residence time in the individual process units in the plant and has a significant effect on entrainment and froth recovery. This paper reviews some of the water recovery models available in the literature, including both empirical and fundamental models. The selected models are tested using the data obtained from the experimental work conducted in an Outokumpu 3m3 tank cell at the Xstrata Mt Isa copper concentrator. It is found that all the models fit the experimental data reasonably well for a given flotation system. However, the empirical models are either unable to distinguish the effect of different cell operating conditions or required to determine the empirical model parameters to be derived in an existing flotation system. The model developed by [Neethling, S.J., Lee, H.T., Cilliers, J.J., 2003, Simple relationships for predicting the recovery of liquid from flowing foams and froths. Minerals Engineering 16, 1123–1130] is based on fundamental understanding of the froth structure and transfer of the water in the froth. It describes the water recovery as a function of the cell operating conditions and the froth properties which can all be determined on-line. Hence, the fundamental model can be used for process control purposes in practice. By incorporating additional models to relate the air recovery and surface bubble size directly to the cell operating conditions, the fundamental model can also be used for prediction purposes.Water recovery is one of the key parameters in flotation plant design and operation. It determines to a large extent the circulating load and residence time in the individual process units in the plant. Meanwhile, entrainment and froth recovery are strongly associated with water recovery and influence both mineral recovery and concentrate grade. Hence, the ability to model water recovery and to control it, especially in industrial scale flotation cells has always been an important goal of both researchers and plant operators. This paper reviews some of the water recovery models available in the literature. The selected models are evaluated using data obtained from the test work conducted in an Outokumpu 3 Water recovery may be defined as the fraction of the water entering the flotation cell that is recovered in the concentrate. However, this definition of water recovery is only one of several found in the literature owing to the use of different flotation systems by different workers and use of the water recovery data for different purposes. For example, water recovery is sometimes calculated as a fraction of the total water in the flotation cell that is recovered to the concentrate. This definition of water recovery is commonly used for batch flotation tests. It is also not unusual to use the water flow rate of the concentrate directly instead of the fractional recovery of the feed water or the total water in the cell, especially in a batch flotation cell when the volume of the pulp varies during the test. Some researchers avoid use of the fractional recovery of water because the concentrate water flow rate is believed to be relatively independent of the feed water flow rate or the amount of water in the pulp phase. If so, it would be misleading to compare the fractional water recovery for different operating conditions or different sizes of flotation cells. In this instance, the concentrate water flow rate would be a more proper term to use. Finally, it should be noted that water recovery in a flotation cell is the result of a two-step transfer process—transfer of the water in the pulp phase to the froth phase and transfer of the water in the froth phase to the concentrate launder. The amount of water entering the froth phase from the pulp phase is closely related to the pulp conditions such as the bubble surface area flux, the concentration of chemical reagents, the concentration of suspended solids and the bubble loading condition. Only a certain fraction of the water entering the froth phase may be recovered into the concentrate. The rest returns to the pulp phase via drainage and/or with the collapsed froth. These two steps of transfer are not totally independent of each other. The amount of water entering the froth phase may to a large degree determine the characteristics of the froth (froth mobility and stability and solids/liquid/air hold-up in the froth phase) and hence influence the recovery of the water and solid particles in the froth phase to the concentrate launder. Research has been going for many years, trying to understand the froth behaviour and the mechanisms behind the water recovery in flotation. However, due to the complicity of the froth system and the limitations in measurement techniques, water recovery was modelled simply by related to an certain aspect of the cell performance, commonly used the solids recovery ( In this approach, concentrate water flow rate is linked directly with the concentrate solids flow rate. This allows the water flows throughout the plant to be fixed uniquely in flotation modelling ( Based on the conservation of the volume and mass of water and solids in a given stream, the relationship between the water and the solids flow rates can be expressed as Generally, the solids and water specific gravities can be assumed to be constant. Hence, to predict the water flow from the solids flow is to predict the In JKSimFloat ( Again, the usefulness of this model depends on the extent to which the model parameters,  It can be clearly seen in If all the experimental data are used in the model fitting regardless of cell operating conditions (cal-1), the fitted values of the constants    It may be useful to extend the model modification of In summary, the practical application of the concentrate water flow rate model as a function of the solids flow rate given in Eq. Froth residence time is possibly the most frequently used variable in the modelling of froth recovery. Two definitions of mean froth residence time, based on the air rate and concentrate slurry flow rate, respectively, can be found in the literature ( Eq. It should be noted that the residence time of the air bubbles and attached particles in the froth phase usually differs from that of the water and entrained particles in the same froth but the two residence times are closely related. It should also be noted that, in industrial flotation cells, there is always a significant portion of the froth burst on the surface of the cell and not reporting to the concentrate launder ( The main motivation of using Eq.   Eq. It should also be noted that the water recovery proposed by Meanwhile, The overall recovery of the water is a result of the recovery of the water from the pulp phase to the froth phase and the recovery of the water from the froth phase to the concentrate. The water returning from the froth phase to the pulp phase may be considered as an additional feed to the flotation cell pulp. Hence, the overall water recovery can be expressed by Combining Eqs. In comparison with the power function model (Eq. Finally, it is worth mentioning that applying a simple exponential function (Eq.  The model for the froth recovery of water is expressed as an exponential function of the mean froth residence time. Two forms of froth recovery models are adopted by Eq. Combining Eqs. It should be noted that, although the model of water recovery from the pulp phase to the froth phase has the form of a first-order process, it is not the author’s intention to suggest the water recovery mechanism is indeed first-order: it is a purely empirical model which attempts to correlate the water recovery with the cell operating variables. However, as mentioned at the beginning of the paper, it is still debatable whether the amount of water entering the froth phase is related to the feed water flow rate. The results from the Outokumpu 3 It should also be noted that Eq. In summary, the approach of What is the relationship between the water recovery from the pulp phase to the froth phase and the mean pulp residence time? How to distinguish the constant for water recovery from the pulp to the froth ( In the model of To determine the initial water flow rate from the pulp phase to the froth phase, it is assumed that the water is carried by the air bubbles and that the film thickness is constant in a given flotation system. During the transfer process in the froth phase, water drains back to the pulp phase at a rate proportional to the water concentration at the froth level of interest. Since the froth residence time can be expressed as Eq. Because the ( Combining Eqs. There are only two fitted parameters in Eq.  In general, there is a trend of increase in the water flow into the froth phase from the pulp phase with increase in the air rate. However, the curve of the pulp water recovery to the froth phase and air rate in It is also interesting to see that the froth recovery of the water calculated from the model falls on the same curve at the two high air rates and again at the two low air rates tested in the Outokumpu 3 In summary, Research into understanding the foam/froth structure, developing measurement techniques and modelling the water recovery in flotation has been advanced significantly in the recent years, especially by a group of researchers at the UMIST ( In brief, The numerical solution for the length of Plateau borders per volume of the froth is based on the dodecahedron geometry of the froth: The cross-sectional area of the Plateau borders in the froth phase is determined through a balance of forces acting on the water in the Plateau borders. Three main forces are considered: gravitational forces, capillary forces and forces due to viscous dissipation. For the froth on the top of the cell, capillary force may be neglected. Hence, the solution for the cross-sectional area of the Plateau borders on the top of the froth is given as The It should be taken into account that only a fraction of the air bubbles remaining unburst and reporting to the concentrate launder: Hence, the concentrate water flow rate can be obtained as In general, the size of the bubbles on the cell surface increased with increase in the froth height in an approximately linear manner. However, it should be noted that using image analysis to determine the surface bubble size in two dimensions may not truly represent the bubble shape in three dimensions, which is especially important for the calculation of the length of the Plateau borders. In addition, a large portion of the froth entering the concentrate is coming from the froth flow beneath the surface layer. The actual bubble size could be significantly smaller than that measured on the surface. Therefore, for the purposes of model fitting, it is convenient to assume that the size of the surface bubbles increases linearly with increase in the froth height: The measured bubble size on the cell surface is also affected by the froth stability. When the froth is unstable and bubble bursting occurs rapidly, fine bubbles are exposed between the large bubbles. This often happens in a high air rate or at a low bubble loading condition. Accurate measurement of the air recovery is also difficult. To collect the unburst bubbles in the concentrate launder is almost impossible. The image processing method (Eq.  The fitted results using the model developed by Although there is a significant difference between the measured bubble size and the model fitted one, there is clearly a strong correlation between them. It is an area in the future to improve the measurement technique and/or develop a model for calibration. The air recovery calculated is between 25% and 71% in the Outokumpu 3 The most significant feature of the fundamental model (Eq. No matter whether they are empirically or fundamentally based, the mathematical models for water recovery or concentrate water flow rate reviewed in this paper tend to fit the experimental data reasonably well for a given flotation system. However, the empirical models which relate the water recovery to the solids recovery ( The authors would like to thank the sponsors of the AMIRA P9 project for the funding which made this work possible. The authors would also like to thank Outokumpu for the loan of the 3