Heap chloride leaching of low-grade copper sulfides with the use of seawater has been proposed as a feasible alternative to address challenges associated with water scarcity and depletion of oxides. Our previous study of leaching kinetics showed that the leaching reaction slowed down in the second stage and the maximum copper extraction achieved at ambient temperature was around 70–80%. To uncover the reasons for the slowed-down leaching, we investigated the evolution of solid surface properties during leaching, particularly morphology and sulfur chemical state, and the responses of mineral surface properties to different leaching conditions using SEM-EDX and XPS techniques. The results showed that sulfur sequentially transformed from monosulfide S2
                     − to disulfide S2
                     2
                     −, and then to polysulfide Sn
                     2
                     − and elemental sulfur S0. Less elemental sulfur was present on the solid particle surfaces at high solution potentials, the removal of which by CS2 washing did not improve copper extraction. In contrast, at low solution potentials, a slight increase in copper extraction was associated with sulfur removal from the solid surfaces. These results led to the conclusion that the slow decomposition of polysulfide formed during leaching was responsible for the slow reaction at high solution potentials, whereas at low solution potentials, a combination of polysulfide decomposition and diffusion barrier by elemental sulfur layer was the reason for the slow dissolution. The effect of chloride was concluded to be important only at low solution potentials where the level of elemental sulfur crystallinity was lower.One of the major challenges faced by copper mines today is processing large amounts of low-grade copper sulfides of increasing complexity and elevated concentrations of impurities. In most cases, the challenge is compounded by a range of water-related problems, such as lack of freshwater. A potential strategy to address such challenge is to use seawater and water with elevated concentrations of chloride for heap leaching of secondary copper sulfides, in conjunction with existing solvent extraction and electrowinning facilities previously built for processing oxides. Our previous work showed that solution potential and temperature determined the kinetics of chalcocite leaching in ferric chloride media ( In general, the slow dissolution of copper sulfides at ambient temperature is believed to be associated with the formation of a passivating layer, such as metal-deficient sulfides, jarosite, polysulfides, and elemental sulfur ( The techniques used and the knowledge gained for chalcopyrite passivation during leaching provide valuable guidance in understanding changes in chalcocite surface properties and their influence on leaching kinetics. The formation of a sulfur layer in acidic chloride leaching of chalcocite has been hypothesized to be the cause of slow dissolution in the second stage. In the present study, we investigated the evolution of chalcocite surface properties in the course of chloride leaching and the changes in mineral surface properties in response to different leaching parameters using SEM-EDX and XPS techniques. The results of mineral surface characterization were used to interpret the leaching kinetics and reveal the reasons for the slow kinetics in the second stage of leaching. The experimental objectives were to explore the evolution of solid surface properties in the course of leaching and to examine the responses of surface properties to varying leaching conditions. To evaluate the evolution of solid surface properties, the surfaces of the leaching residues collected at different leaching times corresponding to increasing levels of copper extraction was characterized by SEM-EDX and XPS techniques. To examine the responses of surface properties to different leaching conditions, the leaching residues corresponding to 80% copper extraction were collected under different solution potential (ORP), chloride concentration, and temperature, and analyzed by SEM-EDX. To evaluate the role of elemental sulfur in the slow second-stage leaching, leaching tests with and without sulfur removal were performed at either 600 mV or 800 mV (vs SHE), as shown in The sample preparation and experimental procedure were described in our previous work ( To study the role of sulfur on copper extraction kinetics, two tests were conducted at either 600 or 800 mV. At 600 mV, when copper extraction reached 74%, one leaching test was paused and the leaching residue was collected, washed by CS To study the surface of chalcocite leaching residues by SEM-EDX, dried powder samples were placed on pin-type stubs with double-sided carbon adhesive. The samples were then coated with carbon by means of a high-vacuum thermal evaporation technique to make the surface conductive and minimize surface charging. The images were taken using the secondary electron (SE) imaging mode with a FEI Quanta 650 SEM-EDX. The equipment was operated at 20 kV to obtain sufficient secondary electrons for imaging and the working distance was maintained at 10 mm. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) is a surface analysis technique that has been used to study the surfaces of copper sulfide minerals ( In the present study, Leybold Max2000 spectrometer was used for the XPS analyses of the untreated chalcocite sample and the leaching residues. X-ray photoelectron spectra were generated using the Mg Ka ( The morphological changes of chalcocite surfaces during leaching were characterized by scanning electron microscopy. For comparison,  To identify changes in the surface elemental composition during leaching, EDX analysis was performed with a general resolution of about 1–2 μm in depth.  We investigated the survey XPS spectra of chalcocite and the high-resolution spectra of copper and sulfur species. The high-resolution spectra of Cu 2p and copper auger spectrum Cu Chalcocite sample The XPS analysis of the chalcocite sample before its exposure to a leaching solution was conducted to obtain a baseline for comparison. To study the surface composition of chalcocite, the survey XPS spectrum of chalcocite and the high-resolution spectra of copper and sulfur species were obtained (  The high-resolution peak of S 2p of chalcocite sample was also studied. The S 2p exists as doublets of S 2p  Leaching residues  The copper auger spectra shown in  To elaborate the alteration of sulfur chemical state during leaching, peak fitting of the S 2p spectra corresponding to increasing levels of copper extraction was performed using the XPSPeak 4.1 program. The binding energies of the various sulfur chemical states were shown in As leaching transitioned to the second stage, the proportion of disulfide markedly decreased, which was converted mainly to polysulfide and elemental sulfur. Concomitantly, the proportion of polysulfide and elemental sulfur became larger. It should be noted that there was a possibility of evaporation of elemental sulfur and polysulfides in the ultra-high vacuum chamber of XPS. Consequently, the portion of sulfur and polysulfide, especially in the second stage of chalcocite leaching, may be higher than what was observed ( In summary, the XPS analyses showed that copper existed as Cu Solution potential had a positive effect on the copper extraction rate in the second stage of chalcocite leaching (  EDX analyses were conducted on two main areas on the surfaces of the leaching residues, namely, nodules (shown as A on the SEM images) and the bulk surfaces (shown as B on the SEM images). To evaluate the influence of the sulfur layer on the leaching behavior at low and high potentials, the sulfur layer was removed from the leaching residues corresponding to 74% and 80% copper extraction at 600 and 800 mV, respectively. After CS It is believed that the beneficial role of chloride ions compared with sulfate on copper sulfide leaching is twofold. Chloride ions may accelerate copper dissolution by forming Cu(II)/Cu(I) chloro-complexes, which act as the redox couple for oxidization of copper sulfide minerals ( To examine the effect of chloride ions on solid surface morphology, SEM images were taken on the surfaces of the leaching residues collected at 80% copper extraction. Our previous work found that copper extraction was insensitive to chloride concentration in ferric chloride media when potential was set at 810 mV ( The SEM images taken at varied chloride concentrations in cupric chloride media showed thin amorphous layers and some nodules on the surfaces of the leaching residues ( Our previous work ( Our previous study of the leaching kinetics showed that increasing the solution potential enhanced the leaching rate, but the reaction was still slow at solution potentials as high as 800 mV ( The XPS analyses identified both polysulfide and sulfur as the main reaction products on the surfaces of the second-stage leaching residues. However, the formation of a sulfur product layer occurred to a lesser extent on the solid surfaces at higher chloride concentrations and higher solution potentials, as suggested by the SEM-EDX results. Therefore, we attributed the higher copper extraction rates obtained under those leaching conditions to either less resistance to oxidant diffusion towards the mineral surfaces or faster electron transfer from the mineral surfaces to the oxidant. Despite the formation of thinner sulfur layers at higher solution potentials, the leaching rate was still slow in the second stage. The removal of sulfur layer slightly improved copper extraction at 600 mV, but did not improve the leaching performance at 800 mV ( Given the difference in the analysis depth of XPS (<10 nm) and SEM-EDX (1–3 μm), the Cu/S ratios obtained by these two techniques were compared to shed light on the progressive conversion of chalcocite particles to various reaction products during leaching. The comparison in This progressive conversion model was supported by the XPS results. Consistent with the literature ( In the progressive leaching of chalcocite in an acidified cupric/ferric chloride solution, the cathodic reactions involved are the reduction of Cu(II) by Eq. (1) and the reduction of Fe(III) by Eq. (2) on solid particle surfaces ( To uncover the reasons that copper leaching from chalcocite in chloride media slowed down after 70–80% copper extraction, we investigated the evolution of solid surface properties during leaching and changes in surface properties in response to different leaching conditions. The SEM images showed the development of cracks on solid surfaces and the disintegration of solid particles as leaching progressed. Using the XPS analysis, we concluded that during leaching copper in the solid phase remained unchanged as Cu The SEM-EDX analysis of Cu/S ratio confirmed the formation of elemental sulfur layer on solid surfaces, which appeared to be thinner at higher solution potentials. To understand the role of the sulfur layer on leaching kinetics, elemental sulfur was removed from the solids under leach by CS Mohsen Hashemzadeh carried out this work as his PhD thesis project under the supervision of Wenying Liu. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.