The separation of yttrium and calcium from acid leach liquor obtained from leaching of fluorescent lamp phosphors has been investigated by solvent extraction with D2EHPA and Cyanex 272 in kerosene. The preliminary tests suggested that D2EHPA was more efficient than Cyanex 272 for separation of yttrium. The experimental tests allowed to define the best process conditions, among those investigated, to separate and recover yttrium selectively. The best separation circuit included three-stage cross current extraction with 20%v/v D2EHPA in kerosene (O/A=1/1, room temperature, 10 min of contact, pH 0.02) and stripping step in counter current with 1.5M sulfuric acid (O/A=1/1, room temperature, 30min of contact). After stripping, yttrium was recovered as oxalate by the addition of oxalic acid. According to the experimental results, a hydrometallurgical process was developed. The final recovery from leach liquor was around 90% and the grade of the final product was 97.5% as hydrated yttrium oxalate. The main impurity was sulfur, 1.28% wt, in addition to traces of other elements such as Si (0.057% wt), Zn (0.015% wt), Eu (0.14% wt) and Fe (0.02% wt).Rare earth elements (REE) are widely used in many technological devices such as fluorescent lamps, laser, TVs, screens, liquid crystal displays (LCDs), special magnets and many others. The extraction of these elements is concentrated in few countries, particularly China, so that recycling of REEs is crucial in western countries. After the publication of a report where 14 elements, including rare earths, were defined as critical to the economy of EU by the European Commission in 2010, the interest in collection and recycling of waste containing such critical elements is growing and many directives entered into force to support these strategies in the EU-27 ( The above reasons explain why recycling of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) is getting growing attention: moreover, the amount of such waste produced in western countries is huge and grows year by year. WEEE represent a real secondary mine, known as urban mine, from which base, precious and rare earth elements can be reclaimed. Pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes are the most used, often in combination thereof, depending on the specific equipment and metals ( The main components of the fluorescent powder are represented by red phosphors Y Alternatively, mechanical activation by ball milling to destroy the crystal structure of the green and blue phosphors ( Mechanical activation, carried out by an intense frictional action, is able to enhance the leaching yields of rare-earth elements from 0.9% to 81% at room temperature ( The fluorescent powders were mixed with zirconia balls (Ø As already stated, another effective pre-treatment for spent fluorescent lamp phosphors is calcination: alkaline fusion with barium hydroxide at 950   The process proposed by    An alternative and greener technology was recently proposed by In the present paper the recovery of yttrium from fluorescent lamp powders was investigated by using acid leaching and liquid-liquid extraction. The present paper is an improvement of the work carried out in the ambit of the HydroWEEE projects ( In the experiments described in the present manuscript, the influence of several factors (%v/v D2EHPA, mixing time, concentration) on the extraction efficiency was investigated. Counter current stripping tests were also conducted to recover yttrium from pregnant solutions. The results of the tests were used to design a hydrometallurgical process to reclaim yttrium from fluorescent phosphors, including leaching with sulfuric acid, solvent extraction with D2EHPA in kerosene, stripping with sulfuric acid and final recovery of yttrium by precipitation with oxalic acid. Original powder from dismantling of fluorescent lamps was analyzed by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) after acid digestion. The grain size of the fluorescent powder, supplied by Relight srl (Rho, Italy) and used in the leaching tests, was − Calcium is the main impurity; nonetheless, europium has a comparable concentration but is another rare earth element that increases the economic value of the final RE oxide concentrate. The other REEs were determined in the final oxide in order to understand the actual economic value of the product. Gd, Tb, Ce and La have low concentration in the leach liquor (extraction yields lower than 10%): in fact, they are contained in green phosphors that require a thermal pre-treatment to be extracted quantitatively ( Leach liquors from dissolution of lamps were used to perform solvent extraction tests. The original leach liquor contained around 15 Solvent extraction studies were carried out using Cyanex 272 and D2EHPA as organic extractant. Kerosene was used as diluent. In each test, the pH was adjusted to the required values by the addition of concentrated sulfuric acid or sodium hydroxide solutions. Several tests, listed in According to the main results from extraction and stripping tests, the overall process for recovery of yttrium was simulated. Such process includes solvent extraction, stripping and precipitation of yttrium oxalates. The aqueous solutions, after stripping, were used in precipitation tests, in which a white salt was recovered, washed, dried and calcined: the content of yttrium and other metals in the precipitate was determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy after acid digestion with aqua regia. Each extraction and stripping test was carried out in separator funnels, at room temperature with the proper aqueous/organic (A/O) volume ratio for the required time. Regarding extraction experiments, 10 Atomic absorption spectroscopy method (AAS, Varian AA240FS) was used to determine the concentration of metals in aqueous solutions. Concentration in the organic phase was calculated by subtracting the raffinate concentration from the initial concentration in the aqueous solution. Calcium and yttrium were analyzed in solvent extraction and stripping tests: yttrium is the most concentrated REE in the lamp's phosphors, whereas calcium is the greatest impurity in the leach liquor. The extraction yield, for the metals of interest, was calculated by the following equation: Results of quantitative analysis by AAS showed the following metal concentration in the powder: 9% wt Si, 13% wt Ca and 9% wt Y, as average values. This fluorescent powder was used to carry out the leaching stage according to the best conditions found in previous works ( 20%v/v of D2EHPA or Cyanex 272 in kerosene were used as extractant to conduct the preliminary tests. The aqueous/organic (A/O) volume ratio was 1/1. In these experiments, the extraction trends of yttrium and calcium were investigated as a function of pH. The extraction yields of such elements were carried out by the addition of sodium hydroxide to the solutions to test several pH levels (maximum pH D2EHPA showed a higher selectivity to yttrium at pH At pH The leach liquor was acidified to 0.02 with concentrated sulfuric acid. Below pH A 22 full factorial design, with three replications of the central point, was chosen for conducting the solvent extraction tests ( The Yates' algorithm was applied to number each test and three replicated central point experiments (tests 5, 6, 7) were carried out to have an independent estimation of the variance of the experimental error. Each test was replicated twice. Y experimental data were worked out by means of Minitab 17 software package for ANOVA and regression analysis. Nonetheless, calcium data were not analyzed by ANOVA as the extraction yield was null for tests 1–4. The Yates' algorithm was used to evaluate the significance of the main interaction effects for the investigated factors. The significance was assessed by F-test with a confidence level of 95% (α The statistical analysis also showed that factors A (%v/v D2EHPA) and B (A/O volume ratio) were found to be significant to maximize the extraction of Y, whereas interaction AB was not statistically significant. Factor A had a positive effect, factor B had a negative effect instead: this means that Y extraction is enhanced when %v/v of D2EHPA increases and A/O volume ratio decreases. The results of this factorial plan were used to describe an empirical mathematical model able to fit the experimental extraction data. X1 and X2 were the dimensionless coded factors corresponding to the two real factors. X1 is the coded factor for %v/v D2EHPA, whereas X2 is the coded factor for A/O volume ratio. The ANOVA results and the relevant indexes are listed in The comparison between the experimental extraction yields for yttrium and those obtained by using the Eqs. This diagram provides information about the goodness of the mathematical model and being close to 0.9 a good data regression was certainly achieved. It is possible to highlight that the maximum extraction for yttrium, around 30% (green band on For these reasons, the next extraction tests were conducted in the following conditions: 20%v/v D2EHPA in kerosene, A/O volume ratio According to previous results of liquid-liquid extraction, additional tests were carried out with D2EHPA (20%v/v) in kerosene at pH The equilibrium pH decreased slightly with the increase of the extraction stages, because of release of protons in solution. From data in Organic solutions underwent stripping tests came from the extraction process with three stages in cross current, as described in the The Yates' algorithm was applied with three replicated central point experiments (tests 9, 10, 11). Yttrium stripping yields were worked out by ANOVA. The Yates' algorithm was used to evaluate the significance of the main factors and their interaction effects. The significance was assessed by F- test with a confidence level of 95% (α The statistical analysis showed that the factors A (sulfuric acid concentration) was found to be significant for the stripping yield of Y, but the other factors and the interactions were not significant. Factor A had a positive effect, therefore Y stripping increased with sulfuric acid concentration. The maximum yields were achieved in test 4 (sulfuric acid 6 As it can be inferred from the half-normal plot, the most significant factors were A and B. The results of the previous tests were used to simulate the entire process starting from the leach liquor of fluorescent lamp. The process included solvent extraction with three stages, stripping with two stages and precipitation by oxalic acid. The two-stage stripping process was chosen as a first attempt, as the best stripping yield obtained in The obtained aqueous solution was used to carry out precipitation and recovery of yttrium: oxalic acid was added in stoichiometric amount with respect to the amount of yttrium. In this case, it was possible to notice that no salts precipitated; a white solid precipitated just after the addition of sodium hydroxide. The amount of the 50% wt NaOH solution resulted to be 42%v/v with respect to aqueous solution. The addition of NaOH for neutralization of the solution led to a secondary reaction between oxalic acid and sodium: this was a disadvantage since a greater amount of oxalic acid must be used to precipitate yttrium. Moreover, the final product was a mixture of yttrium and sodium oxalates that produced an oxide concentrate once calcined. As a consequence, it was necessary to wash the final product with distilled water in order to reduce the amount of sodium. The solid was digested with aqua regia and the solution analyzed by AAS: the actual concentration of yttrium was 46.6% wt. In conclusion, the total stripping yield for yttrium was 80%, thus at least one more stage is required to increase the reclaim of such element. Nevertheless, in the cross current stripping process, there are two main disadvantages: firstly, increasing the number of stages, the consumption of NaOH required for neutralization is too high. Secondly, the higher the amount of NaOH, the greater the sodium in the final precipitate. For these reasons, the counter current stripping system was selected for further stripping experiments. In the second series of tests, one counter current stripping process was performed, as indicated in Each box represents a batch separator funnel. This experiment was carried out to study the possibility to avoid the neutralization with NaOH during the precipitation of yttrium with oxalic acid: since the strong acidity of the solution inhibits the precipitation of oxalates, as demonstrated in Yield was around 15% on average, and the total stripping yield was 76.5% after five stages. The obtained aqueous solution was used to carry out precipitation and recovery of yttrium: oxalic acid was added in stoichiometric amount with respect to the amount of yttrium. In this case, unlike the first series, no sodium hydroxide was necessary to obtain the precipitation of yttrium oxalate. The precipitation yield was around 90% and the salt recovered on the bottom was dried and dissolved with aqua regia for the determination of yttrium. Other elements were measured by XRF, reported in The experimental results suggested a possible flow-sheet to recover yttrium from leach liquors from fluorescent lamps: the flow-sheet is shown in leaching with sulfuric acid; solvent extraction by 20% D2EHPA in kerosene, A/O counter current stripping (5–7 stages) by 1.5 precipitation by oxalic acid. The hypothesized process provided three stages of solvent extraction, counter current stripping, precipitation with oxalic acid and calcination of yttrium oxalate concentrate to obtain the corresponding oxide. From the experimental results of the counter current stripping tests, an average stripping yield of 15% is estimated and five stages are able to extract 76.4% of Y from the organic phase; in this manner, it is reasonable that yttrium can be stripped almost completely with seven stages. In this hydrometallurgical treatment, a concentrate of yttrium could be recovered (oxalate or oxide) with a recovery yield of nearly 90% with respect to the amount contained in the leach liquor. The experimental results obtained from this research were also used to work out a techno-economic profitability analysis ( In this paper a process to recover yttrium from phosphors coming from fluorescent lamps by solvent extraction was studied. Leach liquors obtained from leaching of fluorescent phosphors were used in this work. The main elements in the solutions were Y and Ca. D2EHPA and Cyanex 272 in kerosene were investigated as extractants and the main results were the following: D2EHPA was more efficient to extract yttrium from leach liquors at the original pH, i.e. around 0.02, than Cyanex 272; three stages of extraction are enough to remove Y from the leach liquor. The conditions for each step were A/O stripping tests demonstrated that the sulfuric acid solution is effective to remove yttrium from the organic phase and two stages of stripping were sufficient if 4 counter current stripping should be carried out to reduce the amount of sulfuric acid, lower the acidity of the aqueous solution and remove the addition of sodium hydroxide during precipitation of oxalates by oxalic acid. The stripping yield for each stage was around 15%. In conclusion, from these results it can be inferred that the recovery process includes three stages of extraction with 20%v/v of D2EHPA in kerosene and seven stages of counter current stripping with 1.5 The final recovery of yttrium from leach liquor is nearly 90% and the grade of the final product around 97.5% as hydrated yttrium oxalate Y The authors acknowledge the partners of HydroWEEE projects funded by the