Gold often coexists with pyrite as micron and submicron-inclusions and pyrite is therefore floated to maximize gold recovery in gold processing plants. In practice, different types of grinding media and a great range of pH and collector concentrations are used for pyrite flotation without scientific guidance. In this study, the effect of three different types of grinding media including forged steel, 15% chromium steel and 30% chromium steel on pyrite flotation at a range of collector (potassium amyl xanthate) concentration was investigated at pH 5.0 and 7.0, and the underpinning mechanism was determined through pulp chemistry measurement, X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) surface analysis and electrochemical measurement. It was found that grinding media had a different effect on pyrite flotation at pH 5.0 and 7.0. At pH 5.0, both iron contamination originating from grinding media and xanthate oxidation played an important role in pyrite flotation. While iron contamination on the pyrite surface depressed pyrite flotation, it might be reduced by xanthate oxidation. This explains higher pyrite flotation after grinding with chromium steel than forged steel and at a higher collector concentration. At pH 7.0, pyrite flotation was mainly controlled by xanthate concentration. At a low xanthate concentration, pyrite oxidation was the predominant anodic reaction and pyrite flotation was poor due to the inability to form dixanthogen. At a high xanthate concentration, the formation of dixanthogen became predominant, which facilitated pyrite flotation.Pyrite, as the most common sulphide mineral, contains considerable amounts of solid-solution gold, colloidal gold and gold micro-inclusions in its crystal structure ( In fact, pyrite floats the best at acid pH 4.0–5.0 or weakly alkaline pH 8.0 and poorly at neutral pH 6.0–7.0 ( From literature, the oxidation of xanthate and the reduction of Fe Other studies investigated the effect of grinding media on selective flotation of copper and lead sulphides against pyrite at alkaline pH. It has been found that the effect of grinding media on mineral flotation is through iron contamination and the modification of pulp chemistry ( In this paper, how different types of grinding media influence the formation of iron contamination, the oxidation of xanthate at different concentrations, the reduction of Fe Pyrite was purchased from GEOdiscoveries, Australia and its chemical compositions analysed by Inductively Coupled Plasma - Atomic Emission Spectrophotometry (ICP-AES) are shown in Potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) and NASCOL 442 were used as collector and frother, respectively, in flotation. The pH was adjusted by the addition of H 100 g pyrite was combined with 100 mL water pre-adjusted to pH 5.0 or pH 7.0 and then ground in a stainless-steel rod mill with forged steel, 15% chromium steel and 30% chromium steel grinding media to obtain a P After grinding, the pulp was transferred to a 1.5 L mechanical flotation cell at an agitation speed of 700 rpm. Different dosages of collector (PAX) and 60 g/t frother were added after pH adjustment and conditioned for 2 min after the addition of each reagent. Then air was introduced to the system at an air flow rate of 6 dm These pH values were chosen based on the conditions used in auriferous pyrite flotation plants as discussed previously. The results at pH 5.0 and 7.0 were reported in this paper and a comparative study at pH 8.5 will be reported in a separate paper. EDTA extraction was employed to quantify the amount of iron oxidation species formed on pyrite after grinding with different types of media. Samples for EDTA extraction were obtained from the flotation cell and frozen in liquid nitrogen. The EDTA extraction procedure was detailed by XPS analysis was used to investigate the surface compositions of pyrite. The samples for XPS analysis were collected from the flotation cell after pyrite was ground with different types of grinding media. The XPS analysis was detailed elsewhere ( The electrochemical measurement was conducted with a three-electrode electrochemical cell with a plate platinum counter electrode with 1 cm The electrochemical measurements were performed with the potentiostat of a Scanning Electrochemical Microscope (CH Instruments, US). The electrochemical cell was connected to the potentiostat and controlled by a computer software CHI 920D. Prior to each measurement, the working electrode surface was renewed by wet polishing with 1200 grit sand paper and thoroughly rinsed with deionized water. After putting the working electrode in a pH 5.0 or 7.0 buffer solution, an open circuit potential was first recorded and then cyclic voltammetry (CV) was employed to investigate the adsorption of xanthate on the pyrite surface. The refreshed pyrite electrode was first conditioned in the buffer solution containing different concentrations of PAX and then inserted into a fresh buffer solution for analysis. CV was started negatively from the OCP and scanned in the potential range of −0.8 V to 0.5 V at a scan rate of 0.02 V/s for five cycles. The potentials were reported against an Ag/AgCl reference electrode.  The influence of grinding media type on pyrite flotation at pH 7.0 was different. Insignificant differences in pyrite recovery and flotation rate were observed after grinding with the three types of grinding media at pH 7.0 as shown in Flotation was then conducted at different PAX dosages at pH 5.0 and 7.0, and the results are shown in At pH 7.0, for all the three types of grinding media, pyrite recovery gradually increased with the increase of PAX dosage, reaching around 80% at 240 g/t PAX. Unlike the case observed at pH 5.0, a similar pyrite recovery was obtained at the same PAX dosage regardless of the grinding media type at pH 7.0. In other words, at pH 7.0, the type of grinding media did not have a significant influence on pyrite flotation. Pulp potential E The samples analysed by EDTA extraction were collected from the flotation cell and the amount of EDTA extracted iron at pH 5.0 and pH 7.0 is also shown in The low E Then the ferrous and ferric ions may precipitate on the pyrite surface through hydrolysis following Reactions The charges released from media corrosion are consumed by the reduction of dissolved oxygen on the cathodic site, pyrite, through Reaction Grinding media becomes less active with an increase in chromium content ( It should be noted that the iron species originating from pyrite oxidation may also contribute to the amount of EDTA extracted iron. The less electrochemically active grinding media has a weaker galvanic interaction with pyrite, producing a more oxidizing condition. Therefore, pyrite oxidation would be the strongest after grinding with 30% chromium steel media, followed by 15% chromium steel media and forged steel media. XPS was applied to detect the species formed on the pyrite surfaces after grinding with different types of media in the absence and presence of 120 g/t PAX at pH 5.0 and pH 7.0. Characteristic photoelectron peaks of Fe, S, C and O were identified on all the samples at XPS survey scan mode. Carbon was present due to adventitious surface contamination. The atomic concentrations were normalized to Fe, S and O excluding C and the results are shown in It is observed from The high resolution XPS spectra of Fe 2p on the pyrite surfaces after grinding with forged steel, 15% chromium steel and 30% chromium steel in the absence and presence of 120 g/t PAX at pH 5.0 and pH 7.0 are shown in The high resolution XPS spectra of Fe 2p on the pyrite surfaces in the absence of PAX after grinding with forged steel, 15% chromium steel and 30% chromium steel at pH 5.0 are shown in The high resolution XPS spectra of Fe 2p recorded on the pyrite surfaces in the presence of 120 g/t PAX after grinding with forged steel, 15% chromium steel and 30% chromium steel at pH 5.0 are shown in The high resolution XPS spectra of Fe 2p on the pyrite surfaces in the absence of PAX after grinding with forged steel, 15% chromium steel and 30% chromium steel at pH 7.0 are shown in The high resolution XPS spectra of Fe 2p recorded on the pyrite surfaces in the presence of 120 g/t PAX after grinding with forged steel, 15% chromium steel and 30% chromium steel at pH 7.0 are shown in CV was employed to study the interaction of PAX with pyrite at pH 5.0 and 7.0. It is observed from The j-E curves of the pyrite electrode in the absence and presence of different PAX concentrations in buffer solution of pH 7.0 are shown in It is observed from Xanthate adsorbs on the pyrite surface through the oxidation of xanthate ions to form dixanthogen (X It is reported that the oxidation of xanthate on the pyrite surface could lead to the dissolution of iron hydroxides formed through pyrite oxidation following Reaction Therefore, pyrite flotation at pH 5.0 was controlled by the amount of iron hydroxide formed on the surface and the concentration of xanthate. Iron hydroxide formed on the surface depressed pyrite flotation, but iron hydroxide might be reduced as a result of xanthate oxidation and adsorption on the pyrite surface. The reduction of iron hydroxide and the oxidation of xanthate were facile at pH 5.0. As shown in The CV analysis in this study showed that at pH 7.0 the formation of dixanthogen became difficult because pyrite oxidation occurred in preference to xanthate oxidation. The E Based on the amount of EDTA extracted iron in Therefore, pyrite flotation at pH 7.0 was controlled by the concentration of xanthate while the amount of iron hydroxide formed on the surface played an insignificant role. At a low xanthate concentration, the formation of dixanthogen was inhibited as a result of the preferential pyrite oxidation. As a result, pyrite exhibited poor flotation performance. At a high xanthate concentration, xanthate oxidation became easier than pyrite oxidation and more xanthate ions in solution were available to be oxidized to dixanthogen to enhance the hydrophobicity of the pyrite surface and promote pyrite flotation. The interaction of grinding media with collector and its effect on pyrite flotation were different at pH 5.0 and 7.0. At pH 5.0, grinding with 30% chromium steel achieved the highest pyrite recovery, followed by 15% chromium steel and forged steel at the same collector dosage. This was because the high chromium steel produced less iron contamination on the pyrite surface and also a higher pulp potential making the oxidation of xanthate on the pyrite surface easier. The oxidation of xanthate readily dissolved the iron oxidation species and therefore the negative effect of iron contamination emanating from grinding media might be mitigated with a higher collector concentration. At pH 7.0, pyrite recovery was generally lower than that at pH 5.0 using the same type of grinding media at the same collector concentration. This was due to the formation of less dixanthogen at pH 7.0 than at pH 5.0. At pH 7.0, the grinding media type did not show any significant influence on pyrite flotation because pyrite flotation was mainly controlled by the collector concentration. At a low collector concentration, extensive pyrite oxidation was easier to occur than xanthate oxidation, inhibiting the formation of dixanthogen and leading to poor pyrite flotation. A high collector concentration reduced the potential required for xanthate oxidation, making it easier to occur than pyrite oxidation, facilitating pyrite flotation. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the