Objective
                  To report a case of a peri-prosthetic hip fracture fixed using a previously unreported technique of intramedullary nailing with dual proximal fixation.
               
                  Case summary
                  An 81-year-old nursing home resident suffered a multi-fragmentary peri-prosthetic hip fracture around a Birmingham Hip Resurfacing arthroplasty (BHR), which was fixed using a novel technique.
               
                  Discussion
                  Such fractures pose a significant surgical dilemma with regards to the optimal method of treatment. The increasing popularity of these implants suggests that these fractures will become increasingly common.
               
                  Conclusion
                  We believe that our technique provides a practical and satisfactory solution to these fractures.Post-traumatic pertrochanteric fractures following resurfacing arthroplasty of the hip have rarely been reported in literature. The low risk of wear, dislocation, proximal bone preservation and the long-term survival of the prosthesis together have revived an interest in resurfacing arthroplasty in recent years. Subcapital fractures of the neck of femur have been described most often as a complication following resurfacing arthroplasty. The treatment of subcapital fractures following resurfacing arthroplasty is inherently different, if not simpler, from the overall management of pertrochanteric fractures around these implants. The complex nature of the injury associated with the poor proximal femoral bone stock in the elderly provides a significant surgical challenge. The difficulties associated with the fixation of osteoporotic bones irrespective of the type of device used (intra or extramedullary) versus the complications associated with a complex revision procedure in the presence of a pertrochanteric fracture, remain the main surgical dilemma when deciding on the treatment of these fractures. To our knowledge, use of a cephalomedullary nail with dual proximal fixation and a trochanteric starting point has not been described in literature for the treatment of osteoporotic, peri-prosthetic hip fractures following resurfacing arthroplasty. We present a case of a multi-fragmentary, pertrochanteric fracture distal to a well fixed hip resurfacing implant, treated with the Holland universal nailing system An 81-year-old male nursing home resident sustained a peri-prosthetic pertrochanteric fracture of his right hip following a mechanical fall whilst trying to get up from a chair. The patient had previously undergone a Birmingham Hip Resurfacing arthroplasty (BHR) The initial radiographs performed in the A&E following the fall revealed an AO Type 31 A3 fracture of the right hip ( The procedure was performed under fluoroscopic guidance. The operative technique as recommended by the manufacturer and from previous studies using the Holland universal nailing system Post-operatively the patient had pain free ROM of his right hip and could stand with the support of a frame and assistance of two physiotherapists from post-operative day (POD) four. He was discharged from orthopaedic care on the 10th post-operative day and was transferred back to the nursing home. He was readmitted 10 weeks post-surgery following an episode of aspiration pneumonia and was treated with antibiotics. At 10 weeks follow-up he was able to full weight bear on the operated limb during the bed to chair transfers without any pain. He had pain free ROM in the right hip with flexion to 120°, extension 10° abduction 30° and adduction 20. However his condition deteriorated during the hospital stay for the aspiration pneumonia and he suffered from respiratory failure and sustained a cardiac arrest and died two weeks later, three months post surgery. Peri-prosthetic pertrochanteric fractures are becoming increasingly common due to the popularity of resurfacing arthroplasty of the hip. Extended use of these implants in the elderly population creates a challenge when traumatic hip (peri-prosthetic intertrochanteric and sub trochanteric) fractures occur around these implants, since the elderly tend to have a significantly higher peri- and post-operative mortality rate. Stable internal fixation of these fractures allowing early mobilization may be justified in this population when the medical condition precludes a major revision procedure. A variety of fixation devices have been reported in literature to stabilize these injuries varying from cannulated screws, locking Peskun et al The intramedullary nails have the advantage that a minimally invasive technique can be used for their insertion, which reduces the amount of blood loss and soft tissue compromise. The mismatch in the electrode potentials of the metal in the femoral stem (cobalt chrome) and the implant (stainless steel) increases the chance of galvanic corrosion. Intramedullary nails (like the Holland nails In conclusion, more evidence will be required in future to ascertain the ideal method of treatment for these peri-prosthetic fractures, especially in the elderly population. It is debatable whether a major revision procedure, taking into consideration the associated co morbidities, is warranted in the elderly to treat these complex injuries. However, we believe that the Holland All authors have none to declare.