We describe our experience of the operative treatment of sequelae from high-energy injuries of the clavicle.
                  Surgery was performed on 17 patients who often had more than one indication. This included the following: painful non-union (nine patients), neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS), hypertrophic non-union three patients, hypertrophic malunion five patients, bony spike two patients), vascular TOS (two patients) and brachial plexus neuroma (one patient). At clinical review, functional outcome was assessed by using a Constant score, a visual analogue pain score, return to work status and by patient subjective satisfaction rating.
                  We performed 11 decompressions with callus excision, three simple neurolysis, eight fixations for non-union, one osteotomy and three excisions of bone spikes. Two patients required a further decompression procedure; one patient developed deep sepsis requiring sequestrectomy and two patients required removal of metalwork. At mean follow-up of 49 months the average Constant score was 64 (range 27–93). The mean pain score was 4. Ten patients returned to work at an average of 8 months. Five patients were completely asymptomatic, eight reported occasional paraesthesiae and three had significant cold intolerance. Patient satisfaction scores were 14% very satisfied, 50% satisfied, 14% unsatisfied and 22% very unsatisfied.
                  High-energy clavicle injuries can cause significant morbidity due to non-union and TOS. Refractory symptoms can be improved by operative intervention with satisfactory functional outcome. However, the majority of patients experience some degree of residual symptoms.Fractures of the clavicle are commonly encountered in daily orthopaedic practice, accounting for 35–44% of shoulder girdle injuries Following high-energy trauma, refractory symptoms may arise from a variety of causes including brachial plexus injury, non-union, malunion and secondary thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS). It is still not clear which patients with clavicular fractures are likely to develop late complications and there has been little discussion about high-energy injuries in relation to late complications. We describe our experience with specific regard to the operative treatment of the sequelae of high-energy injuries and their outcome. We reviewed patients presenting to Coventry and Warwickshire Hospital and those referred to the Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital, Stanmore, with symptoms in their upper limb following a fracture of the ipsilateral clavicle. All patients had anteroposterior and 30°-caudad tilted radiographs of the injured clavicle ( The patients’ notes and imaging studies were reviewed and the patients were interviewed. The fractures were classified using the Robinson classification We identified 17 patients who underwent surgery between 1985 and 1999 for symptoms in their upper limb. The patients presented between 4 months and 2 years following a fracture of the ipsilateral clavicle. Data were available for all 17 patients, all of whom had a history of high-energy clavicular fractures. Seven were involved as passengers in high velocity road traffic accidents, four had accidents riding motorbikes, two had a direct heavy weight crush injury on their shoulders, one had fallen down a mountain slope while riding a mountain bike, one fell off a horse during racing, one fell from a height and one was assaulted directly on the shoulder with a baseball bat. There was often more than one indication for surgery, including secondary neurogenic TOS (three patients with hypertrophic non-union, five patients with hypertrophic malunion, two patients with bony spike), nine patients with painful non-union, two patients with vascular TOS and one patient with brachial plexus neuroma. Two patients had sustained significant multiple trauma. Three patients were excluded; one was lost to follow-up (living abroad), another had a postoperative follow-up of only 5 months and subsequently, did not attend any appointments. At the time of this patient’s last attendance the patient was making a satisfactory recovery with minimal pain and the fracture union was progressing. The third patient had sustained a concomitant major brachial plexus injury and we felt it inappropriate to include this patient’s results, as they would have been greatly affected by the brachial plexus pathology. Of the remaining 14 patients, there were 12 males and 2 females. The mean age was 40 years (range 23–59 years). The average follow-up was 49 months with a minimum of 18 months. The most notable symptoms we found were dynamic or static upper limb dysaesthesiae, paraesthesiae and pain. There was marked variation in brachial plexus symptoms, depending on the exact site of plexus compression, but the symptoms often disappeared at rest. Shoulder abduction, external rotation, overhead activities, lifting and generally loading of the clavicle tended to aggravate the dysaesthesiae (dynamic symptoms). In some patients, the symptoms occurred during their sleep and the initial impression was often that of a peripheral entrapment neuropathy. Clinical examination suggested a static or dynamic compression of the brachial plexus at the costoclavicular space. Ten patients had dynamic symptoms only, two had static symptoms only and two had dynamic and static symptoms. According to Robinson’s classification Surgery often involved more than one operative procedure per patient. We carried out eleven decompressions with callus excision, three simple neurolysis procedures, eight internal fixations (six with iliac bone grafting and two with graft taken from the hypertrophic callus) for non-union, three excisions of bone spikes impinging on the brachial plexus and one corrective clavicular osteotomy internally fixed and bone grafted. The implants used for internal fixation were dynamic compression plate (DCP) in three cases, limited contact dynamic compression plates (LCDCP) in two cases and reconstruction plates in four cases. Two patients had implant failure (one patient with a DC plate and one with a 3.5 One patient required further decompression of the brachial plexus, one patient developed deep sepsis requiring sequestrectomy and two patients required removal of symptomatic metalwork. The average postoperative Constant score was 64 (range 27–93). The mean pain score on visual analogue scale was 4 out of 10. Three patients returned to their original occupation, seven returned to lighter duties or undertook different, lighter occupation and four did not return to work. The average time of symptom resolution following surgery was 7 months, and the average time for return to work was 8 months. Five patients were completely asymptomatic or had minimal symptoms, eight reported residual symptoms (hand dysaesthesiae or hypoaesthesia, arm twitching, neck pain, chest wall hypoaesthesia) and one significant cold intolerance. Patient satisfaction scores were 14% very satisfied, 50% satisfied, 14% unsatisfied and 22% very unsatisfied. We further analysed the outcomes of surgical decompression of the brachial plexus although this operation was often combined with other procedures (for example ORIF or excision of bone spike). The mean Constant score of these patients was 60 and the mean pain score was 5. The patient satisfaction scores in this subgroup were 18% very satisfied, 54% satisfied, 10% unsatisfied and 18% very unsatisfied. Adult middle third clavicular fractures are commonly regarded as benign injuries with a satisfactory outcome if treated conservatively, despite reports challenging this view Problems following clavicular fractures are, a cosmetically displeasing end result, delayed union, persisting non-union, chronic pain, residual paraesthesia, local tenderness, altered shoulder function as a result of deformity or pain, partial loss of shoulder motion (mainly total elevation), TOS, thoracic duct injury, subclavian artery or vein compression, thrombosis or pseudoaneurysm, brachial plexus palsy and refracture Watson-Jones Jupiter and Leffert Shen et al. in their large series of operatively managed clavicular fractures reported a 78% high-energy injury rate without secondary TOS with a 4.4-year follow-up We are not aware of the incidence of late TOS in patients with clavicular fractures. All our patients had sustained high-energy injuries prior to development of their symptoms, two of them having suffered multiple trauma. All the patients had Robinson 2B-1 or 2B-2 type injuries, which imply extensive bony and soft tissue trauma. So far we have not observed late neurovascular complications developing in patients with low energy injuries. We believe the high-energy factor to be crucial in the development of these complications. The fact that one of the institutions in this study (RNOH, Stanmore) is a tertiary referral centre makes it impossible to determine the overall number of clavicle fractures treated during the period of this study. Larger and longer epidemiological studies are required to determine the incidence of late neurovascular complications and their correlation with high-energy injuries. The shape of the middle third of the clavicle greatly determines the load distribution on the implant. Jupiter and Leffert described the mechanism of non-union and implant failure The predominant feature in our series is the delayed development of static or dynamic brachial plexus compression symptoms. Postoperatively, only five of the 14 patients were asymptomatic or had minimal symptoms. Despite successful treatment of the underlying pathology, the majority of the patients continued to experience some degree of residual symptoms. The mean postoperative pain score was high (4/10 in visual analogue scale). Eight patients continued having dysaesthesiae and three patients had persisting cold intolerance. The mean Constant score in our series was 64. We have been unable to compare our results with other series, because of the lack of a consistent scoring system. Another problem is the suitability of a scoring system for this particular group of patients. It appears that the pain origin in our patients was mainly neurogenic. The Constant scoring system has been widely used for the assessment of shoulder function with readily reproducible results but the pain score section refers to musculoskeletal pain which is clearly different to neurogenic pain in terms of character and management. The patient satisfaction score was low and 36% of the patients rated the result as unsatisfactory. Interestingly, the majority of the unsatisfied patients had good Constant scores. The limited number of cases prevented any meaningful statistical analysis. High-energy clavicular fractures can cause significant morbidity due to secondary TOS, non-union and malunion. We recommend a longer follow-up, since we anticipate a higher incidence of complications in this group. A lower threshold for early operative intervention may be appropriate in patients with high-energy injuries. Refractory symptoms can be improved by operative intervention with satisfactory functional outcome; however, the majority of patients experience some degree of residual symptoms.