India has around 28.52 billion tons of hematite and magnetite ore reserves, over 20% of which is in the form of fines. Also during the mining, crushing and washing of ore, huge quantities of fines are generated, majority of which end up into tailing ponds owing to their high alumina contents (∼10–15%). Selective dispersion flocculation is a promising route for beneficiation of such fine ores as opposed to conventional gravity and magnetic separation techniques; however, one requires selective reagents for effective beneficiation. We are engaged in the design and development of selective reagents for beneficiation of iron ores based on a molecular modelling approach. In the present study we have employed density functional theory (DFT) to calculate the interaction energy of hematite (0 0 0 1), goethite (1 0 0), gibbsite (0 0 1) and kaolinite (0 0 1) surfaces with carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC). The magnitudes of the computed interaction energies follow the trend:
                  Hematite > Goethite ∼ Gibbsite ∼ Kaolinite Al–OH terminated > Kaolinite Si–O terminated.
                  Electronic structure analysis revealed that the O-atoms in the hydroxyl and carboxyl groups of CMC form coordinate covalent bonds with surface Fe-atoms of hematite while forming only weak hydrogen bonds with goethite, gibbsite and kaolinite surfaces thus explaining the trends in the interaction energies.
                  These DFT findings were validated by experimental flocculation results which show that a final concentrate of 64.4% Fe, 4.2% Al2O3, and 1.9% Silica with a yield of 56% can be obtained from a feed containing 56.5% Fe, 7.0% Alumina, and 4.9% Silica.
                  Mineral wise estimation of chemical assay shows that CMC can be selective in flocculating hematite mineral particles over goethite, gibbsite and kaolinite. Our work thus highlights the important role of molecular modeling techniques such as DFT in screening and design of selective reagents for beneficiation of alumina-rich iron ore slimes.Huge quantities of slimes are produced during the mining and processing of iron ores, especially in India. Due to their high alumina content (10–15%), these slimes cannot be used for blast furnace operations because of the deleterious effects of high alumina contents on blast furnace operations. In current practice, these slimes are being dumped into massive tailing ponds. Consequently, a significant quantity of iron ore (∼10–25%) containing ∼40–60% Fe is wasted resulting in huge economic losses and as well as various environmental problems associated with the creation of tailing ponds ( In our earlier studies, we have demonstrated that using selective flocculation technique it is possible to beneficiate these fines and slimes having particle sizes even less than 37 µm with desired yield and Fe grade. Starch and guar gum have been used as selective flocculants for hematite and goethite ( In the present study, we have investigated, using DFT, the interactions of CMC with the surfaces of the key minerals present in alumina-rich iron ore slimes, viz., hematite (Fe The CMC-mineral surface interactions were modelled using DFT as implemented in PWscf code within the Quantum Espresso-5.0.2 package ( where E The iron ore sample was obtained from Barsua iron ore mine, Steel Authority of India Limited, Odisha, India. These were high alumina containing iron ore lumps which were crushed and ground to -37 µm size (- 400 mesh) in order to represent Indian iron ore slimes. The particles size analysis was performed by Horiba LA 950 particle size analyser. It was found that approximately 90% of the particles was below 10.3 µm and the mean particle size was 3.9 µm The series of steps involved in batch selective flocculation process is depicted in In our previous communication, we had studied flocculation of iron ore slimes using guar gum, which is composed of galactose and mannose units. The backbone of guar gum is a linear chain of β-1,4-linked mannose units, while galactose residue is 1,6-linked at roughly every second mannose forming short branches ( It can be seen from the computed interaction energies presented in The computed interaction energies thus suggest that CMC would adsorb strongly on the hematite surface (at least 2.3 times stronger) as compared to goethite, gibbsite, and kaolinite surfaces. Significantly high interaction energy differences between hematite and the other minerals point towards the possibility of selective flocculation of hematite from the other minerals present in iron ore slimes. In comparison with water, the interaction energies of CMC are found to be higher in all the cases indicating that CMC will be able to replace water present on the surface of the minerals. The interaction energies obtained for flat and vertical confirmations are reported in the previous section for each mineral surface ( Both flat and vertical conformations of CMC on the hematite surface were studied. It was found that in both the conformations, there is a formation of hydrogen bonds (O- - -H) between O-atoms of hematite surface and H-atoms of CMC apart from the chemical bonds between surface Fe-atoms and O-atoms (Fe–O) of CMC The CMC molecule shows relatively weaker interactions with the other three minerals, namely goethite, gibbsite and kaolinite, as compared to hematite. On goethite (1 0 0) surface, the Fe – atoms and on gibbsite (0 0 1) surface, the Al- atoms are saturated by hydroxyl groups (–OH). Thus the –OH terminated surface allows only formation of weak hydrogen bonds with the CMC molecule which results in lower interaction energies compared to hematite ( In order to further elucidate the nature of the interaction mechanisms, we have plotted the electron density difference iso-surfaces at 0.003 e/Å Several experiments were performed in order to arrive at the correct combination of input parameters such as pH, pulp density, flocculant dosage and settling time. Alkaline pH above 8.5 was found suitable for selective flocculation using CMC as flocculant. It was observed from the experimental studies that pulp density, flocculant dosage and settling time are interdependent. At 1% pulp density and 2000 g/ton CMC dosage,30 min of settling time is required to achieve the desired results; while at 10% pulp density and 400 g/ton dosage 5 min of settling time gives better yield and selectivity. The results obtained at the optimized conditions for 1% and 10% pulp densities ( In order to check the selectivity of CMC, mineral wise compositions were estimated from the elemental chemical assay information using the method proposed by The mineralogical recoveries in the concentrate were compared with the computed interaction energies of CMC with mineral surfaces ( Theoretical and experimental techniques were employed to investigate the adsorption behaviour of CMC on hematite, goethite, gibbsite and kaolinite surfaces. We performed molecular modelling using the framework of density functional theory to get molecular level information regarding adsorption of CMC on mineral surfaces. Our computations revealed that O-atoms of hydroxyl and carbonyl groups form coordinate covalent bonds with Fe-atoms of hematite while H and O-atoms of hematite and other minerals form hydrogen bond with the O and H atoms of CMC molecule. The presence of coordinate covalent bonds was validated by electron density difference plots. The computed interaction energies follow the trend: Hematite > Goethite ∼ Al–OH terminated Kaolinite ∼ Gibbsite > Si–O terminated Kaolinite, which signifies that CMC would be more selective towards hematite than the other minerals. The theoretical findings were confirmed by selective dispersion-flocculation experiments where the Fe grade of a typical slime sample improved from 56.5% to 64.4% with a Fe-recovery of 63% and Al The authors are grateful to M/s Steel Authority of India Ltd for providing the samples of natural iron ore for their investigations. The help, support and encouragement received from Mr K. Ananth Krishnan, Chief Technology Officer (CTO), Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) during the course of this work is gratefully acknowledged. The authors declare no competing financial interest. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 