Carbon fiber reinforced aluminum matrix composites are used as advanced materials in aerospace and electronic industries. In order to investigate role of aspect ratio of carbon fiber on fracture toughness of aluminum matrix composite, the composite was produced using stir casting. Al–8.5%Si–5%Mg selected as a matrix. The samples were prepared with three volume fractions (1, 2 and 3) and three aspect ratios (300, 500 and 800). Three-point bending test was performed on the specimens to evaluate the fracture toughness of the materials. The results showed that the fracture toughness of composites depends on both fiber volume fraction and aspect ratio. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was employed to elucidate the fracture behavior and crack deflection of composites. The study also, showed that the toughening mechanism depends strongly on fiber volume fraction, aspect ratio and the degree of wetting between fiber and matrix.Over the past few years, carbon fibers have been considered as very important reinforcements for aluminum (Al) and its alloys in fabricating advanced composite materials. Carbon fiber (CF) reinforcement/aluminium matrix composites are of great interest because of their high specific strength and stiffness, low coefficient of thermal expansion, and high thermal/electrical conductivity There are some different techniques for fabrication of composite materials consisting of aluminium, matrix and carbon fibers. The methods are: squeeze casting, metal spray and metal infiltration The main problems encountered in the development of Al/CF composites are the reactivity of carbon fibers with aluminum and the poor wetting characteristics of carbon by liquid aluminum The carbon–aluminum interface importantly affects the overall performance of composite materials. Improper wetting and chemical reactions at the interface during synthesis or under service conditions can degrade the mechanical properties of the composites. The reaction at the carbon–aluminum interface at temperatures above 800 From the viewpoint of composite making, fabrication of Al/CF composite divided in to several routes, regarding their production temperatures. The processes can be sorted in to (1) Production in liquid state, (2) production in semisolid state and (3) production in solid state The liquid processes have several advantages on other production routes. High production rate, low cost and potential of production of complex parts are some of them. This route has several subsets but among them stir casting is the most popular Many investigations The high strength carbon fiber with trade name of C-Sheet 240 from CRI company was used as a reinforcement. Since one of the most important problems in casting of Al/CF is production of harmless phase of Al The used carbon fibers were cut in three different aspect ration (l/d), i.e. (300, 500 and 800) using a special cutter. Since the surface of carbon fibers had been coated with epoxy resin they were put in a mixer for a short time to separate them from each other. In order to manufacture Al/CF composite with different aspect ratio, carbon fibers were added to melt Al-alloy, gradually. Then the composite was mixed by a propeller to make vortex flow condition. To avoid bubble coalescence the shape of propeller and its position was under control. Finally, a series of Al/CF composite reinforced with both different volume fraction (i.e. 1, 2 and 3%) and different aspect ratios (i.e. 300, 500 and 800) were made using casting method. To elucidate the role of carbon fiber on crack propagation in Al/CF composite, the surfaces of the samples were polished to achieve a surface roughness of about 3 The standard fracture toughness samples were produced according to the ASTM E399 standard. The test was done by Zwick 250KN test machine at the crosshead speed of about 5 Simultaneously, upon loading on samples, the pre-crack started to propagate with a special pattern on the surface of composite. The result of the test is a load—displacement graph that shows the load drops suddenly after reaching to a maximum. After testing of the specimens under three-point bending test, the Surface in front of pre-crack was investigated using both scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (LEO 1450 VP) and optical microscopes. A typical graph of load—displacement for a sample with 3 To clarify the fracture mechanism of Al/CF composites during three-point bending test, the results of microscopic studies were useful. The interaction between the reinforcement and the crack front can cause the crack to be deflected and to become non-planar. The crack deflection takes place when the crack intersects to some obstacles that cannot pass through them (   Some of the other toughening mechanisms which can be appeared after crack propagation are micro-crack toughening, crack branching and fiber breakage.  The other toughening mechanism that occurs in the current composite is the fracture of fiber in the path of crack propagation. SEM micrograph of fiber breakage in the Al/CF composite are shown in In summary, to find out which kind of mechanism is dominated, the results of three point bending test can be useful. Based on The effect of carbon fiber aspect ratio on fracture toughness of aluminium matrix composite was studied in this study and the following results are obtained: Plane-strain fracture toughness of the aluminum alloy improved as carbon fiber was added to it. KIC of Al/CF depends on both volume fraction and aspect ratio of fiber. Crack deflection is a dominant fracture mechanism of Al/CF, although crack bowing, debonding, fiber pull out, fiber breakage, fiber branching and micro-crack toughening observed in all samples.