The purpose of this study was to assess the solubilization of silicates during the chemical and bacterial leaching of finely ground black schist in shake flasks. The main sulfide minerals were pyrrhotite (Fe1−xS) and pyrite (FeS2) with lesser amounts of sphalerite (ZnS), pentlandite (Ni,Fe,Co)9O8), violarite (FeNi2S4), and chalcopyrite (CuFeS2). Quartz, micas, and feldspars were the main Si-containing phases. Dissolution of the non-sulfidic minerals was monitored by analysis of Si, Al, Ca, Mg, and K solubilized from the black schist in 30day leaching experiments at 22±2°C. The dissolution of main constituent elements from silicate minerals was a function of the pH of the leach solution and no direct role of bacterial action on the solubilization of silicates was evident. Ferrous or ferric iron addition did not affect the concentrations of elements dissolved from silicates except for mica interlayer K+, which was incorporated into the jarosite fraction.In the chemical and bacterial leaching of sulfide ores, the pH and oxidation reduction potential (ORP) are influenced by several concurrent oxidation, reduction, dissolution, and precipitation reactions. Acidophilic Fe- and S-oxidizing bacteria, H Silicates generally react in bioleaching systems at slower rates than sulfide minerals. They can impact the leaching process because, depending on the parent silicate, the release of Si and Al consumes protons and may release potentially toxic elements such as fluoride ( The purpose of this study was to examine the dissolution of non-sulfide phases occurring during the leaching of a black schist ore. The general mineralogical and geochemical features of the deposit, subsequently developed to a bioheap leach mine by Talvivaara Mining Co. Plc., have been previously described ( The sample of black schist ore used in this study has been previously described ( The leaching experiments were carried out in 250 Dissolved ions in HCl-preserved supernatants of leach solutions were analyzed using inductively-coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy ( The reaction of the black schist sample in leach solutions was initially acid-consuming. Without a pH control, the pH of leach suspensions in chemical controls increased from initial pH 1.5 to > The solubilization of Si, Al, Ca, K, Na, Ca, Mg, and Fe from black schist was monitored over the 30-day contact time. The dissolution of Si and Al was almost congruent (  Ca precipitates in bioleaching systems as gypsum (CaSO The concentrations of the alkali metal K were lower than those of Si, Al, and the alkaline earth metals Ca and Mg and were unrelated to the measured pH values. In inoculated cultures the dissolved K remained very low during the time course ( The solubilization of feldspar group of minerals detected in the black schist (anorthite, microcline, and plagioclase) was highly dependent on the pH, indicating the important role of acid attack in the leaching process. Bacterial leaching reactions did not have direct role in the solubilization of these minerals. Indirectly, of course, acid production from sulfide minerals in the bioleaching enhances the dissolution of silicates. In the case of micas, chemical leaching is mediated by acid attack and supplemental iron had no direct effect on the leaching of non-sulfidic phases. In the bioleaching system, dissolution of K, regardless of its source, is associated with K-jarosite precipitation and therefore the dissolved K concentrations were low and showed no relationship with the pH of the leach solution within the stability field of jarosite. Partial funding for this work was received from the