The following study is a review of 3 different treatment methods for treating comminuted distal periprosthetic femur fractures in 23 patients over the age of 70 (average age 80, range 70–90). Reconstruction techniques included 7 allograft prosthesis composite (APC), 9 revision systems (RSA), and 7 distal femur endoprosthesis (DFR). Operative time and blood loss were found to be significantly less in RSA and DFR patients compared to the APC patients. Hospital stay was shortest for the DFR patients. No significant difference was found in the 6-week or 6-month Knee Society Scores. Our preliminary results demonstrate that in experienced hands, distal femur endoprosthesis should be considered in patients with advanced age and poor bone quality who require early mobilization.Periprosthetic distal femoral fractures around total knee arthroplasty are a highly complex reconstructive challenge, particularly in the presence of bone comminution and poor bone quality in elderly patients. With the number of primary total knee arthroplasties annually increasing to more than 300 000 a year in the United States Our group It is the authors' practice to revise, rather that attempt to fix, periprosthetic fractures of the knee which are very close to the femoral or tibial implants, particularly when associated with osteoporosis and comminution. Younger patients with such fractures and significant bone loss around the knee are managed with an APC while patients over the age of 70 The purpose of this study was to review and compare the short term results in elderly patients treated with an allograft prosthesis composite (APC), standard revision systems with augments (RSA), or distal femur replacement endoprosthesis (DFR) for comminuted distal periprosthetic femur fractures with significant bone loss. Follow-up was restricted to 6 A retrospective review of our prospectively collected database was undertaken between the years 2000 to 2010 after obtaining institutional ethics review board approval. Patients were included if they had a previously uncomplicated TKA and sustained a periprosthetic fracture secondary to trauma. Inclusion criteria included age greater than 70 Using our database as well as hospital and office charts, we obtained demographic information, operative time, blood loss, acute-care and rehabilitation hospital length of stay, mechanism of injury, fracture configuration, and perioperative and postoperative complications. Patients were clinically evaluated with follow-up at six weeks, three months, and 6 During the ten-year study period, there were twenty-eight patients treated with either an APC, RSA or DFR for periprosthetic fracture. Four patients were below the age of 70 and one elderly patient who underwent a DFR for a comminuted supracondylar fracture in a native knee were excluded, leaving 23 knees in 23 patients for inclusion in the study. There were 7 APC, 9 RSA, and 7 DFR patients with average ages of 79 (range 70–90), 74 (range 70–81), and 76 (range 70–84), respectively. Surgery was undertaken only after each patient was optimized medically preoperatively and informed consent was obtained. All patients received perioperative antibiotics. All surgery was performed by one of two surgeons. The majority of the APC cases were performed early in the review while DFR were performed at the later part of the study interval. RSA cases tended to be performed at the midpoint of the review and when bone loss was reduced to APC and DFR. Eighteen of the APC and RSA cases were performed using Zimmer NexGen Revision System (Zimmer Orthopedics, Warsaw, Indiana) while all DFR cases were performed using the Stryker GMRS system (Stryker Orthopaedics, Kalamazoo, MI). One case in the APC group was performed using the Depuy PFC system (Depuy Orthopaedics, Warsaw, Indiana) and one RSA was performed using the Stryker Triathalon System (Stryker Orthopaedics, Kalamazoo, MI). In all cases, both the femoral and tibial components were revised to stemmed implants. Postoperatively, all patients received a minimum of 24 All preoperative and postoperative radiographs were reviewed by two blinded fellowship trained arthroplasty surgeons to ensure that the patients met appropriate inclusion criteria and assessed for radiographic outcomes and complications. Patient demographics, reason for index total arthroplasty, medical comorbidities, type of revision, KSS scores at 6 Operative time ( The average hospital implant cost of each construct used in the reconstructions, at our institution was APC $8000, RSA $10500, and DFR $12500. The atypically low cost of the APC can be explained by the procurement and preparation of all allografts at our own hospital. In other circumstances, a higher cost for the APC procedure can be expected. Specifically, a distal femoral allograft cost our group $1000. Also, it should be noted that the cost of the DFR would have been reduced to $9000 if we had used the GMRS all-polyethylene tibia. It is possible that when these factors are taken into account, there may not be any real difference in reconstruction costs between groups.   Complications in the APC group included one deep infection, one nonunion, and one case of instability requiring revisions for the APC. Each patient was treated with surgical management. Specifically, the deep infection occurred 4.5 The complications in the RSA included two superficial infections, one dislocation, and one case of instability. One of the superficial infections was successfully treated with antibiotic therapy while the second has continued to be problematic and had not healed at 6 No complications were experienced in the DFR group. In addition, there were no perioperative myocardial infarctions, deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolisms, or cerebrovascular events in any of the three groups. Periprosthetic fractures around total knee arthroplasty in the elderly are associated with a number of factors including trauma, pathologic bone, loose implants, as well as neurologic disorders such as epilepsy, Parkinson's Disease, Cerebellar Ataxia and myasthenia gravis In the simplest scenario where fracture fixation is not possible, using revision components to reconstitute knee function and reconstitute bone loss is ideal since surgeons are most comfortable using this type of prosthesis. Previous studies have demonstrated good results using standard revision components utilizing either constrained or unconstrained components, as required When bone loss is of a magnitude beyond the capacity for standard revision components to achieve a stable platform for reconstruction, the use of APC has been advocated by some authors. Due to the resource intensity and technical complexity of this method of treatment, it typically occurs in specialized, high volume revision arthroplasty centers There are few studies in the literature describing the results of DFR for treatment of complex total knee revisions or periprosthetic fractures. Jones et al reviewed 16 cases using S-ROM (Depuy Orthopedics, Johnson & Johnson Co, Warsaw, IN) mobile bearing hinge total knee arthroplasties for ligamentous instability and/or bone loss Only a single, recently published, study has looked specifically at DFR for periprosthetic fractures. Mortazavi et al described their results in 20 patients ranging in age from 54 to 86 (mean 69.5 The results from the current study demonstrate significantly shorter operative time, less blood loss, and shorter hospital stay in elderly patients who underwent DFR as compared to APC. The findings for patients treated with RSA fit somewhere in between the DFR and APC. Similar to DFR, the RSA patients generally had the benefit of being able to immediately weight bear as tolerated post operatively, thus allowing rapid return to pre-fracture function sooner than with APC. Unlike the previous study by Mortazavi et al Several possible confounding factors could have affected the results. APC patients were treated mostly at the beginning of the study, RSA in the middle, and DFR near the end. Review of the senior authors' practice demonstrated that length of stay was likely not affected by treatment timing since no significant changes were made in discharge practice, postoperative analgesics, rehabilitation protocols, or destination of discharge over the ten-year period. In addition, patients with previous failed open reductions did not appear to influence their respective group's results. A subsequent review of the five patients with previous ORIF (3 APC, 2 DFR) demonstrated no hardware related differences. Overall blood loss and operative time were not significantly affected by the previous surgeries since the time for hardware removal was minimal. Blood loss differences could best be explained through the time required for reconstruction and operative time without the use of a tourniquet. Specifically, increased operative time was required to fashion the APC resulting in increased time with an open femoral canal. Tourniquets had to be deflated after 2 Although this is a case controlled study, with a small number of patients that were followed for a relatively short period of time, there are several interesting findings that should be considered. First, in our experience, treatment of periprosthetic fractures in the elderly using DFR does not result in increased complication rates as compared to APC and RSA. Our DFR patients recovered faster, had fewer complications, and left hospital sooner than the other groups. Although the reasons for this are likely multifactorial, it may be related to the shortened surgical time and decreased blood loss. Second, this study demonstrates that treatment of periprosthetic fractures in the elderly can result in reasonably good function by six months using APC, RSA, or DFR. Similar KSS scores, change in ambulatory function and level of independence were found in each group at six month follow-up. Although this study is underpowered to distinguish any potential difference between groups, it does demonstrate that even though APC and DFR involve larger and more complex reconstruction techniques, there may not actually be a difference when performed by experienced surgeons. Third, there is an assumption that the use of a distal femoral replacement prosthesis is cost prohibitive in revision total knee settings. A thorough and formal cost-benefit analysis must be undertaken to determine the true difference in the reconstructions. However, preliminary data in the current study demonstrate that the initial differences in the price of the prosthesis, could be recouped in the shortened hospital stay in and of itself. A larger study would likely demonstrate that when the cost of ambulatory dysfunction and prolonged recovery are considered it is actually more cost effective to perform DFR in elderly patients with comminuted periprosthetic fractures. Management of periprosthetic fractures of the knee is challenging, particularly when associated with compromised bone stock, loss of ligamentous attachments and an elderly group of patients who poorly tolerate prolonged immobility. The goals of surgery for these fractures are to restore the limb's structural ability to bear weight, ligamentous integrity and knee range of motion. In certain cases of advanced patient age and extreme bone deficiency, it is the authors' opinion that reconstruction with a distal femoral replacement prosthesis should be considered. Further research is required in order to determine the long term implant survival and patient function. Conflict of Interest Statements The authors would like to acknowledge Leslie Soever and Matthew MacDonald for their assistance throughout the paper.