This paper presents a method to determine the stress profile in PECVD poly-SiGe layers. Poly-SiGe films are thinned down by successive plasma etching to obtain different thicknesses. Stress gradient values are obtained for each thickness. These values are fitted to the best possible function. The relative stress profile is obtained from this function. The average stress value for the film is obtained by measuring wafer curvature before and after film deposition. Using the average overall stress value, the stress profile is determined completely. This method is applied to a 
                        10
                        \mu
                      m thick PECVD poly-SiGe film. This procedure was repeated for another layer with a stress compensation layer on the top. It was demonstrated that it is possible to calculate the required thickness of this compensation top layer such that the film has a zero stress gradient.Poly-SiGe has recently been promoted as a material suitable as structural layer for several MEMS applications Much of the low temperature poly-SiGe reported, uses the low power chemical vapour deposition (LPCVD) technique The poly-SiGe films used in this work are deposited by a multilayer process that combines the use of LPCVD for low temperature crystallisation and PECVD for high growth rates Several ways to determine the stress profile over thickness have already been reported in the literature Large stress variations in the vertical direction can cause free-standing structures to have unfavourable out-of-plane bending. This might cause anomalous behaviour of designed structures upon release. Thus, it is extremely important to control the stress profile through the thickness of a film. A cantilever beam exhibiting a concave shape, i.e. a bending away from the substrate, is associated with a positive stress gradient (bottom layers more compressive than top layers); and a cantilever beam bending towards the substrate, i.e. a convex beam, is associated with a negative stress gradient (bottom layers more tensile than top layers). The first order expression for the stress As a result of a linear stress variation with thickness, a bending moment  Throughout the article, the coordinates described in The equation relating the deflection of the cantilever  In this method, the stress profile is assumed to be a polynomial function of Since In another method, the stress profile was considered as a linear function between two measured thicknesses In the method presented by Furtsch Then we must find the value that verifies the relation This method is just a mathematical method, not based on physical considerations or relations. It is therefore difficult to evaluate if the obtained results are correct. The method proposed here differs from the methods described previously in that the other methods directly rebuild the stress profile from the stress gradient values. Whereas, in this method, first linear stress gradients at different thicknesses are measured, and then a best fit approximation of the data is done to obtain the function Thus, the relative stress profile can be deduced when a good approximation of the function is obtained: Finally, it is possible to find Several methods can be used to obtain a good approximation of Polynomial: Exponential: With the polynomial fit, the formula for the relative stress profile is as follows: With the exponential fit, the following expression for the relative stress profile is obtained: Both methods are used and the errors are compared in order to choose the best approximation. It is also possible to use other fitting functions; the choice can be made after an analysis of the data with the objective of reducing the error. The stress profile of a deposition of a very thin PECVD seedlayer (94 nm) as a nucleation layer for the LPCVD layer; deposition of a LPCVD layer (370 nm) to help in crystallizing the top PECVD layer; deposition of a PECVD layer until 10 The whole process is done with the same mixture of silane, germane, diborane and hydrogen at a process temperature of 450 The films deposited with this process have a tensile stress of It is important to underline that the values of average residual stress are the stress levels in the film (not in the beams) because they are calculated by measuring wafer curvature before and after deposition. Beams from the films have a lower stress because the stress can relax in the width direction. The value of the mean residual stress of the unreleased cantilevers under plane stress condition can be deduced from the following equation: As each of the described films has a concentration of Germanium between 62 and 65%, the Young’s modulus is assumed to vary only between 146 and 148 GPa A reactive ion etching with inductive coupled plasma (RIE-ICP) etcher with HF vapour etching is used to remove the silicon dioxide (sacrificial layer) and to release the structure without stiction With the optical microscope the deflection of the free-end of the cantilever is measured by focusing the optical beam first on the top of the anchored structures and then on the top of the free end of the cantilever. With the laser profilometer a linear scan of the profile of the cantilever is made in order to obtain a measurement of its deflection ( As the results obtained with these two methods are consistent, only the results obtained with laser profilometer are presented. When it is not possible to use laser profilometer, the measurements from the optical microscope are reported. To investigate whether the RF power used for thinning damages the layer and thus causes variations in the stress profile or not, a 1.5 times higher power setting than normal was tried. The layer was thinned down to 6.2  A stress profile was also derived using the other methods described above ( The measurements of the linear stress gradient for the 11.6 In order to improve the fit of the linear stress gradient for the 11.6 From these two graphs it is possible to deduce the stress profiles of the beams in the 11.6 In order to validate the presented method we considered that, after the largest thinning, the cantilevers have a thickness of only 1.6 One of the objectives of this work was to try to obtain the top layer thickness value for which the linear stress gradient is equal to zero. Using the data measured (both for the 11.6 This top layer thickness value was determined for different fits. The calculated value of the thickness for a zero stress gradient lies between 11.7 and 11.9 A method to obtain the stress profile in a film by fitting stress gradient measurements was described and compared with other existent methods. In this method, the stress gradient at different thicknesses is obtained after thinning and measuring the deflection of released cantilevers. The stress profile of the cantilevers was rebuilt for a 10 It was verified that it is possible to deposit a compressive layer on top of this layer to reduce the stress gradient. The stress profile for the beams in a film with a top layer deposited with increased silane flow was determined. It was found that the stress gradient is reduced. From the obtained fit it is also possible to predict the top layer thickness for which the stress gradient is zero. The authors would like to thank all people of MCP-SSM group of IMEC for their help and suggestions, Eddy Simons for help in thinning the SiGe films and the Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna di Studi Universitari e Perfezionamento of Pisa for the financial support.