Prosthetic replacement arthroplasty for glenohumeral arthritis is a well-developed and well-described technique with good and excellent results. The surgeon is faced with many decisions to make, however, regarding choice of implant, implant fixation, soft tissue management, and options for glenoid resurfacing. In general, when the precise cause of the arthritic condition is identified, the choices become more straightforward. For advanced osteoarthritis of the shoulder joint in an older patient with asymmetric posterior erosion of the glenoid, a total shoulder arthroplasty renders the best relief of pain and improvement in motion. Similarly, for advanced rheumatoid arthritis in patients with an intact rotator cuff, a total shoulder arthroplasty results in the best pain relief. If the rotator cuff is deficient and irreparable, an anatomically sized humeral head replacement is appropriate, taking care to preserve the coracoacromial arch. Acute, nonreducible fractures of the proximal humerus are treated best with a humeral head replacement. Post-traumatic arthropathy of the shoulder joint is treated with arthroplasty, and the decision to resurface the glenoid should take into account the age of the patient and the wear and concentricity of the glenoid. Many options exist for the choice of an implant; biomechanical and anatomic studies suggest that a better technical result can be achieved with a third-generation implant design that has the ability to recreate accurately the proximal anatomy of the humerus. Copyright 2003, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.Although the first report of prosthetic arthroplasty of the shoulder joint is by a French surgeon, Pean, in 1893, Neer is widely considered the pioneer of shoulder arthroplasty surgery. Neer designed the first widely used humeral head prosthesis, the Neer I, and Neer, Brown, and McLaughlin The Neer prosthesis has a fixed head inclination, 1 radius of curvature (44 mm), and 2 head thicknesses. Second-generation total shoulder design developed after the Neer prosthesis is modular, allowing the stem to accommodate heads of variable diameter and neck length, which theoretically achieves better soft tissue tensioning. Modular components simplify revision surgery by allowing head removal alone during the exposure of the glenoid. Lastly, third-generation prosthetic design also is modular, but the stems are typically available with variable inclination and the option to Symptomatic osteoarthritis of the glenohumeral joint is relatively uncommon; about 1 shoulder arthroplasty is performed for every 10 hip arthroplasties. Primary osteoarthritis results after breakdown of the articular cartilage. The precise cause and mechanism for this process is unknown, but the characteristics are well described. Patients develop erosion of the cartilage, flattening of the joint surface, osteophytes, and asymmetric wear of the posterior glenoid. Soft tissue changes follow, resulting in anterior capsule and subscapularis contractures and a patulous, attenuated posterior capsule. Significant rotator cuff tears are uncommon. As the posterior glenoid wear worsens, the reconstructive complexity increases. Arthroplasty is performed most commonly through the deltopectoral approach. If severe anterior contractures are present, the anterior, thickened capsule may be excised without risking instability in the osteoarthritic shoulder. Also, the subscapularis can be elevated from the lesser tuberosity subperiosteally and secured in a more medial position at closure. The inferior capsule should be released to allow adequate exposure of the glenoid and inferior humeral osteophytes. All osteophytes should be removed so that the capsular insertion is visualized, providing a landmark for the anatomic neck (Fig. 2). Neer Comparative analysis of HHR versus TSA by Boyd and Thomas et al Cofield, Frankle, and Zuckerman Levine and Djurasovic et al A subsequent study by Gartsman, Roddey, and Hammerman Glenoid implantation must be weighed against the commonest complication of glenoid replacement, which is loosening. Although the probability of implant survival is reported as 93% after 10 years and 87% after 15 years, the glenoid revision rate remains low, 5.6% at a mean 12.2 years' follow-up. Radiographic loosening is more common, however, 44% in this series. The actual significance of the loosening is not known precisely, but diminution in function over time in patients with loosening was observed HHR alone avoids the complication of glenoid loosening. A surgeon may be inclined to perform glenoid implantation only after a HHR fails. The revision of a HHR to a TSA for glenoid arthrosis is not uniformly successful, however. In a series of patients undergoing glenoid replacement after HHR, at a mean duration of 4.4 years, 7 of 18 patients had an unsatisfactory result by the Neer criteria secondary to limited range of motion. Revision of a HHR to a TSA is less predictable compared with a primary TSA The typical patient with osteoarthritis has posterior wear of the glenoid with an anterior capsular and subscapularis contractures and a patulous posterior capsule. Preoperative evaluation should include an axillary radiograph or computed tomography scan of the glenoid. The surgeon should plan to correct the version of the glenoid to neutral or risk postoperative posterior instability. Adjustment of the humeral retroversion does not correct the tendency of the prosthesis to slide posteriorly (Fig. 3). The humeral component can be implanted with press-fit, fully cemented or proximally cemented technique. Although earlier series reported that the use of press-fit techniques resulted in subsidence, modern press-fit designs with roughened surfaces that fill the canal combined with impaction grafting techniques show little subsidence Fully cemented techniques achieve excellent initial stability and have documented excellent long-term results Rheumatoid arthritis is a systemic synovial-based polyarticular disorder affecting the shoulder joint that causes severe pain and disability. Modern medical treatment has reduced the progression of the disease, and shoulder arthroplasty was done less frequently in 2000 compared with earlier decades. Patients with rheumatoid arthritis undergoing shoulder arthroplasty deserve special attention. Frequently, multiple joints are involved, and a staged plan needs to be developed. The most symptomatic joint usually is addressed first. If a shoulder arthroplasty is done, one must be cognizant of the length of stem selected and amount of distal cementing done so that an elbow arthroplasty performed at a later date is technically feasible (Fig. 5). Glenoid wear in the rheumatoid patient is central and superior. Erosions and synovial infiltration into the cartilage is common (Fig. 6). Long-standing large tears of the rotator cuff (>2 complete tendon tears) result in superior migration of the humeral head. Subsequent erosion of the glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint, and undersurface of the acromion is termed The treatment goal of arthroplasty in this patient group is limited to pain reduction and modest improvements in motion. The rotator cuff is irreparable, and glenoid implantation is contraindicated. A hemiarthroplasty can be done with preservation of the coracoacromial arch. The soft tissue dissection is limited as much as practical. Frequently the humeral head can be delivered as a The commonest causes of osteonecrosis of the humeral head are chronic systemic corticosteroid use and trauma. As a group, patients with osteonecrosis who undergo TSA and HHR perform poorly compared with osteoarthritis patients. Post-traumatic patients with a history of previous fixation attempts perform least well Severe glenoid articular wear in a young patient is a perplexing problem. HHR often results in residual or even intolerable pain. A polyethylene glenoid component wears more rapidly in an active young patient, however, resulting in need for early revision and concomitant bone loss. A fusion is invariably unsatisfactory with regard to motion and function. One alternative is biologic resurfacing of the glenoid with fascia lata. Burkhead and Hutton Hemiarthroplasty is a surgical alternative for 4-part, head-splitting and certain 3-part proximal humerus fractures. Important patient factors include age of the patient, bone quality, fracture configuration, and comminution. Elderly patients with greatly comminuted fractures and poor bone quality are good candidates. A young patient with a 3-part or 4-part fracture that can be reduced and fixed to a near-anatomic position may have less ideal results with hemiarthroplasty and need revision at a young age. The results from hemiarthroplasty are related to the technical precision of the implantation. Neer's The anatomy and dimensions of the proximal humerus have been studied carefully, and the data have been incorporated into the design of the third-generation humeral implants Second, the retroversion of the proximal humerus is 17.9° with a wide variation (range, −6.7° to 47.5°). Arthroplasty intended to replicate normal anatomy should replicate the humeral retroversion; incorrect retroversion can result in instability, and a poorly placed osteotomy may damage the rotator cuff. The osteotomy should be made at the anatomic neck, after exposure of the capsular insertion. This approach requires adequate exposure and removal of osteophytes ( The average inclination of the proximal humerus is 129.6°. The range is less variable (123.2° to 135.8°) compared with the highly variable proximal humeral version anatomy. Proximal humeral components with the option to vary the proximal humeral inclination may be advantageous if one is to match more precisely the proximal humeral anatomy. Head design is also an important factor. The diameter of curvature of the humeral head (DC) has a constant relationship with the thickness of the humeral head (HT): HT= 0.75 × DC. Only 1 In North America, nearly all glenoid components are polyethylene with pegs or a keel and are inserted with cement. Early experience with metal-backed glenoid components was unsatisfactory secondary to increased polyethylene wear, metal–polyethylene dissociation, and screw breakage Shoulder arthroplasty provides relief of pain and improvement in function in patients with degenerative or rheumatoid arthritis. Glenoid implantation results in more favorable pain relief in patients with complete erosion of the socket cartilage. Patients with painful arthritis and a complete, irreparable rotator cuff tear can achieve good pain relief and modest improvements in motion after an anatomically sized HHR. Humeral prosthetic implantation for fractures should be precise, with special attention to proper version and height. Third-generation implants enable more accurate re-creation of proximal humeral anatomy and theoretically deliver higher performance.