The extent of the plastic zone of the surrounding rock of a deep tunnel is significantly greater than that of a shallow tunnel, giving importance to correctly determine the post-peak mechanical behavior during a deep tunnel analysis. In this study, the nonlinearity of strain softening and dependence on the confining stress and plastic shear strain of the dilation angle were considered. Based on the incremental equations of the theory of plastic flow in FLAC3D, the influences of the strain softening and dilatancy on a deep tunnel analysis were discussed, and the modified M−C model was used in the numerical simulations for verification and further analysis. The results indicate that the extent of the plastic zone and the surface displacement of the surrounding rock are unrealistically small when the strain softening and dilatancy are ignored. When considering only strain softening, the plastic zone and surface displacement increase significantly. When considering only the dilatancy, the extent of the plastic zone exhibits no change, and the surface displacement increases only slightly. The increase in dilation angle will lead to an acceleration of the strain softening process, that is, a decrease in the strength of the rock mass occurs. There is a significant synergistic effect of the strain softening and dilatancy, that is, the influence of considering the two factors together is greater than the sum of considering the two factors individually. A rock bolting system can improve the residual strength of the surrounding rock of a deep tunnel, strengthen the confinement of the shallow to deep parts of the surrounding rock, reduce the level of strain softening and the dilation angle, and thus, significantly reduce the extent of the plastic zone and surface displacement of the surrounding rock. Therefore, a tunnel should be supported in time after an excavation to prevent a degradation of the surrounding rock and make full use of the self-support capacity of the surrounding rock. When a numerical simulation is applied to the deformation prediction and the support design of a deep tunnel, the accurate strain softening and dilatancy should be considered simultaneously.In recent years, with a shift in resource development to greater depths, the excavation depth of underground engineering projects has gradually increased, shifting attention to the mechanical behavior of deep rock masses ( Compared with tunnels excavated in shallow areas, deep tunnels are more significantly affected by in-situ stress ( To analyze the strain softening behavior of the surrounding rock in a tunnel, Dilatancy is closely associated with the process of deformation and failure of a rock mass ( Owing to the complexity of the problem, most of the abovementioned studies on the post-peak effect of the surrounding rock have focused only on the circular tunnel and assumed the stress path. However, for underground tunnels, particularly for mining tunnels, rectangular and arch-shaped sections are the most common ( In this study, the nonlinearity of strain softening and dependence of the dilation angle on the confining stress and plastic shear strain are considered. Based on the incremental equations of the theory of plastic flow in FLAC Because a tensile failure occurs in only the shallow part of the surrounding rock, the failure mode of the surrounding rock in a tunnel is mainly a shear failure caused by lateral unloading. Therefore, in this study, only the shear failure and degradation of the shear strength parameters are analyzed. FLAC Although the constitutive model is convenient, it has the following problems: It ignores the dependence of the confining stress. The softening parameter The different definitions of softening parameter To accurately consider the post-peak effect of a rock mass, the strain softening model provided by FLAC Based on a micromechanical perspective (  To exclude other influencing factors and facilitate the analysis, in this study, a tunnel excavated in homogeneous mudstone is considered by applying the fitting parameters obtained by   The M−C model in FLAC Decomposing Δ For Δ Here, Using the linear property of The most obvious effect of strain softening is a yield surface shrinkage. For a more intuitive description, the yield surface is simplified to the Plotting Eqs. By comparing Eqs. Using the consistency condition, Using the linear property, Substituting Eq. Considering that According to Eq. The surface displacement of the surrounding rock increases. The surface displacement of the surrounding rock of the tunnel is due to the radial strain in the surrounding rock, and the radial strain of deep tunnel surrounding rock is mostly radial plastic strain According to Eq. The plastic shear strain According to Eq. In addition to the above two effects caused by the increase in Rock mass dilatancy is commonly described based on the dilation angle, and its physical meaning can be derived from Eqs. Eq. The dilation angle Substituting Eqs. In this study, the friction angle of mudstone is set to  If only the dilatancy is considered without strain softening, the rock mass strength parameters will not decrease, and thus the extent of the plastic zone will basically not change. In addition, the dilation angle As described in First, the influence of the strain softening on the dilation angle is discussed. On the one hand, considering the strain softening induces a decrease in the confining stress The influence of dilatancy on the strain softening is discussed in the following. The increase in dilation angle Finally, the synergistic effect of the strain softening and dilatancy in a tunnel analysis is discussed. As indicated in In this section, the influence of the strain softening and dilatancy on the calculation results is analyzed for a deep tunnel, as is the interaction and synergistic effect of the strain softening and dilatancy. However, the following problems remain: The analysis of a constant Owing to the nonlinearity of the stress–strain response, the incremental constitutive equations are adopted in the analysis, leading to the analysis focusing on the current or following cycle. Thus, only a qualitative analysis of the influence of the strain softening and dilatancy on the final results can be conducted. Owing to the high nonlinearity and nonmonotonicity of the variation in dilation angle Because the influence of the strain softening on the dilatancy is complex, only the influence of dilatancy on the strain softening is considered in the analysis of the synergistic effect. In the following numerical simulations, the problems above are addressed, and the analysis results described in this section are verified. Using the FISH language, the M−C model in FLAC A single-grid numerical model (1 m As shown in  Model size and mesh generation. As shown in Initial conditions and boundary conditions. The excavation depth of the tunnel is set to 1000 m, the rock mass density is set to 25 kN/m Schemes and material parameters. To study the influence of the strain softening and dilatancy on the calculation results, four schemes without a support are studied: A. no softening and no dilation, B. no softening with dilation, C. softening but no dilation, and D. softening and dilation. Then, based on the scheme D, add the scheme E, in which the rock bolting system is considered. Common support parameters of deep tunnels are adopted: There are 4 and 3 bolts per row in the roof and each wall, respectively, with a row spacing of 0.8 m, diameter of 20 mm, length of 2.6 m, anchorage segment length of 0.9 m, yield load of 157 kN, and pretension of 70 kN; and there are 3 and 1 cables per row in the roof and each wall, respectively, with a row spacing of 1.6 m, roof cable length of 8 m, wall cable length of 6 m, diameter of 22 mm, anchorage segment length of 1.8 m, yield load of 550 kN, and pretension of 200 kN. The modified M−C model is adopted in the schemes A–E. In addition, add the scheme F, in which the SS model is adopted to consider the strain softening and dilatancy for comparison with the scheme D. The tunnel is excavated in a homogeneous mudstone, the material parameters of which are shown in All the schemes are calculated to equilibrium (when the maximum unbalanced force of the model is set to less than 1 × 10 According to the scheme A, without considering the strain softening and dilatancy, the roof subsidence is only 3.1 cm, the floor heave is only 3.0 cm, and the wall convergence is only 2.9 cm (single side). For a tunnel with an excavation depth of 1 000 m and a side pressure coefficient of 1.5, excavated in weak surrounding rock (uniaxial compressive strength of 20 MPa), and without support, the surface displacement of the surrounding rock is unrealistically small ( By comparing the schemes B and A, when considering the dilatancy but not the strain softening, the roof subsidence increases to 4.3 cm, the floor heave increases to 4.1 cm, and the wall convergence (single side) increases to 3.0 cm. The surface displacement of the surrounding rock is still unrealistically small, which verifies the predictions described in section 2.4, namely, if the strain softening is not taken into account, an increase in the dilation angle will not cause a significant increase in the surface displacement of the surrounding rock of a tunnel. According to the surrounding rock state figure and cohesion figure, the extent of the plastic zone barely changes, which verifies the predictions described in section 2.4, namely, the extent of the plastic zone basically does not change. According to the dilation angle figure, without considering the strain softening, the plastic shear strain By comparing the schemes C and A, when considering the strain softening but not the dilatancy, the roof subsidence increases to 20.8 cm, the floor heave increases to 19.6 cm, and the wall convergence (single side) increases to 7.2 cm. The surface displacement of the tunnel surrounding rock increases significantly, which verifies the conclusion described in By comparing the scheme D with the schemes A–C, when considering both the strain softening and dilatancy, the roof subsidence increases to 47.2 cm, the floor heave increases to 43.9 cm, and the wall convergence (single side) increases to 30.6 cm. Taking the roof subsidence as an example, compared with the scheme A, the scheme B increases by 1.2 cm, the scheme C increases by 17.7 cm, and the scheme D increased by 44.1 cm, which is a significantly larger increase than the sum of the schemes B and C (18.9 cm), verifying the conclusion described in By comparing the schemes E and D, when considering both the strain softening and dilatancy, the surface displacement of the surrounding rock is significantly reduced by the rock bolting system, namely, the roof subsidence is reduced to 27.6 cm, the floor heave is reduced to 35.6 cm, and the wall convergence (single side) is reduced to 8.6 cm. According to the surrounding rock state figure and cohesion figure, the extent of both the plastic zone and the residual cohesion zone is significantly reduced by the rock bolting system, although the cohesion of the shallow part of the surrounding rock still reaches the residual cohesion. According to the stress tensor figure, the rock bolting system induces a peak stress point of the surrounding rock closer to the tunnel excavation boundary, and the stress concentration coefficient decreases slightly. According to the dilation angle figure, the dilation angle By comparing the schemes F and D, when considering both the strain softening and dilatancy, the dilation angle in the SS model only decreases with an increase in the plastic shear strain, but cannot increase with the unloading of the surrounding rock. As a result, the dilation angle in the plastic zone is smaller, then, the deformation of the surrounding rock is also smaller, particularly the wall convergence (single side), which is only 7.6 cm. This shows that ignoring the confining stress dependence of the dilation angle will lead to an error, and the scheme F is not discussed in the following analysis. Because the failure mode of the surrounding rock is mainly a shear failure, only the shear failure area is analyzed. The deep part of the surrounding rock is not significantly disturbed, whereas a tensile failure occurs in the shallow part of the surrounding rock. Therefore, the measurement point is selected at 1.75 m away from the excavation boundary and in the middle (width direction) of the tunnel roof. Because the M−C criterion does not consider the intermediate principal stress As shown in In the schemes A and B, without considering the strain softening, a plastic flow occurs continuously on the initial yield surface In the schemes C–E, strain softening is considered. After a transient plastic flow occurs on the initial yield surface The plastic shear strain According to In the schemes C–E, strain softening is considered, resulting in a large plastic shear strain Because the cohesion According to When the scheme B reaches equilibrium, without considering the strain softening, the plastic shear strain To analyze the composition of the surface displacement of the surrounding rock, taking the middle position (width direction) of the roof as an example, the radial strain According to In the schemes A and B, without considering the strain softening, the radial strain In the schemes C–E, considering the strain softening, the radial strain It is well known that when modelling a non-associative behavior using a continuous numerical model, some localization problems may appear. For instance, FLAC By comparing the schemes E and D, which consider both strain softening and dilatancy, the effects of the rock bolting system are considered in The mechanism of a rock bolting system in a deep tunnel can be inferred from the effects above, namely, the rock bolting system can improve the residual strength of the surrounding rock, strengthen the confinement of the shallow part to the deep part of the surrounding rock, reduce the level of strain softening and the dilation angle, and thus significantly reduce the extent of the plastic zone and the surface displacement of the surrounding rock. Therefore, a tunnel should be supported in time after an excavation to prevent a degradation of the surrounding rock and make full use of the self-support capacity of the surrounding rock. The material parameters of the schemes A–E are adopted to calculate the tunnels at excavation depths of 200–1 200 m. Taking the roof subsidence as an example, the influence of the excavation depth is analyzed, the results of which are shown in According to In this study, based on the incremental equations of the theory of plastic flow in FLAC If the post-peak effect of a rock mass is neglected in a deep tunnel analysis (without considering the strain softening and dilatancy), the extent of the plastic zone and surface displacement of the surrounding rock will be unrealistically small. Compared with the calculation results without considering the post-peak effects, when considering only the strain softening without dilatancy, the extent of the plastic zone and the surface displacement of the surrounding rock in a deep tunnel will increase significantly; however, when considering only the dilatancy without strain softening, the extent of the plastic zone basically does not change, and the surface displacement only increases slightly. Considering that a strain softening will lead to an increase in the plastic shear strain of the surrounding rock and a decrease in the confining stress, the dilation angle decreases with an increase in the plastic shear strain, and increases with a decrease in the confining stress, resulting in a complex influence of the strain softening on the dilatancy. An increase in the dilation angle will lead to an acceleration of the strain softening process, that is, a degradation of the strength of the rock mass. There is a significant synergistic effect of the strain softening and dilatancy, that is, the influence (on the extent of the plastic zone and surface displacement of the tunnel surrounding rock) when considering the two factors together is greater than the sum when considering the two factors individually. Considering both the strain softening and dilatancy, the mechanism of a rock bolting system in a deep tunnel is as follows: the rock bolting system can improve the residual strength of the surrounding rock, strengthen the confinement of the shallow part to the deep part of the surrounding rock, reduce the level of strain softening and the dilation angle, and thus significantly reduce the extent of the plastic zone and the surface displacement of the surrounding rock. Therefore, a tunnel should be supported in time after an excavation to prevent a degradation of the surrounding rock and make full use of the self-support capacity of the surrounding rock. A numerical simulation is widely used in the deformation prediction and support design of tunnel excavation projects. During the processes of a numerical simulation, strain softening and dilatancy, as objective post-peak effects of a rock mass, should be considered simultaneously and correctly; otherwise, errors will occur, particularly at greater depths.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work has been supported by the