It is believed that chitosan plays an important role on the formation of specific inorganic–organic hybrid structure of shells. In this paper, insoluble chitoan was modified to a water-soluble macromolecule—carboxymethyl chitosan (CMCS), and further used as an additive in the crystallization process of calcium carbonate (CaCO3). The combination investigation of XRD, Micro FT-IR and SEM on the precipitated crystals shows that the addition of CMCS obviously changed the crystal morphology, but did not induce the transformation of the crystal form, i.e., CaCO3 keeps calcite form in all the cases no matter whether CMCS exists or not in the precipitation systems. The morphological variation of CaCO3 strongly depends on the CMCS concentration in the aqueous solutions.It is well known that biominerals such as mollusk shells, teeth and skeleton in organisms have superior performance to the unnatural compartment, not only for the mechanical strength, also for the functional properties. The outstanding properties are attributed to the well-organized structure and strong interfacial interaction between biomacromolecules and inorganic components. This kind of biomaterials is therefore called high-performance inorganic/organic hybrids, and becomes the model for the biomimic materials. Many materialists are inspired by such biomineralization products, which revealed a prevalent, strict adherence to well-defined crystal size and morphology by detailed analysis Because of the simplest composition and structure, mollusk shell becomes one of the most often mentioned natural biomineralization materials among various biominerals, which contains about 95% or more calcium carbonate and 5% or less biomacromolecules, such as proteins, polysaccharides, etc. In order to synthesize or prepare composites with similar properties as shells or pearls, scientists tried as many as matrices to control or collaborate the crystallization of calcium carbonate, e.g., water soluble proteins and insoluble polysaccharides extracted from the natural biomineralization materials are used as templates to study the influence on the inorganic crystallization Chitin is one of the most important biomacromolecules in invertebrates, which influences the mineralization process of calcium carbonate in an essential way. Because of its insoluble properties, most investigations focus on the derivatives of chitin, i.e., chitosan, which can dissolve in acidic media, and is always used as templates for the deposition of calcium carbonate Carboxymethyl chitosan was prepared according to a modification of the preparation described by Addadi and Weiner CMCS was dissolved in deionized water, and then sodium carbonate solution was added in. Calcium chloride solution was added into the above system at last. Immediately, the mixture was stirred at constant speed for 10 Micro-IR spectra of the synthesized CMCS were recorded on a Nicolet Magna 750 FT-IR spectrometer at room temperature. The degree of acetylation (DA%) of chitosan was determined following the method of Miya et al.  CMCS can react with CaCl Crystallization of CaCO The addition of carboxymethyl chitosan, however, greatly changed the morphology of precipitated CaCO  The mechanism of the influence of organic additives on the crystal nucleation, growth, crystal form and orientation is quite complex, which is ordinary defined as molecular recognizing. The molecular recognizing between organic and inorganic species is always believed to be the combination effect of static interaction, crystal lattice geometry matching and stereochemistry complementary When the calcium chloride was poured into the CMCS solution, there are two competitive reactions in the mixed solution: one is reaction between Ca We have shown here that the carboxymethyl chitosan (CMCS) has remarkable influence on the crystallization habit of calcium carbonate. The crystal morphology and size of the CaCO This work was partly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, Grant No. 20151004).