An ideal high performance poly(etheretherketone) (PEEK)/AlN composite that has unique combination of anisotropic linear coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) and dielectric properties was developed for the use in electronic packaging substrate as an alternative of conventionally used epoxy/E-glass substrate. The out-of-plane and in-plane CTEs of the composites were very close to that of copper and silicon chip, respectively. The dielectric constants of the composites are almost independent with increasing frequency. The dissipation factor decreased approximately 50% compared to the pure PEEK. These results reveal that the composite may be the futuristic candidate for high performance electronic packaging substrate.In electronics packaging, substrate or printed circuit board (PCB) materials must have an anisotropic coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) to minimize the thermal expansion mismatch between the PCB material and the ceramic chip carriers. In multilayer PCB, holes are drilled through the boards and then plated with copper to get electric connection between two sides of a board. The thermal expansion mismatch between the out-of-plane CTE of the PCB material and the copper may leads to cracking in the plated holes and thus, failure of solder connections under thermal loading. An ideal PCB materials which exhibit anisotropic CTE (i.e., in-plane CTE matches with the ceramic chip carrier and an out-of-plane CTE matches with the copper) is the current requirement of PCB manufacturers particularly for high temperature applications Here, we report that aluminum nitride (AlN) particle filled poly(etheretherketone) (PEEK) composites, not only have an anisotropic CTE but also exhibit frequency independent dielectric constant and low dissipation factor compared to the commercial epoxy/E-glass substrate. The AlN ceramic powder was selected because of its excellent thermal conductivity, low CTE and good mechanical properties. PEEK was selected because it is a high performance semi-crystalline polymer. It has excellent fire retardancy (free from bromine), mechanical, thermal and dielectric properties. The commercial PEEK (Grade 5300PF) donated by Gharda Chemicals Ltd. India under the trade name GATONE™ PEEK was used as matrix. The mean particle size and particle size range of PEEK powder were 25 For the CTE measurement, a rectangular specimen of 18    The results discussed in this letter demonstrated a simple method to fabricate high performance PEEK/AlN composites. We showed that the anisotropic CTE and dielectric properties can be tailored by varying AlN loading in the matrix depending upon the requirement. The out-of-plane and in-plane pre- The authors acknowledge Dr. P. D. Trivedi, Polymer Division, Gharda Chemicals, India for providing poly(etheretherketone) (PEEK) powder for this research.