A novel approach for nonlinear ultrasonics is presented which relies on an amplitude modulated high-frequency excitation, as distinct from the conventional vibro-acoustic approach based on a low-frequency pumping wave in combination with a high-frequency probing wave. This amplitude modulated excitation contains three frequencies that interact in the presence of nonlinearity and transfers energy to frequencies not part of the original input. This effect can be exploited to detect and quantify damage-induced nonlinearity. This novel method is demonstrated experimentally for three distinct contact conditions, utilising different types of transducer and excitation signals of various amplitudes and frequencies. The performance is compared with the conventional vibro-acoustic technique. It is shown that the new technique has comparable performance to existing methods. Specialized measurement system design with superb sensitivity is also demonstrated. Unlike conventional cross-modulation based nonlinear ultrasonic techniques, this new method does not require two separate excitation sources. This represents a significant practical advantage which will greatly facilitate the implementation of nonlinear ultrasonic methods for a wide range of applications.Quality assurance is an important part of ensuring the health and safety of engineering structures and materials. Developing reliable quantitative non-destructive testing (NDT) methods is therefore a key requirement to guarantee their integrity. Many techniques are used for non-destructive evaluation (NDE) and structural health monitoring (SHM). Of these methods, ultrasonic NDT is the most common and is successfully used to detect damage, verify welds, determine elastic material properties and measure the thickness of critical components. However, conventional (linear) NDT methods have reached their limits of detectability for small damage such as closed fatigue cracks, barely visible impact damage in composite materials or weak-bonds in adhesive interfaces [ Research into nonlinear ultrasonic NDT methods has demonstrated promise for detecting damage where linear methods are inadequate [ Several nonlinear NDT techniques have been developed based on the exploitation of nonlinear responses, such as the evaluation of higher harmonics [ A novel method is proposed in this paper, whereby the LF source is omitted and instead the HF excitation is amplitude modulated (AM) resulting in three distinct frequencies applied to a single ultrasonic source transducer. An example of a typical amplitude modulated waveform used in the experiments with its corresponding frequency spectrum is seen in This report is organized as follows; the experimental setup is presented in Section Two experimental apparatuses have been developed to compare the proposed MHF method with a typical nonlinear vibro-acoustic (VA) evaluation technique. The apparatuses consist of two ultrasonic transducers stacked upon one another. Samples can be placed between the transducers. A small loudspeaker is bonded to the top of the transducer stack with a backing mass attached to the speaker's cone. The loudspeaker is the source of the LF excitation in the case of the vibro-acoustic configuration, and the backing mass helps to increase the magnitude of the LF vibration. The configuration of the two experimental systems is such that it is possible to run either one of these methods for a given test sample without moving or physically altering the setup in any way as the excitation parameters are altered electronically. Two types of transducers were employed. The first configuration used PANAMETRICS X1020 100 kHz commercial ultrasonic NDT transducers. In the second configuration, the piezo-electric transducers are substituted with generic 40 kHz ultrasonic transducers commonly used in high power cleaning applications. The same speaker and backing mass were used in both configurations. The purpose of utilising two configurations with two distinctly different ultrasonic transducer systems is to demonstrate that the proposed method is viable regardless of the excitation source used. In both cases the top transducer is used as the transmitter with the bottom one as the receiver. Both transducers and a schematic diagram of the apparatus can be seen in Preliminary work has shown [ For the baseline case a thin layer of lithium soap based machine grease was placed between the transducer faces. Effort was undertaken to ensure the couplant layer was as uniform and homogenous as possible with no entrapped air or other defects present. This was achieved by placing a small amount of grease in the center of the bottom piezo and then spreading the layer very thinly and uniformly by pressing down with the top transducer in a circular motion. Grease was used as it has excellent long-term stability and does not dry out like water based couplants. The next configuration was a dry contact case, the transducer's surfaces are cleaned with acetone and allowed to dry before being placed on top of each other. For the last case a thin (1 mm thick) silicone rubber sheet was placed between the transducers, the rubber sheet was trimmed into a disc to match the size of the transducers. No couplant was used between the transducers and the rubber disc. Each transducer and sample configuration was tested 5 times. In the vibro-acoustic configuration, a steady-state, high frequency probing wave is delivered from the top piezo transducer while a low frequency pumping excitation is supplied by the loudspeaker. The frequency of the probing wave in the vibro-acoustic measurement mode is set to equal to the resonance frequency of the transducers to achieve maximum amplitudes (105 kHz and 40 kHz). It was found that the 100 kHz transducers had peak acoustical output at 105 kHz excitation and they were driven at this frequency rather than their specified 100 kHz center frequency. A Rigol DG1032z arbitrary function generator was used as the signal source. For driving the loudspeaker, the signal is first unity buffered by a Topping TP20 audio amplifier. In this configuration (VA) the high frequency probing wave is held constant while the pumping wave amplitude is adjusted. The LF excitation at the loudspeaker is varied from 200 Hz to 5.2 kHz in 1 kHz steps, the driving excitation was varied from 1 to 5 V in 10 discrete steps. A summary of the excitation parameters are given in The loudspeaker excitation is simply disabled for MHF configuration. The signal source is configured for amplitude modulation, this gives 3 input frequencies, the carrier plus two sidebands. Carrier frequencies Starting with the baseline (grease couplant) configuration the excitation network is configured for vibro-acoustic excitation. HF excitation is a constant 105 kHz or 40 kHz sine wave. System response measured from the bottom transducer is recorded at each excitation interval as described in section The transducers are then pulled apart and surfaces cleaned with acetone to remove any trace of grease. The transducers are placed back together in the dry interface configuration and the measurement procedure is repeated. Lastly, the rubber disc is placed between transducers and the measurement process repeated once more. These steps are repeated 5 times for each transducer stack (40 kHz and 100 kHz) for a total of 60 experiments. System response is measured from the bottom transducer; the signal is directly digitized using an EVAL-AD7760 evaluation Analog to Digital Converter (ADC) in conjunction with an EVAL-CED1Z development board. The AD7760 is a 24-bit, 2.5 MSPS (mega samples per second) ADC and is ideally suited to this application given its sample rate and high dynamic range [ For each configuration, the sideband ratio is calculated from the FFT of the system response. The sideband ratio is the ratio of the primary sidebands to the fundamental measured amplitude. This can be defined as follows: The primary sidebands are defined as the first new frequencies that were not part of the original input. Therefore, for MHF measurement the A2 sidebands are used instead of A1, as the A1 sidebands are part of the excitation signal. The sideband ratio is used as a quantitative measurement of the system nonlinearity. It represents how much energy has been transformed into those (new) frequencies due to nonlinear interactions. As is common in previous research [ In previous research [   In In  Lastly, in In general, it appears that either method is suitable for and capable of detecting differences in nonlinearity for the different contact cases as long as frequencies are chosen appropriately. The best performing configuration was MHF excitation using 100 kHz transducers, not only demonstrating greater nonlinearity for dry/rubber interfaces at all tested frequencies but also exhibiting less extreme variations in performance as modulation frequency was changed. It has been demonstrated that it is possible to distinguish between baseline and dry/rubber contact conditions with either MHF or VA methods. This suggests that the MHF excitation method is a viable alternative to conventional nonlinear VA methods. However, it is clear that system performance can be significantly effected by the selection of excitation frequencies for both VA and MHF methods. In general VA excitation appears to have more significant frequency dependent effects and less consistency than MHF methods and this could be partly due to modal effects from the LF excitation in VA methods. Another interesting observation is that in general MHF appears to be more sensitive to the nonlinearity caused by the rubber contact condition compared to VA. One possible explanation for the differences observed between the 40 kHz and 100 kHz transducers is the surface finish of the transducer faces. The 100 kHz transducers have a considerably smoother surface characteristic compared to the raw machined finish of the 40 kHz transducers. An image of the transducer faces is given in One consideration is that the excitation voltage used in this report is quite low; peak excitation voltage was 5 V. This is extremely low compared to the hundreds of volts typically used [ Overall, the results confirm previous observations about the performance of nonlinear ultrasonic NDT systems [ This paper has presented the results of applying a novel nonlinear NDT technique to measurement of nonlinearity using a transducer stack with various contact configurations. The novel method developed involves modulating the high frequency excitation signal into a single transducer. In contrast, existing methods based on nonlinear cross-modulation have typically required the use of both a piezo transducer to provide a high frequency probing wave and an electromagnetic source for a low frequency pumping excitation. It was found that the MHF method is a viable alternative to vibro-acoustic techniques. Using two different transducer stacks both methods were compared. The first set of transducers were commercial 100 kHz NDT transducers, the second set were 40 kHz high power transducers usually used in cleaning applications. Three different configurations were tested using each transducer stack. The configurations were a baseline test where the expected nonlinearity should be small and two other cases: a dry contact interface and a rubber disc interface where the expected nonlinearity is large. The gradient of the measured sideband ratio as a function of input excitation was used as a measure of the system nonlinearity. It was found that either method was suitable for detection of nonlinearity provided that appropriate frequency selection was considered. In general the performance of both methods improved as modulation frequency was increased. The overall best performance was observed with MHF using 100 kHz transducers. Ultimately, this work highlights that more research is required in order to develop reliable nonlinear ultrasonic NDT techniques. Analysis of nonlinear phenomena and the optimisation of excitation selection and measurement techniques is needed before these methods can be developed into robust NDT techniques for practical applications. Even so, existing research has demonstrated that nonlinear methods are adept at detecting contact acoustic nonlinearity phenomena, eg. Ref. [ None. This study was supported in part by an The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at