Production decline analysis of multiple fractured horizontal wells (MFHW) is crucial for long-term shale gas development. Analytical solutions of production decline model accounting for sorption, diffusion (slip flow and Knudsen diffusion) and non-static (stress-dependent) permeability can precisely predict the long term production behavior, especially for the late time production period. However, little work has simultaneously incorporated all these mechanisms into production decline analysis for shale gas wells. In this work, a new production decline model for MFHW in shale gas reservoirs incorporating multiple flow mechanisms is established. To weaken the strong nonlinearities of seepage mathematical equation caused by combining multiple mechanisms, perturbation technology is employed to establish the point source solution considering stress-dependent permeability of MFHW and little effort has been done on this before. Besides, Laplace transformation, numerical discrete method, Stehfest numerical inversion algorithm and Gaussian elimination method are employed to solve the new model’s mathematical problem. Estimated inversion values of reservoir parameters are consistent with the reported data from Barnett shale. Further, comparisons between production behaviors with and without multimechanics flows were made in three flow periods and the production discrepancy increases with continuous depletion, which is attributed that desorption and diffusion is increasingly important as pressure depleting. Finally, the effects of major parameters on production decline curves are analyzed by using the proposed model and it was found that different parameters have their own influence period and sensitivity intensity.volume factor, dimensionless wellbore storage coefficient, m dimensionless wellbore storage coefficient, dimensionless gas compressibility, Pa gas compressibility at initial condition, Pa diffusion coefficient, m reservoir thickness, m permeability of matrix system, m permeability of fracture system at initial condition, m modified Bessel function of first kind, zero order modified Bessel function of second kind, zero order modified Bessel function of second kind, first order reference length, m length of horizontal well number of hydraulic fractures apparent molecular weight of shale gas, kg/kmol molar quantity of shale gas, kmol pressure of fracture system, Pa initial pressure of shale gas reservoirs, Pa pressure at standard condition, Pa surface production rate of the line sink, m mass flow rate per unit reservoir between shale matrix and fracture, kg/(m flux density of the jth segment in the ith fracture, m Laplace transformation of sandsurface flow rate, m dimensionless production rate of the line sink, dimensionless radial radius, m radial radius in spherical matrix blocks, m well radius of multiple fractured horizontal well, m dimensionless radius, dimensionless gas constant, J/(mol·K) external radius of matrix block, m variable of Laplace transformation, dimensionless skin factor, dimensionless time, s dimensionless time, dimensionless reservoir temperature, K temperature at standard condition, K flow velocity of shale gas in fracture system, m/s volumetric gas concentration, sm dimensionless gas concentration, dimensionless equilibrium volumetric gas concentration, sm volumetric gas concentration at initial condition, sm Langmuir volume (at standard condition), sm   length of upper wing of length of lower wing of length of discrete segment ( dimensionless length of discrete segment (  shale gas density, kg/m shale gas density at standard condition, kg/m porosity, dimensionless gas viscosity at current condition, Pa·s gas viscosity at initial condition, Pa·s adsorption index, dimensionless a parameter related to permeability modulus, Pa pseudo-pressure, Pa/s Langmuir pseudo-pressure, Pa/s pseudo-pressure at initial condition, Pa/s pseudo-pressure difference, Pa/s additional pseudo-pressure drop, Pa/s dimensionless pseudo-pressure, dimensionless storativity ratio, dimensionless interporosity flow coefficient, dimensionless dimensionless permeability modulus, dimensionless The conventional natural gas productions are depleting at an alarming rate and the gas production from shale becomes one of the primary energy sources for United State. The shale gas revolution is only possible because of the technology advancements including multistage fracturing and horizontal drilling It is widely reported that the pore characterization of shales is challenging because of the wide spectrum of pore sizes and types within shales The pore structures of natural rocks are known to be fractal and gas flow for real state gas(es) through rocks is very complex MFHW has been proved to be the most effective well type and completion technique for the economical shale gas development. Numerical simulator (dusty-gas model) with an adjusted Knudsen diffusion coefficient In the formation, the gases need to flow through both shale matrix system and fracture system. The matrix system is composed with microscale pores which have very low permeability. The fracture system includes both naturally occurred fracture and hydraulic stimulated fractures. It is known that the gas flow regime varies at different length scales, which makes overall gas deliverability description quite challenging. In order to mathematically define the gas flow behavior for the tight shale formation, the following assumptions are made: As a dual-porosity anisotropic medium, a shale gas reservoir consists of fracture system including hydraulic stimulated fractures network and naturally occurred fracture system and micro-/meso-pores. Gas is stored as compressed free gas in pores and void spaces and as adsorbed gas within the shale matrices. As shown in Hydraulic stimulated fracture network is infinite-conductivity because the permeability of fracture network is known to be orders of magnitudes higher than that of natural fracture. And these stimulated fractures are assumed to be perpendicular to the lateral horizontal wellbore as illustrated in MFHW produces at a constant rate MFHW is located in the center of cylindrical reservoir with a non-flow outer boundary whose top and bottom boundaries are also impermeable. Shale gas reservoir has multiple flow mechanisms due to its multiscale pore/fracture structure from the molecular scale (nanometer) to macro scale as illustrated in Considering the mass flow rate between shale matrix and fracture in unit volume reservoir being equal to (1 − The state of natural gas in shale can be described by the equation of state (EOS) for real natural gas, thus, gas density can be defined as follows: The high overburden stress can result in the closing of fractures with an exponential decrease of fracture permeability. Fractures’ closure which is caused by high overburden stress would decrease permeability in fracture system. Here, we introduce the theory of Klkanl and Pedrosa The pseudo pressure can be defined as: Combining Eqs. The equivalent permeability of shale matrix is in nano-Darcy scale and Knudsen diffusion is the dominate flow in shale gas matrix Knudsen diffusion coefficient is defined by And slippage coefficient can be mathematically defined as follows In gas shale reservoir, the major gas storage space is micro- and nano-pores. These pores have nano-scale sized diameters resulting in large specific surface areas which can be served as gas sorbing sites. Generally, gas in micro- and nano-pores is driven by concentration gradient which can be simplified using Fick’s law. In this current work, we try to model this micro-scale flow using transient diffusion method. As shown in Substituting gas flow velocity in matrix, i.e. Eq. According to Eq. So the apparent diffusivity can be introduced as follows: In Eq. According to Fick’s second law, the partial differential equation of transient diffusion in shale matrix can be written as: The inner boundary of matrix blocks is non-flow as gas diffusion in the spherical matrix blocks is symmetric, so The outer boundary conditions can be described as that gas concentrations in the fracture system and on the external surface of matrix blocks are approximately the same. The initial condition is given as: The desorption behavior of the matrix international surface can be described as: Here we identify a dimensionless variant Combining Eqs. According to the definitions of dimensionless variables in The solution of Eqs. Based on the definitions of dimensionless variables in Permeability of naturally occurred fracture system is a pressure dependent parameter which leads to a nonlinear seepage model. In order to solve this nonlinear equation, we can use Pedrosa’s substitution to solve that problem Substituting Eq. The degree of nonlinearity in Eq. The zero-order perturbation solution can satisfy accuracy requirement because dimensionless permeability modulus is always very small. So Eq. Taking the Laplace transformation of Eq. Substituting Eq. where There are Ozkan and Raghavan’s method The well produces at a constant production The dimensionless of Eq. By using perturbation technique and having zero-order solution, we can obtain: Combining Eq. We can get the zero-order of dimensionless pseudo-pressure as follows: In order to estimate the gas shale well production decline curves, it is reasonable to assume an elliptical non-flow boundary as illustrated in The pressure response of MFHW in shale gas reservoir will be obtained by discretizing fractures and applying principle of superposition (detailed derivations can be seen in Appendix B). The pressure responses at ( The constant flow rate equation can be written as follows: Eqs. The By Stehfest numerical inversion algorithm, Based on Van Everdingen and Hurst’s study With Stehfest numerical inversion algorithm, we can get well production rate, The proposed model is a semi-analytical model which can inverse reservoir’s parameters and also predict production decline curve. By analyzing the daily production versus time using the proposed models, it was found that the production behavior of a MFHW is most sensitive with the controlling equivalent radius. Then a workflow of interpreting production data is proposed here. During the modeling exercise, the value of controlling equivalent radius is initially assumed and estimating fracture’s half-length which is strongly associated with controlling equivalent radius. Then, the production data were fitted to estimate the best input modeling parameters. Finally, the validated model can be used either to inversely estimate the reservoir parameters or predict the future production behaviors of the existing well. According to parametric sensitivity level, we initially validate the model then provide a simple workflow to invert unknown parameters and/or predict production rate decline curves. To analyze the production decline curve, we took the published production data from Barnett Shale as the working data set After doing sensitivity analyses, it turns out that equivalent controlling radius, As shown in In order to understand the unique production behavior with multimechanistic flows, we tried to compare the shale MFHW’s production behavior with and without consideration of sorption effect, Knudsen diffusion, slippage effects and stress-dependent permeability. Different flow regime analysis was conducted to investigate the impacts of various flow mechanisms on the overall production behaviors. Based on type flow regimes division and gas flow characteristics in each period, three key times (in early-time linear flow, pseudo-radial flow around each fracture and intermediate-time linear flow, respectively) are selected to analysis shale’s production behaviors. In this section, the production sensitivity analyses for different key reservoir parameters were conducted and discussed. The key reservoir parameters include initial absolute permeability in fracture system, From  As discussed as above, fracture shape (half-length of fracture, fracture number and fracture spacing) impacts early stage of gas production (when t < 100 days) and producing gas for this period mainly comes from fracture depletion. When the fracture depletion is done, the micro-scale flow will dominate the overall gas production which will be independent of the fracture permeability as shown in  As shown in According to Trends of average difference percentage of parameters are shown in This work conducts production decline behavior of multiple fractured horizontal wells (MFHW) in shale gas reservoirs by incorporating multiple flow mechanisms. The main conclusions can be drawn as follows: The proposed coupled production model can be used to predict the long-term gas production behavior. The inclusion of desorption, diffusive flow, slippage effect and stress-dependent permeability is the novel method to ensure the model can precisely predict the long term production behavior, especially for the late time production stage. Meanwhile, multiple mechanisms will bring strong nonlinearities to seepage mathematical equation. To conquer this problem, we use perturbation method and the strong nonlinearities are considerably weakened. Perturbation technology is used to establish the point source solution with consideration of stress-dependent permeability which little research has done before. Based on equivalent area method, we set a series of Type pressure curves for shale MFHW were divided into seven flow periods and comparisons between production behaviors with and without multimechanics flows were made in three flow periods. The production discrepancy becomes larger and larger with continuous depletion and the elevated productions were found to be 9.8%, 45.1% and 60.9% in early-time linear flow, pseudo-radial flow around each fracture and intermediate-time linear flow, respectively. This is attributed that desorption and diffusion is increasingly important as depleting. Using the proposed model, the sensitivity analyses were conducted and it was found that fracture half-length, This article is supported by The dimensionless equations for transient diffusion model for matrix is expressed as follows based on Section 2.2: Taking Laplace transformations of Eqs. (A-1)–(A-5) yields Eq. (A-7) becomes by making The general solution of Eq. (A-10) is as follows Substituting Eq. (A-12) into Eq. (A-8) yields The following relationship can be obtained combining the inner boundary condition Eq. (A-13): Then Eq. (A-12) can be expressed as Substituting Eq. (A-15) into Eq. (A-9) yields After taking Laplace transformation with respect to Combing Eqs. (A-16) and (A-17) yields The dimensionless gas concentration in shale matrix in the Laplace space can be obtained by substituting Eq. (A-18) into Eq. (A-15): Eq. (A-19) can be further derived as follows: Thus Eq. (A-6) can be rewritten as As shown in The coordinates of the As a MFHW produces at a constant production rate and discrete unit number, As the hydraulic fracture plane is vertical to Here we define the dimensionless flux per unit length of the discrete segment ( So Eq. (B-6) can be rewritten as So Then the pressure response at the discrete segment As we consider that hydraulic fractures are infinitely conductive, so Hence, Eq. (B-9) effectively becomes: By writing Eq. (B-12) for all midpoints for discrete segments 