Data on the solubility of manganese sulphate monohydrate in water, and in aqueous alcohols is essential for salting-out crystallization studies. The solubilities for the quaternary system MnSO4·H2O+MgSO4·7H2O+H2O+MeOH solution were determined in the temperature ranges 293.2–308.2K over the mole fraction methanol ranges of 0.00–0.16. The solubility data were used for modelling with the modified extended electrolyte non-random two-liquid (NRTL) equation. The present extension uses ion-specific parameters instead of the electrolyte-specific NRTL binary interaction parameters. This approach has feasibility for many electrolytes and mixed aqueous solution systems principally. The model was found to correlate the solubility data satisfactory.Manganese sulphate monohydrate is mostly produced as a side product from the production of electrolytic manganese dioxide (EMD) in the battery making industry. These by-products consist of many impurities, mainly magnesium. Salting-out crystallization is a good procedure to separate manganese from magnesium. Data on the solubility of manganese sulphate monohydrate in water, and in aqueous alcohols is essential for salting-out crystallization studies. Many separation processes such as salting-out crystallization involve solutions of solid solutes dissolved in mixed liquid solvents. One of the main characteristics that distinguishes between different solutions is the dissociation of the salts into cations and anions, and because the ions so produced interact through much larger distances, it has a strong nonideal effect on the thermodynamic properties of the solution. The activity coefficient models can describe these nonideal effects on the thermodynamic properties of the solution. The solubilities of inorganic salts are affected by changes in their activity coefficients in the presence of different solvents of other solutes. Generally, activity coefficient in a dilute electrolyte solution can be expressed by the Debye–Hückel equation In this study, the solubility of MnSO The solubility for manganese sulphate–water–methanol system at the temperature 293.2–308.2 Precalculated quantities of methanol were weighed and mixed with a fixed mass of water to create solutions of various mole fractions (0.00–0.16) methanol. The solutions were placed in separated flasks. The flasks were stoppered and sealed with a Paraffin film to prevent evaporation of solvents. These flasks fitted with submersible magnetic stirrer were placed in the controlled thermostatic bath at the desired temperature. An accurately weighed out mass (in excess of saturation) of Analar grade manganese sulphate monohydrate (APS Chemicals Ltd.) was added to the solubility cells and continuously stirred for 24 To study the effect of methanol on the solubility of MnSO Crystallization of inorganic salts is based on the phase equilibrium between the aqueous phase and the salt's crystal phase, or on the solubility product defined by activity coefficient and molality of aqueous ions as follows: We assumed that aqueous electrolyte solution consists of water, anion, and cation in the system. This complete dissociation assumption was extended to aqueous mixed electrolyte systems. Since the activity coefficient of individual ion In the electrolyte-NRTL model proposed by Chen et al. The Pitzer–Debye–Hückel equation is a function of ion strength that is given by: The NRTL equation is expressed by: The solubility data for MnSO According to the original NRTL equation (see Eq.  The solubilities of MnSO activity parameter of van’t Hoff equation (J/mol) Debye–Hückel constant for the osmotic coefficient parameter of van’t Hoff equation (J/mol/K) NRTL interaction parameter for all species; molecules and ions (J/mol) parameter of NRTL equation ionic strength in mole fraction scale solubility product based on activity molality (gmol/kg solvent) solvent molecular weight (g/mol) gas constant, =8.314 temperature (K) true liquid phase mole fraction based on all species; molecules and ions NRTL non-randomness parameter, =0.2 activity coefficient stoichiometric number the closest approach parameter of Pitzer–Debye–Hückel equation, =14.9 NRTL interaction parameter for any species in solution Pizter–Debye–Hückel equation unsymmetrical convention infinite dilution cation species anion species