The recovery of tungsten from alkaline leach solutions has been studied examining the effect of temperature, pH, Ca/WO3 molar ratio and nature of the precipitated calcium tungstate. The precipitation kinetics of calcium tungstate, upon the addition of aqueous sodium tungstate to calcium solutions, was followed by potentiometric measurements using a calcium ion-selective electrode. Two models, a crystal growth model and a second-order reaction opposed by zero-order reaction, have been used to test the experimental data. Both models show that the apparent activation energy of CaWO4 precipitation falls in the range 58 to 67 kJ mol−1.
                  The kinetic data shows that the maximum recovery of precipitated calcium tungstate occurs at pH≥8.5 with a 10% excess of CaCl2 at 50 °C over a period of 20 min using sodium tungstate solutions of 100 g L−1 and 150 g L−1 WO3.Tungsten is one of the most important refractory metals used in several industrial applications taking into account its hardy and heat-resistant performance in the form of tungsten carbide. The main sources of tungsten are the high-grade concentrates of wolframite and scheelite ores. Currently, synthetic scheelite is a strong contender as a third source of tungsten. Under normal circumstances the medium-grade concentrates of tungsten have reduced commercial value and are difficult to place in the market ( The precipitation reaction kinetics depends on the predominance of a slow step in the mechanism of crystal growth. If the equilibrium at the crystal surface is rapid, the transport of the lattice ions from solution to the primary nuclei will be the rate-limiting step. The rate of crystal growth is then proportional to the supersaturation, through Fick's law of diffusion. Conversely, if the interface controls the reaction, the rate of growth is proportional to the square of the supersaturation. Many precipitation reactions follow this latter mechanism, such as calcium carbonate ( The kinetics of crystal growth of calcium tungstate from sodium tungstate melts have been performed by This paper reports the kinetics of calcium tungstate precipitation from alkaline sodium solutions and the influence of temperature, supersaturation, pH and nature of calcium tungstate on tungsten recovery using a calcium ion-selective electrode. This potentiometric technique has the advantage of being non-destructive and measures high to low concentrations directly. All chemicals were analytical grade from Merck and used without further purification. Orion (92-20-01) was the ion exchanger used to prepare the calcium ion-selective membrane electrodes. All solutions were prepared by diluting a stock concentrate. Since the ionic strength influences the kinetics and morphology of crystal growth ( The titration of the calcium and tungstate concentrated solutions was performed by potentiometry using a solution of EDTA (0.1 M) and lead perchlorate (0.1 M) (Orion 94-82-05), together with calcium and lead ion selective electrodes, respectively. The construction of the calcium ion-selective electrode was performed according to Moody and Thomas' technique ( To obtain the kinetic data the reaction was performed in a glassware with the solution stirred magnetically and monitored for pH and calcium ion concentration. Calcium tungstate was then precipitated from sodium tungstate solutions of 100 g L Scanning electron microscopy micrographs were obtained on a JEOL JSM-6301F instrument. Since sodium ions can act as interfering species in calcium ion selective electrodes it was necessary to evaluate the extent of sodium ion interference in the potentiometric measurements performed with the constructed electrodes. The calcium ion-selective electrode potential, The interference of sodium ion was analysed according to the In the trials performed on a larger scale, either both reactants were added simultaneously, or calcium chloride solution was added to the bulk sodium tungstate solution. Reaction time was 20 min in both procedures. The filtered solid residue was washed with hot water to eliminate chloride and the filtrate analyzed for WO The precipitation of calcium tungstate from sodium tungstate solutions by calcium chloride solutions is given by the following reaction: Tungstate precipitation can be seen as a second-order reaction opposed by a zero-order reaction since the product is a solid. Considering both reactants as having the same initial concentration and designating A as Ca Let us consider the reactant concentration expressed in terms of the conversion Looking at the reaction Thus at low supersaturation the growth rate dependence on supersaturation is parabolic. In The experimental data was tested considering a surface-controlled reaction for the models represented by Eqs. The model 1, based on the principles of crystal growth, represents satisfactorily the tungstate precipitation, which has been found to hold for a number of sparingly soluble 2-2 electrolytes ( The integrated form of Eq. The fitting of the experimental data according to the model 2, based on the second-order reaction opposed by a zero-order reaction, is presented in The calculation of apparent activation energy with the Arrhenius equation provides a further criterion for determining the controlling step of the reaction. The Arrhenius plot constructed for models 1 and 2, shown in Further evidence for an interfacial mechanism as the rate-step controlling the reaction is provided by the insensitivity of the yield induced by stirring speed rates higher than 200 min Scanning electron micrographs of the crystals, Many factors can affect the precipitation yield of tungstate by calcium ions from leaching solutions including particle size, the calcium salt, excess of reagent, temperature, pH, reaction time, and stirring. This study is only concerned with the reaction yield, since the effect of reaction parameters on the particle size has already been described (   Apart from the common tungstates, the para-tungstates ( Our results present a poor yield on tungsten recovery at pH between 5 and 7 that is explained by the increasing para-tungstate formation at lower pH. The use of 15% excess of Ca(OH)  The yield of calcium tungstate precipitation is dependent on pH, temperature and excess of calcium reactant. The main conclusions to emerge from this work are as follows: 1) the proposed kinetics equations are identical for We acknowledge the Portuguese Science and Technology Foundation (FCT) for the Project POCTI/ECM/39646.