Background
                  The literature is limited on the etiology and outcome of acute traumatic knee extensor mechanism injuries in skeletally immature patients with lack of a reliable classification system.
               
                  Methods
                  Data on patients who sustained an acute traumatic injury of the knee extensor mechanism were reviewed with a minimum of 12-month follow-up. Functional outcome was evaluated regarding knee active range of motion. Functional outcome was described using the Knee Society Score (KSS). Data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation.
               
                  Results
                  Seventy-two patients with 74 knee extensor mechanism injuries were identified. The age at the time of injury was 13.9 ± 1.9 years. They included 59 injuries with tibial tubercle avulsion fracture, six injuries with patellar tendon avulsion without bone injury, six injuries with combined patellar tendon avulsion with tibial tubercle fracture, two injuries with sleeve fracture, and one injury with quadriceps tendon avulsion. According to our classification, type IB1 injury was the commonest injury (79.7%). The time to return to sports was 5.23 ± 2.98 months. The flexion was 128.7° ± 13.3°. A mean terminal extension lag of 5.6° was detected in three patients (4.1%). The KSS was 94.8 ± 8.1 and the functional outcome was graded excellent in 64 patients (88.9%), good in seven patients (9.7%), and fair in one patient (1.4%).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Traumatic injuries of the knee extensor mechanism in skeletally immature patients represent a wide variety of injuries including bony injuries in 82.4% of cases reviewed, tendinous injuries in 9.5%, and both bone and tendinous injuries in 8.1%. Our proposed classification system provides a more precise description of the injury pattern.The knee is the most common site of injury in children during sports activity [ Although tibial tubercle fractures were classified originally by Watson-Jones [ After approval by the local institutional review board, a retrospective review of the electronic medical record was performed to identify pediatric patients who sustained acute traumatic injury of the knee extensor mechanism with a minimum of 12-month follow-up at a level I pediatric trauma center. Demographic and clinical data included age at time of injury, sex, laterality, mechanism of injury, medical history, associated co-morbidity or injuries, complications, diagnostic imaging such as plain radiographs, computerized tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance images (MRI), method of fixation, period of postoperative immobilization, time to return to sports activities, follow-up duration, and further need for surgery were reviewed. Tibial tubercle fractures, if present, were described according to the Ogden classification [ The functional outcome was evaluated regarding the final knee active range of motion (AROM) using goniometer and the presence or the absence of terminal extension lag. Additional clinical outcome rating using the Knee Society Score (KSS) was performed based on pain (50 points), range of motion (25 points), and stability (25 points) [ Data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation. We studied the difference between the knee extensor mechanism injury patterns (bone injury, tendon injury, and both bone and tendon injury) that have been used in the new classification regarding the postoperative immobilization period and the time to resume sports activity using analysis of variance (ANOVA) test. Statistical analysis of the difference between the proportion of functional outcome grades based on the knee extension mechanism injury patterns was performed using Chi-square test. Statistical significance was set at Seventy-two patients (68 males and four females) with 74 knee extensor mechanism traumatic injuries were identified. The left knee was involved in 40 patients, and the right knee in 30. There were bilateral knee injuries in two patients. The age at the time of injury was 13.9 ± 1.9 years (range: 6–16 years). They included 59 injuries (79.7%) with tibial tubercle avulsion fracture, six injuries (8.1%) with patellar tendon avulsion without bone injury, six injuries (8.1%) with combined patellar tendon avulsion with tibial tubercle fracture, two injuries (2.7%) with sleeve fracture, and one injury (1.4%) with quadriceps tendon avulsion. The injury occurred in relation to sports activities in 62 patients (83.8%) ( Bilateral knee injuries were detected in two patients. The first patient was a 16-year-old male who had bilateral tibial tubercle fractures (IIIB on the right knee and IV on the left knee) and nondisplaced proximal left fibular fracture after falling from height. The patient was classified as IB1 based on our new classification. The second patient was a 14-year-old male who experienced bilateral tibial tubercle fractures (IB on the right knee and IIIB on the left knee). The patient was classified as IB1 on the right knee and IB3 on the left knee because on associated patellar tendon injury. Plain radiographs were helpful in the diagnosis of tibial tubercle avulsion fractures in 65 injuries (87.8%) ( CT was performed in nine patients (12.5%) with comminuted complex fractures. Non-displaced Salter–Harris type IV fracture of the proximal tibia and displaced intraarticular fracture of the proximal tibial metaphysis were detected in two patients in addition to the tibial tubercle fracture. Bilateral CT arteriogram of the lower extremity was performed in one patient for suspected arterial injury. MRI was performed in 12 patients (16.6%) with suspected tendinous injuries before the surgery. In four patients, it showed complete patellar tendon rupture without bone avulsion fracture. Partial tear of the patellar tendon was detected in one patient. In two patients, the MRI scans showed no ligamentous or intraarticular injury beside the tibial tubercle fracture type IIIB. In one patient with displaced tibial tubercle fracture type IIIB, scans showed mild partial tearing of the distal patellar tendon laterally at the site of the comminuted fracture fragments with a small portion (less than or equal to 10%) remained attached to the proximal tibia. More than 50% of the medical collateral ligament (MCL) had been avulsed anteriorly in another patient with tibial tubercle avulsion fracture type IIIB. In one patient with tibial tubercle avulsion fracture type IB, MRI scans showed comminuted and displaced tibial eminence anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) avulsion fracture with the anterior and posterior roots of the lateral meniscus attached to the avulsed fragment. There was also a horizontal tear of the posterior root of the lateral meniscus and interbody medial meniscal white zone contusion. MRI scans revealed complete disruption of the quadriceps tendon fibers that were retracted superiorly with a displaced avulsed fragment of the superior patellar cartilage in one patient ( Most cases were diagnosed immediately after the injury without delay, while three patients with tendinous injuries were diagnosed late by seven to 10 days after the time of injury. This was because the X-ray did not show signs of fracture, so it was thought that it might be a contusion and were treated conservatively with immobilization; while in another patient with juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), it was assumed that trauma might exacerbated an arthritis flare and the patient's complaint was more likely due to JIA flare rather than an acute injury. Associated knee ligamentous injury was detected in two patients (2.7%) including MCL tear and ACL avulsion. Meniscus injury was reported in two patients (2.7%). All patients were treated operatively. Screw fixation (n = 66), transosseous suturing (n = 18), suture anchors (n = 7), tension band wiring (n = 5), and staples (n = 2) were used for the reconstruction for such injuries. Cannulated screws were used with washer (n = 45) or without washer (n = 21). The washers were used to optimize the compression across the fracture site and prevent the screw head from going beyond the cortex. The screws were placed in perpendicular direction to the fracture line and parallel to the epiphyseal plate ( For patellar tendon avulsion injuries from the tibial tubercle, Krackow stitch type using two No. 2 FiberWire sutures (Arthrex, USA) was placed in the patellar tendon putting one suture at the peripheral side of the tendon, while the other through the central part ending in four suture strands at the distal end of the avulsed tendon. We also used the FiberWire suture passed in a Krackow configuration through the patellar tendon when the avulsed tubercle fragment was small to be held securely by a screw for additional stability. Then, the four FiberWire suture strands were fixed to the tibia using either suture anchors or transosseous tunnel. The used suture anchors were BioComposite suture anchors (Arthrex, USA) and Mitek QuickAnchor (DePuy Synthes, USA). Two suture anchors were placed just medial and lateral to the tibial tubercle after pre-drilling. Two of the suture strands (one from the central and one from the peripheral suture strands) were tied to the corresponding suture anchor. A third suture anchor was used in two patients, which was placed just distal to the tibial tubercle. The suture strands of the third anchor were passed through the middle of the patellar tendon using Bunnell suture technique for additional repair reinforcement. In the patients where the transosseous suturing was performed, two surgical techniques were used. In the first technique, two drill tunnels were made with one tunnel from the center of the tibial tubercle out medially and another from the center of the tibial tubercle out laterally. The FiberWire sutures were passed from the center out; two through each tunnel. Then, a transverse bone tunnel was performed just distal to the tibial tubercle through which the FiberWire sutures were brought from medial to lateral and tied laterally under cover of the anterior compartment musculature. In the second technique, two bone tunnels were performed transversely at the level of tibial tubercle (one tunnel is posterior than the other) through which the suture strands were passed from medial to lateral in one tunnel and from lateral to medial in the other tunnel. The two peripheral FiberWire strands went through the more posterior tunnel, while the two central FiberWire strands went through the more superficial tunnel and tied down. The site of patellar tendon–bone repair was reinforced in all patients by either a screw over a spiked washer, staple, or combination. Any tears of the medial and lateral retinaculum were repaired simultaneously. Surgeon must pay attention to avoid over tightness of the patellar tendon repair; otherwise, patella baja ( Tension band wiring was performed to provide additional fixation in patients with patellar tendon avulsion either from the patella or the tibial tubercle and in patients with small and/or multi-fragmented tibial tubercle fracture where the screw fixation alone was not adequate. For that purpose, we drilled transverse tunnel through the middle third of the patella and another transverse tunnel through the anterior tibial cortex just distal to the tibial tubercle. Then, cerclage wire was inserted in a figure of eight fashion and tightened. Measures to prevent over tightness of the wires were taken such as allowing the knee to flex to 90° intraoperatively and using fluoroscopy to get lateral images of the injured and normal knees to ensure comparable patellar height. For patellar tendon avulsion from the distal patellar pole (sleeve fracture injury), transpatellar suturing was performed in which three longitudinal tunnels were made through the patella. The central two strands of FiberWire suture placed in a Krackow configuration through the patellar tendon and still attached patellar periosteal flap were passed from distal to proximal in the middle tunnel using suture passer, while the peripheral two strands were passed in the lateral and medial tunnels. Then, each central strand was tied with the corresponding peripheral strand over the proximal patellar pole and tightened with the knee in full extension. For quadriceps tendon avulsion, two FiberWire sutures was placed in a Krackow configuration through the quadriceps tendon and the attached osteochondral fragment ending in four suture strands at the distal end of the avulsed tendon. Then, three bone tunnels were drilled longitudinally from proximal to distal. The central two strands were passed through the middle tunnel, while the peripheral two strands were passed through the medial and lateral tunnels. The sutures were tied distally over a bridge of bone in the same manner as mentioned previously. Fourteen adverse events were reported in 13 patients (18%) ( The postoperative immobilization after surgery was 7.6 ± 3.5 weeks, which was variable among the different injury patterns ( The knee is a commonly injured joint in children particularly those who participate in sports activities [ The mean age of our study patients at the time of injury was 13.9 years, which is comparable with 13.7 years reported by Frey et al. [ In our study, the most commonly detected type of tibial tubercle fracture was III instead of IIIB in 33 instead of 31 traumatic injuries (50.8% instead of 41.9%). Similarly, Pretell-Mazzini et al. [ Among our series, associated knee ligamentous injury was detected in two patients (2.7%) including MCL tear and ACL avulsion. Previous reports showed similar knee ligamentous injury in patients with tibial tubercle fracture such as MCL, ACL, coronary, and arcuate ligaments [ Thirteen tendon injuries (17.6%) were detected. Among these injuries, six injuries (8.1%) included tibial tubercle fracture with ruptured patellar tendon. Although double-hit injury of the knee extensor mechanism is an extremely rare condition, it becomes more frequent due to increased participation in sports and high-energy recreational activities at younger age [ In our study, plain radiographs were helpful in the diagnosis of tibial tubercle fractures in 65 injuries (87.8%). Certain radiologic signs were helpful to suspect underlying tendinous injury such as high riding patella in patellar tendon rupture, patellar displacement ratio in combined tibial tubercle fracture and patellar tendon rupture, and possible patella paja in quadriceps tendon injury. However, Pandya et al. [ Among our series, two patients (2.7%) developed compartment syndrome that required fasciotomy. The reported average incidence of compartment syndrome in patients with tibial tubercle fractures was 4% [ The aim of treatment of such injuries is to restore the functional integrity of the quadriceps muscle. Variable methods of fixation including screws, transosseous suturing, suture anchors, staples, and tension band wiring were used for the reconstruction for such injuries. The choice of the method of fixation depends on the nature and complexity of injury and the surgeon's preference. Initially, tibial tubercle fracture type I or II injuries were treated conservatively by immobilization for six weeks, while type III injuries were treated with internal fixation to achieve anatomical reduction [ Currently, the primary indications of surgery are fracture displacement [ The mean postoperative immobilization period was 7.6 weeks, which is relatively higher than the mean period reported after tibial tubercle fracture which is 5.2 weeks. This is due to the associated tendinous injuries that require a relatively longer period of immobilization. The mean knee flexion at the last follow-up visit was 128.7°, which is comparable with 130.1° reported by Pandya et al. [ The mean time to return to sports activities for our patients was 5.2 months, which is slightly earlier than 7.2 months reported by Pretell-Mazzini et al. [ Tendon-to-bone healing occurs slowly and of inferior quality in comparison with bone-to-bone healing [ In conclusion, among 74 traumatic injuries of the knee extensor mechanism reported in skeletally immature patients, there were 59 injuries (79.7%) with tibial tubercle avulsion fracture, six injuries (8.1%) with patellar tendon avulsion without bone injury, six injuries (8.1%) with combined patellar tendon avulsion with tibial tubercle fracture, two injuries (2.7%) with sleeve fracture, and one injury (1.4%) with quadriceps tendon avulsion. Traumatic injuries of the knee extensor mechanism included a wide variety of injuries that affected bone only in 61 injuries (82.4%), tendon only in seven injuries (9.5%), and both bone and tendon in six injuries (8.1%). Bone injuries were associated with earlier return to sports and higher proportion of better functional outcome compared with tendinous injuries. Our proposed classification system provides a more precise description of the injury pattern, which will assist physicians and investigators in data collection and analysis. It also allows for better effective communication with the family as far as the expectation of postoperative recovery depending on the injury pattern. The study was approved by the institutional review board. There is no funding source. The author declares that there is no conflict of interest.