The problem of developing robust thresholds for fault detection is addressed. An inequality for the solution of a linear system with uncertain parameters is provided and is shown to be a valuable tool for developing dynamic threshold generators for fault detection. Such threshold generators are desirable for achieving robustness against model uncertainty in combination with sensitivity to small faults.
                  The usefulness of the inequality is illustrated by developing an algorithm for detection of sensor faults in a turbofan engine. The proposed algorithm consists of a state observer with integral action. A dynamic threshold generator is derived under the assumption of parametric uncertainty in the process model. Successful simulations with measurement data show that the algorithm is capable of detecting faults without generating false alarms.Technical systems are inherently exposed to faults such as leaking valves, broken bearings, faulty sensors, etc. In most applications, it is vital that these faults are detected and isolated in an early stage and accommodated for. In e.g. a single engine aircraft, a fault that leads to a shut down of the engine will inevitably have hazardous consequences. This is of course not allowed to happen, instead continuous operation despite any occurring faults must be ensured. As faults in mechanical systems mainly are due to wear, stress or poor quality, it is not likely that there will be less faults in the future so a good strategy for detection and handling is of great concern. The idea behind model-based fault detection is to use the redundancy in information obtained from measurement in combination with a process model. If the measured output does not match the expected output produced by a process model, then the presence of a fault can be deduced. The two main properties that are desired in a fault detection algorithm are When an analytical process model is available, fault detection methods based on analytical redundancy may be employed. During the past three decades, extensive research has been carried out in this area and many methods have been developed ( However, the residual is almost always nonzero due to disturbances and model uncertainty, even if there is no fault. The purpose of the second step of the fault detection algorithm is thus to evaluate the residual and draw conclusions on the presence of a fault. This is done by comparing some function of the residual, the Detection thresholds that are robust against frequency domain uncertainty are developed in e.g. In An uncertain parameter in a general, nonlinear system, can clearly affect the system response in many different ways. However, considering a Taylor approximation of a state-space representation of the system motivates distinguishing between additive and multiplicative parameters. In this context, it is clear that parameters entering mutiplicatively with the state constitutes the main difficulty. Therefore, we will here consider systems of the type When applying a Luenberger observer to a system of the form (1), then the error system, i.e. the dynamics of the estimation error, also take the form (1) with Two very different fault detection problems have, so far, been successfully addressed with the described results. In The continuation of this paper begins with some mathematical notations and preliminaries in The     The Kronecker product      Of the above, (b) and (c) can be found in All functions of time are assumed causal, i.e. are defined on The truncation operator A star between two functions In this section, motivation for considering the model structure (1) will be given. The main feature of the model structure (1) is the product between the state Without loss of generality, it can be assumed that      Taken together,  Under The system structure (1) is invariant under linear state transformation. Define the new state vector Provided that the measurement matrix A central part in any fault detection algorithm is the residual generator, which is often constructed as a state estimation algorithm. It will now be shown that applying a Luenberger observer to (1) generates an error system which is also of the form (1). Since nothing is known about Due to the model uncertainties and other disturbances the residual is, in general, always nonzero. Thus, to be able to infer the existence of a fault, an evaluation signal Before stating the main result, two lemmas to facilitate its proof are given. The first lemma provides some useful inequalities involving the convolution operator.      See The second lemma concerns the complementary sensitivity function  It is well known (see e.g. Theorem 7.3-1 in The following theorem is the main result of this study. It provides an upper bound for the modulus of the state vector of a linear system with parametric uncertainty acting multiplicatively on the state vector. The upper bound is time-varying and depends on both the input  The nominal system, i.e. with Obviously, the above implies that The condition If   Using Note that, due to One issue that remains to be solved is how to find systems  The modulus of the impulse response matrix is Typically, the matrix The choices of One obstacle when using Theorem The criterion on the parameter vector Some reasoning concerning potential sources for conservatism of the inequality Negative values in Different signs in the elements of The choice of feedback In an implementation, A major advantage with the proposed approach compared to traditional interval analysis is that the scalability is good, both with respect to the order of the process and the number of uncertain parameters. The complexity of the implementation depends mainly on the systems In this section, all signals are scalar valued for simplicity. Parameter uncertainty is a powerful way of describing the discrepancy between measurement data and the predictions of a model. It is, however, not the best tool in all situations, e.g. for describing measurement noise, which is an important disturbance in the jet engine example in the sequel. Thus, to be able to use An elementary result regarding the space of functions In order to make a decision on whether a fault has occurred or not, an evaluation signal We propose to use the following class of evaluation operators: The major advantage of the proposed class of evaluation operators is that it provides efficient ways of calculating the robust threshold Note that all the evaluation operators above are based on linear filters. Choosing Mechanisms that prevent faults from leading to catastrophic failures are today standard when developing aircraft jet engines. The most commonly used methods are hardware redundancy, typically sensor redundancy, computing redundancy and even process redundancy (more than one engine). The fault detection mechanism are in these cases based on voting or out-of-range checks but the introduction of electronic units into the control system has enabled the use of model-based fault detection methods. Model-based techniques are expected to provide improved fault detection methods, decreasing the number of aborted missions, and reduction of the need for redundant sensors, resulting in lower cost and weight, e.g. for the military low bypass turbofan engine RM12 installed in the single engine aircraft JAS-39 Gripen. See In normal mode, demanded thrust in the RM12 is obtained by controlling the compressor speed (NH). This is achieved by computing an NH-reference from the demanded thrust (PLA—pilot lever angle) and the compressor inlet temperature (T25, actually T2.5). For the PLA, there are redundant measurements, but the temperature T25 is measured by a single sensor only, which makes it very important to determine the health of this sensor. The temperature at the compressor inlet (T25), in the RM12, is modeled by the following linear time-varying, first order differential equation: The uncertainty in the process model is represented by the unknown function The task is to detect faults in the T25 sensor. Experience has shown that such faults are first manifested as increased sensor noise and the fault hypothesis is therefore defined as An observer with integral action and time-varying feedback is chosen as residual generator. The observer can be represented by The dynamics of the estimation error Thus, by defining the state vector To prevent false alarms caused by the measurement disturbance and the uncertainty, the threshold function In order to find expressions for the operators The fault detection algorithm described in the previous sections has been successfully tested with test-bed data from an RM12 turbofan engine. The weight of the evaluation operator was chosen to   An inequality for the solution of a linear system with uncertain parameters was developed. This inequality is expected to be a valuable tool for providing the time-varying fault detection thresholds that are desired to achieve robustness against parametric uncertainty in combination with sensitivity to small faults. The usefulness of the inequality was illustrated by developing a method for detecting sensor faults in a turbofan engine. The proposed method consists of Luenberger observers extended with integral action. A robust detection threshold was calculated under the assumption of parametric uncertainty in the process model. Successful simulations with measurement data show that the obtained detection threshold exhibits the desired behavior, i.e. imitate the behavior of the evaluation signal when no fault is present. Some issues that need to be considered in the future are how to find numerical values for the uncertainty bounds Funding of the projects The Hölder inequality ensures that