Trucks are the primary means of haulage in surface coal, metal, and nonmetal mining operations. The number of fatal accidents involving trucks is higher when compared to all other mining equipment. Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) reports that 137 fatalities were haul truck-related in the United States between 1995 and 2011. A total of 12 accidents, including 13 fatalities, were recorded in surface coal mining operations in West Virginia (WV) during this period. The objective of this study was to better understand the root causes of accidents in WV. The Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) technique was used to systematically analyze these accidents. Results of the study indicate that inadequate or improper pre-operational check and poor maintenance of trucks were the two most common root causes of these accidents. A total of eight accidents occurred on haul roads, while 10 accidents occurred while the trucks were moving forward. The two most violated provisions of Code of Federal Regulations were 30 CFR§77.404 – Machinery and equipment; operation and maintenance (six times), and 30 CFR§77.1606 – Loading and haulage equipment; inspection and maintenance (five times).According to Mine Safety and Health Administration ( It can be seen in There have been several studies analyzing truck-related fatalities ( Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) is one of many symbolic logic analytical techniques. It involves development of a graphic model of the pathways within a system that can lead to a foreseeable, undesirable loss event, which is referred to as the “Top Event,” as it is located at the top of the Fault Tree (FT). It is not a model of all possible causes for system failure, but rather includes those faults that contributed to the undesired “Top Event” ( The main objective of this research study was to build upon previous studies and better understand the root causes of truck-related accidents. In this study, FTA was used to learn how lower level events interacted to cause the upper level event, and ultimately the top event (i.e., the fatal accident) to happen. This study was focused on fatal accidents in surface coal mining in West Virginia. Data on truck-related accidents for the period from 1995 through 2011 were obtained from investigation reports, which are publicly accessible from the MSHA web site (  The first step in conducting FTA is to define the objective. In this study, FTA was carried out with the objective of better understanding of the root causes of the accidents. In the second step, the top event needs to be defined. This study considered the haul truck-related accidents, so all the top events for all constructed FT were defined as “fatal accidents.” In the third step, the scope of FTA should be defined. According to The fifth step involves the definition of ground rules for the FTA. Generally, the ground rules include nomenclature by which the events are named in the FT. In order to make clear what exactly happened, names of the events are fairly verbose and similar to those words stated in the MSHA investigation reports. In the sixth step, the actual construction of FT is conducted. The main symbols of events and logic gates that are used in the FT to represent the relationship between events are shown in In the FTA, the event symbol, signified by a rectangle, can be either top event or intermediate event. Top event is an undesirable event, toward which all the paths flow. In this study, all the top events are defined as “fatal accident.” Intermediate event is the output event of its upper level event and the input event of its lower level event, i.e., intermediate event is the result of its lower level event and the reason for its upper level event. Basic event is a basic initiating fault requiring no further development. Root causes stated in every investigation report were applied as basic events in this study. The evaluation of FT, which is used in seventh step, can be conducted qualitatively quantitatively, or both ( The final step in FTA (Step viii) involves the interpretation and presentation of the results. The results are shown and interpreted in Section 3 (Results and Analysis). It is common practice to use one unique FT in analysis of accidents. In this study, it was decided to construct FT for every accident, as opposed to one unique FT, in order to show adequate and relatively detailed information on truck-related accidents. Such an approach helps to provide a better understanding of how the root causes caused each fatal accident to occur. In addition, constructing FT for every accident helps summarize the frequency of root causes. A unique FT will be eventually developed in a subsequent phase of the study, and is desirable for conducting an overall impact study of contributing factors of fatalities, and determining their importance measures such as Fussel-Vesely (FV) or Risk Achievement Worth (RAW) as described in Although there was no root cause analysis of four accident reports (#1, #2, #3, and #4), conclusions of MSHA reports indicated contributing factors. These contributing factors were used with root causes of the eight accidents to list all factors involved in twelve accidents. The number of fatalities was later used to examine the relationship among other elements, such accident location and truck activity before the accident happened. A pictorial representation of 12 haul truck-related accidents in surface coal mining in West Virginia is presented in In order to show adequate and detailed information of every accident and how the basic events caused the upper level and top event to occur, FTs were constructed for every accident.  According to Despite the fact that no root causes were specified in MSHA investigation reports of Accidents #1, #2, #3, and #4, the conclusion of each report indicates the contributing factors of these accidents ( Many mechanical failures that occurred during operation were related to poor maintenance, and to defective trucks being placed into service due to inadequate or improper pre-operational check. Mechanical failure is often the result of a combination of inadequate or improper pre-operational check and poor maintenance. As In Accident #2, the unstable ground failed to support the truck. According to 30 CFR § 56.9304, dump locations should be visually inspected before operation. In addition, loads should be dumped at a safe distance from the edge of an unstable area of the bank where there is evidence that the dump location may fail to support the equipment. Accident #11 was caused as a result of operator being affected by alcohol. Accident #1 was caused by failure of the operator to control the truck because of some unknown reason. Accident #4 was caused by failure to set the parking brake when the operator exited the truck. Failure of the victims to follow the rules for approaching large equipment caused the Accident #5. Excessive speed resulted in Accident #8. There were only six accident reports indicating whether the seat belt was used at the time of the accident ( A significant proportion of haul truck-related fatal accidents involve operators with less than 10 The association between the number of accidents and accident location is shown in With the exception of a few investigation reports that did not specify the slope grade of the accident location, most of the slope grades of the locations were recorded. The grades and their average value are displayed in The relationship between the number of fatal accidents and haul-truck activity just before the accident happened was also examined (  Citations to the companies were also recorded in the MSHA investigation reports. Based on the citations stated in these reports, The 30 CFR § 77.404 ( Mobile and stationary machinery and equipment shall be maintained in safe operating condition and machinery or equipment in unsafe condition shall be removed from service immediately. Machinery and equipment shall be operated only by persons trained in the use of and authorized to operate such machinery or equipment. Repairs or maintenance shall not be performed on machinery until the power is off and the machinery is blocked against motion, except where machinery motion is necessary to make adjustments. Machinery shall not be lubricated while in motion where a hazard exists, unless equipped with extended fittings or cups. The 30 CFR § 77.1606 states that: Mobile loading and haulage equipment shall be inspected by a competent person before such equipment is placed in operation. Equipment defects affecting safety shall be recorded and reported to the mine operator. Carriers on aerial tramways, including loading and unloading mechanisms, shall be inspected each shift; brakes shall be inspected daily; ropes and supports shall be inspected as recommended by the manufacturer or as physical conditions warrant. Equipment defects affecting safety shall be reported to the mine operator. Equipment defects affecting safety shall be corrected before the equipment is used. In the next phase of this research, it will be important to develop effective intervention strategies to eliminate truck-related fatalities in surface mining operations. FTA is a useful and effective method of identifying the root causes of certain accidents. In this study, FTA was used to show how root causes, which are also the basic events in the FT, interacted to cause the fatal accident (top event of the FT) to happen. The results show that the two most common root causes of these accidents are inadequate or improper pre-operational check and poor maintenance. Failure to wear a seat belt and inadequate training were also important contributing factors in the twelve accidents. Analysis of the relationship between the number of accidents and their location indicates that eight out of 12 accidents occurred on haul roads. Analysis also shows that truck’s activity “moving forward” accounts for the largest number of accidents. Analysis of the frequency of violation of 30 CFR helped to understand the root causes, and the result shows the two most commonly violated provisions were 30 CFR§77.404, and 30 CFR§77.1606, both related to inspection and maintenance of equipment. Therefore, sufficient attention and resources should be allocated to maintain trucks, make sure the pre-operational check is adequately and properly conducted, and properly train new operators. This study was sponsored by the West Virginia Coal and Energy Research Bureau (CERB). The views, opinions and recommendations expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not imply any endorsement by CERB. Their financial contribution is gratefully acknowledged.