The influence of microwave pretreatment on the grindability of high-ash Indian coal was investigated. Scanning electron microscope analysis characterized the micro fractures in microwave treated coal samples, which may be due to the thermal stress cracking resulting from the microwave pretreatment. X-ray diffraction analysis showed that the microwave treated coal had a higher peak compared to the untreated coal indicates that the crystallinity increased with the microwave exposure time. The calculation of the Hardgrove grindability index indicated an increase in the ease of grinding or an increase in the grindability index of the microwave treated coal. Bond grindability tests showed that the work index decreased 15.4% after a microwave exposure time of 120s. Grindability tests showed that the microwave treated coal ground much more rapidly initially than the untreated coal, with the specific rate of breakage (S1) increasing by an average of 15%. The results showed that the rates of breakage of both microwave untreated and treated coal samples were dependent on particle size.Comminution in a mineral processing plant, involves a sequence of crushing and grinding processes. Comminution of coal is essential for effective utilization, be it through combustion, carbonization, gasification and/or beneficiation Materials react to microwave energy in one of three ways: insulators are transparent to microwaves, conductors reflect microwaves, and semi-conductors (also known as dielectrics) attenuate microwaves by adsorbing the electromagnetic radiation as heat. Microwave energy is a non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation with frequencies in the range of 300 Microwaves can pass through materials like glass, paper, plastic and ceramic, and be absorbed by foods and water; but they are reflected by metals. Microwave energy is derived from electrical energy with a conversion efficiency of approximately 50% for 2450 Microwave heating has been shown to be an attractive method to improve the efficiency of comminution processes. Various authors have shown that differential heating within heterogeneous ores can induce thermal fracture, which is a function of the different loss factors of each component within the ore The grindability index of coal is an important technological parameter to understand the behavior and assess the relative hardness of coals of varying ranks and grades during comminution. This is usually determined by the Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI), which requires special grinding equipment and accessories The grindability of an ore in mineral processing can be determined by the use of the Bond work index (W Preheating a coal in an oven has been shown to reduce grind strength, although it is unlikely that this would be an economically viable method, at least not through associated energy requirements A literature review revealed that the grinding characteristics of coal can be improved by microwave pretreatment. The grindability study of coal has been studied mostly with low-ash coals. Since Indian coals are high in ash content and the nature of low-ash coal is completely different from Indian coals. In this paper, it is shown that microwave energy is capable of inducing thermal stress cracking to decrease the energy requirements of grinding. In the present investigation, therefore an attempt has been made to investigate the properties of microwave treated minerals for scanning electron microscope, X-ray diffraction, grindability tests. Two Indian high-ash coals were selected for this work, one was from Jamadoba washery referred to coal-X (38% ash content) and other was from the West Bokaro washery referred to coal-Y (32% ash content). The original coal samples of 15 The schematic diagram of experimental setup is shown in The − In this test, eight 1″ (0.0254 A Bond ball mill work index (WI) test is a standard test for determining the ball mill work index of a sample. It was developed by Fred Bond in 1952 and modified in 1961 Initially, a 10 Where, W is work input (kWh/t), W The standard Bond test ball mill with standard mild steel ball charge was used to grind the different coal size fractions, both microwave treated and untreated. For all tests 0.5 The proximate analysis of the microwave pretreated and untreated coals (coal-X and Y) for different sizes are presented in Results show that the ash content of microwave-treated coals is lower than that of original untreated samples. This lowering of ash content due to microwave treatment may be due to the liberation of mineral matter in each size fraction The moisture content of microwave-treated coals was found to be lower than that of untreated coal. This trend has been observed for coals of different particle sizes. The volatile matter and fixed carbon of microwave-treated coals were found to be more than those of untreated coals for both coal-X and Y, which is quite obvious, as discussed earlier, due to partial removal of mineral matter. The same findings were observed by various authors SEM has been performed by Scanning Electron Microscope and Energy Dispersive X-ray micro analyzer. The model specification was JEOL JSM-5800 Scanning Microscope, OXFORD ISIS-300 X-ray powder diffraction measurements were carried out using a Philips PW-1710 X-ray diffractometer with monochromatic radiations under Bragg-Brentano geometry at 40 It has been observed that the coal temperature increases with the duration of microwave treatment. The rise in temperature of coal-X for the same treatment period is greater than that of coal-Y as shown in This method determines the relative grindability or ease of pulverizing an ore in comparison to a chosen ore (Galena) given as an index of 100. This method is based on Rittinger's law, which states that work done in pulverizing is proportional to new surface area produced. A prepared sample receives a definite amount of energy in a standard pulverize and new surface is determined by sieving. The HGI is calculated as; Where, W is the weight of material passing through 200 mesh i.e. 75 The effect of microwave exposure time on the mass retained of >  A substantial decrease in the work index of 15.4% was obtained at an increase in microwave exposure time of 120 The range of particle sizes of interest can be split into a number of size intervals defined by a Where w This is referred to as the first-order hypothesis of grinding. Plotting experimental values of w Thus, the breakage selection function To determine the selection function for a particle size class, a semi-logarithmic curve of the remained mass on the screen vs. grinding time is plotted.   The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of microwave treatment on the grindability of high-ash Indian coals. SEM analysis showed the micro fractures in microwave treated coal sample and XRD analysis showed the crystalline content of the sample. Grindability test was carried out in a standard ball mill. It was found that the microwave treated coal grinds much more rapidly initially than the untreated coal. As a result of microwave pre-treatment, the rate of breakage increased, which is an economically important change in grinding characteristics. The grindability increased significantly as a result of microwave pretreatment with the specific rate of breakage ( Consequently, it was concluded that the microwave-assisted grinding produced good results particularly for HGI, WI and specific rate of breakage ( The authors thankfully acknowledge the reviewers for suggesting valuable technical comments of this paper. The author is very much thankful to the sponsor