Bubble aspect ratios and rising velocities of dodecylamine (DDA), methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC), sec-octyl alcohol (2-octanol), DDA-MIBC blend, and DDA-2-octanol blend were investigated for different concentrations. The bubble aspect ratio of these individual reagents was found to follow the same order as molecular weight: DDA>2-octanol>MIBC. DDA addition further increased the aspect ratio of the bubbles in the individual MIBC and 2-octanol solutions, and the aspect ratio of the DDA-MIBC blend was found to be smaller than that of the DDA-2-octanol blend for a random but identical reagent concentration. The bubble rising velocity of these individual reagents followed the order MIBC>2-octanol>DDA. DDA addition had a significant effect in terms of decreasing the rising velocity of the bubbles in the individual MIBC and 2-octanol solutions; meanwhile, the bubble rising velocity of the DDA-MIBC blend was larger than that of the DDA-2-octanol blend. Bubble rising velocity showed a negative linear correlation with aspect ratio that was independent of reagent type, concentration, and blend.Flotation is a widely used method for processing fine particles of coal, bitumen, graphite, etc., and bubbles play an important role in the flotation process, where they act as the carrier of hydrophobic minerals to the foam [ Extensive research on bubble characteristics has been conducted, and the studies have mainly focused on the effect of the solo use of a single frother/collector. With the addition of the collector/frother in water, the aspect ratio of the bubbles is found to increase, while the rising velocity is found to decrease. The bubble aspect ratio is also found to be related to the rising velocity, specifically, a study has demonstrated that flattened bubbles lead to a high rising velocity, while spherical bubbles lead to a low velocity [ Until now, only a few research studies have been carried out to explore the effect of collector-frother blends on bubble characteristics. The critical coalescence concentration and dynamic foamability index of a series of polyoxypropylene alkyl ethers, including DF-200, DF-250, DF-1012, etc. blended with methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC), are found to be between the corresponding values of the two blended reagents [ This study aims to provide a better understanding of the effect of DDA-frother blends on bubble rising characteristics. Therefore, the bubble aspect ratios and rising velocities of DDA, MIBC, sec-octyl alcohol (2-octanol), DDA-MIBC blend, and DDA-2-octanol blend were investigated, and the relationship between aspect ratio and rising velocity has been discussed.  The setup to determine the bubble rising characteristics as a function of reagent concentration is shown in The dimensions of the glass hexahedron are 50 mm width × 20 mm depth × 300 mm height, and a capillary of 1 mm inner diameter was fixed at the bottom of the hexahedron. A vertical coordinate axis marked as H was established, with the origin at the same height as the bottom. An area of 25 × 20 mm The velocity in the vertical direction was used to represent the bubble velocity, and the average value of the velocity depending on the measured height was calculated to represent the final bubble velocity for each measurement. The aspect ratio was obtained by dividing the minor semi-axes by the major semi-axis of the ellipse fitted onto the projected bubble area, in other words, the aspect ratio cannot be larger than 1.0 [ Bubble aspect ratio as functions of DDA, MIBC, and 2-octanol concentrations are presented in Aspect ratio as functions of MIBC concentration in the absence and presence of DDA at different concentrations, 1, 2, and 4 mg/L, are given in  A comparison of The velocity as functions of DDA, MIBC, and 2-octanol concentrations are shown in The velocity as functions of MIBC concentration in the absence and presence of DDA at different concentrations, 1, 2, and 4 mg/L, are presented in  Through a comparison of The aspect ratio and velocity of MIBC, 2-octanol, DDA, and the blends are shown in In this study, the bubble aspect ratio and rising velocity of DDA, MIBC, 2-octanol, DDA-MIBC blend, and DDA-2-octanol blend were experimentally explored. Bubble aspect ratio followed the order DDA>2-octanol>MIBC, while rising velocity followed the reverse order MIBC>2-octanol>DDA. DDA addition had a significant effect on further increasing the aspect ratio, though it decreased the rising velocity of bubbles in individual MIBC and 2-octanol solutions. The aspect ratio of the DDA-MIBC blend was smaller than that of the DDA-2-octanol blend for a random but identical reagent concentration, while the DDA-MIBC blend exhibited larger rising velocities. Bubble rising velocity roughly decreased linearly as the aspect ratio increased, independent of reagent type, concentration, and blend. The authors gratefully acknowledge the