Industries which transport slurries and other particle-laden liquids in pipes expend the equivalent of millions of pounds every year to repair erosion damage caused by solid particle impingement. It is against this background that the perceived relationship between pipeline erosion and imposed swirling flow fields in pipe bends is important. Definitions of flow fields and particle dispersions which minimise erosive wear are sought to facilitate the development of new designs and geometries for slurry handling equipment. Such an approach is pertinent to industries handling valuable or hazardous material in the face of increasing safety, efficiency and economic requirements. Robust erosive wear models must be developed to explore the advantages of swirl flow and subsequent particle dispersion.
                  Collaboration between the universities of Nottingham and Southampton is aimed at the reduction of wear at critical locations in slurry handling pipelines by applying swirl-inducing pipes upstream of pipe bends. This paper details the improved particle distributions, particle impingement conditions and lower flowrates resulting from such swirl flow. These factors are discussed in terms of current erosion models and the predicted reduction in wear rates. Parallel visualisation studies using simulant particle-laden liquids augment computational modelling of the flow patterns.Erosion damage to slurry pipelines by solid particle impingement causes downtime, loss of income and high repair costs. In the UK, a recent survey by the Department of Trade and Industry Pipes with a circular cross-section are the simple choice for piping applications. Their smooth interior makes no obstruction to encourage wear or excessive pressure loss. They are inexpensive to make and they are almost everywhere. There are standard sizes, standard fittings and there is no need for transition pieces so long as internal pipe diameters are equal either side of a union. The low internal surface roughness of circular pipes encourages the settling of low-speed slurries. To avoid settling, designers specify a minimum speed to entrain settling particles into the flow. This velocity is usually higher than needed to simply transport a slurry, so the pumping power requirement is high and so is the propensity for components to wear. Bends act like concave mirrors and reflect the flow (with any entrained particles) to wear hot spots. Impacts between particles and bend walls can be at any angle between normal and parallel to the surface. These result in multiple erosion mechanisms which lead to cutting, deformation and ploughing wear for bends manufactured from ductile materials, (see In the current paper, it is shown that pipes which encourage swirl can get particles into suspension at lower pumping power and lower pressure drop than a conventional round duct. This is by no means a new idea. Over 100 years ago Henry A. and Henry M. Gordon In 1966, the first application of swirl-inducing pipes to mining slurries was described by Professor S.E. Wolfe stopping and starting of flows could be done without difficulty; low minimum velocities were required to keep particulate solids in suspension; wear could be reduced because of the lower particulate velocities. Wolfe also suggested an approximately optimal helix angle of 45° (3.14:1 pitch/diameter ratio). Work continued in Canada with Charles et al. in 1971 The dimensions of swirly flo boiler tubes were nearly ideal for slurry piping with a pitch/diameter ratio of 8 It is against this background that the authors explore the perceived relationship between pipeline-bend erosion and upstream swirling flow. This should lead to definitions of flow fields and particle dispersions which reduce erosive wear and, importantly, facilitate the development of new designs and geometries for slurry handling equipment. They contend that robust erosive wear models must be developed to explore the advantages of swirl flow and subsequent particle dispersion. The benefits of swirling flow will be illustrated by experiments on PMMA flow visulaisation loops. Computer models are used to define the impact sites on the internal surfaces of 90° bends. The velocity and angle of impact were used as input to a simple erosion model based on carbon steel properties. This allowed comparative erosion analysis of the swirling and non-swirling impact conditions. The aspiration to induce particle suspension at lower axial velocities is not helped by poor definition of an acceptable level of suspension. Several identifiable states of suspension and partial settling have been observed in pipes and this means that there is no practical definition of a single “lowest critical velocity” which will apply for all circumstances. Thomas Sze-Foo Chien  To understand the implications of swirling flow on the wear of pipe bends an erosion model which relates particle impacts to volume loss is required. However, slurry erosion is a complex and under-researched area and thus robust models have yet to be developed. This is certainly true for erosion of pipelines and is compounded by the fact that most published literature on the wear of pipework relates to pneumatic conveying systems. Meng and Ludema So for pipe bend erosion the problem is to identify a suitable basic model that could be developed and in parallel develop a better understanding of the flow field and particle trajectories to generate accurate input into the model. A further stage would be to compare the model predictions with experimental results. Understanding the particle trajectories through bends is of great importance if wear rates are to be predicted at specific locations within a bend. Blanchard et al. The prediction of erosion rates and locations is therefore difficult for equipment handling particle laden process streams. Haugen et al. The model identifies particle mass ( A more complex modelling strategy recognises the two erosion mechanisms of cutting and deformation erosion, with discrete models representing each, Forder This model includes additional variables to those considered in This approach is similar to that of a recent paper by Li and Shen Swirling flow is likely to decrease deformation type wear leaving cutting wear only. Greater particle impact dispersion reduces localised attack and gives more uniform and hence greater bend life. To demonstrate the influence of swirl flow on the impact angle and velocity distribution over the internal surfaces of a bend a study had been completed using the FLUENT5.3 CFD code with embedded multi-phase (algebraic slip) model. A 0.05  The presence of upstream swirl on the impingement angles is shown in The implications on wear rates can be seen by reference to The authors have shown potential benefits for the strategic generation of swirl in commercial slurry pipelines. Particle suspensions could be achieved at strategic points at a fraction of the forward velocity required in conventional systems. This had the potential to reduce the pumping power and erosive wear per se. Particle tracking using computational fluid dynamics software to model suspension flows through bend geometries, with and without upstream swirl induction, has highlighted, more important further benefits. Swirl induction is shown to spread the particle impingements over the entire inner surfaces of a bend, thus, reducing the potential for localised wall penetration. Particle impingement details for various sections of a bend have been calculated and discussed in relation to an erosion model based on the summation of cutting and deformation mechanisms. Predicted impingment angles for swirl induced flows show cutting type erosion is likely to be the dominant wear mechanism but is no longer associated with high velocity impingements predicted for non-swirl flows. Examination of the erosion model shows that the net effect of swirl flow on erosion generally should be beneficial. Collaboration between the universities of Nottingham and Southampton continues to pursue these benefits.