  Professor Robert H. Wagoner has made many significant contributions to the field of plasticity in the areas of metal forming, plasticity theory, finite element analysis, mechanical behavior of materials and micro-mechanisms of deformation. These have been honored by numerous research awards including the Robert Lansing Hardy Gold Medal, Rossiter W. Raymond Memorial Award (twice), Presidential Young Investigator Award, SAE Melbourne Award, and the Champion H. Mathewson Gold Medal. Most recently, Professor Wagoner was honored by receiving the Khan International 2011 Award at Plasticity 2012. This prestigious award, established by Professor Akhtar Khan and Dr. Tanveer Khan, is awarded by a committee of prior award recipients based on five metrics: (1) total citations of all plasticity, plasticity-related or plasticity-supporting papers, (2) quality and quantity of research contributions to the field of plasticity, (3) other contributions to the field of plasticity, e.g. books, monographs, book chapters, conference and symposium organizations, etc., and (4) total citations of all papers published in the International Journal of Plasticity (IJP). Dr. Wagoner is a member of the National Academy of Engineering. He is also a fellow or equivalent of 5 professional societies: TMS, ASM, ASME, SAE, and AIME. He is co-founder of the NUMISHEET series of international conferences and sheet forming benchmark problems that began in 1988. The Numisheet Conference series is held every three years at rotating locations among North America, Asia/Australia, and Europe. The next one will be held in January 2014 in Melbourne, Australia. A key distinction of the Numisheet Conference is the Numisheet Benchmark Test, which is an idea pioneered by Professor Wagoner and adopted by the metal forming industry as a valued litmus test of the state of science in industrial relevant metal forming simulation. In contrast with many international conferences, Numisheet provides a balanced forum among industry, academia, and government laboratories and receives strong financial and participatory support from all three. Professor Wagoner received his BS, MS, and PhD degrees in Metallurgical Engineering from Ohio State University in 1974, 1975, and 1976, respectively. He then accepted an NSF postdoctoral fellowship to study at The University of Oxford in England from 1976–1977, prior to accepting a position as Staff Research Scientist in the Physics Department at General Motors Research Labs in 1977. After five years of experience working for industry, Professor Wagoner returned to Ohio State University as Associate Professor in 1983, joining the faculty of the Department of Material Science and Engineering. He was appointed to full professor in 1986. At OSU, Dr. Wagoner was named Distinguished Professor of Engineering in 1999 and Distinguished Scholar in 1990; he received the Harrison Faculty Award for Excellence in Engineering Education in 1988, and won College of Engineering Research Awards in 1987, 1993, 1997, 2001 and 2008. He was appointed to George R. Smith Chair in 2001. He was also Director of CAMMAC (Center for Advanced Materials and Manufacturing of Automotive Components), 1994–2010. Professor Wagoner has supervised more than 22 MS theses, 23 PhD theses, and 14 post-docs at Ohio State. He has also hosted 30 distinguished scholars for extended visits and developed lasting collaborative relationships among the international community of leading scientists and engineers. He has authored or co-authored more than 300 publications, including more than 210 peer-reviewed papers, written 2 books and 2 text books, and served as editor of 2 conference proceedings. He has organized more than 20 conferences and conference sessions. Professor Wagoner’s work is highly regarded by both academia and industry. One area of high recognition is his work on the subject of springback, which reflects the change in shape of stamped sheet metal parts after the forces and moments generated by the forming tools are unloaded and the components are trimmed for assembly. The subject continues to be a persistent challenge for the automotive industry, and is made more challenging by the higher forming stresses for Advanced High Strength Steels (AHSS) and the lower moduli of aluminum and other light-weight alloys. Five of Dr. Wagoner’s 10 most-cited papers are related to springback, so it is fitting that the contribution to this special issue is dedicated to a review of this topic. Professor Wagoner’s work has shed considerable light on an improved understanding of this rich topic, including exposition of the role of real or apparent elastic modulus change and novel constitutive modeling solutions, the role of integration points in shell elements, the role of initial and developed anisotropy, the role of anti-clastic curvature effects, and the time-dependent nature of springback. Beyond these basic scientifically oriented topics, he has developed industrial die design methodologies predict and compensate for springback. Dr. Wagoner has also made significant contributions to testing methods that are well recognized, including novel test methods to provide critical information for constitutive modeling of processing conditions that occur in complex metal forming and stamping processes. These tests include a plane-strain tension specimen design, a compression-tension test, a bending under tension test, and a friction test. Professor Wagoner’s group was also among the first in academia to develop finite element codes (the SHEET family of programs) suitable for industrial application of sheet metal forming simulation, years before commercial software became available. Although this early work has now been supplanted by commercial codes, SHEET and its variants gave Professor Wagoner’s early students a head start in expanding the frontier of commercializing virtual die design, developing and validating finite element methods including element types, contact algorithms, and constitutive laws. Professor Wagoner also contributed significant insight into the importance of strain rate and temperature effects, not only in constitutive modeling in general, but more recently, for its critical role in driving localization of higher strength AHSS’s. While not encapsulating the full breadth of Professor Wagoner’s research, we will conclude our brief review of Prof Wagoner’s contributions by mentioning some of his work at the microlevel of plasticity, which should be no surprise given his educational background is physical metallurgy. In fact his currently most highly cited work is on the subject of twinning of AS31B Mg sheet and its evolutionary effect on hardening. The second-highest cited one deals with mechanisms of dislocation and grain boundary interactions and related criteria for transmission of slip across grain boundaries. His broad view of material science and solid mechanics at all many length scales is one of the reasons why his advice is so valued and sought by his colleagues throughout academia and industry. In closing, we would like to express our sincere gratitude to the Editor-in-Chief of IJP, Professor Akhtar Khan, for giving us this opportunity to serve as Guest Editors of this special issue, and the privilege of honoring our esteemed colleague in this way.