The extraction behaviour of trivalent rare earths namely La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm, Gd, Dy and Ho including Y (M(III), where M represents rare earths and yttrium ) from chloride medium has been studied with the solutions of high molecular weight carboxylic acids such as cekanoic, naphthenic, neo-heptanoic and Versatic 10 in dodecane. The effects of equilibrium pH, extractant concentration, metal ion concentration etc have been investigated. Using slope analysis technique it has been inferred that the metal ions form monomeric complex of the type [M(HA2)3] with carboxylic acids (H2A2, the dimer form). The stoichiometry of the species has also been confirmed using non-linear least square regression method. The carboxylic acids show different behaviour for Y extraction, it resembles to that of heavy rare earth (Ho), for sterically hindered acids (neo-heptanoic and Versatic 10) and to that with lighter rare earths (Ce, Pr) for the less sterically hindered acids (cekanoic and napthenic). The extraction order for the rare earths has been found to be the same with the four acids, i.e., La<Ce<Pr<Nd<Sm<Gd<Dy<Ho. The extraction constant (K
                     ex) of the systems and the separation factor amongst the rare earth pairs have been evaluated.Different phosphorus based extractants, tertiary and quaternary amines, sulphoxides, carboxylic acids, etc., are being employed for separation of rare earths ( The commercially available cekanoic, neo-heptanoic acids (Exxon Chemicals), naphthenic, Versatic 10 acids (Shell Chemicals) were used as supplied. Naphthenic acid is a name given to a group of cyclic aliphatic monocarboxylic acid and has molecular weight (MW) of 288.1 with an acid value of 180 (mg KOH/g). Versatic 10 acid has MW 172 with an acid value of 316 (mg KOH/g). Neo-heptanoic and cekanoic acids have MWs of 130 and 172.2 with acid values (mg KOH/g) of 420 and 322, respectively. All these carboxylic acids were > The extraction experiments were carried out by equilibrating equal volumes of the aqueous and organic phases for five minutes at 25 In this work since the concentration of Cl The plots between percent extraction and equilibrium pH for the extraction of La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm, Gd, Dy, Ho and Y from chloride medium with cekanoic, naphthenic, neo-heptanoic and Versatic 10 acids are given in It is interesting to note that, with cekanoic and naphthenic acids, Y behaves like lighter rare earths and finds its place in between Ce and Pr, whereas with neo-heptanoic and Versatic 10 acids it behaves like heavy rare earths. The behaviour of yttrium to that of heavy rare earths with neo-heptanoic acid and Versatic 10 acid is most likely due to the ionic radius of Y  The extraction of the rare earths including yttrium with carboxylic acids (H Taking logarithm and rearranging, we can write The From the value of A plot of log Thus the extracted complex with the carboxylic acids is [M(HA  The extraction constants (log For rare earth ions (La and Ce), The separation factor ( Although the The extraction studies of rare earths including yttrium from chloride medium with cekanoic, naphthenic, neo-heptanoic and Versatic 10 acids in dodecane have shown the formation of a monomeric neutral complex [M(HA The authors are grateful to their colleague Dr. S.L. Mishra for his valuable suggestions.