To reduce the size of paracetamol crystals for enhancement of the dissolution property, a crystallization process involving sonication to supersaturated paracetamol solution obtained by rapid cooling was proposed. It was found that when polyvinylpyrrolidone, a surface-active agent that exerts an inhibitory effect on coalescence of cavitation bubbles generated by sonication, was added, the kinetic parameter of classical nucleation theory increased remarkably. The average size of the paracetamol crystals obtained using the proposed process, which inhibited agglomeration, was about 3 μm with a narrow size distribution, where these particles are much smaller than the agglomerates (40–50 μm) obtained by agitation alone.Crystallization from solution is an essential purification process in the production of over 90% of active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) Over the past decades, the production of submicron-sized APIs by top-down processes such as high pressure homogenization or wet comminution have been extensively studied Paracetamol, the target material in this work, is an analgesic drug used worldwide in various dosage forms and is a poorly water-soluble API (solubility: 0.017 g/g water at 30 °C) In the present work, we demonstrate that paracetamol crystals with a size of about 3 μm can be produced by sonication to a supersaturated paracetamol solution. A high level of supersaturation is induced by rapid cooling combined with addition of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP). PVP, which acts as a surface-active solute in hydrophilic solvents, prolongs lifetime of the cavitation bubbles by absorption onto the bubble surfaces Paracetamol (98%) was supplied from Acros Organics and used without further purification. Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP K30; At a given temperature, a paracetamol suspension in a cosolvent of water and ethanol (1:1 mass ratio) was prepared in a jacketed vessel with/without the addition of PVP K30 (0.5 wt%) and agitated at 300 rpm by a magnetic bar. The temperature was controlled by a thermostat (Polyscience, model 9712, Niles, IL) and recorded at 5 s intervals by a data logger (Pico Technology, PT-104) equipped with an immersion-type platinum resistance thermometer (Pico Technology, SE012; accuracy: ±0.03 K). The solubility of paracetamol was measured by a gravimetric method: after 24 h stirring, the suspension was left for 3 h without agitation to allow the undissolved paracetamol to sink to the bottom of the vessel. The upper part, considered as the clear saturated solution, was transferred to a Petri dish and evaporated slowly over 24 h until the mass of the sample did not change. The average value was taken as the solubility from three measurements. A 750 W ultrasonic processor (Vibracell, SONICS) with a frequency of 20 kHz was used for all experiments. The probe was immersed downwards at a depth of one-third of the level of the water and fixed at the center of the vessel. Five vibrational amplitudes (20, 30, 40, 50, and 60%) of the ultrasonic processor were selected to calibrate the ultrasound intensity with the sonication time. The power input (W or J/s) for sonication was calculated from Eq. With the assumption of the “single nucleus mechanism”, where an initial nucleus is formed through primary nucleation and grows to a certain size, the growth time where The paracetamol solutions (50 mL) with supersaturation ratios ( The sample solutions were stabilized at 60 °C for 30 min and cooled to 30 °C at an approximate rate of –10 °C/min. To achieve such a rapid cooling, the thermostat maintained at 60 °C was switched immediately to the second thermostat at 5 °C. As soon as the temperature reached 30 °C, the third thermostat at 30 °C was connected, and thereafter, the induction time was recorded. Paracetamol crystals were obtained by sonication to 50 mL of supersaturated solution at 30 °C prepared with rapid cooling by the identical procedure as in the induction time measurements (Section “Induction time measurements”). The supersaturation ratio as large as possible to irradiate ultrasound before spontaneous nucleation is 1.70 because nucleation may occur prior to reaching 30 °C in paracetamol solution with a supersaturation ratio larger than 1.70. The operating variables for ultrasonic irradiation were the sonication time and the vibrational amplitude of ultrasound processor. For an investigation of the crystal size, morphology, and dissolution property, the final products filtered were washed with cool water and dried over 24 h at 50 °C using a vacuum oven. The size of the paracetamol crystals was analyzed from the scanning electron microscopy (SEM; JSM-6010LA, JEOL) images, and was determined by image analysis in such a way that two lengths, the minimum and maximum, passing through the centroid of a crystals, were averaged. The crystal size was considered as the mean value of average sizes of at least 500 crystals and the size distribution was fitted by a cumulative log-normal distribution function. The dissolution profiles were determined by using a UV–vis spectrophotometer (SINCO, S-3150). Recrystallized paracetamol (40 mg) was dissolved in water (50 g) maintained at 37 °C with stirring at 200 rpm using a magnetic bar. The supernatant (0.1 mL) of the solutions sampled with different dissolution times was filtered through a 0.22 μm HPLC disposable filter and transferred to a UV quartz cell and diluted by addition of water (3.1 mL). The dissolution profiles were compiled in terms of the percentage paracetamol dissolved by normalizing the UV absorbance peak intensity at wavelength of 242 nm (i.e. peak intensity was normalized to 100% when 40 mg paracetamol was perfectly dissolved in 50 g water). The average value taken from three measurements was used to plot the dissolution profiles. The solubility data for paracetamol measured in the temperature range of 10–40 °C ( As expected, the induction times measured by fixing the supersaturation, temperature, and volume of the paracetamol solution showed large variations due to the stochastic nature of nucleation. Using Eq. The two parameters In Eqs. When nucleation was triggered by sonication to the supersaturated solution with the addition of PVP, the obtained Generally, the  The vibrational amplitude of the ultrasound processor was varied while fixing the sonication time to 3 min. SEM images of the paracetamol crystals are shown in At vibrational amplitudes of 20, 40, 60, and 80% with sonication for 3 min, the sizes of the crystals were 5.44, 3.15, 3.50, and 3.59 μm and the energy inputs for sonication were calculated to be 1.99 × 10   Micron-sized paracetamol crystals were produced by direct sonication to the supersaturated solutions generated by rapid cooling and addition of a surface-active agent, PVP K30. Explosive nucleation with no agglomeration by sonication was shown to result in production of crystals with a size of about 3 μm with a narrow size distribution. When the paracetamol solution containing PVP K30 (0.5 wt%) was cooled rapidly at an approximate rate of –10 °C/min, sonication with an energy input of 3.3 × 10 The nucleation kinetics of paracetamol in the present process was found to be well described by the classical nucleation theory and the parameters of the nucleation rate equation were estimated by statistical analysis of induction times. It was found that cavitation bubbles formed in the solution by sonication act as foreign bodies of heterogeneous nucleation mechanism, and in particular, when PVP was added, the kinetic prefactor of nucleation kinetics increased significantly due to the inhibitory effect of PVP on bubble coalescence. The authors declare no competing financial interest. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is the Supplementary data to this article: