In this study, benzohydroxamic acid (BHA) is first introduced as a collector for rutile flotation, whereas BHA alone exhibits low collecting capacity to rutile. The addition of lead ions effectively improves the flotation of rutile using BHA as a collector. The order of addition for lead ions and BHA significantly affects their interactions with the rutile surface and therefore the rutile flotation recovery. Compared to the traditional method of adding reagents in sequential order, the pre-mixed addition, which first generates lead ion–BHA complexes, improves the adsorption efficiency of BHA on the rutile surface as well as the flotation recovery. Although previous research has investigated the activation mechanism of lead ions in BHA flotation of oxide minerals, most such studies have focused on the positive effects of lead ions on BHA adsorption on the mineral surface. The present work emphasizes a new perspective, considering the adsorption behavior of lead ions on the rutile surface under different BHA collector conditions. It is shown that in the system pre-activated with lead ions, lead species are initially transferred to the rutile surface to activate it for BHA attachment; the pre-absorbed lead species undergo desorption when the BHA collector is added into the bulk solution. In addition, the desorbed lead ions in the bulk solution partly react with the BHA collector, leading to the potential adsorption of hydrophobic lead ion–BHA complexes on the rutile surfaces. However, in a binary mixed lead ion–BHA system, the lead ions react with BHA to form hydrophobic lead ion–BHA complexes at the first stage; these complexes with superior adsorption capacity are then adsorbed on the rutile surface. Visual MINTEQ simulations show that, at the optimum rutile flotation pH ∼9, this improvement is mainly attributed to the adsorption of [Pb(OH)(A)] on the rutile surfaces.Titanium has recently become increasingly important because of its widespread applicability in the fields of medicine, navigation, aerospace, functional materials, and catalysis ( Selective separation in froth flotation depends mainly on the functional groups and molecular architectures of collectors. Conventional collectors used in the selective flotation of rutile ores include unsaturated fatty acids, water-soluble petroleum sulfonate, benzyl arsenic acid, and styryl phosphoric acid; benzyl arsenic acid is considered a more selective collector for rutile ( Hydroxamic acids are organic compounds containing –CONHOH groups that are adsorbed to mineral surfaces by chelating reactions ( Pradip explored the utility of alkyl hydroxamic acid for the flotation separation of rutile from hematite, but found no selectivity in separation ( Perusal of the flotation literature indicates that detailed studies on the utility of BHA in rutile flotation are scarce, despite its status as the most well-studied and widely used chelate collector. BHA is widely used in the flotation separation of wolframite, cassiterite, and scheelite, where it has high selectivity ( To achieve acceptable flotation performance, BHA is first introduced as a collector for rutile flotation in this study. The collecting capacity of BHA for rutile and the influence of lead ions on the flotation behavior and adsorption of BHA are investigated for two cases, i.e., the sequential addition of lead ions and BHA and the addition of lead ion–BHA complexes. Two interaction modes with the rutile surface, induced by the different addition order of lead ions and BHA, are proposed, based on a new perspective on lead ion adsorption testing under different BHA collector conditions to illustrate the different interaction mechanisms of lead ions and BHA with the rutile surface. Simultaneously, determination of the speciation of lead ion–BHA complexes is performed using Visual MINTEQ. A high-grade rutile sample was obtained by hand pick from Xinyi in Jiangsu province, China. The rutile sample was hammered, purified by shaking-table and electric separation, and then pulverized in a porcelain mill filled with agate balls. Microscopic and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of the purified sample indicated that that it was a very pure sample with only a small amount of limonite. Chemical analysis showed that the rutile sample was 99% pure. For the flotation and adsorption tests, the fraction with the particle size of +38–75 µm fraction was used. The BHA and analytical-grade lead nitrate used in this study were supplied by the Chemistry and Chemical Engineering Institute of Central South University (China) and the Tianjin Kermil Chemical Reagents Development Centre, respectively. The lead ion–BHA mixed collector was freshly prepared by uniformly mixing specified masses of lead nitrate and BHA at a specified pH in deionized water. Solutions of HCl and NaOH were used to adjust the system pH. Double-distilled water was employed in all tests. Microflotation tests were performed using an XFG-type laboratory flotation cell machine with a 40-mL hitch groove flotation cell. A four-bladed impeller at 1800 rpm was employed to stir the contents of the cell. (a) Using the lead ions as activators and BHA as the collector, the microflotation tests involved the following procedures: (I) wetting 2.0 g of minerals within the particle size range of +38–75 µm with deionized water for 2 min; (II) adding HCl or NaOH and conditioning for 3 min to adjust the pulp pH; (III) adding lead ions and conditioning for 3 min; (IV) adding the collector BHA and agitating for 5 min; (V) adding 2 × 10 A UV spectrophotometer was used to measure the amount of BHA adsorbed on the surface of the rutile. The samples were analyzed using the UV absorbance at 228 nm. The rutile sample (2.0 g), conditioned with the desired pH, lead ions, and collectors of different concentrations, was oscillated at 25 °C for 30 min. Afterwards, the solids were separated out using a high-speed centrifuge, operated at 9000 rpm. The amount of BHA in the supernatant was determined by UV spectrophotometry. Finally, the adsorbed quantity of BHA on rutile was calculated by the residual concentration method. For lead ion adsorption testing, 2.0 g pure rutile particles were made up to 40 mL with HCl or NaOH to adjust the pH, before adding lead ions and collectors at the desired concentrations. The suspension was agitated vigorously in a stirring hot plate maintained at 25 °C for 30 min. The suspensions were then centrifuged and the supernatants pipetted out to determine the lead ion concentrations using either a Thermo Fisher model ICP6300 spectrometer or a PerkinElmer model PinAAcle 900F atomic absorption spectrophotometer (AAS). The percentage of adsorptive precipitation ( Visual MINTEQ is a freeware chemical equilibrium model that allows for the calculation of speciation, solubility, solid equilibrium, and dissolved mineral phases in aqueous solution (  As mentioned above, the BHA collector alone exhibits a low rutile collection capacity, while the addition of lead ions significantly improves the collection flotation of rutile using BHA. The order of addition of lead ions and BHA greatly affects the flotation and recovery of rutile; those obtained with the lead ion–BHA complex are much higher than those with the sequential addition of the lead ion activator and the BHA collector.  The effects of the BHA concentration on the flotation of rutile with different addition methods of lead ions and BHA, shown in The adsorption quantities of BHA onto rutile as a function of pH are presented in Previous studies on the adsorption mechanism of lead ions and BHA in flotation processes have only investigated the positive effects of lead ions on BHA adsorption on the mineral surface, rather than on the influence of BHA on lead ion adsorption on the mineral surface ( Based on these results and discussion, the potential interaction modes on the rutile surface are proposed in In the lead ions pre-activation system ( In a binary mixed lead ion–BHA system ( Visual MINTEQ was applied to study the speciation of lead ion–BHA complexes in the present work. The species distribution diagram of lead ion–BHA complexes at the lead ion and BHA concentrations of 1 × 10 The collecting capacity of BHA for rutile and the influence of lead ions on the flotation behavior and adsorption of BHA have been investigated through microflotation tests and BHA adsorption quantity measurements. BHA alone exhibits a low rutile collecting capacity with the maximum flotation recovery of only 20% at pH 9.0. The addition of lead ions significantly improves the flotation of rutile using BHA as a collector. The order of addition of lead ions and BHA greatly influences the effect of flotation; the recovery of rutile with the lead ion–BHA complex is much higher than that with the sequential addition of lead ions as activator and BHA as collector. In the binary mixed lead ion–BHA system, pre-mixed mixtures with different ratios of lead ions and BHA show different collecting abilities; the optimal ratio is 1:10 for rutile flotation. Compared to pre-activation with lead ions followed by using BHA as collector, the mixtures formed by lead ions and BHA obtain higher recovery and float out more than 80% rutile with 4 × 10 The adsorption test results correspond well with the microflotation results the and indicates that the mixed collector formed by lead ions with BHA exhibits higher adsorption efficiency for rutile than the BHA collector activated by lead ions. Lead ion adsorption tests were conducted to characterize the influence of BHA on lead ion adsorption on the rutile surface. It is found that in the lead ion pre-activated system, the subsequent addition of BHA as collector reduces the adsorption of lead ions on the surface of rutile. In addition, the percentage of adsorptive precipitation of lead using the lead-BHA complex is 20% higher than that with the sequential addition of lead ions activator and BHA collector. Based on the results, potential interaction modes on the rutile surface are proposed to illustrate the different interaction mechanisms of lead ions and BHA with the rutile surface in two cases, i.e., the sequential addition of lead ions and BHA and the addition of lead ion–BHA complexes. It is suggested that pre-mixing to generate lead ion–BHA complexes is critical in successful rutile flotation with BHA, because the complexing improves the adsorption efficiency of BHA and lead ions on the rutile surface as well as the flotation recovery. At the optimum flotation pH of 9, [Pb(OH)(A)] are predominant as the fraction of total lead ions in the binary mixed lead ion–BHA system. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the