In this paper, the effect of milling energy on solid solubility extension of Si in Fe was studied. Ball-milling experiments were conducted under different conditions such as rotation speed, ball-to-powder weight ratio and milling time. The phase composition, morphology and magnetic properties of nano-structured alloy powders were analyzed by X-ray diffraction, field emission scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy and vibrating sample magnetometer techniques, respectively. The milling energy was calculated by using the collision model. A total energy of about 31.9kJ/g was necessary for solid solution formation. A comparison between formation enthalpy and total energy of grinding balls was also done. Results showed that the efficiency factor was about 1.4%. It was also found that the phase evolution in this system is closely related to the milling energy. The impact energy has a significant effect on morphology, crystallite size and lattice strain. The crystallite size of the Fe–Si (α) phase decreased up to 15nm and the particle size reached to 100nm under the given experimental conditions.Pure iron is a ferromagnetic material with low resistivity, so in some applications it leads to large eddy current losses. The addition of Si to Fe can enhance electrical resistivity and therefore reduce eddy current loss Nano-structured Fe–Si alloy has showed improved magnetic properties when its grain size is less than the ferromagnetic exchange length which is typically of the order of tens of nanometers Although a number of publications have appeared in recent years on the extension of solubility limit of Si in Fe through ball milling Weighed quantities of high-purity (99.9%) elemental Fe and Si powders correspond to the atomic compositions of Fe Phase analysis of the samples was investigated by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique using a Philips PW-3710 diffractometer with Cu-K A thermodynamic analysis was carried out to predict the more stable phase and to compare with mechanical alloying results. Considering the formation of disordered A(B) solid solution from a mixture of pure A and B elements, the Gibbs free energy change can be presented as The elastic contribution of enthalpy (ΔH ∆H Therefore, the Gibbs free energy of a disordered solid solution and an amorphous alloy in terms of  To investigate the effect of milling parameters on the solid solution formation, the total energy transferred during ball milling was calculated. All the milling parameters are accounted for two energy parameters, i.e. the impact energy of each ball (E  By collision model, E In order to evaluate the effect of milling energy on phase evolution more clearly, the Fe It can be concluded that in different milling conditions (e.g., BPR, rpm, and milling time) total energy is a more definite criterion to find out produced phase. Similar results were reported by Murty et al.   The morphology of produced particles in different conditions was evaluated by the FESEM technique. Typical bright field TEM image with its corresponding selected area diffraction (SAD) pattern (the bottom-right corner) of C2–50 sample is shown in The magnetic hysteresis loops of final samples are shown in This study demonstrates the processing of nano-structured Fe Based on the Miedema's model in the Fe–Si system, the most stable phase is the solid solution compared to the amorphous phase at all compositions. XRD results showed that the α-Fe(Si) solid solution was produced which is in consistent with thermodynamic calculations. A comparison of Gibbs free energy barrier of α-Fe(Si) solid solution formation with milling energy calculation shows that the milling efficiency of milling process in this study is about 1.4%. Non-equilibrium amorphous phase can be formed in high intense milling condition, and then it was transformed to a more stable solid solution phase. It can be concluded that in different milling conditions, total energy is a more definite criterion to find out the produced phase. Also, at the same impact energy, BPR was a more effective parameter than milling time during ball milling process that influences crystallite size and microstrain. TEM and FESEM results confirmed the formation of nano-structured α-Fe(Si) solid solution powder with relatively spherical shape. The magnetic properties were influenced by the milling energy. The support of this work by the