Carbonation of industrial wastes rich in earth-alkali oxides is found to have a significant potential for CO2 sequestration. This process opens new perspectives not only for carbon dioxide mitigation, but also for the valorization and new applications of industrial waste materials from coal-burning power plants. In this study, mineral carbonation of high–calcium fly ash is investigated under dry and moist conditions in a continuous flow reactor during up to 2 h, at temperatures ranging from 160 to 290 °C and CO2 pressures between 1 and 6 bar. A comprehensive characterization of treated and untreated samples was carried out before and after carbonation using X-ray diffraction, X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy, thermogravimetric analysis, infrared spectroscopy and scanning electron microscopy. The maximum sequestration capacity achieved was 117.7 g CO2/kg fly ash (48.14% carbonation efficiency) under dry conditions. Results showed that increasing the pressure and temperature enhances the process of carbonation, as well as the presence of moderate amounts of water vapor in the CO2 gas flow. Newly formed carbonates were always present in the treated samples. This study shows that about 21% of all CO2 emissions of a coal-burning power plant could potentially be sequestered as carbonates.The International Energy Agency (IEA) states that 4000 Mt of the world total primary energy demand and 45.9% of the world carbon dioxide emissions from fuel combustion come from coal processing. Additionally, forecasts predict these numbers to increase ( The utilization rate in EU of the siliceous fly ashes amounts to 80% (commonly as concrete admixtures), and 20% for the HCFA ( The process of carbonation is a simple 2-step reaction, including hydration of the Ca and/or Mg followed by carbonation of their respective hydroxides ( Carbonation of natural minerals and industrial waste has recently received a renewed interest, but many challenges regarding this process stay unresolved ( The goal of this investigation is to study dry and moist carbonation of a high calcium fly ash. The process is maintained at 3 different temperatures: 160, 220 and 290 °C and at pressure range of CO Testing was performed on a high–calcium fly ash resulting from lignite burning at the Ptolemaida power station (Ptolemais, Greece), with 660 MWe installed electrical power. This power plant has 5 electric blocks equipped with electrostatic precipitators as filters. The fly ash production reaches 7.6 Mt/yr, with only 300 kt being recycled. The rest is being disposed at exhausted mine workings. A limited amount is used by cement companies for the manufacture of blended cements. From 2002 Ptolemais fly ash is accepted under European Standard EN 197-1( The major oxide constituents of the fly ash are: SiO Experiments were conducted on a specially designed reactor ( Experiments were carried out at three temperatures: 160, 220 and 290 °C, with a heating rate of 5 °C/min. Total CO X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF) was performed on a UniQuant instrument from Thermo Fisher Scientific™, using the fusion bead method. Prior to the analysis, the fly ash sample was calcined for 2 h at 1000 °C. The mineral composition of the investigated samples before and after reaction was determined by powder diffraction (XRD) using a Bruker D8™ advanced diffractometer equipped with a theta-theta goniometer. The analysis was conducted in the 2θ range of 10–80°, with a step-size of 0.02° and measuring time of 1 s per step. Thermogravimetric analysis was performed on a TA instruments™ TGA G50 apparatus. About 30 mg were heated up from 30 to 950 °C, at 10 deg/min, under an N The XRD patterns of the fresh and carbonated samples for different experimental conditions are shown in Accelerating carbonation by increasing the temperature is also well known ( Thermogravimetric data (mass losses and derivative weight change) as a function of temperature change from 30 to 950 °C are shown in All treated samples show a TG profile with a peak (mass loss) at around 400 °C, corresponding to the decomposition of Ca(OH)  Furthermore, the amount of anhydrite (CaSO  Diffraction patterns of experiments done at 160-290 °C, 1–6 bars of CO XRD patterns of the experiments maintained at 160 °C and 6 bars of CO  The calculation of the sequestration capacity and carbonation efficiency was made on the basis of TGA results, concluding that the weight losses observed at 30–105 °C, 105-600 °C and 600-950 °C are caused, respectively, by dehydration, and decomposition of calcium hydroxide and calcium carbonate ( m Δm In order to calculate the weight loss of CO The total calcium content (Ca CaO[wt%] – the CaO content in the fly ash obtained from the XRF results M  Fourier-Transform infrared spectroscopy analysis results are shown in One of the main components of the HCFA are round cenospheres mainly (  Direct carbonation of high-calcium Ptolemais fly ash was conducted, in the temperature range of 160–290 °C and under 1–6 bars of CO The influence on the carbonation process of three different parameters was studied: temperature, pressure and water vapor addition. All the performed analyses showed that the increase of temperature and pressure enhances carbonation, and that it is possible to achieve reaction between carbon dioxide and solid particles of fly ash without the addition of water. However, comparison of the results from dry and moist experiments at 160 °C and 1 bar of CO SEM imaging shows the continuous formation of carbonates on the surfaces of the fly ash cenospheres, to a lower or larger extent depending on experimental conditions. Nucleation of carbonates is favored by the presence of oxide particles at the surface of the cenospheres. It can be concluded that the direct fly ash mineral carbonation at low pressure and moderate temperatures is an attractive process for CO This work was partially funded by the