High energy fractures of the distal tibial plafond and calcaneus have been associated with high functional morbidity and wound complications. Although both of these fractures result from a similar mechanism, they have rarely been reported to occur on an ipsilateral extremity. The combination of these 2 injuries on the same extremity would increase the likelihood of an adverse surgical or functional outcome. We present the case and management strategy of a 43-year-old male with bilateral open pilon fractures and closed calcaneal fractures after falling from a height. A staged protocol was used for the bilateral pilon fractures, with external fixation until operative fixation on day 9. Nonoperative management of the calcaneal fractures resulted in a successful functional outcome at 10 months of follow-up. Treatment of this fracture pattern must incorporate the condition of the soft tissues, an understanding of the fractures, and minimize patient risk factors to optimize the functional and surgical outcomes.High-energy calcaneal and tibial plafond (pilon) fractures of the distal lower extremity have been associated with high morbidity and functional impairment Owing to the similar mechanism of injury, it would seem that these fractures would occur together on an ipsilateral extremity. Cadaver studies have reproduced ipsilateral pilon and calcaneal fractures after a direct axial load to the hindfoot A 43-year-old intoxicated male presented with bilateral leg deformities after jumping from a height of 20 ft. The initial physical examination revealed stable vital signs with a Glascow coma score of 15. His bilateral lower extremities were neurovascularly intact with palpable pulses. The left ankle exhibited a 1.5-cm open lateral wound that expressed lipohemophilic fluid ( Immediate management included tetanus prophylaxis and cefazolin with washout and splinting. Emergent operative intervention consisted of bilateral formal washout and debridement with delta frame external fixation ( Owing to illicit drug use and tobacco dependence, the concern for noncompliance and wound complications dictated conservative calcaneal management. He began range of motion exercises at 4 to 5 weeks postoperatively but remained non-weightbearing and wheelchair bound for 12 weeks until radiographic and clinical union of both fractures had been observed. At 10 months postoperatively, he was full weightbearing. The right and left ankle exhibited 10° and 8° of dorsiflexion, respectively. The left subtalar motion was 10° of inversion and 15° of eversion. The degree of right sided inversion and eversion was 20° and 30°, respectively. Radiographs demonstrated healed fractures with a maintained implant position ( High energy calcaneal and pilon fractures present a complex problem to the orthopedic surgeon. Calcaneal fractures account for 1% to 2% of all fractures and are the most commonly fractured tarsal bone Wound complications from open reduction for both of these fracture types have prevented the endorsement of a universal treatment protocol. However, attention to the surrounding soft tissues, modifying a patient's medical and social risk factors, and understanding the fracture pattern are essential for optimizing the results. Owing to a similar mechanism, these injuries can coexist on an ipsilateral extremity. Should this occur, the concern for a poor outcome will be greatly escalated Mittal et al Treatment of intra-articular calcaneal fractures has shifted toward open reduction when the soft tissues permit Management of ipsilateral pilon and calcaneal fractures involves an intricate understanding of both the organic and the nonorganic components of the injury. The present study is the first report of a bilateral open pilon with ipsilateral calcaneal fractures. Our findings emphasize the importance of creating a treatment plan that integrates the biology and social factors associated with the injury pattern. We have reported an acceptable functional outcome with staged management of bilateral open pilon injuries combined with conservative treatment of the calcanceal fractures. Assessment of not only the fracture and soft tissue envelope, but also the risk of patient compliance, must factor into the final treatment plan to maximize the patient's outcome.