Sandwich ham in Australia is a medium-quality added-brine ham and is made from minced-pork trimmings. The type and amount of additives used depend on the level of extension required. The brine is added to the minced meat and the mixture is normally mixed in a paddle mixer, rather than being tumbled. Chicken loaf is produced worldwide and there are a huge variety of products sold under this name. The processing technology for economy chicken loaf is different from that used for the higher-quality chicken loaf in that sometimes the MDM, chicken skin emulsion, and around 30% of the total brine are mixed together in a bowl cutter at slow knife speed to eliminate all possible lumps of MDM and skin emulsion. Delicates ham is a perfect example of a high-quality added-brine ham. Lean pork meat, leg and loin, is membrane skinned and all visible fat is removed. Spices and herbs that remain visible in the finished product are frequently added to this type of ham. Care should be taken if green peppercorns are used, as these are generally sold in brine and the extra brine, which is acidic and extremely salty, must not be added to the ham mass. Green peppercorns are therefore rinsed well with water and drained before being added.  The brine is added to the minced meat and the mixture is normally mixed in a paddle mixer, rather than being tumbled. A full vacuum is applied during mixing, and the process takes around 3–4 h before the mixture is placed in a chiller overnight. The next day, the mass is mixed again for around 1–2 h, and then filled into waterproof casings. The slightly underfilled product is placed in square (4 in × 4 in) grid moulds. The ham mass extends into the corners of the mould during thermal treatment, resulting in a square end product. The meat is cooked with steam or in a water bath at around 76–80 °C until a core temperature of 70 °C is reached. The finished product is Chicken loaf is produced worldwide and there are a huge variety of products sold under this name. A high-quality chicken loaf is made from chicken breast meat at 30–50% extension, and the finished product is white in colour. Commonly, no nitrite is added to such ‘white’ products. The breast meat is minced with a kidney or 20 mm blade so that large pieces of meat are visible in the finished product. The amount and type of additives used for high-quality chicken loaf vary greatly but, in most cases, phosphate, carrageenan and some starch is used. Proteins are not normally added at this extension level unless food laws dictate a certain level of protein in the finished product. Around 4–5 g of phosphates per kilogram of total mass are added, and 2–5 g of carrageen per kilogram of total mass, depending on the desired level of extension. Products that are extended around 50% normally require 10–30 g of starch per kilogram of total mass to prevent water separation if a waterproof casing is used. Starch and whey protein lighten the colour of the product and whey protein complements the flavour of chicken meat well. Smoke flavouring can also be added. To produce a chicken loaf with 50% extension using coarse-minced chicken breast meat, phosphates are added at 4–5 g per kilogram of total mass, carrageenan at 2–3 g per kilogram of total mass, whey protein at 5–10 g per High-quality chicken loaf is also sometimes tumbled instead of being mixed. Tumbling lasts for around 3000–5000 rev, depending on the level of extension and the type of baffles inside the tumbler. Baffles need to be gentle for chicken meat because it is soft. Waterproof casings are most common, but fibrous casings can also be used for chicken loaf. Products in waterproof casings are cooked with steam or in a hot-water bath at 76–80 °C until a core temperature of 70–72 °C, or the desired An ‘economy’ chicken loaf typically uses chicken MDM, chicken skin emulsion and some thigh or breast meat as the raw materials. Products containing no breast meat are also common where customers cannot afford a high-quality product. In extreme cases, chicken loaf is made predominantly from chicken MDM and chicken skin emulsion, and hardly any real meat is used. This mix of MDM and skin emulsion is extended by 80–100% and functional additives such as carrageenan and starch stabilize all the water added. The amount of protein added, mostly soy protein, is high, helping the texture of such low-meat products. The amount and type of additives used for economy chicken loaf vary greatly and countless different combinations are possible. In general, the amount of salt is 16–20 g per kilogram of finished product, carrageenan 5–7 g per kilogram of finished product, soy protein 20–40 g per kilogram of finished product and starch 40–120 g per kilogram of finished product. A compromise has to be reached between obtaining the maximum yield and avoiding water separation during cooking on the one hand, and the cost of all the additives on the other hand. Nitrite is occasionally introduced in economy chicken products. The processing technology for economy chicken loaf is different from that used for the higher-quality chicken loaf in that sometimes the MDM, chicken skin emulsion and around 30% of the total brine are mixed together in a bowl cutter at slow knife speed to eliminate all possible lumps of MDM and skin emulsion. This slurry is then added to the mixer with the other minced meat and remaining brine and mixed. The mixture is then filled in waterproof casings and cooked at 76–80 °C until a core temperature of 70–72 °C is reached. In extreme cases, all the raw materials are placed in the bowl cutter and all the brine is added while cutting the entire mass at a slow Delicates ham is a perfect example of a high-quality added-brine ham. Lean pork meat, leg and loin, is membrane skinned and all visible fat is removed. The layer of connective tissue on the back of the loin is also removed; so the meat is completely free of any sinew and fat. Sow meat is often used as it has a strong red colour, is low in intramuscular fat and is less expensive than pork from young pigs. The meat is passed through the mincer worm once or twice, which tears the muscle apart nicely and creates a large surface area. The level of extension is around 25–30% and additives such as phosphates (4–5 g per kilogram of product), salt (16–20 g per kilogram of product), nitrite (around 250 ppm per kilogram of product of the raw uncooked mass), ascorbate (0.5–0.7 g per kilogram of product) and sometimes a touch of carrageenan (1–2 g per kilogram of product) are used. Various flavourings such as garlic and juniper are commonly used as well. The brine is added to the meat in the tumbler and the mixture is tumbled for around 3000–3500 rev under full vacuum. The tumbled mass is primarily filled into fibrous casings, but waterproof casings are sometimes used as well. Products in waterproof casings are thermally treated with steam or in a hot-water bath at 76–80 °C until a core temperature of around 70 °C is reached. Products in fibrous casings are generally dried first at 60–65 °C for around 30–60 min, until the surface of the casing is dry, then smoked at 65–70 °C for around 1 h before being finally cooked with Spices and herbs that remain visible in the finished product are frequently added to this type of ham. Care should be taken if green peppercorns are used, as these are generally sold in brine and the extra brine, which is acidic and extremely salty, must not be added to the ham mass. Green peppercorns are therefore rinsed well with water and drained before being added.