High dense tantalum sintering components with a hardness gradient within individual grains were synthesized successfully by means of spark plasma sintering (SPS) of the nitrided tantalum particles at a pressure of 400MPa and a temperature of 950°C. High yield strength up to 1350MPa combined with 12% fracture strain was achieved in the compression tests, which can be attributed to the novel gradient composition inside the grain structure.Tantalum is an attractive material for the biomedical application because it is a relative inert material showing high in vivo safety with good mechanical properties in terms of fracture toughness and workability, excellent corrosion–erosion resistance However, extremely high melting temperature of tantalum (3017 In this letter, authors are strengthening bulk tantalum by utilizing spark plasma sintering (SPS) technology from the nitrided tantalum powders which featured gradient nitrogen content and gradient properties from the outside surface to the center of the particles. Tantalum powders used for this study were prepared by (1) turning the chips from the electron beam (EB) refined tantalum ingot, (2) degreasing and hydriding chips, (3) ball milling the chips to make the powders, (4) dehydriding powders, and (5) sieving. Hydrogenation was carried out in a hydrogen gas atmosphere at 700 The sintering parts were firstly grinded by using emery paper to a mirror finish and then the density was measured by the Archimedes method. The contents of oxygen and nitrogen were analyzed by using a carrier gas hot extraction (O/N analyzer/Leco). Specimens for microstructural observation and X-ray diffraction (XRD) were wet ground with water-proof silicon carbide papers to 2000 grit, buff polished and ultrasonically cleaned in a series of baths. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses were carried out with a Rigaku RU-300 X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation. The micro-hardness were measured on the sintered specimens etched with 5:2:2 volume mixture of H The nitrided Ta powders for this study have a particle size distribution ranging from 100 to 250  It can be seen from XRD profile 1 in Optical micrographs of Ta-900 and Ta-1000 are shown in Compression properties of the sintering specimens are summarized in The fracture surface observations are in accordance with the apparent ductility. Two typical fracture surfaces of Ta-1000 can be found, as shown in It is well known that sintering without existing of liquid phase is a process whereby interparticle pores in a granular material are eliminated by atomic diffusion driven by reduction of the interface energy, while the reduction of the interface energy for sintering and grain growth are comparable in magnitude, therefore, the final stage of conventional sintering processes are always accompanied by rapid grain growth The high yield strength attained is mainly derived from solid solution strengthening of nitrogen with additional contribution from that of oxygen, much higher than that of conventional Ta alloys widely used, such as Ta–9.2W–0.5Hf alloy (740 A gradient structure was formed within an individual grain in a bulk Ta compact by a unique methodology combining nitriding of powders and subsequent SPS treatment. The compacts exhibit significantly enhanced strength together with apparent ductility in the presence of high nitrogen and oxygen content. With an increment in nitrogen content, the strength increases and plasticity descends. The high strength originates from solution strengthening of nitrogen and the considerable ductility may be attributed to the presence of soft grain center. The results open possibilities of tailoring properties of bulk material by designing microstructure of a powder particle during powder metallurgy process. This work was supported by