Flotation collectors have a significant effect on the flotation performance and efficiency of fine low rank coal (LRC) particles. In this study, a mixed collector consisting of a nonpolar collector (dodecane) and a polar collector (C12EO4, tetraethylene glycol monododecyl ether) was used to improve the flotation performance of LRC. The results show that flotation behavior can be enhanced with the addition of C12EO4 in dodecane. The yield, combustible matter recovery, and flotation efficiency index increase with a larger volume ratio of C12EO4 in the mixed collector. A molecular dynamics simulation (MD) approach was applied to explore the microscopic strengthening mechanism of the mixed collector. The simulation demonstrated that the interaction strength and spreading ability of the mixed collector on the LRC surface increased due to electrostatic attraction and hydrogen bonding between the mixed collector and the LRC surface (as indicated by interaction energy and contact surface area), thereby enhancing flotation performance of the LRC. The effect of C12EO4 on the emulsification and dispersibility of dodecane is also discussed.Low rank coal (LRC) is an important fossil energy source with large reserves. However, LRC must be first upgraded to use it efficiently. The properties of LRC, such as low density, fragility, and high concentration of fine particles, limit the application of gravity separation in upgrading LRC. Froth flotation is an effective method for fine coal separation. Flotation reagents, especially the flotation collector, play a significant role in the cleaning efficiency of coal slimes in the coal preparation and utilization industry It has been proved that a mixed collector containing nonpolar and polar collectors (oxygenated surfactants) is effective in LRC flotation Currently, the application of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations is becoming more popular for studying phenomena that cannot be observed by experimental methods, tracking the dynamic evolution process of a system, and explaining the micro-mechanisms. In the area of mineral processing, molecular dynamics simulations are often used to study the interaction of minerals and collectors In the current investigation, a mixed collector consisting of dodecane (C An LRC sample from Inner Mongolia, China was used in this study. The LRC was crushed and screened to smaller than 0.5 mm. The proximate and ultimate analyses of the coal are given in Flotation tests were completed in an XFG flotation machine with a 500 mL cell with pulp density at 10%. The impeller speed of the flotation machine was 2000 rpm, and the airflow rate was 0.17 L/min. The dosage of the collector was 1600 mL/t, and octanol was used as the frother, with a dosage of 200 mL/t. Dodecane (C The Hatcher lignite coal model was selected to represent LRC, as shown in Molecular dynamics simulations were performed using the Nosé thermostat and canonical ensemble with a 1 fs time step. For full interaction, 500 ps simulations were conducted. The Ewald method with a precision of 0.00 1 kcal/mol was used for electrostatic interactions, and the Van der Waals interaction was calculated under the atom-based option with a cutoff of 12.5 Å. The output files were analyzed and discussed. The MD simulations were performed using the Forcite module in Materials Studio 6.0. A polymer consistent force-field was employed for all simulations. The flotation results are displayed in The yield increases significantly using the mixed collector. Within the research scope of this work, as the ratio of C The microscopic enhancement mechanism of a mixed collector on LRC flotation was investigated by MD simulation. In this section, we use 20 dodecane and 4 C   To gain deeper insight into the adsorption mechanism of the collector, the components of interaction energy were analyzed In addition to interaction energy, we introduce the contact surface area (CSA) to evaluate the intensity of adsorption, which can be calculated using Eq. To describe the dynamics properties of the collector, the mean square displacement (MSD) was calculated. Based on the MSD, the diffusion coefficient ( The adsorption behaviors of mixed collectors on the oxygen-containing groups of LRC were investigated by MD simulation to obtain the distribution characteristics of the mixed collector. In this section, two C  The interaction energies of the mixed collector and oxygen-containing groups were calculated by the same method described in It is acknowledged that hydrogen bonding of the polar parts of the LRC surface with the oxygenated functional groups of the reagent greatly enhances the LRC flotation response Similarly, the contact surface area was also computed as a measurement of adsorption intensity of collectors on oxygen-containing groups. In comparison with the single collector, the contact surface areas between the mixed collector and oxygen-containing groups are enlarged, indicating that the mixed collector coverage of oxygen-containing groups is increased, as shown in Aside from the adsorption of a polar collector on oxygen-containing groups to increase the hydrophobicity of the LRC surface, the emulsification of dodecane with surfactants is often used to explain the synergistic mechanism of a mixed collector for LRC flotation The enhancement of LRC flotation using a mixed collector consisting of dodecane and C Based on the MD simulation results, it was found that the adsorption of C  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the