Sinters correspond to the main burden of blast furnaces for pig iron production. The industrial sinters studied were produced with iron ores from Quadrilatero Ferrifero, which are hematite-rich ores. They are composed of four main phases: hematite, magnetite, silicoferrite of calcium and aluminium (SFCA) and silicates. Hematite corresponds either to a relict phase (pure Fe2O3) or to a restructured mineral; the relict phase can be, not rarely, related to specific fabrics of each iron ore mix employed in the industrial sintering process, while the restructured hematite represents particles grown by coalescence and/or partially reequilibrated (Al2O3-bearing). Magnetite is associated to SFCA, which can replace it, and it is also related to MgO-bearing silicate cores, which are favourable sites to develop it. SFCA is an important phase in sinters and, in controlled amount, it contributes to a good mechanical strength of these agglomerates. SFCA common types are massive, columnar and acicular. Pseudomorphs of massive SFCA after magnetite have been observed. The columnar type occurs at the relict hematite edges and in association with magnetite. Intergrowths of thin SFCA and silicates are identified too. Silicates composition ranges from Ca-rich (dicalcium silicate) to Fe–Ca-bearing, both with significant phosphorus content. These microstructural aspects play an important role in evaluating industrial sinters quality such as mechanical strength parameters and behaviour during reduction stages.Sinters are the main burden employed in blast furnaces to produce pig iron. Sintering corresponds to an agglomeration process that involves the heating of large amounts of iron ore fines and fluxes (serpentinite, limestone and lime). The heating is promoted by coke combustion. The industrial sinters were produced with iron ores from three mines in Quadrilatero Ferrifero, Minas Gerais State (Brazil), which are hematite-rich ores related to Proterozoic banded iron formations ( The microstructure characterisation research contributes to the knowledge of sinter properties, regarding its use in blast furnaces. The fabrics described in these sinters exhibit partially the sintering conditions, printed from the stages of heating, transformation and cooling that produced these agglomerates, in which the chemical composition of each phase is also related to some remarkable arrangements of the microstructures. The industrial sinters evaluated correspond to the equivalent of one month production, in which five variations of iron ores proportions were the only substantial change in the process. These five types of sinters have been studied by means of microscopy techniques such as reflected light optical microscopy (RLOM) and scanning electron microscopy––backscattered electron images (SEM-BSE), microanalyses by energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometry (SEM-EDS) and electron backscattering diffraction as a complementary technique (EBSD, hematite and magnetite Kikuchi patterns). Other tests have been performed such as chemical analyses (whole sample) and evaluations of the magnetic behaviour and the metallurgical parameters. The data discussed are the results of mineralogy and microstructures registered from study of polished sections in optical microscope and scanning electron microscope (JEOL model JSM-5410), detailed by microanalyses (NORAN TN-M3055 spectrometer with a VOYAGER software, version 3.3). The microchemical results have only been briefly discussed, since they are not the main scope of this paper. All data are discussed by The iron ore sinters are composed of four main phases: hematite, magnetite, silicoferrite of calcium and aluminium (SFCA) and silicates ( Hematite corresponds either to a relict phase (pure Fe Granular, lamellar (flaky of Restructured hematite represents particles grown by coalescence or it results from partial reactions within the sintering mix. Many crystals have rounded edges, showing the homogenisation process of the original hematite. Some of them maintain regular external forms of the original crystals and some have subhedral and anhedral edges as a consequence of the destabilisation by SFCA, for instance. Magnetite was formed during the sintering and many microstructure arrangements were developed. Its association with SFCA which can replace it is noteworthy. In this case, magnetite crystals are hypidiomorphic or xenomorphic ( In association to silicate cores, but in a different way, small crystals of magnetite with euhedral forms or completely irregular ones can be observed included in these cores. Their composition can incorporate Cr, an element inherited from original serpentinite transformations, which is one of the fluxes in the sintering process ( Relict magnetite can be suggested, although the fabrics observed show that it is unusual. However, small anhedral crystals of magnetite distributed within hematite can suggest that this association represents martitized magnetite relicts from the original iron ores ( Another uncommon fabric is represented by isolate magnetite crystals on the edges of hematite aggregates ( SFCA is an important phase in sinters and, in controlled amount, it contributes to a good mechanical strength of these agglomerates. The common types are massive, columnar and acicular. The columnar type occurs at the relict hematite edges ( Many researchers have developed studies on sinters using pilot plants, identifying step by step the evolution of sintering ( SFCA has been correlated to the aenimagtites mineral group ( SFCA is a typical phase of iron ore sintering, capable of incorporating the main elements present in the sintering mix and developing in such conditions. The silicate microstructure aspects have already been presented, because of their relationship with previous described phases. In summary, their common arrangements are represented by their intergranular distribution in hematite and magnetite, and SFCA can intergrown there ( Silicates are the slag phase of this system. They can be neoformed phases by partial melting of the fluxes mixed to the iron ores due to the high temperatures during sintering. They comprise the more significant variation in composition of the sinters phases. Their composition ranges from Ca-rich (≅65 wt.% CaO, dicalcium silicates) to Fe–Ca-bearing (≅10–20 wt.% Fe On the other hand, silicates can be a remnant phase, partially reequilibrated, as suggested by the rounded cores compositions (MgO-bearing) and by the magnetite composition within these cores (Fe–Cr contents), Sinters are iron ore agglomerates, which present many inherited characteristics from the original sintering burden and many other aspects acquired from the sintering process. Their mineralogy and microstructures allow most of the times the identification on both aspects, and the microchemical registers ratify these observations. The following inherited characteristics were observed: relict aggregates of hematite (pure Fe The relation between the phases and the voids in sinters corresponds to an important aspect of this process. In spite of the fact that porosity has not been specifically treated here, the observation of preserved original pores directly related to the iron ores fabrics is noteworthy. However, a new stage of pores generation is also identified, actually a preferable term in this case is vesicle, when round forms are developed, and vugs to irregular ones. These voids indicate the loss of volatiles during the sintering due to the saturation of gases such as O The neoformed phases and microstructures identified were hematite grown by coalescence (Al The phases and their relationships reflect the sintering conditions such as temperature and gases fugacity (O The phases of sinters are formed or partially reequilibrated due to the sintering conditions, which are partially dependent on the mix content. Then a very well controlled process is an essential condition to have good quality sinters. Therefore, grain size studies, metallurgical parameters evaluation and chemical composition control of industrial sinters are usual procedures. However, characterisation researches involving phases and microstructure descriptions and the respective chemical compositions have not been given much attention, although some authors have remarkable results, which associated to other parameters usually analysed, would certainly improve the quality of sinters. The microstructure research associated to the microanalytical results of the studied industrial sinters proved to be important in sinter evaluation, as these parameters reflect the sintering conditions and also because these sinters display many inherited characteristics, which are directly related to the iron ores that compose the sintering mix. These microstructural aspects are associated to the mechanical strength and to the reduction behaviour, which are critical parameters in the quality evaluation of industrial sinters. We would like to thank Prof. R.P. Tavares of the Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Department from UFMG for the discussions about sintering and the manuscript reading; S.C.E.M. Teixeira and R.C. Lois of the Mining Engineering Department from UFMG for helping in the laboratory routine. The Brazilian Research Council (CNPq) gave the financial support, as research grant and scholarships.