This paper deals with a new technology for fine grinding of hard materials, based on a high-compression roller mill with ultrasonic capabilities. The machine was tested by producing fine powders from hard rocks, with and without ultrasonic activation, permitting the beneficial effects of ultrasound to be evaluated.
                  The experimental set-up allows the following operational parameters to be measured: material flow, applied torque, angular velocity of the rollers, stress on the shafts, ultrasonic energy applied and the vibration amplitude and phase behaviour of the transducer roller.
                  It is found that the application of ultrasonic energy diminishes the torque required, the stress over the shafts and the total energy consumed for the same grinding results. In addition, a reduction in the erosion of the grinding surfaces was found.
                  The optimal value of the applied ultrasonic power was determined by measuring the specific rate of breakage, a parameter that refers to the energy consumed for the generation of 1ton of material, for each size range.Comminution is defined as the mechanical breakdown of solids into smaller particles without changing the state of aggregation In order to produce a mechanical fracture, the material must be stressed beyond a certain critical limit. At present, three main stress mechanisms for particle size reductions are generally used: stress applied between two surfaces, applying normal and tangential forces to a single or many particles in the bulk material as in various crushers (jaw crushers, overhead eccentric jaw crushers, impact crushers, giratory crushers, disk crushers, roll crushers, hammer crushers roller and ring-roller mills); stress applied at a single solid surface (surface–particle or particle–particle) such as in grinding media mills (tumbling mills, vibration mills, planetary mills, autogenous mills); stress applied by a carrier medium, such as in wet grinding. In conventional grinding machines, the energy that is actually needed for particle reduction is approximately 1% of the total energy applied to the machine. Despite the economic importance of comminution, its technology and efficiency have basically remained unchanged for many years, leading to a great demand for improvements Recent developments include the high-compression roller mill The low efficiency of current grinding technologies is mainly due to the application of the stress to the whole material volume. This produces an excess of elastic energy in the load, an important part of which is finally dissipated as heat. Therefore, to increase the grinding process efficiency, it would be advisable to look for a way to apply the grinding energy only to the specific material to be fractured. Some mechanisms to supply the breaking energy just in the grinding material have been explored previously. An example is the Snyder process, which uses a pressure discharge in a chamber filled with coarse material to produce fluidization and a grinding effect. Thermal stress, electrical discharge and electro-hydraulic effects have also been tried as alternative non-impact grinding methods, but have resulted in energy demands an order of magnitude higher than those needed by traditional technology to obtain the same product In the meeting of International Comminution Research Association, in Warsaw in 1993, the feasibility of the application of ultrasound energy to the grinding process was seen a viable avenue of exploration and research. Several different reasons were argued in the meeting to support such a proposition. One of the most convincing originated in the accepted fact that inside any material there are a number of inherent cracks and ultrasonic energy has the capacity to produce crack propagation from within the particle to its outer surface, producing an efficient fracture. In addition, in the case of mineral grinding, this method would be qualitatively better than the application of external stress, because the fractures would occur in the natural boundaries within the material compounds, precluding inter-crystalline breakage, a phenomenon that produces new substances, complicating the extraction process. In synthesis, the objective is the efficient transfer of ultrasonic energy from the source to the material to be ground. The fragmentation effect of ultrasonic fields in suspensions and in solids has been investigated since the fifties. Gärtner Tarpley and Moulder In 1992, Lo and Kientzler Menacho et al. The majority of the devices mentioned above were composed of a stationary vibrating surface opposing a passive rotating device that nips the particles in a gap that is smaller than the feed particle size. The ultrasonic vibration amplitude is about an order of magnitude smaller than the gap. The low processing capability attained with this design limits the method application, in spite of the very low energy consumption claimed by the authors. In this paper, new developments in applying ultrasound energy to grinding are presented. The design is based on a high-compression roller mill in which one of the rollers can be ultrasonically activated. In this way, the device retains its high performance, extending its ability to the efficient treatment of hard material. The two rollers apply mechanical stress to the material, facilitating the breakage process and coupling the active roller to the particles to be ground. To obtain a low specific energy consumption, the active roller was designed as a high-efficiency ultrasonic vibrator piezoelectrically driven at its third longitudinal resonant mode. To minimize any housing problems and to ensure a long operational life, the roller bearings were mounted at the nodal planes of the piezoelectric transducer. The breakage behaviour of the new device was investigated under several different loading conditions, and the actual effect of ultrasonic activation was evaluated. The optimal operational conditions were established by calculating the specific rate of breakage, a figure of merit that summarizes specific energy consumption, particle size distribution and material flow. In the design of a mill, the main problem to be overcome is the high energy and material consumption demanded by the size reduction of particles from a few millimetres to hundreds of micrometres. To broach the design of the new machine, and in view of the necessity for energy efficiency, the strategy adopted was the development of optimization criteria for the design of the ultrasonic components in the machine. The ultrasonic roller mill presented in this paper is a high-pressure roller mill in which at least one of the rollers is ultrasonically active. In order to obtain a high efficiency, the active roller was designed as a stepped rod driven at resonance in its third extensional mode (24.5 The radial vibrational amplitude distribution, measured for typical input powers with a laser vibrometer, is shown in The active roller was mounted in front of the other passive roller forming a high-compression roller mill as shown schematically in the power input line, which connects a motor to the gear train and is fitted with a power meter to measure the energy supplied to the rollers; a torque sensor to monitor the roller mill during the test; the ultrasonic roller mill; a power generator with dynamic control that adjusts the frequency following the changes in the resonance of the ultrasonic system during operation instrumentation to measure the applied ultrasonic power, the roller angular speed, and the instantaneous roller separation, allowing the stress over the shafts to be measured. The ultrasonic roller mill was used to reduce the size of several substances under different operating conditions. To simulate the operating conditions in grinding plants, the system was always operated in a shock-feed state; the condition reached when the chamber formed by the two rollers is full of material, as opposed to the single particle feed state. After each test, the size distribution of the mill products was determined by screening. To ascertain the breakage pattern of the ultrasonic roller-mill, a series of grinding tests were conducted with different materials and in different operation conditions. The first test attempted to compare the grinding quality for the high-compression roller mill and the ultrasonic machine. The experiment was carried out by feeding the ultrasonic mill with different size distributions of quark, a brittle material, with and without ultrasonic activation. The results were very promising and showed that the grinding quality remained unchanged when the high-compression roller mill was ultrasonically activated. This conclusion is supported by For the second test of the ultrasonic grinding machine, copper mineral from Andina_Codelco was used. This is a very hard granite mineral that causes a high consumption of grinding media due to the high wear. Again, the curves shown in To assess the significance of these results on the energy consumption of the process, a further series of experiments were carried out on the mill, by applying different levels of ultrasonic power. The results, presented in  Special tests to establish the mechanical behaviour and wear characteristics of the ultrasonic grinding machine were also carried out. For the wear test, the ultrasonic machine was equipped with two sets of rollers constructed with relatively soft steels. Wear tests were carried out for each one. For rollers built with SAE 1020 steel, the ultrasonic activation of the machine reduces material consumption by 54%, while for SAE 4340 steel, the material consumption is reduced by 38%. These results are shown in the To obtain comparative results of the ultrasonic machine with the technology currently in use to grind hard materials, two equal amounts of copper minerals from Andina mining were ground to a powder to the same degree with the ultrasonic device and in a ball mill ( It can be deduced from The specific breakage velocity is a very useful parameter with which to evaluate grinding technologies: it includes the flow of treated material, the size distribution and the specific use of energy One of the most surprising features found during testing of the ultrasonic grinding machine was the important reduction in wear. This effect can be explained using a theoretical model to assess the effectiveness of ultrasound in decreasing the friction coefficient in rolling processes The last expression is a complete elliptical integral that can be solved by numerical methods. The solution for our experimental conditions is shown in The experimental wear data point obtained would appear to agree closely with the predicted value. A more detailed experimental wear analysis, using a variety of different steels and velocities, is beyond the scope of this paper. Finally, new tests were carried out to find the optimum vibrational displacement amplitude for the best ultrasonic grinding. In this way, the localized magnitudes that optimize the process can be established. These values will be critical to scale up the developed machine. The average displacement amplitude found for an ultrasonic applied power of 25 It should be noted that the capacity of the laboratory ultrasonic grinding machine developed is 20 A new kind of ultrasonic grinding machine has been designed, constructed and tested. The results showed that the ultrasonic device produces high-quality ground products with a lower energy and material consumption than the conventional systems. Some of the localized magnitudes for scaling up the device were determined. Further research work to determine the fundamental parameters of the ultrasonic fracture of material has to be carried out in order to optimize the process. Ultrasonic grinding is a very promising new technology, as it may help improve the efficiency and to broaden the capabilities of conventional grinding systems. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support from FONDEF Project D97T1011.