Halloysite is one of the nanoscale tubular minerals in nature. This article reports the mineralogical character, dispersion treatment, structural, and morphological stabilities of a 10Å-type halloysite mineral from Hunan, China. X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), particle-size distribution and N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms were adopted to characterize the raw and calcined minerals. Ammonium lauryl sulfate was used as the surfactant to obtain mono-dispersed halloysite nanotubes.
                  The raw mineral is a kind of tubular nanotube with a hollow interior channel, the specific surface area is 56.7m2/g. Alunitization occurred in the impure mineral. Thermal treatment to the mineral induced shrinkage of the c-axis and yielded a 7Å-type structure. The tube wall was transformed to an amorphous structure in the dehydration process at 450°C. Phase segregation occurred to yield amorphous SiO2 and γ-Al2O3 at around 1000°C. The tubular morphology can be maintained even after it is calcined at 1100°C for 6h, and the specific surface area is enlarged slightly to 65.7m2/g. While after being calcined to 1300°C, the mineral will generate mullite and silica, accompanied with collapse of the tubular walls. A schematic diagram is proposed to illustrate the structural transformation procedure. The results provide assurance to the use of halloysite in high temperature circumstances, such as three-way catalysts.Halloysite (abbreviated as Hal ( Hal was often used as raw material to produce fine ceramics in the past. The specific morphology and unique properties of the mineral determine that it should be applied in some high-tech fields, such as its use as a support for catalysts and other functional materials. Many investigations have been carried out to expand the application fields of this unique mineral. For example, some magnetic particles were assembled in hollow tubes to obtain magnets with high coercivity ( Hal will inevitably be used under some high temperature conditions in industries. To what extent the tubular morphology of Hal can keep its stability will determine the possibility of using this mineral as functional materials, such as catalysts. Some groups have reported the morphological stability and structural transformation of Hal under high temperature circumstances ( The tubular morphology of a Hal mined in Hunan province, China has been reported by our group ( Hal raw mineral was obtained from Chenxi, Hunan, P.R. China. Before the mineral was characterized, impurities were manually eliminated. Dispersion of the raw mineral was conducted before morphology characterizations. According to previous work ( The chemical composition of the raw mineral was analyzed by a PANalytical Axios PW4400/40 X-ray fluorescent technique (XRF) and chemical analysis. The results are shown in Hal mineral deposits in Chenxi, China are located underground at − To detect the crystal structure and the possible preferred development of the crystal facets in the two kinds of Hal, bulk minerals were cut into 1 Thermal stability of the Hal has been reported by Structure of the calcined mineral changed in accordance with the DSC/TG results. The XRD patterns of the pure Hal calcined at different temperatures are shown in Since the raw Hal mineral is a kind of bulk sediment, the application of the nanotubes often requires mono-dispersed slurry. The TEM image of the raw mineral, without special dispersion treatment, in The morphological characterizations mentioned above were all conducted on the raw mineral without any thermal treatment. The following conclusions are focused on the shape stability of the tubular Hal after calcination at different temperatures. TEM images of the Hal calcined at 800 N A schematic illustration of the transition mechanism for the Hal during thermal treatment is proposed in The 10 This work was supported by the