The terminal velocity and mass transfer coefficients of drop swarms of high viscosity solvents were investigated to study the effect of viscosity on drop behavior in a column packed with super mini ring (SMR) packing. The experimental column was equipped with a multi-channel precise syringe pump and a computerized video imaging system. Cyanex 923S kerosene solutions of different concentrations were used as experimental systems, and their viscosities are ranged from 1.2 to 53.7 mPa S. The effect of drop size and viscosity on the mass transfer coefficient, K
                     od, has been studied. It is clear from the results that K
                     od decreases sharply with the increase of viscosity, whereas drop size only has a little effect on K
                     od. The SMR packing increases K
                     od significantly up to 100%. Calculations with well-known literature equations cannot predict our experimental data, thus a model considering the interfacial mobility was provided to predict K
                     od of high viscosity solvents. The model has an adjustable parameter easily obtained from experimental data and fits the experimental data well. A modified Klee–Treybal equation describing terminal velocity under mass transfer conditions was also proposed in this paper.Solvent extraction has been widely used in petrochemical, pharmaceutical, hydrometallurgical and environmental industries. Although many researchers consider that extraction is a fully mature technology lacking in potential for further improvement, there are still many questions that need to be solved urgently. One of them is to design commercial extractors safely with low costs. Nowadays, the scale-up of extractors still depends on large quantities of pilot experiments, which is expensive and time-consuming. Measuring mass transfer coefficients by single drop experiments is a promising method to solve the above problem. Researchers ( It is well-known that packings can enhance mass transfer by decreasing axial dispersion, increasing drop breakage probability and enhancing surface renewal. However, there is still a lack of direct evidence on whether packings can increase the mass transfer coefficients of a single drop. Only regular packings were used to investigate this aspect ( Several new high viscosity solvents have been developed and applied successfully in hydrometallurgy and petrochemical industries recently. These solvents have favorable thermodynamics properties, however, their mass transfer coefficients are very low due to high viscosity. Diluents or higher extraction temperature have to be used in industry to enhance their mass transfer, however, these operations will cost more energy and make an extraction process more complicated. Mass transfer can be enhanced by introducing energy into the extraction system, but experiments showed that agitation has only a little influence on the mass transfer coefficients of high viscosity solvents. Therefore, it is necessary to find new methods to increase the mass transfer coefficients of high viscosity solvents. Terminal velocity and mass transfer coefficients of drop swarms were measured with high viscosity solvents in this paper. The effect of drop size, viscosity and the SMR packing on mass transfer was studied. A new mathematical model was proposed to predict mass transfer coefficients of high viscosity solvents.  Drop swarms were produced by a multi-channel syringe pump (Cole-Parmer Ins. Co., model 74900-10), which guarantees that each syringe pump has the same flow rate. Medical needles of seven different gauges were used in the experiment to produce drops of different sizes. Teflon pipes were used as connectors between needles and syringes. A computerized video imaging system, which consists of a PC computer with a capture card, a video camera and a video tape recorder, was installed to record the movements of drops. When the effect of packing on drop swarms was studied, a tube with 95 mm external diameter was suspended inside the column, and it was filled with Cyanex 923S was kindly provided by Cytec Industries Inc. (Canada). Commercial kerosene with a boiling point of 180∼230 °C was used as a diluent. Water was distilled and deionized before use. Analytical grade acetic acid without further purification was transferred from continuous water phase to dispersed organic phase in the experiment. In order to study the effect of viscosity, six experimental systems with different Cyanex 923S concentrations were prepared and their physical properties are listed in The coalescence of drops at the interface of water and organic in the funnel has some influence on mass transfer coefficients. In order to eliminate this effect, the interface should be kept as small as possible. The regular way to remove organic phase is by pump or by siphon, however, these processes are rather complex. In our experiments, the organic phase can be simply and automatically removed by volume exchange. When drop swarms enter the column filled with 0.2 M acetic acid aqueous solution, since the whole column is airtight and has no elastic parts, the organic phase of equal volume will leave the top funnel automatically. In case the organic phase was removed too slow or too fast, a syringe at the upper Plexiglas was used to adjust the speed through injecting or sucking continuous phase. The flow rate of the pump was adjusted so that drops were produced in about 2–3 s. The size of drops was calculated according to the flow rate of the pump and the time used to produce a certain number of drops. After samples were collected at steady state, concentrations of acetic acid were titrated with 0.1 M NaOH in the presence of thymol blue. Assuming the overall mass transfer coefficient Where Terminal velocity is an important parameter in designing a commercial column. There are many references ( For free rise drops, our results demonstrate that the bigger the drop size, the higher the terminal velocity. The drop velocity is slowed down by the packing. The effect of drop size on rising velocity disappears because the packing has a smooth effect on drop velocity. Terminal velocity of our experimental systems was calculated by equations ( The new constant is 93% of the old one, which means that the terminal velocity with mass transfer is about 7% lower than that without mass transfer. The comparison between experimental results and calculated ones is provided in The measured mass transfer coefficients The viscosity of solvents affects both molecular diffusion and convection inside a drop. First, the increase in viscosity decreases the diffusion coefficient and molecular diffusion rate inside the drop. Second, the circulation rate and convection rate inside the drop will decrease with the increase of the viscosity. Both of these two aspects have a negative influence on There are many equations for calculating mass transfer coefficients of inside drop and outside drop in the literature ( The Reynolds numbers in our experiments are in the range of 150 and 400, which means the drops are in the circulating state. Several well-known equations for calculating  This model has only one parameter, The calculated data of two experimental systems are illustrated in  Our experimental results are provided in The effect of packing height on Experiments of drop swarms were designed to investigate the hydrodynamics and mass transfer of high viscosity solvents. The results illustrate the terminal velocity of free rise drops increases with drop size, while the SMR packing can slow down the terminal velocity significantly. Mass transfer has some influence on the terminal velocity, and a modified Klee–Treybal equation considering this effect was proposed. Mass transfer coefficients increase with drop size, while this trend will level off with the increase of the viscosity. Compared with drop size, the viscosity of solvents has significant effect on The effect of the SMR packing on mass transfer coefficient of high viscosity solvents was also studied. Our results illustrates that packing can increase mass transfer coefficient of high viscosity solvents by up to 110%, which proves the possibility of enhance mass transfer of high viscosity solvents by the SMR packing. [m [m [m], drop diameter [–], fraction degree of extraction [m s [m s [m s [–], distribution coefficient [–], enhancement ratio [–], Reynolds number (=duρ / μ) [–], Sherwood number (=kd / D) [s], time velocity initial velocity [m s [mol l [mol l [mol l [Pa S], viscosity [kg m [kg m [–], interfacial motion hindrance factor [N/m], interfacial tension continuous phase dispersed phase The authors wish to express their appreciation to the State Key Laboratory of Chemical Engineering (Tsinghua University), China, for its support. The authors also show their thanks to Cytec Industries Inc. (Canada) for providing Cyanex 923S.