The reduced graphene oxide (rGO) decorated with Ag nanoparticles was synthesized by the chemical reduction of graphene oxide in an aqueous solution containing AgNO3, in the presence of hydrazine hydrate as a reducing agent. The reduction of graphene oxide was confirmed by FT-IR and raman spectroscopy analyses. The x-ray diffraction pattern and UV–visible investigations demonstrated the formation of Ag particles on the surface of rGO sheets. After successful decoration, the Ag/rGO nano-composite was used as the reinforcement in the copper matrix composite. Cu–Ag/rGO composites with different percentages of Ag/rGO (0.4, 0.8, 1.6 and 3.2 vol%.) were prepared by mechanical milling and spark plasma sintering (SPS). The effects of the Ag/rGO content on the consolidation process, micro-hardness, bending strength and also, fracture surface of the prepared samples were then investigated. The three-point bending strength of the sintered samples was increased from 285 to 472 MPa by the addition 0.8 vol%. of Ag/rGO, as compared to the pure Cu. Moreover, increasing the reinforcement content to the 3.2 vol%. Ag/rGO led to decreasing the bending strength to 433 MPa. The highest micro-hardness (81 Hv) was obtained for the composite sample containing the 1.6 vol%. Ag/rGO. By increasing Ag/r-GO as the reinforcement (3.2 vol%.), the Vickers hardness was decreased to 69 Hv. Also, investigation of the fracture surface morphology showed transformation of fracture mechanism from plastic changes to brittle ones by raising the Ag/rGO content volume from 0.8 to 1.6 vol %.Copper and its alloys have been widely used in many branches of engineering applications due to such unique properties as high electrical and thermal conductivity and also, good corrosion resistance. These properties make copper and its alloys suitable candidates for use in electrical sliding contacts, resistance welding electrodes, heat sinks, etc, [ Graphene and CNTs have gained more attention among other reinforcements in copper metal matrix composites, such as SiC [ Graphene is a carbon allotrope with sp Although extensive studies have been carried out to improve the mechanical properties of metallic materials with addition of graphene, the homogenous distribution of graphene in the metal matrix is still a major challenge in the preparation of metal-graphene composites. This is since graphene nanosheets (GNPs) tend to agglomerate due to their high surface area and van der Waals forces between GNPs. On the other hand, the weak interfacial bond between copper and graphene, which is due to their different thermal expansion coefficients, causes a significant reduction in the mechanical properties of Cu-based composites. To tackle the difficulty of GNPs agglomeration in metal matrix composites, several different methods have been proposed; these include combined liquid state ultrasonic processing and solid state stirring, flake powder metallurgy and molecular-level mixing. The uniform distribution of GNPs as a result of applying the mentioned method leads to improved mechanical properties [ The molecular-level mixing is a new method preventing the agglomeration of GNPs synthesized on metallic nanoparticles in metal matrix composites (MMCs). One of the most important benefits of metallic nanoparticles attached to GNPs is that a space obstacle is crated, thereby preventing GNPs from joining. Additionally, physical and mechanical properties of MMCs can be improved by correctly selecting metallic nanoparticles located on GNPs, helping to establish strong bonding in the metal-graphene interface. In the present work, Ag- rGO (reduced graphene oxide) nano-composite was synthesized by some simple chemical reduction. The employed method offered two benefits: (1) Ag-rGO nanocomposite could be easily provided in one post by the reaction between AgNO Ag- rGO nanocomposite was synthesized by the chemical reduction of silver nitrate and graphene oxide in an aqueous solution, in the presence of hydrazine hydrate as the reducing agent. For this purpose, 100 mg of GO was dispersed in 200 ml of deionized water by ultrasonication for 40 min in order to achieve a stable colloid of GNPs. The obtained colloid of GNPs was stirred for 1h; then 0.1 g of the AgNO Field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, MIRA 3 TESCAN, Czech Republic) was used to observe the morphology of the synthesized sample. The phase analysis of the sample was performed by X-ray diffraction (Philips-PW3710) in the 2θ range of 5–80° with Cu K The powder samples were sintered by spark plasma sintering (SPS, 20 T-10, Easy Fashion Metal Products Co. China). Copper powder with 99.7% purity and a particle size less than 45 μm and the synthesized Ag-rGO nanocomposite in the previous stage were used as the starting materials. Different contents of Ag-rGO (0.4, 0.8, 1.6, 3.2 vol%) were selected for mixing with the copper powder. The initial powders were mixed in a planetary ball mill for 5h at 300 rpm with the ball/powder ratio of 10:1 by using different sizes of balls under Ar atmosphere and 0.5% stearic acid in order to prevent the agglomeration of the powder particles and adhesion of them to the inner walls of the cup. The milled powders were inserted into a graphite mold with the diameter of 32 mm. The graphite foil with 1 mm thickness was also used to prevent the attachment of the final part to the mold walls and upper and lower punches. The samples were sintered by SPS with the initial and final pressure of 10 and 35 MPa, respectively, under vacuum, at 800 The density of the sintered samples was measured using the Archimedes’ principle. The phase composition of the samples was determined using X-ray diffraction (Philips-PW3710) in the 2θ range of 5–80° with Cu K    Raman spectroscopy is a beneficial tool to characterize carbon structures, especially for the investigation of their order/disorder structure. FE-SEM images of rGO and the Ag/rGO nanocomposite can be observed in   The relative density changes showed the decrease of relative density by increasing the reinforcement content, according to There are several different mechanisms for strengthening the metal matrix composites by adding graphene. The addition of graphene influences the microstructure of metal matrix composites; the high density of dislocations is created in the vicinity of graphene-metal intersection due to the high thermal expansion mismatch between graphene and the matrix. The increase of dislocations could improve the strength of the metal matrix composites. The reduction of the grain size is another effect of adding graphene on the microstructure of the metal matrix composite. The reduction of grain size is equal to an increase in the grain boundaries, which can act as an obstacle against the deformation of the composite during loading. One of the important mechanisms of strengthening in composites is the load transfer from the matrix to the reinforcement phase. In copper-graphene composites, the proper load transfer does not occur due to the poor bonding between the copper matrix and graphene. However, previous research [  The fracture surface morphology of Cu- 1.6 vol% Ag/rGO and Cu- 3.2 vol% Ag/rGO samples exhibited a layer-by-layer structure indicating a brittle fracture. The porosity and layer-by-layer structure marked in   Ag/rGO nanocomposite was synthesized by a chemical reduction of graphene oxide in an aqueous solution under hydrazine hydrate as the reducing agent and silver nitrate. The morphology of the synthesized nanocomposite showed the homogenous distribution of Ag nanoparticles with a size in the range of 40–55 nm on the rGO sheets. An Ag/rGO nanocomposite with different volume contents was used as the second phase in the copper matrix composite. Cu– Ag/rGO composites were prepared by mechanical milling and spark plasma sintering. The samples of the sintered composites had high relative density. The relative density of the composites samples was reduced from 99.4% to 95.8% for the samples of pure copper and Cu- 3.2 vol% Ag/rGO, respectively. The micro-hardness and bending strength of the composite samples showed a significant increase, as compared to the pure copper sample. The highest values micro-hardness (81 Hv) and bending strength (472 MPa) belonged to Cu-1.6 vol% Ag/rGO and Cu-0.8 vol% Ag/rGO samples, respectively, while the values of micro-hardness and bending strength of pure copper were obtained to be 51 Hv and 285 MPa, respectively. The change of the fracture mechanism from a plastic one to a brittle one occurred in the Cu-0.8 vol% Ag/rGO sample. The change of the fracture mechanism originated from the increase of the graphene content in the samples and this as accompanied with the aggregation of the graphene sheets. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.