The current global interest in fine grained sedimentary shale rock is driven by its ability to store gas in the pore spaces in them. The current study focuses on the understanding of the gas storage capacity of less explored Damodar Valley shales of India, in light of pore characteristics of organic matter and clay minerals. In this study, four samples were collected from different parts of Damodar valley basin and their geochemical composition, pore structure and adsorption capacity were investigated by XRD studies, rock-eval analyses, low-pressure N2-CO2 adsorption analyses and high-pressure methane adsorption experiment. The samples were also studied to know their hydrocarbon potential. The relationship between mineralogy, organic matter, and pore-structure was analyzed and finally, their effect on methane sorption capacity was discussed. The shale samples are found to be clay rich. The average clay content of the shale samples is 50.69% and average quartz content is 31.65%. Presence of excellent TOC content (4.8%–37.36%) with a predominance of type III organic matter and Tmax varying from 440 °C to 465 °C suggests a very good to excellent hydrocarbon generation potential in all the samples. The correlation between the TOC and VL was found to be positive indicating a positive influence of organic matter on methane sorption capacity of the studied samples. However, a lack of correlation between total clay and CH4-VL indicates that the role of clay minerals on methane sorption behavior of these shales are inconclusive. A positive correlation between CO2 micropore volume, CH4-VL and TOC suggest microporous nature of organic matter within the shale samples and their positive control on methane sorption potential. The negative correlation of clay mineral with CO2 micropore volume suggests a lack of microporosity in the clay minerals of the collected shale samples. It was also observed that thermally mature shale samples have higher micropore volume and surface area, and are prone to higher methane sorption capacity compared to that of less mature shales.Organic-rich shales have gained extreme importance in recent times because of their emergence as hydrocarbon reservoirs ( Gas in place (GIP) plays a vital role in the shale-gas resource assessment. GIP is controlled by organic/inorganic compositions and porosity and permeability properties of rock. Understanding the micropore structure in shale is of utmost importance as significant gas contents are present in the adsorbed state in shale micropores (  It has been reported by As per EIA reports of 2015 India has a total shale gas resource of 584 tcf with 96 tcf of recoverable resource. After the discovery of RNSG-1, the first shale gas well of India Barren Measure Shale with reported gas shows, along with D-A and D-B well of Cambay black shale with modest shale gas and oil production, it can be concluded that there exists a significant potential for shale gas resource development. Shale gas scenario in India is in a very nascent stage with very few reports in the public domain. Although few researchers have reviewed potential gas shale formations and characterized their source rock potential and methane sorption capacity, the relationship of the organic-inorganic matter with pore characteristics and methane sorption capacity is not clearly understood ( The Permian Barakar coal formations of the Damodar Valley basins in India have played a vital role in providing energy security to India ( Four shale samples of Permian age were collected from Damodar Valley coalfields. The sample locations are shown in After sample collection, they were crushed to different sizes for different analysis. To understand the presence of mineral phases, X-Ray diffraction study was done on the powdered samples. To know the hydrocarbon potential of shale samples, Rock-eval pyrolysis was done on a powdered sample of 72 mesh (−212 μm). The low-pressure N All of the collected samples were crushed to powder and screened through −212 microns sized mesh before carrying out the analyses. X-ray diffraction analysis of the crushed samples was done in IIT Kharagpur, using Bruker D8 Advance instrument with Cu target and lynxeye detector. The X-ray powder diffraction (XRPD) patterns were recorded for 2θ values in the range of 7–80° using Copper Kα radiation. The clay and non-clay minerals peaks were distinguished, using basal spacings ( The powdered shale samples (−212 μm) were weighed crucibles depending upon the organic matter content (∼50–70 mg). A Rock-Eval 6 instrument was used for the Rock-Eval pyrolysis and TOC analysis of the samples. Particulars on Rock-Eval have been discussed by several workers ( High-pressure CH To determine the void volume, the prepared sample is filled in the SC and the SC is closed by tightening the nuts. The RC is charged with helium keeping the valve 1 (between the RC and SC) closed. In the first step, helium is filled in the RC to a pressure of approximately 1 MPa and the pressure readings are noted at an interval of 30 min until equilibrium pressure is achieved. Once the pressure in the RC equilibrates, the valve 1 is opened. The pressure of the RC and SC is allowed to stabilize and the stable pressure is recorded. For the second step, the valve 1 is closed and the RC is again charged with helium to a higher pressure (approximately 1 MPa higher than the previous value). This procedure is repeated for 3 times. For each step, the void volume is calculated using the real gas law. The average value of the void volume obtained in three steps is considered as the void volume of the setup and subsequently used for methane adsorption calculation purpose. After completion of the helium steps, keeping the valve 1 closed, helium gas is vented out from the RC. The RC is repeatedly flushed with methane at low pressure and vented to the atmosphere. Flushing and venting of methane are at least 3 times to ensure that all the helium from RC is driven out. Then methane is charged into the RC to a pressure of approximately 1 MPa and the steps followed with helium are repeated with methane. Increasing pressure is charged to the RC in successive steps. At each pressure step, the volume of methane adsorbed is calculated using real gas law taking into account the compressibility factor of methane. The compressibility factor for pure methane was calculated from the Peng-Robinson equation of state ( The low-pressure gas adsorption (LPGA) method for estimation of pore volume, pore size distribution (PSD), and total surface area using isotherms is selected as a widely used technique for pore characterization ( Samples were crushed to <250 mm for low-pressure CO Where W is the weight of the sorbed gas at relative pressure P/P0, Wm is the weight of the monolayer adsorbent (N The total pore volume was calculated as the molar volume of adsorbed nitrogen at the relative pressure of 0.99. The N CO V is the volume of sorbed gas at equilibrium pressure (cm XRD analysis was done in order to identify and quantify different mineral phases and ultimately their controls on the pore size distribution. A wide range of mineral compositions was observed from the analysis and the mineral percentages for all the samples are given in Rock-eval pyrolysis was carried out to estimate the hydrocarbon potential of the samples and the results are shown in The organic richness of the samples is indicated by excellent TOC content ranging from 4.8 wt % - 30.91 wt % ( T HI vs T Low-pressure N BET surface areas and pore volumes, obtained from the N Low-pressure N The methane adsorption isotherms of shale samples are shown in In order to check the repeatability of the adsorption data, experiment for two of the shale samples (i.e. MOON and PB shale) were repeated ( The pore size versus differential pore volume graph was plotted in The methane Langmuir volumes were compared to the TOC of the studied sample. The correlation between the TOC and V The effect of clay minerals on methane sorption behavior was studied. As seen from The methane Langmuir volumes were correlated with the N The negative correlation of clay mineral with CO Source rock characteristics of shale depend upon quality, quantity and thermal maturity of the organic matter. An effort has been made to understand the effect of source rock parameters on sorption behavior. V High-pressure methane sorption analysis was performed on four shale samples from Damodar Valley basin considered as probable shale gas target reservoir for shale gas exploration in India. Similarly, pore structure analyses have been applied to these same four samples of Damodar valley basin of India. The source rock characteristics and mineralogical compositions have driven us to investigate the control of these parameters on microporosity and sorption capacity. The conclusions of the study are summarized below: A very good to excellent hydrocarbon generation potential is indicated by the studied shale samples with the presence of excellent TOC content, type III kerogen, and also the thermally mature nature of the shales. An excellent genetic potential is shown by all samples. The methane adsorption isotherms for the studied shale samples are following typical Langmuir (Type I) curve. Although shales are found to be richer in clay minerals (kaolinite, illite, and chlorite) than quartz, they play no role in methane sorption. The abundance of clays shows no correlation with methane sorption potential. TOC, V It is observed that in case of MOON, PB, WB, NKP shales CH The authors are extremely grateful to ECIL, NECL, and TISCO for providing samples for this work. The authors also wish to acknowledge important contributions by Dr. Devleena Mani of NGRI for her help in experimentation of Rock-Eval pyrolysis and Dr. Sujan Saha of CIMFR for his help in the experimentation of N