Rock phosphate (RP) alone or in combination with vermicomposts was incubated at room temperature in Aqualfs to reveal their effect on nutrient dynamics. Different types of organic wastes viz. cow dung, grasses, aquatic weeds and municipal solid wastes (MSW) were used for vermicompost preparation. Fresh cow dung is the cheapest and most commonly used bulk organic manure in India. So it was also applied as a treatment for comparative study between vermicompost and cow dung. Higher rate of P-mineralization was recorded in soil treated with RP as compared to other treatments. But after 60 days of incubation, available P content was declined in this soil, and finally it (14.36 mg kg−1) became statistically at par with available P-content of soils received vermicompost prepared from grass (13.66 mg kg−1) and cow dung (13.43 mg kg−1). Application of vermicompost in soil increased pH, organic carbon, mineralizable nitrogen and exchangeable potassium content in soil as compared to the application of RP alone. Clustering was done to identify the similar treatments using standard technique. We also proposed a bi-phasic model, which could explain the dynamics of phosphorus release in acid lateritic soils.Application of phosphatic fertilizers in soil converts phosphate into secondary insoluble compounds forming bonds with iron- or aluminum hydroxy- ions, which indicates the rate of P-release from fertilizer itself ( Increasing microbial activities in the soil could remarkably enhance the bioavailability of phosphorus in the soil ( So far, comparative study of RP and vermicompost as source of phosphorus-nutrient and effects of vermicompost on phosphorus release from both right soil and RP has not yet been studied. Soil type and quality of organic wastes added to soil may also influence the rate of mineralization of phosphorous ( A certain part of the entire dynamics can be explained by the exponential portion of the rate curve. This was explained by In this experiment, we used fresh cow dung and vermicomposts prepared from different organic wastes, viz., cow dung, grass ( This study was conducted to: 1) determine the effects of vermicompost application with or without RP on phosphorus release in acid lateritic soil, and 2) determine the optimum time of P availability using established model framework of periodic phosphorus release from vermicompost and RP on these soils. Acid lateritic soils (Aqualfs) sampled within 20 cm depth from the agricultural experiment farm of the Indian Statistical Institute at Giridih, Jharkhand, India were used in this study. These soils have acidic soil reaction (pH 5.4), loamy soil texture, and are composed of 4 g kg Vermicomposts were prepared from different organic wastes, viz. cow dung, grass ( Four different vermicomposts as described previously were incubated at the rate of 15 mg ha pH of samples (soil and organic wastes) was determined by glass electrode using sample-water suspension in the ratio 1:2.5. Water holding capacity was determined by Keen–Raczkowski method. Texture of the soil was determined by International Pipette method. Organic carbon was determined by the dichromate oxidation method. Mineralizable nitrogen of samples was determined by Kjeldahl apparatus in the KCl extract. Available phosphorous content of the samples were determined by molybdenum blue method after the extraction with NaHCO The inspiration of model formation came from the graphical study of the phosphorus release pattern for different treatments. The nature of phosphorus release varied in different treatments ( It is to be noted that when RP was applied to lateritic soil, primarily the rate of phosphorus release was not high and this “lag phase” continued up to a certain time period (7 days) ( So, the dynamics of phosphorus release due to different treatments exhibited complex growth curve, with multiple process occurring sequentially or simultaneously. The standard 3-parameter form of the logistic growth model describes only one period or “pulse” of growth curve. But the experimental results revealed a rapid exponential growth within a certain phase of incubation and thereafter it slowed down near the carrying capacity ( The system considered here is characterized by the multiple growth pulses. In the case of a system with multiple well-defined serial growth pulses, it is possible to split the time-series data set in multiple phases and model each set with a separate function. This method is limited because it is often unclear exactly where to split the data set. Cases appear rare where one process ends entirely before the second begins. Problems arise in assigning values from the “overlap” period to the first or second pulse. A superior alternative is to analyze systems that exhibit multi-phasic growth by using the time-series data to estimate the parameters of a model comprised of the sum of multiple growth pulses. Now in the incubation process a natural phosphorus release mechanism/dynamics without any interactions or hampering elements should have three phases such as “lag”, “log” and “stationary”. But the use of phosphorus for activating microbes in vermicompost and as well as for bond fixing mechanism added a “negative-feedback” on the phosphorus release dynamics. Let us define the former process indicating the natural phosphorus release by It is really reasonable to assume the natural phosphorus release process Here The simulated Depending on the composition of the soil The simplified model (2) should have a better chance of convergence with less number of parameters than the original model (1). So instead of taking a convex combination one may consider the resultant process by just adding the two processes Additionally, the model (1) (or (2)) has the following key features: At The curve has two points of inflexions. Data were subjected to analysis of variance (ANOVA) using SPSS 13.0 statistical package. Comparisons among treatments were done by least significant test ( Physico–chemical characteristics of soil, vermicomposts and cow dung manure are given in Incubation of vermicomposts after 90 days has changed the pH of acid lateritic soil (5.4) to neutral reaction (6.6–7.8) as shown in Organic carbon (OC) content in soils varied depending on the nature of applied vermicomposts ( Application of vermicompost and fresh cow dung significantly ( Application of vermicomposts and fresh cow dung significantly ( Vermicomposts increased (13–26%) the available phosphorus (P) content in soil after 90 days of incubation. Vermicompost obtained from cow dung resulted the highest P-content (13.66 mg kg Periodical analysis of available phosphorus (P) content revealed an initial decrease in P-content in soil up to 7 days of vermicompost incubation ( The simple scatter plot with line for phosphorus release on different days of incubation in application of 11 different treatment combinations clearly exhibited 4 distinct dynamics shown in second bracket “}” in  Now we have fitted our experimental data for each of the cluster separately except the control case. The observed data and expected curve are illustrated in Vermicompost, the earthworm-decomposed product rich in humic substrates ( Application of vermicompost in soil increased the rate of mineralization by enhancing the rate of carbon oxidation ( In lateritic soils where phosphorus (P) is limiting, the addition of vermicompost increased the available P content of soil through stimulation of microbial activity ( During vermicomposting, microbial decomposition of organic substrates produces several organic acids or ligands such as malonic, fumaric, succinic acids ( Both assimilation and mineralization of phosphorus are microorganism-mediated processes and application of vermicompost increases the rates of these two processes in soil ( Application of RP immediately increased the available P content of soil, but after six weeks it started to be retained by soil colloids through chemisorption. When vermicompost was added to the soil instead of RP, it had shown a steady increase in P content for nine to ten weeks. The C-to-P ratio rather than total P content of vermicompost governed the increase in P content of vermicompost treated soils. Vermicompost application was also beneficial in terms of increasing N and K content of soil. Combined application of vermicompost and RP was proved to be the best option for phosphorus fertilization. Clustering also suggested clubbing few of the treatments. We proposed a bi-phasic model to explain the dynamics of P release in lateritic soil and it has a global appeal to predict the P release pattern in other soil conditions.