The differentiation of adult stem cells is usually performed in vitro, by exposing them to specific factors. Alternatively, one can use nanocarriers containing such factors, to be internalized by the cells. In this work we have reduce the size of those carriers to the nanoscale, developing bioactive silica nanoparticles with diameters under 100 nm, containing calcium and phosphate ions (SiNPs-CaP). These ions, once released inside adult stem cells, induce bone cell proliferation and differentiation, and stimulate the expression of bone-related proteins in a single dose administration. The SiNPs-CaP nanomaterials were prepared through a sol-gel approach, and the ions added with a post-synthesis functionalization method. The synthesized SiNPs-CaP have narrow size distribution, good colloidal stability, and show high levels of ion incorporation. Furthermore, the SiNPs-CaP have good cytocompatibility and promote the osteogenic differentiation of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSC), with alkaline phosphatase, osteopontin and osteocalcin production levels comparable to the ones obtained in standard osteogenic medium. The novel bioactive SiNPs-CaP are synthesized in a simple and fast manner and show the ability to promote osteogenic differentiation after a single dose administration, independently from external osteogenic inducers, showing great potential as carriers in bone tissue engineering applications.A total of 2.2 million bone tissue graft transplants are currently performed every year [ Silica nanoparticles (SiNPs) are often used in nanomedicine applications due to their unique properties, such as large specific surface area, controllable particle size, versatile surface modification and good biocompatibility [ In this work our goal was to produce bioactive spherical SiNPs containing phosphate and calcium ions (SiNPs-CaP) with diameters under 100 nm, low size dispersity, and without calcination ( Tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS, 98%, Sigma-Aldrich), ammonium hydroxide solution (25% NH4OH, Fluka), absolute ethanol (99.9%, Scharlau), calcium hydroxide (≥95%, Ca(OH) SiNPs were synthesized by a modified Stöber method [ The SiNPs were dispersed in milli-Q water and the calcium and phosphate precursors were added directly in the dispersion in a concentration of 0.15 g L Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were obtained on a Hitachi transmission electron microscope (Model H-8100 with a LaB6 filament) with an accelerator voltage of 200 kV. One drop of the nanoparticles dispersion in ethanol was placed on a carbon grid and dried in air before observation. Coupled plasma emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) was used to quantify the calcium and phosphorus. For the quantification of incorporated ions, the silica network was deconstructed by dispersing the SiNPs in a solution of NaOH 0.5 M in an ultrasonic bath for 2 h. The pH was adjusted to 7.5 using HCl 0.5 M. The release studies were performed for 24 h and TRIS buffer was used as dispersion medium because it does not have any calcium or phosphate ions. In vitro bioactivity tests were carried out at 37 °C under orbital shaking (50 rpm) in simulated body fluid (SBF). The preparation of SBF followed the protocol described by Kokubo [ Human bone marrow stem cells (hBMSCs) were obtained from a commercial lineage acquired from ATCC. ARS staining was performed to confirm that the stem cells osteogenic differentiation potential occur when supplemented with osteogenic medium. hBMSCs were seeded with SiNPs/SiNPs-CaP in two independent experiments, each with three samples per condition and culture time. At passage 4–7 the bone marrow stem cells (hBMSCs) were seeded at a density of 2 × 10 Nanoparticles cellular uptake kinetics in hBMSCs were evaluated via fluorescence microscopy. Briefly, hMSCs were seeded in μ-Slide 8-well chambers (ibidi GmbH) overnight at a density of 3 × 10 The effect of the nanoparticles on the metabolic activity of hBMSCs was investigated through alamarBlue assay (Invitrogen). A solution was made of alamarBlue in culture medium in the proportion of 1:10, according to the manufacturer's instruction. The culture plates were incubated at 37 °C in 5% CO ALP activity was quantified by the specific conversion of p-Nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP, Sigma) into p-Nitrophenol (pNP). 1% Triton (Sigma) was added to the cells, which were after frozen at −80 °C. The samples were thawed and sonicated for 5 min to induce complete membrane lysis. 60 μL of buffer solution containing 2 mg mL OCN and OPN secretion from hBMSCs was determined via ELISA kit for human OCN/OPN according to the manufacturer's instructions. For this assay, culture medium from the ALP activity experiments at day 14 was collected and frozen at −20 °C. Then, OCN/OPN levels were quantified by UV–vis analysis at λ = 450 n and were expressed in ng mL For the imaging studies, hBMSCs were seeded at a density of 8 × 10 The data are presented as mean ± standard deviation. ANOVA statistical analysis was performed with post hoc Tukey's multiple comparisons tests, using GraphPad Prism v6.00 software (San Diego, USA). Statistical significance was defined at p < 0.05 for a 95% confidence interval. Silica nanoparticles (SiNPs) were functionalized with calcium and phosphate ions to induce osteogenic differentiation in stem cells, and avoid the need for seeding in osteogenic-complemented medium. In order to optimize the incorporation of the bioactive calcium and phosphate ions, two different approaches were used. In the first one, the ions were incorporated during the synthesis of the SiNPs, and in the second we used a post-synthesis modification process. The objective was to maximize the incorporation of the ions and their release performance, while controling the nanoparticles size and size dispersity. But more important, in both methods the calcination step was avoided so that these stategies can in future be used with other functionalization (biomolecules, tec.). Bare SiNPs (no modification) were used as blank to evaluate the effect of the ions in cell differentiation. Calcium-containing SiNPs-Ca were prepared by a modified Stöber method, using different calcium precursors: calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH) To incorporate phosphate ions in the SiNPs-P we followed similar strategies to those used for calcium. Two different precursors were used: triethylphosphate (TEP) and diammonium hydrogen phosphate (DHP). The TEM images ( The mass of calcium or phosphorus incorporated in each formulation was obtained by ICP-OES ( The optimized formulation of silica nanoparticles functionalized with calcium and phosphate (SiNPs-CaP) was tested for its ability to induce hydroxyapatite nucleation [ The bioactivity of the SiNPs-CaP was also confirmed by PXRD and FTIR studies. After the second week the SiNPs-CaP PXRD diffractograms are similar to those of crystalline hydroxyapatite ( Once the osteoconductive ability of SiNPs-CaP is confirmed, it is important to verify their cytocompatibility concerning the cells involved in the bone regeneration process. Human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSCs) are commonly chosen for this purpose because of their availability, easy isolation procedure and well established protocols for osteogenic differentiation [ To evaluate their cytocompatibility, SiNPs-CaP and SiNPs were delivered to hBMSCs in three different concentrations for a period of 21 days. The alamarBlue assay, used to assess the metabolic activity of the cells, showed no significant difference in the cells metabolism in presence of the nanoparticles. It is then safe to assume that both SiNPs and SiNPs-CaP do not affect the cells metabolism in any of the three concentrations tested (see The uptake of nanoparticles by hBMSCs was controlled by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) after 6 h and 24 h of administration ( The nanoparticles were added to hBMSCs dispersed in basal medium three days after seeding, in three different concentrations. Ca The bare SiNPs (control experiment) show ALP levels comparable to the basal media, showing no signs of early-stage differentiation ( To confirm the differentiation-inducing ability of the nanoparticles, the presence of both osteocalcin (OCN) and osteopontin (OPN) was evaluated by immunofluorescence after 14 and 21 days, and were quantified by ELISA. OCN is known to be involved in bone matrix formation and serves as a marker to evaluate osteogenic maturation and bone formation [ At day 14, the presence of SiNPs-CaP leads a significantly higher concentration of OCN and OPN than basal medium ( It is noteworthy that the SiNPs-CaP were administered as a single-dose in basal medium, while our positive control, the osteogenic medium, was changed every three days. In most studies with bioactive SiNPs, the particles are administered in osteoconductive media [ In summary, our finely tuned silica nanoparticles are modified with calcium and phosphate in a mild process, without major changes in size, shape and colloidal stability. The method reported here can be used as a versatile platform to modify silica-based materials, namely nanoparticles with different sizes and shapes, with high upload efficiency of bioactive ions. Clinically relevant MSCs were capable of uptaking our nanoparticles, and a single low dose administration could induce an osteogenic response supported by ALP peaking, as well as a production of osteocalcin and osteopontin similar to the one obtained for standard osteogenic medium. In this study several formulations of silica nanoparticles with calcium and phosphate ions were prepared to select the most suitable vehicle for bone regeneration though intracellular delivery. From the different calcium and phosphate precursors, and incorporation methods tested, we chose an optimized SiNPs-CaP formulation, with particles of 80 nm diameter incorporating calcium and phosphate ions. Using our novel modification method, the SiNPs-CaP maintained a narrow size distribution and good colloidal stability. Our nanoparticles exhibited full cell viability, and promoted osteogenic differentiation following a single delivery, in levels comparable to those of the standard method of repeated osteogenic supplementation. Contrarly to the standard studies performed with similar bioactive materials, our SiNPs-CaP were administered as a single-dose in basal medium, and tested against a positive control in osteogenic medium which is changed every three days. Therefore, we hypothesize that by using our SiNPs-CaP the differentiation of MSCs can happen after There are no conflicts to declare. This work was partially supported by