In this study twelve trace elements were investigated in herbal tea commercialized in Brazil. Boldo, Chamomile, Mate and Peppermint tea samples were acquired in Brazil local markets and both herbs and their infusions were evaluated. Trace elements were classified in two groups: poorly (Al, As, Ba, Cd, Cr, Fe, Pb and Se) and moderately (Cu, Mn, Ni and Zn) extractable. This patterned showed that even levels above threshold established by Brazilian and MERCOSUR regulations were observed in herbal tea (Cd and Pb in 89% and 78% of mate and peppermint tea samples, respectively), their infusions did not presented toxic levels. The estimative of exposure and dietary intake revealed important values for a daily consumption of a single cup of herbal infusion and an unique composition was also verified for herbal tea samples: although age and origin was unavailable, multivariate analysis classified the samples in four distinct groups.Tea ( Trace elements composition in herbal tea is highly related to the soil constitution, climate, plant ability to accumulate nutrients and environmental pollution [ In a previous study of our research group, a direct method was evaluated to determine trace elements in herbal tea infusions and soft drinks by ICP-MS. Low values were found for inorganic contaminants, such as arsenic (<0.46-7.73 μg L A study of micro and macroelements in several plants such as tea, coffee, mate, rooibos, honeybush and chamomile was reported by Malik et al. [ More recently, Gómez-Nieto et al. [ Although studies of mineral content in tea and medicinal herbs have been performed worldwide, to the best of our knowledge, few studies were reported in literature concerning trace elements levels in both herbal tea and their infusions. Thus, the main objectives of this study were to i) investigate the levels of twelve trace elements (Al, As, Ba, Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, Se, and Zn) in herbal tea and their extraction to their infusions; ii) estimate the daily intake of micronutrients and the dietary exposure to inorganic contaminants by daily consumption of one cup of herbal tea and iii) classify the herbal tea samples using multivariate analysis. Samples of boldo, chamomile, mate and peppermint tea were purchased in Brazil and trace elements levels were quantified by ICP-MS. Water and nitric acid were purified by reverse osmosis (Gehaka, São Paulo, Brazil, 18.2 MΩ cm) and sub-boiling distiller (Berghof, Eningen, Germany), respectively. Analytical curves were prepared using 1000 mg L Thirty-six samples of herbal tea were purchased from markets in southeastern Brazil: Boldo ( Trace elements Al, As, Ba, Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, Se, and Zn were determined using an ICP-MS (7700x, Agilent Technologies, Tokyo, Japan) operating with the follow conditions: RF power = 1550 W; Ar flow rate = 15 L min Isotopes Trace elements were determined in herbal tea infusions applying a direct method [ Trace elements were analyzed in herbal tea after closed microwave decomposition (Start D, Milestone, Sorisole, Italy) at 170 °C (maximum), for 32 min, using the procedure described in our previous work [ For quality control, sample analysis was performed in triplicate and blank experiments followed the same procedure used for herbal tea samples. Analytical methods were validated based on INMETRO recommendations [ Accuracy was verified using certified reference materials SRM 1547 Peach leaves (NIST, Maryland, USA) and INCT-TL-1 Tea leaves (Instytut Chemii i Techniki Jądrowej, Warszawa, Poland) and spiked experiments. Recoveries ranging from 77 to 118% and from 82 to 120% were verified for certified reference materials and spiked experiments, respectively. Both values were in agreement with AOAC [ Statistical one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey’s test were performed using XLSTAT software (Addinsoft, Paris, France). Principal component analysis (PCA) was executed using Pirouette software (Infometrix, Woodinville, WA, USA). The levels of Al, As, Ba, Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, Se, and Zn were determined in herbal tea samples and the values obtained are described in Despite the different visual appearance, according to the ANOVA and Tukey’s test results, trace elements levels were similar in boldo, chamomile and mate tea samples. Distinguish composition were verified for few elements, such as Ba, Mn and Zn. The highest levels of these elements were found in mate tea samples: 75.2, 1405 and 81 mg kg Few studies are reported in the literature concerning trace elements levels in herbs and herbal tea. In general, trace elements levels found in our study are in agreement with the study reported by Malik et al. [ Arpadjan et al. [ A study of mineral and trace elements in herbs consumed for medical purpose in Poland was reported by Pytlakowska et al. [ More recently, Borges et al. [ Concerning the inorganic contaminants, Brazilian and MERCOSUR regulations set maximum limits for arsenic (0.6 mg kg Multivariate analysis is an important tool to interpret analytical data. Principal components analysis (PCA) algorithm allows classifying samples based on chemical composition. In this study, data was organized in a matrix (36 × 12): lines and columns corresponding to the herbal tea samples and the trace elements, respectively. Auto escalated pre-processing was used and no samples were considered outliers. Two principal components can explain 79.3% of the total variance (Factor 1 = 40.6%; Factor 2 = 38.7%) and were chosen for further analysis. The first principal component (Factor 1) is related to the trace elements Al (0.4163), As (0.3556), Cu (0.3896), Fe (0.4305) and Pb (0.4052) whereas the second principal component (Factor 2) is related to Ba (0.4158), Cd (0.4351), Mn (0.4473), Ni (0.4190) and Zn (0.4403). The values in the parentheses correspond to the loading values. The results are presented in From Group 1 (Mate tea samples) associated with Ba, Cd, Mn and Zn levels (elements with high loading values in Factor 2); Group 2 (mainly Boldo tea samples) associated with low Ba, Cd, Mn and Zn levels (elements with low loading values in Factor 1); Group 3 (Chamomile tea samples) associated with As, Cr and Se levels (elements with loading values near to 0.3 in Factor 1); Group 4 (Peppermint tea samples) associated with Al, Cu, Fe, Pb levels (elements with high loading values in Factor 1) PCA classified correctly herbal tea samples, except for one chamomile tea sample which present similar chemical composition with boldo tea samples. These results are significant due to origin and age of herbal tea when harvested was not available. Herbal tea infusions were prepared brewing the herbal tea bags in the recommended proportion by manufacturers: 1 bag (ca. 1.5 g) for a 200 mL cup. The levels of Al, As, Ba, Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, Se, and Zn in herbal tea infusions and the percentage of extraction from the herbal tea to the infusions are presented in In general, trace elements levels in herbal infusions revealed low variation for boldo, chamomile and peppermint infusions, according to the ANOVA and Tukey’s test results. Nevertheless for Cd, Cu and Fe, a significant difference was observed: Cd in chamomile infusions reached 0.24 μg L Similarly to the herbal tea bags, few studies were dedicated to trace elements investigation in herbal tea infusions. In the study performed by Malik et al. [ Suliburska & Kaczmarek [ The difference between the levels found in our study and those reported in literature may due to different infusions processing habits such as the ratio and contact time between herbal tea and water [ Concerning the trace elements extraction from herbal tea bags to their infusions, the analytes can be classified considering the extraction percentage: poorly extractable (<20%), moderately extractable (22–55%) and highly extractable (>55%) [ Overall, the lowest extraction percentages were found in boldo infusions, being < 15% except for Cu and Ni, 28 and 46%, respectively. In contrast, in chamomile infusions were found the highest values for Cu and Ni, 50 and 81%, respectively. Mate infusions presented a distinctive pattern extraction for Al, Cd, Cr and Zn, according to ANOVA and Tukey’s test results, being the average extractions 4.0, 6.7, 8.3 and 12%, respectively. In peppermint infusions, all trace elements were quantifiable except As, Cd and Se and the highest value for Pb was found in these samples (19%). Several nutritional components have been reported to affect the element extraction from herbal and medicinal. Pinto [ The dietary intake and the estimative of exposure was performed considering a daily consumption of a cup of tea (200 mL) by a 70 kg adult (bw = body weight). This postulation agreed with the established in Camargo & Toledo study [ The estimative of inorganic contaminants exposure for a cup of tea consumption by a 70 kg adult were compared to the threshold values established by European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) and The World Health Organization (WHO). For Ni, the Tolerable Daily Intake (TDI) = 12 μg kg Overall, the estimative of inorganic contaminants exposure revealed safe levels. The highest levels were observed for mate tea infusions: the daily consumption of a cup of mate tea can reach 1.03% of PTMI for Cd, 1.67% of PTWI for Al, 2.27% of TDI for Ni and 0.09% BMDL The micronutrients daily intakes for a cup of tea consumption by a 70 kg adult were compared to the values established by U.S Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the Brazilian Health Regulatory Agency (ANVISA). FDA fixed the daily value (DV) based on a caloric intake of 2000 calories for Cr = 120 μg/100 g, Cu = 2 mg/100 g, Fe = 18 mg/100 g, Mn = 2 mg/100 g, Se = 70 μg/100 g, Zn = 15 mg/100 g [ Low contributions were observed for daily intake of Fe, Se and Zn, being below 0.24% DRI and 0.11% DV. For Cu and Cr, the highest contributions were observed for chamomile and mate infusions, ranging between 0.20 - 0.43% and 0.19 - 0.66%, respectively. Mate infusions were verified to be an outstanding manganese source: 15.9% of the DV and 18.3% of the DRI can be reached by the daily consumption of a single cup of herbal tea. A study of twelve trace elements in herbal tea and their infusions was performed using ICP-MS. Even though the information about the age and the origin was not available, principal component analysis (PCA) allowed to classify the herbal tea in four groups, considering similarities of their trace elements composition. Although inorganic contaminants Cd and Pb were found above the maximum limits set by Brazilian and MERCOSUR regulations in some herbal tea samples, the results demonstrated that the infusion procedure provides low trace elements extraction from the herbal tea. The estimative of inorganic contaminants (Al, As, Ba, Cd, Ni and Pb) exposure revealed safe levels. For micronutrients, low contributions (< 0.24%) were observed to the daily intake of Fe, Se and Zn, while Cu and Cr highest contributions were observed in chamomile and mate infusions, reaching 0.43% and 0.66%, respectively. Mate infusions were verified to be a outstanding manganese source: 16% of the daily value can be reached by the daily consumption of a cup of herbal tea by an adult. The authors declare no conflict of interest. This work was funding by the