Objective
                  To review the functional outcome of patients with complex tibial plateau fractures treated with fine-wire fixation.
               
                  Design
                  Retrospective review with follow-up of patients in outpatient clinic.
               
                  Setting
                  Tertiary trauma center.
               
                  Patients
                  All patients who had fine-wire fixation for tibial plateau fractures between 1996 and January 2001 were reviewed.
               
                  Interventions
                  Fine-wire fixation with/without limited internal fixation for complex tibial plateau fractures.
               
                  Main outcome measures
                  Knee range of motion, adequacy of articular surface reduction, mechanical axis, Knee Society Clinical Rating Scale and Short-Form 36 Health Questionnaire.
               
                  Results
                  Eighteen of twenty-one eligible patients were available for follow-up. There were 14 Shatzker VI and 4 V fractures. Seven fractures were open. Average follow-up was 28.2 months. All fractures united. There were three cases of delayed union, all progressed to union following additional procedures and bone grafting. There were no cases of osteomyelitis, septic arthritis or deep vein thrombosis. Seven patients had Knee Society Clinical Rating Scores of good/excellent (38.9%), and 11 had fair/poor scores (61.1%). Abnormal mechanical axes and multiple co-morbid injuries were associated with poorer outcomes. Although SF-36 scores were lower in the study group compared to matched population norms, 15 of 18 patients had full or partial return to pre-injury levels of functioning.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Fine-wire fixation with limited internal fixation is a satisfactory method of managing complex high-energy fractures of the tibial plateau where soft tissue injury and bony comminution make traditional techniques of open reduction and internal fixation unsuitable.Tibial plateau fractures are injuries with potentially devastating consequences. Management, especially that of high-energy, complex tibial plateau fractures (Schatzker V and VI), continues to pose a challenge to the orthopaedic surgeon. These injuries are characterised by significant articular depression; severe fracture comminution and displacement; significant associated injury to the soft tissue envelope of the proximal tibia; and in Schatzker VI fractures, dissociation of the tibial metaphysis from the diaphysis. The aims of treatment are anatomical reduction and stabilisation of the articular surface, restoration and maintenance of the mechanical axis of the leg, preservation of the soft tissue envelope of the proximal tibia, followed by restoration of a functional range of motion. A universally accepted mode of treatment for complex high-energy tibial plateau fractures remains controversial, with many authors reporting high complication rates and less than satisfactory outcomes. The purpose of this study is to review our experience with the use of tensioned fine-wire fixation for complex (Schatzker V and VI) tibial plateau fractures; and to assess patient satisfaction using generic and disease specific outcome instruments. Patient records from 1996 to January 2001 were reviewed. Twenty-one patients with complex tibial plateau fractures were treated with the tensioned fine-wire fixator. In general, the indications for using the fine-wire fixator were severe fracture comminution or significant open injury to the tibia where traditional methods of open reduction and internal fixation were deemed unsuitable. Patients were excluded if the fine-wire fixator was applied more than 14 days after injury. Patient case histories were reviewed to determine patient demographics, mechanism and nature of the injuries, operative procedures and complications. Initial trauma radiographs (plain films and/or CT's if available) were evaluated and the tibial plateau fractures were classified according to Schaztker's classification. Of these 21 patients, one died of her injuries, and two others could not be contacted for follow-up. The remaining 18 patients (85.7%) were reviewed ( Motorcycle accidents were the cause of injury in seven patients, three were the result of motor-car accidents, three were pedestrians struck by motor vehicles, three resulted from falls, one fell off a bicycle, and one fracture was sustained in a skiing accident. The average follow-up period was 28.2 months, with a range between 11.5 and 65.75 months. There were seven open fractures and these were classified according to Gustilo–Anderson classification. A total of six patients had preliminary management of their tibial fractures before the fine wire frame were applied. In four patients, a conventional half-pin external fixator was used for temporary stabilisation of the fracture. Another patient had a near complete dislocation of the knee joint and this was initially stabilised with two Steinman pins placed longitudinally through the joint. One patient had initial internal fixation in a peripheral hospital. This was deemed inadequate and he was referred to our institution for further management with the fine-wire fixator. All of these were eventually revised to fine-wire external fixators for definitive management. Of the 18 patients, 8 suffered significant associated musculo-skeletal and other injuries. These included femoral shaft, tibial plafond, Lisfranc and pelvic fractures. Three patients had meniscal tears, two of which were repaired acutely, and the third debrided. One patient also had a rupture of the medial collateral ligament, which was repaired. The fine-wire fixators were applied by one of three senior orthopaedic surgeons (ME, EE, RM). The Ilizarov (Smith and Nephew, Memphis, TN, USA) or Ace-Fischer (Depuy Ace, Warsaw, IN, USA) systems were used. These were generally two or three ring or half-ring constructs with tensioned fine-wires used at the tibial plateau, and Schanz pins or fine-wires distally. Three patients had the frame extended above the knee joint for ipsilateral femoral distal shaft or condylar fractures. The above knee rings were removed between 4 and 12 weeks post surgery. All but two patients had associated limited open reduction or percutaneous fixation with cannulated screws or Kirshner wires at the time of frame application. In two patients, this was arthroscopically assisted. Three patients also had associated bone grafting. Postoperatively, patients received 24–72 In order to prevent inter-observer variability, all radiographs were reviewed by one of the authors (DB) to determine adequacy of reduction. Joint line depression was measured as the vertical distance from a line drawn from the opposite remaining plateau to the point of maximum depression. When both plateaus were fractured, a line was drawn through the level of the femoral condyles, and a line parallel to this was drawn through the base of the tibial spines. Joint line depression was then determined from the point of maximum depression of both plateaus to this line. Reduction was judged to be anatomical if there was articular surface depression of less than or equal to four mm, and plateau widening of less than or equal to five mm compared with the width of the ipsilateral distal femoral condyles. At final follow-up, patients were asked to attend an outpatient clinic where the Knee Society Clinical Rating Score and the Short Form-36 (SF-36) general health survey were administered. The Knee Society Clinical Rating Score has separate scores for knee function and pain, with a maximum of 100 points for each category. All analysis was performed using SAS version 8.2 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA), and Epicalc 2000 version 1.0 (Brixton Books 1997). Statistical analysis was conducted using Wilcoxon rank-sum tests, Spearman correlation coefficients and Student's Union was deemed to have occurred when patients had their fine-wire fixators removed and were allowed to fully weight bear without external supports. Fifteen of 18 patients went on to union without additional operative procedures. Average time to union for this group was 14 weeks (range 11–22 weeks). Three required additional procedures for delayed union ( Immediate post fine-wire fixation plain radiographs showed 14 anatomical and four non-anatomical reductions. Of the former group, 13 reductions remained anatomical at final follow-up, with one having lost position. Of the latter group, all remained non-anatomical at final follow-up. At final follow-up, the mechanical axis of the affected lower limb was normal in eight patients (range 2° varus to 3° valgus), five in varus (range 3°–12°) and five in valgus (range 5°–10°). Average range of motion of the affected knee was 103° (range 25°–135°). The average Knee Society Clinical Rating Score was 65.9. There were six excellent scores, 1 good, 3 fair and 8 poor ( Normal mechanical axis of the lower limb at final follow-up was strongly associated with better Knee Rating scores, with 80% of those with abnormal mechanical axis having scores fair or poor (Wilcoxon test, A significant correlation was found between the number of co-morbid injuries and poorer Knee Rating scores (Spearman's Advanced age together with polytrauma was associated with poor knee rating scores in two patients (patients 9 and 13). Patient 9 was a 68-year-old man with a Gustillo I Shatzker VI fracture associated with a contra-lateral tibial shaft fracture which was treated with plaster immobilisation and non-weight bearing. He had a final rating score of 38. Despite this he has returned to work as a restaurateur. In the case of patient 13, a poor outcome was also attributed to compromised pre-morbid status and prolonged immobilisation. He was a 64-year-old man who had severe pre-existing osteoarthritis of both knees with significant genu-varus deformities. He suffered ipsilateral distal and inter-condylar femoral shaft fractures, sacral and T12 fractures and had a prolonged stay in the intensive care unit with pneumonia and sepsis. He was treated with a hybrid fixator, which spanned the knee joint. This was reduced to below the knee at 12 weeks. The tibial fracture went on to union at 18 weeks, however, he had a poor outcome with a knee rating score of 21.5. He presently mobilises in a wheel chair. Fine wire pin-site infections occurred in 12 patients but all settled with oral and/or intravenous antibiotics. Patient 9 required replacement of a distal Schanz pin for infection. Patient 15 required replacement of a fine-wire because it was partially occluding a vascular graft. He also required revision of the vascular graft. There were no cases of wound infection, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis or deep-venous thrombosis associated with the fine-wire fixator. Fine wire readjustments to correct angular deformities were performed in four patients. Two patients with common peroneal nerve palsy had resolution of their neuropraxia after several months. Evaluation of the SF-36 scores showed that scores in our sample were significantly lower in all categories except mental health when compared to weighted means derived from age and sex-matched values for Australian population norms ( At the time of follow-up, seven patients were able to return to pre-injury levels of activity, 8 partially returning and the remaining three not able to do so. Fractures of the tibial plateau represent a wide spectrum of injury for which no single treatment modality can apply. Most authors agree that where possible, open reduction and internal fixation is preferred, as this is the best method of restoring anatomy and commencing early range of motion rehabilitation. Thirty-five percent of Schatzker VI tibial plateau fractures are open, and 86% have associated significant soft tissue injuries. In this series, there were no cases of wound infection or dehiscence, osteomyelitis or septic arthritis associated with the fine-wire fixator or the incision for the limited internal fixation. One distal Schanz pin was replaced for infection. This compares favourably with other studies using fine-wire fixation, which report deep infection rates of up to 17%. The use of the fine-wire fixator, coupled with limited internal fixation techniques, minimises iatrogenic soft tissue injury. The thin transfixing wires are minimally traumatic to soft tissue. The small diameter of the fine-wires provide stable fixation of comminuted fragments. Use of olive wires permit compression of fracture fragments. In the case of Schatzker VI fractures, the limited open reduction and internal fixation restores and stabilises the tibial plateau, whilst the fine-wire fixation distally addresses the problem of meta-diaphyseal dissociation. Our patient sample achieved an average Knee Society Clinical Rating Score of 65.9. Poor outcomes were attributed to the presence of concomitant multiple injuries and abnormal mechanical axis of the lower limb. Open fractures were also associated with poorer outcomes although this was not statistically significant. Kumar and Whittle in a review of 54 Shatzker VI fractures managed with the circular fine-wire frame found an average Knee Society Clinical Rating Score of 69.5 (average knee pain score of 76 and average knee function score of 63). There was no association between the reduction of the articular surface and the final knee rating. Others have noted better scores with anatomical reduction of the articular surface and fractures with lesser degrees of comminution. The importance of restoring the mechanical axis is emphasised in our series with a strong association found between normal mechanical axis and final knee rating. In contrast to traditional ORIF, the fine-wire system allows correction of axial malalignment in small increments and in a continuous or repeated fashion. Most authorities agree that the restoration of the correct mechanical axis of the lower limb is a critical factor in the long term function and prevention of osteoarthritis of the knee. All efforts should be made where possible to obtain and maintain anatomical joint congruity and mechanical axis in managing these fractures. However, in the light of evidence which suggests the knee joint has some potential to accommodate for some degree of joint surface depression, one might be willing to accept a degree of residual joint incongruity rather than risk a prolonged procedure with an extensile incision through compromised tissue, giving priority instead to correcting the mechanical axis with the fine-wire frame. Although most authors advocate the use of open reduction and internal fixation of tibial plateau fractures where possible, the use of the fine-wire fixator is an acceptable alternative for high-energy complex tibial plateau fractures, with low serious infection and soft tissue complication rates. This study evaluates our institution's experience with the use of the fine-wire fixator for high energy Schatzker V and VI tibial plateau fractures. There were no cases of deep infection or deep-venous thrombosis. Pin-site infection was common but was easily treated. The follow-up Knee Society Clinical Rating Scores were comparable to other studies. Poorer outcomes were attributed to the presence of multiple co-morbid injuries, abnormal mechanical axes of the lower limb, open fractures and poor pre-morbid factors. The importance of mechanical axis restoration is emphasised. Eighty-three percent of patients in the study had full or partial return to pre-injury levels of functioning. Although technically demanding, the fine-wire fixator is an acceptable treatment for tibial plateau fractures where severe fracture comminution or soft tissue factors make traditional techniques of open reduction and internal fixation unsuitable. We wish to thank Ms. Helen Donaldson for help with the data processing.