Blends of an amorphous polylactide (PLA) with 25 wt% poly[(butylene adipate)-co-terephthalate] (PBAT) containing 1 and 5 wt% Cloisite 30B (C30B) nanoclay were prepared using an internal batch mixer. Three mixing strategies were used: (S1) direct mixing of all three components, (S2) mixing C30B and PLA followed by mixing with PBAT, and (S3) mixing C30B and PBAT followed by mixing with PLA. X-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmission and scanning electron microscopy (TEM and SEM) were used to study the C30B dispersion and the blend morphology. Small amplitude oscillatory shear (SAOS) and stress growth tests were also conducted to investigate the nanocomposites and blend rheological properties and morphological stability under shear flow. With 1 wt% C30B, the nanoparticles were located at the PLA-PBAT interface for all mixing routes, which was favorable for morphology stabilization. The average PBAT droplet-diameter was reduced from 1.30 μm for the neat PLA-PBAT blend to 0.75, 0.85, and 0.70 μm for blend nanocomposites depending on the mixing strategy used. Under shearing at 0.01 s−1, droplet coalescence did not occur due to the presence of C30B at the interface of the polymer phases. On the other hand, in blends containing 5 wt% C30B, the location of the nanoparticles and the occurrence of coalescence depended on the mixing strategy used.Immiscible polymer blends are used to modify and improve the properties of the polymer matrix. For instance, the use of a ductile or elastomeric polymer as the minor dispersed phase could significantly improve the toughness and ductility of a brittle polymer Regardless of the droplet size and its uniformity, the stability of the blend morphology is one of the most challenging concerns during reprocessing of products. In this context, droplet coalescence and/or breakup could change the final properties of immiscible polymer blends and might lead to unsatisfactory final properties One interesting approach to control the morphology of polymer blends with emulsion type microstructure, while improving the properties of the blend, is the incorporation of nanoparticles In this study, polylactide (PLA)-based multiphase bioblends were prepared using PLA as the matrix, poly[(butylene adipate)- A commercial amorphous linear PLA, Ingeo 4060D (NatureWorks LLC, USA) with a The resins and C30B were first dried in a vacuum oven overnight at 55 °C. The nanocomposites of PLA/C30B and PBAT/C30B were first prepared at three C30B concentrations (1, 3, and 5 wt%). The compounding was conducted using an internal batch mixer, DDRV501 Brabender (C. W. Brabender Instruments, Inc., NJ, USA) under a nitrogen atmosphere for 12 min at 160 °C at 100 rpm. For sake of comparison, neat polymers (unfilled) and blend consisting of 75 wt% of PLA and 25 wt% of PBAT were also prepared. Blend nanocomposites were then prepared containing 1 and 5 wt% C30B based on the total weight. This was performed while keeping the PBAT concentration fixed at 25 wt% but varying the PLA content to achieve the given C30B concentrations. Hence for the blend nanocomposites containing 1 and 5 wt% C30B, the final PLA contents were adjusted to 74 and 70 wt%, respectively. Three different strategies were employed for preparing the nanocomposites: (S1) direct mixing of all three components simultaneously (12 min), (S2) mixing C30B and PLA (6 min) followed by mixing with PBAT (6 min), and (S3) mixing C30B and PBAT (6 min) followed by mixing with PLA (6 min). In S2 and S3, during the first step, the neat polymers were initially processed separately for 6 min in order to maintain the same thermal-mechanical history as the base polymers (12 min of mixing) for all samples. In the blend nanocomposites containing 1 and 5 wt% C30B prepared through S2, the initial concentrations of C30B in PLA were 1.3 and 6.7 wt%, and for S3, the concentrations in PBAT were 3.8 and 16.7 wt%, respectively. Right after melt compounding, the samples were quenched in liquid nitrogen and, subsequently, the samples were dried overnight in a vacuum oven at 55 °C. The samples were then molded using a hydraulic press at 160 °C for 10 min, under a nitrogen atmosphere, to make disk-shape rheological specimens, which were also used for morphological analysis. The molded disks were 25 mm in diameter and 1.5 mm in thickness. Samples were first heated for 4 min, then, pressure forces of 1, 2, and 3 tons were progressively applied for 2 min each. The samples were finally cooled to ambient temperature under atmospheric pressure. The geometric-mean equation was used To analyze the C30Bs dispersion, a wide-angle X-ray diffractometer (WAXD) [D8 Discover, Bruker AXS, (Madison, WI)] was used with a high power, line-focus Cu-Kα-source in combination with a solid-state Kevex detector. The generator was operated at 40 kV/40 mA and the nanocomposites were scanned within the range of 1 to 10° (2θ) at 0.015°/s. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) [JEOL JEM-2100F (Tokyo, Japan) operating at 200 kV] was also utilized to monitor the dispersion of C30Bs in the polymers and blend systems. The morphology of the neat PLA-PBAT blends (before and after shearing) was also examined using a field-emission gun scanning electron microscope, SEM (JEOL 7600F FEG, Japan). After rheological testing, the blend and nanocomposite systems were gradually cooled at about 4 °C/min. This slow cooling rate could provide sufficient time for droplet shape relaxation after shearing, although for blend nanocomposites loaded with large content of C30B, the PBAT droplet relaxation time might be longer than this cooling period. The samples were then removed from the rheometer for TEM and SEM analysis. All specimens were cut across the thickness using an ultra-microtome equipped with a diamond-knife. For all cases, the morphology was analyzed in a plane parallel to the flow direction at a fixed location of the disk samples (2/3 of the radius from the center) to avoid problems related to non-uniform shear in the parallel-plate flow geometry. The volume-average radius ( Rheological measurements were conducted at 160 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere using an MCR-301 rotational rheometer (Anton Paar, Austria) equipped with a parallel-plate flow geometry with a diameter of 25 mm and a gap of 1.3 mm. Due to the sensitivity of the given polymers to thermal degradation, the thermal stability of the neat polymers and their nanocomposites was first examined using time sweep tests. These experiments were also conducted at 160 °C using a strain amplitude of 0.05 and frequency of 0.1 rad/s. Small amplitude oscillatory shear (SAOS) tests were performed from high to low frequencies using a strain amplitude of 0.05, within the linear viscoelastic regime. Stress-growth experiments were carried out at 0.01 s In this section, the interfacial tensions between the PLA/PBAT/C30B components were calculated using the geometric-mean equation (Eq. Using the interfacial tension obtained via the Palierne model the wetting coefficient (ω      In In blend nanocomposites with 5 wt% C30B ( For the three differently prepared batches, C30B was located, respectively: (S1) in the PLA matrix and at the PLA-PBAT interfaces, (S2) in the PLA matrix and slightly at the PLA-PBAT interface, and (S3) at the PLA-PBAT interfaces. In S1 it seems that the excess C30B, that could not be located at the interface of PLA and PBAT, settled within the PLA matrix. On the other hand, in S2, although 6.7 wt% of C30B in PLA migrates to the interface, the majority of the clay particles are dispersed within PLA. At this high clay loading associated with increased viscoelastic properties, the migration of C30B particles during melt mixing could be hindered and, hence, the clay particles might have hardly migrated from one phase to another. Therefore, the localization of C30B at the interface of the polymer phases was not as effective. Moreover, in S3, with 16.7 wt% of C30B loading in PBAT, PBAT showed no tendency to hold the clay particles, which migrated and concentrated at the interface, explaining the smaller PBAT droplet size (larger interfacial area). We also need to mention that the PBAT droplets were shape-relaxed (via slow cooling) before TEM analysis. However, it is observed in the TEM images that the PBAT droplets were not uniform spherical droplets, specifically for the cases of the 5 wt% C30B nanocomposites. This could be due to the effect of the nanoparticles at the interface that prolonged shape relaxation of the droplets   For the neat PLA-PBAT blend sheared at a rate of 0.01 s    The effects of shearing on complex viscosity (ƞ*) and storage modulus of the neat blend and blend nanocomposites containing 1 and 5 wt% C30B was also investigated (not shown in this article). Low-frequency ƞ* drops were observed for the neat PLA-PBAT blend and PLA-PBAT-5 wt% C30B. For the neat blend the viscosity drops were due to the severe droplet coalescence and somewhat to the PLA degradation In this study, the effects of nanoclay (C30B) content and its localization on the morphological and rheological properties of PLA-PBAT-C30B blend nanocomposites as well as on their morphological stability under shear flow were explored. For this purpose, to investigate the localization of C30B in the blend, three different processing strategies were applied. In most cases, it was shown that the C30B tended to be localized at the interface between the PLA matrix and PBAT dispersed phases, which was favorable to stabilize the blend morphology under shear flow. The aligned clay nanoparticles at the interface could act as a droplet coalescence barrier. The results showed that applying a shear rate of 0.01 s Financial support from