A linear annealing method for silicon wafer direct bonding was developed and applied for silicon-on-insulator (SOI) substrate fabrication. The new annealing method was similar to a conventional zone-melting system, except with no additional lower heating modules. The bonded interface, observed using an infrared camera and a transmission electron microscope, showed no gaseous defects. The bonding strength was high enough to separate the thermal oxide layer from the Si wafer surface, which was observed through the tensile test. The bond strength increased with increasing annealing temperature. The new annealing method was thought to be more effective compared with the conventional furnace annealing, as it offered low temperature and fast processing time without the decrease of bond strength.Silicon wafer bonding (SDB) is a leading technology for developing power devices The SOI structure can be created by direct bonding of two Si wafers, with an oxide layer grown or deposited on one or both wafer surfaces. Two silicon wafers are placed with their mirror surfaces in contact at room temperature and annealed to achieve high bond strength at the interface We proposed a new annealing method The linear annealing equipment consisted of a halogen lamp, a light reflector around the lamp, and a movement system for the heat source, as shown in The direct bonding of Si to SiO The wafers were cleaned with general sulfuric peroxide mixture (SPM, H Bond strength was measured by the razor-blade crack-opening method Two different tensile tests were employed, according to the specimen size. Some wafers were cross-cut into four similar fan-shaped fractions. Large tensile holders, matched for the dimensions of the specimens, were prepared. Tensile tests with large specimens aimed to break apart the bonded wafers and to macroscopically investigate the separated interfaces. Tensile tests with small specimens aimed to quantitatively measure the fracture strength of bonded wafer pairs. Rectangular specimens of 15×15 mm  The first tensile test results are shown in The second tensile test was aimed at measuring the fracture strength, which is shown in Tong and Gösele A new linear annealing method for silicon direct bonding was developed and applied to SOI structure formation. From the results observed, we confirmed that no gaseous defects, such as bubbles or voids, were trapped at the interface, even though the annealing temperature was far below that of conventional methods. The bond strength, measured by the razor-blade crack-opening method and two types of tensile tests, showed that our new annealing method derived bonds strong enough to separate the thermal oxide layer from the Si surface, and the bond strength increased with increasing annealing temperature. This linear annealing method could be applicable for silicon direct bonding at low temperature.