The extraction of cadmium from phosphoric media has been studied. The D2EHDTPA was used as extractant and dodecane as diluent. No third phase was observed in the investigated conditions.
                  A continuous micro-pilot scale mixer-settler was successfully tested for both extraction and stripping. More than 99% extraction rate was obtained in steady-state conditions with a flow rate ratio Aqueous/Organic equal to 1.1. Continuous stripping was performed using HCl 4 M. More than 96% of the cadmium was stripped in one continuous mixer-settler stage for flow rate ratio equal to 0.7. Results were in good agreement with the predicted values based on the McCabe–Thiele method. Experimental mixer-settler stages behave as ideal ones (Murphree efficiency >98%).
                  An optimal flow sheet is proposed to purify the Wet Phosphoric Acid (WPA) and to recover a relatively concentrated cadmium solution (1 g L−1). Two ideal stages operating at phase ratio A/S equal to 5/1 are required for the extraction step leading to a very depleted raffinate (<0.2 µg L−1). For the stripping step, six stages are required (S/A=5/1). The recovered organic phase contains less than 2 µg L−1 and could be recycled in the extraction step.The purification of phosphoric acid has been the aim of many industries due to its application in many fields especially in agriculture as fertilizer and food industries as additive and so due to constraining purity regulations ( The synthesis of phosphoric acid by wet process where the phosphates are solubilized by mineral acids, often gives a contaminated product with several heavy metals ( This article deals with the extraction of cadmium from wet phosphoric-acid (WPA) by a mixer-settler extraction stripping process using the di(2-ethylhexyl)dithiophosphoric acid D Cadmium extraction with D Many other studies have developed processes for the purification of phosphoric acid solution, several patents treated the extraction of cadmium and other metals with D The extraction of cadmium from phosphoric acid has been also the subject of numerous studies (  Our study deals with the extraction of cadmium from phosphoric acid solution (4.5 M) with 0.02 M D The feasibility of a mixer-settler pilot plant operation was tested separately in extraction and stripping applications. The di(2-ethylhexyl)dithiophosphoric acid (D Initial solutions of cadmium (4.5 mol L The organic solution contained 0.02 mol L For the stripping study, an organic phase loaded with approximately 0.1 g L The continuous experiments were performed in a mixer-settler system. Both the mixer and the settler have a volume of 0.25 L. The supply of the aqueous feed and the organic phase was supported by pumps. The two phases were stirred in the mixer with an Eurostar digital agitator (IKA-Labortechnik, 50–2000 rpm) with a speed adjusted at 850 rpm, a rather high speed which ensures a perfect agitation of the mixture. The transport of the mixture into the settler and the run off of the organic phase from the settler were performed via gravity. The evacuation of the aqueous phase from the settler was realised with a siphon. One stage of mixer-settler reactor was used in both extraction and stripping studies. Atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Hitachi Z-2300 Polarized Zeeman) was used to determine the cadmium content in both phases. The cadmium content in the organic phase was measured after stripping the metal into HCl 4 M. The mass balance for the metal was always fulfilled in the extraction/stripped procedure within 2.3 and 1.6% respectively. Preliminary batch experiments showed that di(2-ethylhexly)dithio-phosphoric acid, namely D According to These authors show evidence of a cationic exchange type mechanism involving CdR Hence, in the present study, for the investigated phosphoric acid concentration, (i.e. 4.5 M), the cadmium distribution coefficient is given by: the distribution coefficient is defined as: the free extractant molar concentration is: the experimental value of the extraction equilibrium constant, As illustrated in the Hydrochloric acid solutions alone or mixed with sodium chloride was found to be quite efficient for the cadmium stripping of loaded D The predicted stripped complex in chloride media is CdCl The equilibrium constant was deduced: The experimental value of stripping equilibrium constant The validation of the model Eq. Good agreement is proved between experiment and modelisation of Eq. The evolution of the outlet Cd (II) concentrations either in aqueous (raffinate) or organic (extract) phase with time showed that the steady-state conditions were reached in about 2 h ( Under steady-state conditions, the measured outlet parameters were presented in It is worth to notice that the material balance is verified with excellent accuracy (average deviation of 2.3%). The extraction performances are defined as: The prediction's values of the cadmium concentrations As As it can be deduced, the experimental mixer-settler behaves as a theoretical stage. The Murphree efficiency is nearly 100%. Good agreement is then proved between experiment and modelling. The evolution of the outlet concentrations in both aqueous and organic phases is illustrated in Under steady-state conditions, the measured outlet parameters were presented in It is worth to notice that the material balance is verified with excellent accuracy (average deviation: 1.6%). The stripping performances are: The same procedure than for extraction was adopted to calculate As, the distribution coefficient Furthermore, to achieve higher degree of stripping, a counter-current multi-stage operation would be required. Calculations for the same conditions (i.e., same Hence, the feasibility of a viable continuous process was proved for both extraction and stripping steps. High depletion of the phosphoric acid is achieved with 2 ideal extraction stages and 4 ideal stripping stages under the same operating conditions. Experimental mixer-settler stages behave as ideal ones (Murphree efficiency > However, the concentration of the removed Cadmium (II) ions in the stripping solution was not high enough for further processing. Higher flow rate ratios should be investigated. The same procedure than that described in Two ideal stages were sufficient to achieve a depletion factor DF equal to 2.7 10 The operating conditions were the same except the feed aqueous concentration The same procedure than that described in As it can be deduced, six ideal stages were required to achieve a depletion factor DF equal to 1.2 10 In order to purify the WPA and recover a relatively concentrated cadmium solution (1 g/L), the following flow sheet is proposed operating with phase ratio The performances reached are so interesting and industrial promising in comparison to other studies. Indeed, Stenström et al. (1998) have used a relatively high amine concentration (0.05 M) to extract cadmium from phosphoric acid. They have noted that the amine have to be preequilibrated because of its ability to extract the acid, which increase consequently the stages number. The elimination of cadmium from phosphoric acid media has been performed by liquid extraction. The batch experiments permit to identify extractant-stripping reagents for cadmium. Further: the D The test of a viable continuous extraction/stripping process was successfully tested at micro-pilot scale in our laboratory using mixer-settler technology. Thus, one continuous mixer-settler, operating at a flow rate ratio of about 1/1 (mean residence time approximately 10 min), led to excellent performances: 99.1% for extraction and 96.4% for stripping. In order to achieve a nearly complete purification of WPA, a flow-sheet for a counter-current multistage process including two extraction ideal stages and six stripping ones was then proposed. Quite pure outputs (less than 2 µg L M. Touati wishes to thank the “Institut Français de Coopération” in Tunisia for financial support.