A new cloud point extraction method for the preconcentration of ultra-trace gold as a prior step to its determination by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) has been developed. The method is based on the cloud point extraction (CPE) of gold in the non-ionic surfactant Triton X-114 without a chelating agent. The parameters of CPE were investigated in detail. At optimum conditions, the linear range of 5.0–200.0ngL−1 of Au(III) and the detection limits of 1.1ngL−1 for Au(III) along with enrichment factors of 7.5, were obtained. The proposed method was applied to determination of ultra-trace amounts of gold in water samples with satisfactory results.Gold is an important precious metal and it is widely used in industry and economics. Several analytical techniques such as UV–Vis ( The concentration of gold in environmental, geological and metallurgical materials is usually too low to be directly determined owing to insufficient sensitivity and matrix interferences. Various preconcentration procedures had been adoptable in combination with the above mentioned techniques. These include solvent extraction ( Cloud point extraction of gold, O,O-diethyl-dithiophosphate ( A pHS-25 pH meter (Shanghai Precision and Scientific Instrument Corp., China), a 80-2 centrifuge (Anke Scientific Instrument Factory, China), thermostatic bath (Guohua Limited Company, China) and ICP-MS (DRC-e, PE Company, USA) were used. A stock standard solution of gold at a concentration of 1000.0 All reagents were of analytical reagent grade and all solutions were prepared in deionized water. A solution containing gold (concentration 10.0–200.0 The cloud point temperature of the surfactant was decreased the presence of electrolytes ( Effect of Triton X-114 concentration on the extraction efficiency of gold was investigated in the range of 0.02–0.7%. The effect of HCl concentration on the The influence of incubation time within a range of immediately after preparation to 30 Under the optimum conditions, the calibration graph was linear in the range 5.0–200.0 The effect of foreign ions on the determination of gold by the proposed method was investigated. An ion was considered as interfering when it caused a variation in the absorbance of the sample greater than ±5%. Tolerance limits (ion/Au(III) (w/w)) of interfering ions in the determination of 100.0 In order to validate the method for accuracy, gold in a certified reference material (GBW( A simple, rapid and sensitive cloud point extraction methodology has been developed and optimized for the preconcentration of ultra-trace gold before its determination by ICP-MS. The proposed procedure does not need any chelating agent, heating, long incubation time. The proposed method can be applied to the determination of gold in water sample. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (20875082) and the Foundation of the Educational Committee of Jiangsu Provincial Universities Excellence Science and Technology Invention Team in Yangzhou University.