In the production of pure magnesium compounds from serpentinite, acid leaching is usually the first stage of the overall process. However, faster magnesium dissolution can be achieved and the size of a potential leaching reactor can be reduced if serpentinite is calcined prior to leaching. Moreover, use of calcined serpentinite can reduce problems relating to corrosion of the reactor (lower leaching temperatures and pressures can be applied) and foam formation (chemically bonded water, which forms bubbles when released in the reactor, can be removed by calcining). This paper examines how calcination temperature and time influence the amount of magnesium dissolved during the initial period of leaching of calcined serpentine in hydrochloric acid. Fine-grained serpentinite calcined between 640°C and 700°C displayed the highest reactivity. The fraction of magnesium dissolved was up to 30-times higher as compared to leaching of uncalcined serpentine under identical reaction conditions. Currently serpentinites are used as railway ballasts, building materials, or thermal/electrical insulation. Large serpentinite reserves have a potential to find use also in more sophisticated applications, such as carbon dioxide capture and storage ( In the production of pure magnesium compounds, acid leaching of serpentine is usually the first stage of the overall process. Leaching generates a soluble magnesium salt, which builds up in solution and is then separated from the insoluble residue, and later refined. Commonly used lixiviants are hydrochloric acid ( Serpentines consist of acidic silicate layers and basic brucite-like layers, alternating each other. This double-layered structure results in the acid–base character of serpentines, which causes them to be resistant to acidic and alkaline solutions. To accelerate leaching, During calcination, water is released according to Eq. It is hypothesized that calcination of serpentine could accelerate magnesium dissolution, reduce the leaching time and, consequently, the size of the vessel. Moreover, use of calcined serpentinite could reduce problems relating to the corrosion of the vessel since lower leaching temperatures and pressures can be used during leaching. Foam formation in the reactor could be minimized because the chemically bonded water that would be released as bubbles in the vessel, could otherwise be released during calcination. Herein, we explore how calcination of serpentinite can enhance the dissolution of magnesium in hydrochloric acid. The literature reports on the effects of hydrochloric acid concentration, leaching temperature and serpentinite particle size on the dissolution of magnesium ( Bulk material obtained from the mining and processing of serpentinite in Dobšiná, Slovakia was used in our laboratory tests. Two test samples with particle sizes up to 315 The samples contained 22.0–22.2% magnesium, 17.4–17.9% silicon, 5.8–5.9% iron, 12.8–13.0% chemically bonded water and carbon dioxide, and minor elements (calcium, aluminium, and nickel). Mineral phases identified were: lizardite, chrysotile, calcite, magnetite, and orthopyroxene. First, to find the calcination temperature, thermal decomposition of serpentine was studied by differential thermal analysis (DTA) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) as well as by high-temperature in situ X-ray powder diffraction between 100 Then, calcined samples were prepared as follows: ten grams of serpentinite was placed in a crucible with a lid and inserted in a muffle furnace where the sample was heated at a predefined temperature (between 600 Mineralogical composition and crystallinity of uncalcined and calcined serpentinite were determined by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD). The reactivity of uncalcined or calcined serpentinite was determined as follows: one gram of sample was dissolved at 20 In the present study, the reactivity of calcined serpentinite was expressed in terms of the fraction of magnesium dissolved according to the following equation: The fraction of magnesium dissolved, DTA showed that the thermal decomposition of serpentine started at 640 The influence of the calcination temperature between 400 DTA, TGA and XRD analyses suggest that the samples should be calcined at temperatures between 600 The influence of the calcination temperature and time on the amount of magnesium dissolved during leaching is illustrated in The results shown in The non-calcined serpentine leached only 2.2% of the magnesium present. Under optimum conditions of calcination, the calcined serpentine leached close to 70% magnesium. About 10% less magnesium was leached from coarser serpentinite particles. Increasing the calcination time increased reactivity when the calcination temperature was less than 700 The initial magnesium dissolution rate was estimated to be 1–2 The optimum conditions appear to be a calcination temperature less than 700 The effects of calcination time and temperature are the same on coarse-grained and fine-grained serpentine. The effects of calcination temperature and calcination time on the dissolution of magnesium from calcined serpentinite in hydrochloric acid were examined in this study. Sixty minutes exposure to temperatures between 640 Temperatures above 700 This study was financially supported by the