The effects of aluminum (Al) treatment on sediment composition of carbon (C), nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) were investigated in sediment representing pre- and post-treatment years in the Danish Lake Sønderby. 31P NMR spectroscopy analysis of EDTA–NaOH extracts revealed six functional P groups. Direct effects of the Al treatment were reflected in the orthophosphate profile revealing increased amounts of Al–P in the sediment layers representing the post-treatment period, as well as changes in organic P groups due to precipitation of phytoplankton and bacteria at the time of Al addition. Furthermore, changes in phytoplankton community structure and lowered production due to the Al treatment resulted in decreased concentrations of sediment organic P groups and total C. Exponential regressions were used to describe the diagenesis of C, N, and P in the sediment. From these regressions, half-life degradation times and C, N, and P burial rates were determined.Aluminum (Al) treatment is considered as a cost-effective lake restoration method, as sediment phosphorus (P) release (internal loading) is substantially reduced through the binding of mobilized P to Al (e.g. In 1983, sewage was diverted from the hypertrophic Danish Lake Sønderby. This diversion reduced the external P loading by more than 90%, however total P (TP) concentrations remained between 2 and 3 Sediment P groups extracted by an EDTA–NaOH solution can be identified by In this study, the effects of Al treatment on sediment organic matter composition are identified, focusing on organic P groups and their potential degradability by investigating sediment layers representing pre- and post-treatment conditions. This study demonstrates that the Al treatment led to a decreased deposition of carbon (C), nitrogen (N), and P due to an improved trophic status of the lake. Lake Sønderby is a small (8 Eight sediment cores were sampled with a sediment gravity corer in April 2004 at the deepest part (5 Sediment data are represented graphically as measured concentrations (μmol In order to determine the burial concentration of the elements, The P release rate was calculated from the amount of mobile P and the time span over which it was released. The longevity of the Al treatment was calculated based on the amount of total Al added ( Sediment samples for the Peaks were assigned using standard solutions added to one of the sediment extracts and comparisons with literature (e.g. Six P groups, orthophosphate, orthophosphate monoesters, P lipids, DNA-P, pyrophosphate, and polyphosphates, were detected and quantified in the NaOH-EDTA extracts by Orthophosphate constituted the largest part of P groups in the surface sediment followed by orthophosphate monoesters, polyphosphates, DNA-P, and P lipids ( The modelled concentrations generally fit the measured concentrations below the Al treated sediment layer. Within the Al treated sediment layer, orthophosphate displayed a much higher measured concentration compared to the modelled concentration ( A significant amount of mobile P originated from orthophosphate and orthophosphate monoesters. Polyphosphates and DNA-P contained the highest percentage of mobile P ( Generally, TC, TN, and TP followed exponential declines with increasing sediment age below the Al treated sediment layers ( The mobile fractions of TC, TN, and TP in the sediment of Lake Sønderby were approximately 30% ( The molar ratios of C, N, and P demonstrate that N and P were lost preferentially to C and that P was degraded preferentially to N in the upper sediment layers ( This study demonstrates that the secondary effects of an Al treatment can be detected by The use of For the P groups detected by The increased concentration of organic P groups at the time of Al addition ( The Al treatment reduced water column P concentrations more than 95%, resulting in a shift from N limitation to P limitation ( The decline in polyphosphate concentration followed the modelled regression well, indicating that the mineralization process of polyphosphates in the sediment can be regarded as exponential. The rapid removal of polyphosphates ( Since the sewage was diverted in 1983, the external CNP loadings have remained relatively stable. Hence, the observed changes in concentrations of these elements most likely reflect alterations in autochthonous material and sediment diagenesis. Based on the ranges of the The organic P groups showed Pre-treatment surface sediment contained more than 60% mobile P ( The lower TC concentration compared with the modelled TC concentration reflects a reduced supply of TC to the sediment in the post-treatment years. This indicates that the reduced amounts of organic P groups in the EDTA–NaOH extract can be explained by a combination of improved trophic state of the lake and change in the phytoplankton community as a result of the Al treatment. The concentration of TN was not affected by the Al treatment and only deviates from the modelled concentration in the uppermost surface layer ( Based on The low TC: TN ratio in the surface sediment indicates that the source of these elements originates from phytoplankton, rather than allochthonous matter ( Since the TC, TN, TP, and respective P groups are similar to their estimated burial concentrations in the 22-year-old sediment, the burial of these elements can be predicted. Hence, close to 70% of the TC and TN and 80% of the TP entering the sediment can be expected to be retained in the sediment after 22 years. Based on the increase in orthophosphate, in the post-treatment years, it is estimated that 44 Lower P concentrations in the water column due to the Al treatment reduced the production and sedimentation of autochthonous organic matter, which was reflected in a reduced concentration of TC and organic P groups in the post-treatment sediment. Polyphosphate was found to be the most labile P group in the sediment, thus having a high potential impact on the lake trophic level, whereas P detected as orthophosphate showed to be the most recalcitrant P group in the sediment, reflecting the binding of P to Al. Overall, we show that This study was supported by the Danish Natural Science Research Council by Grant ♯ 21020463 and the Swedish Research Council for Environment, Agricultural Sciences, and Spatial Planning. We thank Rebecca Dugopolski for improving the language.