The free jet flotation system was developed at the Berlin Technical University in 1985. This system was able to treat ultrafine particles of about −53 μm. In the present study, the fine size fraction of the coal (−0.5 mm) containing 45% ash taken from the Zonguldak Central Washery Plant (ZCWP) of Turkish Hard Coal was beneficiated by using the free jet flotation system. In the flotation tests, the best results were obtained in the case of using a mixture of 90% kerosene and 10% iso-octanol in the amount of 400 g/ton as a collector. Also, the optimum system parameters of a 30 l free jet type flotation (FJFT) cell used in this study were determined from the results of systematic tests. In the optimum free jet flotation conditions, the floating coal containing 18.73% ash with a combustible recovery of 72.4% was obtained.In general, the mechanization and automation techniques used in the present coal mining cause a large amount of increase in fine coal of −0.5 mm in size. The increase of the high amount of fine size coal (more than 25%) causes both dust problem in the production step and low recovery problem in the beneficiation step. Generally, the fine coal is beneficiated by using the flotation methods, heavy medium cyclones, and shaking tables and spirals. However, if the fine size coal is bituminous, the flotation method is commonly used. Since the recovery of the conventional flotation method decreases as the size of the coal gets smaller, the different flotation techniques, such as column, pneumatic, free jet flotation and Jameson cell, are used The column flotation process has been used in mineral processing since 1980. In early column flotation systems, the diameter, height and froth depth of the columns are 0.3–1.8, 13 and 0.9 m, respectively Since the pioneering work by Alizadeh and Simonis The material used in this study is the bituminous fine coal taken from Zonguldak Central Washery Plant (ZCWP) of Turkish Hard Coal installed in 1935. The capacity of ZCWP is 500 tons/h. In this plant, the coarse size coals (−125+6 and −6.0+0.5 mm) are washed by two different jigging systems. On the other hand, the fine size coals (−0.5 mm) are floated by the conventional system The test samples used in this study were transported in closed barrels to the Mineral Processing Laboratory at Istanbul Technical University (ITU). The results of the chemical analysis of the test samples are given in The free jet flotation type system (FJTFS) is shown in maximum turbulence zone (MTZ), which is the contact between the fine particles and bubbles; and laminar flow zone (LFZ) in which the loaded bubbles with fine particles reach the pulp surface selectively. In this system, the pulp is taken into the conditioner in which the reagents are added for a specific conditioning time. Then, the conditioned pulp is pumped into the nozzle pipe The following parameters play an important role for an effective separation in the FJTFS: (a) number of nozzle holes, (b) diameter of nozzle holes, (c) the distance between the nozzle and pulp surface, and (d) the depth of the encasing tube below the pulp. FJTFS is quite similar to the Jameson cell. The most important difference between FJTFS and the Jameson cell is that the second one uses wash-water to the cell In the experimental studies, mainly the free jet flotation cell with a volume of 30 l and a capacity of 250 kg/h was used. Also, the results of the free jet flotation cell were compared to those of the Denver cell of conventional flotation with a volume of 2.5 l and a column flotation cell with a height of 2.5 m and a cross-section of 5×5 cm. In the free jet flotation tests, the selection of following three parameters is very important. The first parameter, the percentage of solids in the pulp, affects the performance of jet flotation. Using the low percentage of solids results in low efficiency, whereas using the high percentage of solids blocks the nozzles and drops the pressure. During the tests, the percentage of solids in the pulp was changed from 5% to 20%. The second parameter, the immersion depth of the encasing tube, encircles the nozzle pipe and adjusts the height of the laminar flow zone over the maximum turbulence district. As the height of the laminar flow increased, a cleaner concentrate is obtained. In the present study, the immersion depth of the encasing tube above the pulp level was changed from 100 to 200 mm. The third parameter, the height of the nozzle pipe above the pulp surface, is related to the applied pressure to the pulp surface by the pulp-air jet coming out of the nozzles with great pressure. The higher pressure causes an increase in the amount of air bubbles and intensive agitation of pulp. In this study, the height of the nozzle pipe above the pulp level was changed from 50 to 250 mm. These parameters were investigated systematically and then the following optimum parameters were determined. Under these optimum conditions, the obtained test results from the FJFS are given in In the column flotation, a glass frit was used as an internal bubble generator. Wash-water is taken from the top of the column by using a spiral tube. In the column flotation tests, the percentage of solid and the air rate were varied from 10% to 25% and from 0.4 to 0.9 cm/s, respectively. As a result of systematic investigation, the following optimum parameters were determined. Under these optimum conditions, the optimum test results from the column flotation system are given in The fixed conditions of the conventional flotation tests are given below. The results of the conventional flotation tests under these optimum conditions are given in From the results of the release analysis tests conducted on the fine size coal of ZCWP, the obtained clean coals include 7–12% ash content with 25–60% combustible recovery. The results of three experiments tested for each one of the methods used in this study are as follows. The clean coal obtained from the free jet flotation tests for three experiments includes 10.21%, 14.95% and 18.73% ash contents with 42.2%, 55.3% and 72.4% combustible recoveries, respectively. The clean coal obtained from the column flotation tests for three experiments includes 14.08%, 15.14% and 16.21% ash contents with 20.4%, 32.8% and 40.2% combustible recoveries, respectively. The clean coal obtained from the conventional flotation tests for three experiments includes 13.14%, 20.51% and 22.16% ash contents with 35.0%, 64.9% and 73.2% combustible recoveries, respectively. The comparisons of these results are given in Although the result of conventional flotation experiments is similar to those obtained from the free jet flotation tests, in terms of selectivity, the free jet flotation is favorable than the conventional flotation. In the column flotation, the bubbles are free to rise upwards while the liquid descends quite slowly. In contrast, the bubbles in the free jet flotation cell have no place to escape. The downward velocity in the nozzle pipe is chosen in such a way that the bubbles have to stay in the nozzle pipe and emerge to bottom. In this system, while the bubbles try to rise from bottom, the liquid pushes them down. Thus, the holdup inside the nozzle pipe is around 60%. As a result of these specifications of the free jet flotation cell, its capacity is very high and the retention time is low compared to other conventional flotation techniques The clean coal obtained from the free jet flotation system includes the 18.73% ash content with 72.4% combustible recovery. Also, the results of the three jet flotation tests are very close to those of the release analysis tests. The comparison of the results obtained from the free jet flotation system with those obtained from both column and conventional flotation systems indicates that the free jet flotation is the best one. Also, the free jet flotation system is favorable since it requires low operational cost, short retention time and less technical aid in the operational step. The authors wish to thank Turkish Hard Coal of Zonguldak for supporting the presented research.