The aim of this study was to report the epidemiological characteristics and the experience of 5 departments of trauma, in France, in the management of fractures of the proximal ulna.
                  163 patients with fractures of the proximal ulna with a mean age of 49.9 years (range 16–97) were managed. The most common mode of injury was a motor vehicle collision (48%). 18% sustained associated injuries to the ipsilateral limb. Open fractures were present in 42 patients (25%). A total of 109 patients had a fracture of the olecranon, with the Mayo 2A and B types most frequently seen (66%). The patients were invited for clinical examination at a mean duration of 16 months, retrospectively. Validated patient-oriented assessment scores involving the Mayo Elbow Performance Index (MEPI) and the Broberg and Morrey score were evaluated. All patients had follow-up radiographs.
                  The mean arc of elbow motion was 130° (70–150°). The mean MEPI was 91 (20–100) with good results in 23% and excellent results in 52% of the patients. The mean Broberg and Morrey score was 90 after isolated olecranon fracture, and decreased with the complexity of the lesion. 117 fractures (72%) healed with ulnohumeral congruity. 9 fracture non-unions occurred (6%).
                  Although the fracture of the proximal ulna can be described in several classifications, none of them accommodate it satisfactorily, because of the complexity of the lesion. The coronoid process is the keystone for the stability of the elbow. It forms the anterior buttress with the radial head. Tension band wire fixation is by far the commonest technique of internal fixation used for the treatment of non-comminuted olecranon fractures. Dorsal plate fixation is a useful option by providing improved fixation of complex comminuted fractures and fracture-dislocations. The radiocapitellar joint has to be restored appropriately, preserving the radial head when possible and replacing it with a prosthesis otherwise. The lateral collateral ligament complex is commonly disrupted and usually can be reattached to its origin from the lateral epicondyle. In addition, a brief period of hinged external fixation should be considered.Different types of fractures of the proximal extremity of the ulna having different anatomical lesions exist. The most frequent ones are epiphyseal fractures of the olecranon with varying numbers of fragments, treatment of which is well documented and usually with successful outcomes [ Five hospitals from the GETRAUM group (Groupe d'étude de traumatologie) (Bordeaux, Nantes, Niort, Toulon, Toulouse-Purpan) included 163 cases which adhered to the following criteria: adult patient more than 15 years of age, presenting with a proximal fracture of the ulna in the emergency departments of the hospitals, with a follow up of more than 6 months after reconstruction. Data collected in this retrospective series was recorded on a standardised form allowing for statistical analysis. Significance level was set at p<0.05. The MEPS (Mayo Elbow Performance Score) and Broberg and Morrey [ In this study there were 102 men and 61 women with an average age of 49.9 years (range 16–97). In 65% of cases the patient had sustained trauma of only the upper limb and in 18% of cases the trauma was in different zones including the wrist, arm or elbow. Polytrauma cases with visceral or cranio-cerebral lesions accounted for 10% of the study. Accident mechanisms included road traffic accidents in 48% of the cases, low impact falls in 26% and high energy falls in 14%. Open fractures were present in 42 cases, 21 grade I, 16 grade II, and 4 grade III according to Gustilo classification [ The ulnar lesions are shown in In 43 cases, 26% of the total, there was an associated dislocation, 24 of which (15%) were single; 10 were anterior, 12 posterior and 2 lateral dislocations. Eleven (7%) trans-olecranon dislocations and 8 simultaneous posterior dislocations (5%) were identified. Finally, 24 associated radial head fractures (15% of the total) were noted, 13 were simple and/or undisplaced and 11 were comminuted. 155 (94%) of the ulnar fractures were treated surgically, 8 had an Non operative orthopaedic treatment. The surgical approach was mostly posterior (97%) occasionally postero-lateral. The ulnar repair was with tension band wiring in 116 cases (73%) and plate in 37 cases (25%) (single 23 cases, double 14 cases); patients required axial screws on two occasions. Comminuted olecranon fractures, metaphyseal and/or diaphyseal fractures were treated with tension band wiring in 23 cases and plates in 28 cases. Immediate post-operative radiographs showed that anatomic reduction of ulnar fractures had been achieved in 72% of cases. The 24 cases with associated radial head fractures were treated with screws in 14 cases. Post-operative immobilisation was 23 days on average (range 2–135). Supplementary stabilisation was used more than 7 times out of 10 either by splint or simple sling. A physiotherapy programme was prescribed for 81% of the patients for an average duration of 5 months. Hardware was removed after an average delay of 8,5 months (2–29 months) in 55% of cases. The removal was undertaken for half of the patients due to them requesting it; in the other half the metal work was removed for clinical signs of soft tissue irritation. There were 23 cases of cutaneous complications (14%), 13 patients (8%) had a secondary displacement. Early surgical revision was necessary in 18 patients (11%). Nine patients had non-union of the ulna (6%). Out of the 43 patients who had elbow stiffness (29%), only 7 required capsular release at an average of 8.7 months (range 1–17) Average follow up of the study was 12.7 months (6–54). 30% of patients had persistent pain and 30% complained of loss of strength. Average active flexion was 130° (70°-150°), active extension deficit was 15° (−90°/5°); active pronation, supination arc was 148° (50°/160°); The average Mayo score (MEPS) was 91/100 (range 20–100) which allows for classification of the results as very good in 52% of cases, 23% good, 4% fair and 21% bad. The Broberg and Morrey score was on average 83/100 (range 24–98) split into 40% very good 16% good, 10% fair and 34% bad. The final Broberg and Morrey score was linked to the traumatic lesion. Therefore the median score was 90 (range 82–96) after a simple olecranon fracture and 87 (range 82–96) after a comminuted fracture ( The epidemiological characteristics of our retrospective, multicentre study are not identical to those described in the Duckworth study [ When confronted with a proximal fracture of the ulna, the first difficulty is to establish the lesion assessment using conventional imaging. The technical quality of this assessment can be difficult to obtain practically if a significant displacement and pain prevent obtaining two orthogonal views, which can be adequately interpreted [ The position of a longitudinal fracture of the ulna, in particular at the level in relation to the plane of the coronoid, The degree of comminution of the fracture, The position of the radial head and if there is also a fracture at this level, The positions of the 3 epiphyses (olecranon, radial head and distal humeral extremity). If it is impossible to establish a diagnosis, a minimum of fracture reduction of any displacement is indispensable. Certain small size epiphyseal fractures of the radial head correspond to lesions in relation to dislocation. The assessment of the fracture at the level of the coronoid process is very important for the diagnosis because its integrity helps guarantee the overall stability of the elbow joint [ It is routine to classify ulnar fractures in relation to the articular site, olecranon, or extra articular as metaphyseal or metadiaphyseal. In addition to these two principal characteristic lesions, one should add the presence of a proximal radial fracture and the position of the 3 epiphyses relative to each other and other eponymous associated lesions. Transolecranon fracture dislocation of the elbow as described by Biga and Thomine [ A proximal ulna variant to a Monteggia fracture is the association of a metaphyseal or metadiaphyseal fracture with an isolated anterior dislocation of the radial head. This is the Bado type II [ Marotte et al. [ The prognosis of these lesions is linked to the ulna comminution, articular instability and the presence and severity of a radial head fracture [ The Morey [ The AO classification [ Heim [ More recently Chick et al. [ Practically, it is essential to consider these injuries as loco-regional entities whilst searching for each lesion additional to the proximal ulnar fracture and to propose the appropriate surgery with a view to early mobilisation. The principles of therapeutic care are the result of a complete diagnosis of lesions, which itself leads to an anatomical classification. It has to integrate all the fracture and ligament lesions, which render the elbow unstable. The principle of stable anatomic fixation of bone lesions to allow for the earliest possible mobilisation has been highlighted by the Swiss school [ In intra-articular olecranon fractures displacement occurs as a result of disruption of the periosteum and triceps aponeurosis combined with contraction of the triceps. Non-operative treatment is used in non-displaced fractures (the inter-fragment gap is inferior to 2mm [ Tension band wiring is the treatment of choice in displaced olecranon fractures in active patients. It is simple to undertake, not very invasive and gives excellent functional results [ When confronted with a proximal metaphyseal fracture or even more a metadiaphyseal fracture, rigid and stable osteosynthesis by plates is necessary. The effectiveness of these fixations has been reported in a number of clinical [ Whatever hardware is used, the principles of epiphyseal fixation are always the same; rigid enough to allow for immediate mobilisation due to reconstruction of the articular surface especially of the coronoid process. Stable reconstruction of this process is key to stability of the elbow; it is far from simple due to comminution and difficulties of the approach [ Olecranon fractures are the most common proximal ulnar lesions. Their treatment is codified and generally simple to undertake; tension band wiring gives favourable results in most cases. Whenever there is comminution of the fracture site or associated lesions, surgical care becomes a lot more difficult. It becomes necessary to analyse the bone lesions but also ligament lesions. It is of utmost importance to reconstruct in a stable manner the hook of the olecranon and the lateral column as represented by the radial head. Whenever there is comminution or large displacement of ulnar fractures fixation by a posterior or lateral plate is recommended. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.