Antimony electrowinning from synthetic alkaline sulphide electrolytes has been studied in a nondiaphragm electrolytic cell. The electrodes were constructed in such a way that the anode produces ten times higher current density than the cathodic current density to promote sulphide oxidation to sulphate at the anode; and simultaneously decreasing the tendency of hydrogen evolution at the cathode. The result revealed that at an anodic current density lower than 1500A/m2, minute amounts of sulphate ions were formed but when the anode current density increased beyond 1500A/m2, sulphate formation was promoted. The initial molar concentration ratio between hydroxide and free sulphide ions should be ⩾10.3 to avoid thiosulphate formation at 2000A/m2 anodic current density under the conditions used in these experiments. The highest anodic current efficiency obtained based on the amount of sulphate formed was 89%. An increase in the anode current density as well as NaOH concentration enhances the cathodic and anodic current efficiencies with respect to the antimony metal deposited and sulphate ions produced, respectively. Despite the high anodic current densities used, the specific energy of this process ranges from 0.6 to 2.3kWh/kg which is significantly lower than values reported previously due to the prevention of undesirable sulphur species from being formed. The tests revealed that the concentration of thiosulphate formed during the electrolysis decreased with increasing anode current density and NaOH concentration. Addition of polysulphide from 0 to 30g/L to the electrolyte decreases the current efficiency from 83% to 32% and correspondingly increases the specific energy from 1.7 to 4.8kWh/kg. Results showed that a build-up of sulphite and sulphate ions in the solution does not have any detrimental effect on the current efficiency of antimony deposition.Alkaline sulphide leaching has been found to be a suitable hydrometallurgical process to selectively dissolve antimony and arsenic from the materials containing these elements ( In a diaphragm electrolytic cell, antimony is electrowon in a specially designed electrolyte vessel, in which the anode and cathode chambers are mutually separated by means of a diaphragm. By this method, the polysulphide ions and sulphur oxyanions ( In order to improve the performance of a nondiaphragm electrowinning process, The present investigation is based on antimony electrodeposition from alkaline sulphide electrolytes in a nondiaphragm electrolytic cell. The electrolytes were characterised by high ionic-strength and high hydroxide ion concentration as well as high anode current density with a view of forming sodium sulphate at the anode as the main sulphur oxyanion product. The electrodes were constructed in such a way that the anode will produce ten times higher current density than the cathodic current density. This was purposely performed in order to facilitate the production of oxygen or sulphate at the anode with lesser amounts of polysulphides and thiosalts as side-products; and at the same time decreasing the tendency of hydrogen evolution at the cathode. The change in the chemistry of the electrolytes at the end of each test was monitored by determining the amounts of thiosulphate, sulphite and sulphate formed during the electrolysis in order to establish the molar concentration ratio between hydroxide and free sulphide ions that are needed to form sulphate or oxygen as the main anodic product. In consequence, the current efficiency of the process will be enhanced. The effect of increased addition of polysulphide, thiosulphate and sulphite ions to the electrolyte on the cell voltage, specific energy and current efficiency of the process were also investigated. According to the thermodynamic data available in the literature ( Based on the normal oxidation potentials for sulphur oxyanions formation, reaction It is pertinent to state therefore, that apart from increasing the anode potential due to the increase in anode current density, it is equally important that the electrolyte is rich in hydroxide ions such that the consumed hydroxide ion is compensated for during the duration of the electrolytic process so as to force the anodic reaction into sulphate production. The anodic current density should exceed 1500 The electrowinning experiments were conducted in a 1000 Electrowinning experiments were performed to study the influence of anodic current density and sodium hydroxide concentration on the formation of sulphur oxyanions during the electrolytic process. The anodic current density was varied between 500 and 2500 2 To determine the concentration of thiosulphate and sulphite in the filtrate, the iodine–sodium thiosulphate titration method ( A turbidimetric method was used to determine the sulphate concentration in the sample and the procedure is described elsewhere (   In an electrolytic process, the amount of electrons released during the oxidation process at the anode is directly consumed at the cathode for metal deposition and/or hydrogen evolution depending on the prevailing conditions during the electrolytic process. To verify this, the equivalent amperage-hour required to oxidise sulphide ions (Eqs. The result from this computation as well as the actual input amperage during the tests is provided in The effect of anode current density (ACD) on the cathodic and anodic current efficiencies is shown in A series of experiments were conducted in order to study the effect of sodium hydroxide concentration on the formation of sulphur oxyanions in the electrolyte as well as the cathodic current efficiency of depositing antimony from the solution. The characteristic of the electrolyte in terms of the relationship between the molar concentration of free sulphide and hydroxide ions for each test is presented in The results from these experiments reveal that increase in NaOH concentration is important for the formation of sulphate during the electrolytic process ( Thermodynamically, at high alkalinity, disproportionation of The concomitant effect of this oxidation process is reflected on the cathodic current efficiency ( Normally, it is not possible to prevent a little degree of lixiviant oxidation during the leaching step due to the effect of the atmospheric oxygen according to Eq. The effect of addition of polysulphides on antimony electrodeposition was studied and the results are reported in  According to the chemical reaction (Eq. The influence of thiosulphate was investigated by adding various concentrations of sodium thiosulphate during the tests. The effect of this on antimony recovery is presented in The effect of sodium sulphite on antimony electrodeposition was studied using 0, 10 and 30 Electrowinning of antimony from alkaline sulphide electrolytes has been investigated in a nondiaphragm electrolytic cell. The result revealed that at an anodic current density lower than 1500 The financial contribution from Boliden Mineral AB, Sweden, is gratefully acknowledged. The authors would like to appreciate the help received from the Centre of Advanced Mining and Metallurgy (CAMM), Luleå University of Technology, Sweden, during the experimental work.