The 2011 peak in rare earth element (REE) prices revealed a vast knowledge gap on the REE-based industry considered to be almost monopolized by Chinese players. A global value chain (GVC) framework is used to provide an understanding of value-adding segments of REE in their transformation from mine to market but inquiries on the currently most-advanced company strategies for alternative REE supplies form the cornerstone of this paper. The Anglo-REE deposit developer strategies are aligned with the value-adding segments and different approaches to integration and co-optation of REE processing competence are uncovered. On this basis the significance of alternative Anglo-REE-developer supplies is discussed and positioned in the perspective of Chinese industrial upgrading.In the third quarter of 2011, free-on-board China prices for products of rare earth elements (REE), a group of 17 non-ferrous metals, surged by up to +600 per cent, caused by Chinese reductions in export quotas and exacerbated by territorial disputes between China and the second largest-REE market, Japan ( The Chinese market dominance did not appear overnight: from the mid-1980s to the early 1990s, the Chinese share of global REE production increased significantly from 20 to 60 per cent while the US share remained in the range from 30 and 36 per cent. This share was exceeded between 1992 and 1995 when China took over the majority of global production from the US Mountain Pass mine ( China also emerged as the largest geographical market for REE, increasingly producing larger shares (68 per cent in 2011) for domestic consumption and augmenting the value-added in its REE products ( The use of REE in a number of industries (including so-called strategic industries), their importance in high-tech applications and their value-adding potential make them targets of geopolitical interest. In 1992, the Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping suggested that China should become ‘the Middle East for REE’ and the advances China has made in this industry are surely remarkable: it has monopolized the market by high production volumes and steadily increased the value-added in its REE products by using a set of quotas and duties for production and exports. The system created a two-tier market of lower prices within China and higher prices outside for the same product with the aim to relocate foreign players׳ downstream production capacity to China. Already in 2005, the effects of a steep export quota reduction triggered the creation of a black market in China while non-Chinese actors started questioning the organization and dynamics of the industry, the applications relying on REE, and alternative options to resource access ( Several research contributions have investigated these trends and processes which require interdisciplinary knowledge to understand the intricate weaving of explanatory factors derived from mining, geochemistry, metallurgy and economics. The contributions focus on criticality of issues involving the global REE market and REE industrial sectors ( However, the implications derived from the complexity of the REE value chain for the end-user industries and critical appraisals of efforts by REE consumers to encourage alternative supply chains of REE have so far been omitted in academic discussions. The recent contribution on rare earth market developments by The paper is structured into five sections. In the next section we describe the input–output structure of the global value chain of REE by depicting the main value-adding segments that transform the REE and we point to specific intermediate and end-user industry requirements of REE. In Rare earth elements (REE) are a group of 17 transition metals comprising 15 non-ferrous elements of the lanthanides (atomic number 57–71) and also including yttrium (atomic number 39) and scandium (atomic number 21) ( REE occur in mineral and not in elemental form, as for example gold. More than 200 different minerals contain REE ( By volume and value, the magnet sector is currently the most important within the rare earth industry ( In comparison to other mineral commodities, the production of REE entails higher complexity and capital intensity since equal focus is required on both mining and chemical processing (  In the first (mineral) processing step which usually takes place at the mine, a The next multi-step process is Of the four segments in this part of the GVC for REE, chemical separation adds the highest value, especially with the refining (commonly referred to as formulation) of rare earth oxides to end-user requirements. Therefore value-adding objectives mostly focus on this segment. This is clearly exemplified by the trends followed by China: less than 10 per cent of total REE production was in the form of separated REE before 1990 whereas it exceeded 60 per cent in 2011 ( exports included primarily mixed REE mineral concentrates until the early 1990s but thereafter shifted to separated REE oxides and metal ( just before the end of the century, exports of REE-containing product were mainly made up by magnets, phosphors and polishing powders ( Japanese industries are high value-adding users of REE and Hitachi Metals controls the sintered REE magnet market through ownership of the patents for the high performance Neodymium–Iron–Boron (NdFeB) magnets ( In the wake of the REE crisis and industry calls for alternative supplies to diversify supply chains and increase resilience against exogenous factors to their production, the closest alternative appeared to be the re-opening of previous mines. The first we discuss is the Mountain Pass mine, owned by In the 1950s Molycorp produced REE as Molybdenum Corporation of America and supplied most of the global demand for Europium oxide, which was in high demand with the development of red phosphor for color television in the 1960s. Up until the 1980s, Molycorp had met the majority of global demand of light and heavy REE. In 1998, against fierce Chinese competition and production-related environmental hazards, REE separation operations were suspended. In the period until 2002 REE concentrates were recovered from past inventories, but almost 10 years after mine closure, Molycorp re-commenced with new production capabilities ( In 2011, Molycorp acquired Estonian based AS Silmet, one of two European REE processors producing rare earth oxide and rare metals and now known as Molycorp Silmet. In the same year, Santoku America Inc. in Tolleson, Arizona, the only US specialty metal and alloy producer was acquired; it is now known as Molycorp Materials and Alloys (MMA). Molycorp also announced a joint venture (JV) named Intermetallics Japan with Japanese Daido Steel, Ltd., the Mitsubishi Corporation and Dr. Masato Sagawa, the co-inventor of sintered NdFeB magnet manufacture. The JV licensed technology from Intermetallics, Inc., making it independent of the use of patents held by other magnet companies and allowing for the manufacture of permanent rare earth magnets that deliver greater performance with less reliance on dysprosium, one of the REE considered critical ( In 2012, Molycorp Canada was established with the acquisition of Canadian Neo Material Technologies (NMT), which in 2005 had been formed in a merger between the majority shareholder Magnequench and Canadian Advanced Material Resources (AMR) Technologies. The 2012 acquisition of NMT added former AMR light and heavy REE separation capabilities in China via two other JVs, namely Zibo (ZAMR) from light mixed rare earth carbonate and/or chloride including zirconium, and Jiangyin (JAMR) from ion adsorption clays. Former AMR processing competence in China dates back to the 1990s when AMR had increased its stake of 80 per cent in ZAMR to 85 per cent in 2001 and from initial 60 per cent in JAMR to 90 per cent. In 2006, NMT increased its shareholding in ZAMR to 95 per cent, reaching maximum allowable foreign shareholding. In addition, AMR sales expertise of oxides and phosphor products in China, and the alloy, magnet powder and magnet production facility in Korat, Thailand, were added to the portfolio of In addition, the 2012 acquisition of NMT added the Magnequench patented magnet powder portfolio used to produce bonded NdFeB magnets to the product portfolio of Molycorp. Magnequench was a unit of the Delphi Automotive Systems Energy & Engine Management Systems division of General Motors (GM). The company emerged from an agreement of GM with Sumitomo (today part of Hitachi) and the Chinese Academy of Sciences. The three parties had jointly developed a magnet with the up to today highest available energy product containing neodymium (Nd In 2013, all key production facilities were operational at Mountain Pass and production for customers started ( The other, non-Chinese alternative of REE supply has been re-established by In 2006, Lynas signed an agreement for a five year supply of cerium and heavy REE product to Rhodia. The company was a French specialty chemical firm and a spun off from Rhône-Poulenc in 1997. Today it counts five rare earth plants: one each in France, Japan and the US, and two in China ( In 2011, Rhodia was acquired by Solvay, a Belgian specialty chemicals firm ( In 2009, Lynas received a bid by the state-owned China Non-Ferrous Metal Mining (Group) Co. for a 51.6 per cent stake but the bid was blocked by the Foreign Investment Review Board of Australia on grounds of national security concerns ( In 2012, the Atomic Energy Licensing Board in Malaysia issued a temporary operating license which enabled Lynas to ship REE concentrate from Western Australia to Malaysia where the material undergoes cracking and leaching, production and product finishing. In 2013, Lynas constructed a concentration plant at Mt Weld and LAMP was completed with a phase one production capacity of 11,000 Until current low market prices rise again, LAMP remains optimized at 11,000 Our third case is The development path of GWMG towards an integrated supply chain of REE included the acquisition of downstream value adding alloy and metal making through Great Western Technologies Inc. (GWTI) in the USA in 2005. However, the facility was closed in March 2014 as market demand for GWTI׳s NiMH battery alloys remained low in the US market ( In 2011, GWMG finalized the acquisition of the South African Steenkampskraal monazite mine through Rareco (see above). In the same year, GWMG established a JV with Chinese Ganzhou Qiandong Rare Earth Group Ltd. (GQD), referred to as GWMGQD, in which 25 per cent is owned by GQD while the majority of shares are owned by In January 2014, GWMG successfully produced mixed REE carbonate from Steenkampskraal ore in mini pilot plant testing at Mintek, a mineral processor in South Africa ( To recapitulate: the strategies of two of the companies can be divided into three distinct historical periods. The first period reaches back to the 1980s and is marked by a build-up of processing competence and resource access in China via shareholdings in local businesses. It was followed-up by share increases in these firms during the early to mid-1990s. Rhodia, (which is now part of Belgian Solvay and supplying technology to Lynas) enters into a 45 per cent shareholding with Liyang Founder Rare Earth New Material Co. in 2000 in addition to its shareholding in Baotou Rhodia. Around the same time, Canadian Advanced Material Resources Technologies (AMR), now part of Molycorp Canada, increases its original shareholding of 80 per cent in the rare earth processing plant at Zibo to 85 per cent and from initial 60 per cent in Jiangyin to 90 per cent. The second period takes place in the years around 2005 when the first Chinese consolidation efforts take effect and two of the companies acquire the highest possible shareholdings in the Chinese companies they have invested in. Rhodia acquires 70 per cent of Liyang in 2004 and 95 per cent in 2005 and enters into a five year supply agreement with Lynas in 2006. Magnequench, now part of Molycorp Canada, merges in 2005 with AMR Technologies to form Neo Material Technologies (NMT) and gains access to REE chemical processing in China via the JVs of AMR in Zibo (ZAMR) and Jiangyin (JAMR). In 2006, NMT augments its shareholding in Zibo to the maximum allowable of 95 per cent. The third period is characterized by acquisitions and mergers outside China to acquire further REE industry competence and to enter into agreements with large volume end-users immediately following the 2011 REE price peak. Lynas prolongs its agreement with Rhodia to supply REE for a 10 year period with the addition of a commitment by Rhodia to technically support the construction of the Lynas advanced material plant in Malaysia in 2011. In the same year, Lynas enters into a JV for magnet production with majority shareholder Siemens, and into an agreement with BASF. Molycorp completes an acquisition of Estonian AS Silmet for both its chemical separation expertise and for the possibility to source additional REE ore from Russian Solikamsk Magnesium Works in 2010. Two years later, US Molycorp acquires Canadian NMT and thereby consolidates its upstream part of the value chain through shareholdings in REE separation in China (ZAMR and JAMR) and secures an alternative Thai down-stream powder and magnet processing filament as well as the bonded magnet patented technology. In effect, both Molycorp and Lynas are constructing alternative REE supply chains outside China. While Molycorp also has a REE supply chain within China, Lynas has no (apparent) formal links. The strategy of GWMG differs somewhat as the re-orientation towards REE and integration processes of the Anglo-REE-developer begins in 2005 (the second phase above) with the acquisition of alloy and metal making competence through Great Western Technologies Inc. in the USA. Roughly corresponding in time and geography to our third depicted phase, in 2008, GWMG acquires UK-based LCM Ltd. for magnet alloy making competence. The group thus consolidates its business strategy to serve predominantly permanent magnet producers. The described intentions of a backward move in their value chain to increase metal making competence at LCM illustrates their strategic objective to increase the resilience of their business, providing an alternative source of REE metals and alloys. Yet, at the chemical separation segment, GWMG requires Chinese competence. It is the first company building an alternative REE supply chain to enter into a JV with a Chinese firm for separation competence to be installed close to their Steenkampskraal mine. The three strategies to construct alternative supply of REE have seen the vertical integration of different players into the supply chains of US-based Molycorp and Canadian-based GWMG while Australian-based Lynas appears to rely on looser forms of collaboration through agreements (illustrated in In the previous sections we depicted the input–output structure of the GVC for REE and explained the complex processing and value-adding steps. The ‘balancing problem’ ( This insight provides a background for an understanding of the general organization of the REE-based industries and the context for the strategic pathways followed by the three Anglo-REE-mine developers that we examine in this paper. We are able to relate their strategies to the value-adding segments in the GVC for REE and – when applicable – to the filament of permanent magnets. We focus on these companies for two reasons: Molycorp and Lynas are in an advanced project status, while GWMG is well advanced in commissioning the mine, although we recognize that combined REE-deposit developments and integration by mine developers also take place in many other places such as India, Kazakhstan, Vietnam, Russia, and Brazil ( they are highly relevant for the REE market in Japan and for the REE markets of US and Europe as they are working towards creating alternative supply chains of REE. The performance of these Anglo-REE-deposit developers is closely observed by more than 200 mostly junior mining companies across the world. These companies surged particularly in the aftermath of the 2011 REE price peaks and are now in different project phases but all are trying to raise capital in order to continue development ( Continued economic growth in China (and the other BRIC countries) will result in structural change from the primary to the tertiary sector and among industries within the secondary sector. The accompanying social change related to higher skills and wages will most likely lead to higher use of REE-based goods, e.g. increasing demand for high-tech appliances both by industry and consumers. Higher mobility of goods and labor would similarly lead to increased demand for more and cleaner energy in turn resulting in growth of the REE intermediate and end-user industries in the energy and transportation filaments. According to However, the Chinese REE chemical separation segment has a strong foundation in the production of traditional, less pure REE of less value used in metallurgy, petrochemical industry and glass. For example, the state-owned China has gradually moved into higher-value added REE products with its export-oriented, REE-based products ( Hence, the strategies of the Anglo-REE deposit developers to construct alternative REE supply chains is situated between Chinese ambitions to upgrade their own domestic REE-based industries and the continued control of the world market for raw materials – truly a challenging and delicate task. In any case it is relevant to consider the implications for REE-based intermediate and end-user industries outside China if the three companies discussed should succeed in their endeavors. The volumes will be insignificant in relation to Chinese production and consumption but sufficiently interesting for the actors operating on the Japanese market (the second largest REE market) and the smaller markets of the US and the EU. Japanese geographical diversification of supply chains of REE has been extended to South-east Asia, Pacific, India and Kazakhstan, and is also reaching into the EU and the US ( If China continues to further limit access to REE the alternative supply could constitute a solid backbone for retaining high value-adding segments of REE-based intermediate and end-user industries in Europe and the US, despite preferential treatment by Chinese authorities such as tax incentives offered by the Investment Promotion Bureau (2014) to support enterprises and attract competences to the Baotou Rare Earth Hi-tech Zone ( State involvement carries the current two-tier pricing system in which REE products sold inside China are significantly cheaper than REE products sold outside and might be maintained although under increasing pressure from Chinese industrial companies and associations. The two-tier pricing system can be viewed as an effort to facilitate downstream development, yet internal frictions in the Chinese market between right and non-right holders of production and export quota challenged the system and enhanced internal redistribution. The 2011 REE price peak both nourished illegal mining and sales of REE, and significantly changed the threshold for market entry, awakening the interest by profit-seeking junior exploration firms and stimulating technological development (for REE exploitation, processing and (partial) REE substitution) over the past years. Yet, we have observed a lack in the financing of several REE junior exploration firms recently. ( In the meantime, industry consolidation efforts within China may lead to more controlled material flows amongst state-owned enterprises and their satellites, in turn resulting in less accessible REE-containing ore for foreign firms involved in JVs. Finally, increases in Chinese domestic consumption of REE-based products enabled by the production of high-tech goods which might stimulate domestic consumer trust and interest may lead to decreases in available REE (intermediate) products on the world market. Hence, the alternative supply remains important for reasons of Chinese state-ownership structures as part of its REE industry organization. Even though prices of selected REE products are announced in the State involvement in the GVC of REE is also prevalent in the rest of the world. It is most common in the form of 1) foreign investment review boards which agree or object to foreign bids in REE deposit development and mining, 2) monitoring of mergers and acquisitions involving REE intermediate and end-user industries, and 3) government support for diversification of REE supply chains (and for REE recycling). Excluding Japan, which already has government involvement in securing alternative REE supply chains, we find it worthwhile for other countries and regional groupings to reconsider whether public involvement in integrated mining projects would be appropriate when market responses (reflected in significant share price falls of both Molycorp and Lynas over the first three quarters of 2014, at the time of writing) are counterproductive for the efforts to create alternative supply chains of REE. If favored, the question is, obviously, to identify the most efficient locus for intervention. We address this issue in the remaining part of this section. The bottleneck for the establishment of alternative REE supply chains is (as discussed in section two) at the chemical separation segment which requires both high capital expenditures (CAPEX) and operating expenditures (OPEX) as well as cross-cutting knowledge of mineralogy, geology, chemistry and metallurgy. CAPEX is made up by the expenses associated with the purchase of both batteries One way to minimize CAPEX is to establish what is denoted as a tolling station. Such a centralized facility would provide chemical separation services by processing a mixed REE solution (salts/oxides/chlorides/nitrates) from numerous suppliers into individual REEs while complying with the quality requirements of potential buyers. Both the technological and economic feasibility of a tolling separation facility must be critically reviewed. Thus, it is important to comprehend the REE-bearing ore that constitutes the basis of the mixed REE solution which is fed into the tolling facility. Does it originate from one of the four already commercially processed ore types (bastnaesite, monazite, xenotime, loparite) or from non-commercialized sources (such as lujavrite or kakortokite)? In the latter case additional economic risk is added as new and specific processes need to be developed. Further consideration is needed on how the tolling separation facility organizes the risks of the REE-input suppliers, the risks of the potential separated REE-procuring customers and its own risks. As these risks are determined in confidential contracts they can only be addressed generically: First, the mixed REE solution supplier may be contractually obliged to contribute locked-in capital for the tolling facility while also being locked-in to deliver the mixed REE solution. Presumably the delivery of specific volumes of mixed REE solutions will need to be agreed upon with the tolling separation operator in order to allow for the same proportional blending of different mixed REE solutions. Compliance with these specifications is necessary to produce a homogenous feedstock for the chemical separation plant over a defined period of time. In turn, highly sophisticated and customized software will facilitate adequate blending and process control. Thus, second, it could be that the seller of the mixed REE solution (either the original owner of the mixed REE solution or the tolling facility), or the buyer of separated REE (or both) will carry the risk of a binding REE purchase from the tolling separation independent of current market prices. Here it would be interesting to know how a mixed REE solution feedstock originating from both commercial and non-previously commercially processed REE-bearing ore will affect the solvent choice in the separation process and the division of risk in the contracts among the parties. Recently allocated funds by the US Army Research Laboratory, part of the US Department of Defense, to support REE upstream development is highly notable in respect of the potential of state support to the establishment of a tolling station. The purpose is to test the commercialized SX technology with different flow-sheets on a lab-scale to extract and separate the REE ( In Australia and South Africa, supportive initiatives are more generic and grounded in research and development conducted by national research agencies, such as the Australian national science agency ( To which extent governments or other interested parties should support alternative REE supplies is a question of national economic development and national sovereignty objectives. The need for government intervention in the REE industry has (as mentioned above) been dismissed by One of the issues at stake is the value-adding potential offered by alternative REE supplies which would feed into numerous intermediate industries that again serve as key nodal points in several other GVCs. Yet, the value-adding potential by the REE industry obviously cannot be clarified in the abstract but needs a thorough examination of individual REE products and their involvement in flows to numerous intermediate industries and further on to a multitude of end-user industries. We would, however, assume that Japanese government involvement in the establishment of new and alternative channels for REE resource access is mainly due to the economic importance of its electronics industry in which high-value adding activities are enabled by many physical REE properties including miniaturization. Does Japan rely more strongly on REE products for its economy than the US and the EU? Again, what is needed is an investigation of the numerous intermediate good producing industries and end-user industries, including many high-tech industries such as production of technologies for renewable energy generation, the automotive industry and the defense industry. Findings presented by for instance In this paper we map the GVC of REE and depict the strategies of three Anglo-REE deposit developers who seek to establish alternative supplies to the dominant Chinese REE industry. We present their strategies with reference to the value-adding segments of the GVC of REE and transcend into the REE magnet filament for explanatory purposes. Three historically distinct periods which align with the Chinese transformation of the REE industry are observable: intensified increases in shareholdings in their joint ventures in China in the first two periods followed by a third period after the 2011 price peaks characterized by mergers and acquisitions as well as negotiations of off-take agreements outside China. Whereas Molycorp and GWMG pursue acquisitions, Lynas enters into lose agreements possibly influenced by the Japanese government support of its operations at the time. These strategies aim to succeed in a market dominated by China which strives for further industrial upgrading. We point to the upgrading potential in the GVC segment of chemical separation and illustrate the differences in length of downstream integration pursued by the three Anglo-REE-deposit developers: the alternative supply chain of Molycorp reaches down to REE-based magnet production while GWMG will lean into REE alloy production and aims to strengthen capacity in the previous metal-making segment. In contrast, Lynas pursues integration down to the chemical separation segment only, potentially downstream to formulation through Solvay. Against the background of strong Asian presence in the REE industry, we critically reflect on the value of the efforts by the three Anglo-REE-deposit developers. We conclude that the value-adding potential inherent to REE downstream processing following chemical separation is significant from the perspective of indirect value-adding possibilities enabled by REE-containing components. These value-adding opportunities can take the shape of innovations related to product performance which might support the upgrading of firms, employment in the many industries which absorb REE-containing components, and opportunities for research and development which frequently are higher in the geographical and institutional proximity of production sites as ideas can be applied and tested easier. With our illustration of a simplified GVC for REE and a simplified REE-permanent magnet filament, we argue for further research that follows the REE-containing ore to intermediate industries and final end-products to derive specific data on value-adding dimensions of REE-using (globally-organised) industries and of their importance to national economies. We are thankful to the