There is a growing interest in the revalorization of co-products from the food industry. Co-products from tiger nuts (Cyperus esculentus) milk production are a suitable fibre source. “Chorizo” is the most popular dry-cured meat product in Spain. The aim of this work was to study the effect of the tiger nut fibre addition (0, 5, and 7.5%) on the quality (composition, physicochemical, and sensorial properties) and safety (oxidation and microbial quality) of a Spanish dry-cured sausage, during the 28days of its dry-curing process. Tiger nut fibre (TNF) addition decreased fat and increased moisture content. The addition of TNF significantly increased (p<0.05) the total dietary fibre content of “Chorizo”. Lightness (L*), yellowness (b*) and redness index (a*/b*) were significantly (p<0.05) affected by the fibre content. The addition of 5% and 7.5% TNF to chorizo provided rich fibre and a healthier product. Although there were slight changes in the physicochemical properties, its quality (traditional characteristics) and its safety remained.The most popular meat product in Spain is a dry-cured sausage called “ The technological processes to which foodstuffs are subjected, in particular size reduction (comminution) and mixing, as well as the addition of additives and spices (as paprika) affect colour properties ( There is a growing interest in the revalorization of co-products from the food industry. Co-products from tiger nuts ( The principal objective of this study was to analyse the effect of tiger nut fibre addition on the quality (composition, sensorial, and physicochemical properties) and safety (oxidation and microbial quality) of a Spanish dry-cured sausage during the 28 “Horchata” co-products (Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) “Chufa de Valencia”) were obtained directly from a local industry (Horchatería Navia; Pilar de la Horadada, Alicante, Spain) and transported under refrigerated conditions to the IPOA Research Group Pilot Plant at the Miguel Hernández University (Orihuela, Alicante, Spain). These co-products were hand pressed using a tissue filter to remove the residual water. The solid material – namely tiger nut fibre because of its high content of dietary fibre ( Three independent replicates of each batch were prepared at the IPOA Research Group Pilot Plant facilities. A traditional formula was used to obtain a “base” batter as follows (percentages of non-meat ingredients are related to 100% meat): 60% lean pork meat, 40% fat pork meat, 10% water, 2% salt, 0.05% white pepper, 0.05% sodium ascorbate, 0.015% sodium nitrite, 0.03% potassium nitrate, 1% lactose and 4% paprika. Also a commercial starter culture T-SC-150 (CHR Hansen, Germany) was added. The liquid starter was a suspension of Moisture, ash, protein, fat and total dietary fibre (TDF) contents were determined in cured “ The pH was measured on a suspension resulting from blending a 15 Water activity (Aw) was measured at 25 The % of weight loss after dry-cured was calculated as weight difference before and after dry-cured. Colour was evaluated using a spectrophotometer (CM-2600D, Minolta Camera Co., Osaka, Japan) with illuminant D Texture profile analysis (TPA) of cured “ Microbial analysis of the sausages included determinations of the number of total viable cells and lactic acid bacteria. These analyses were made during the dry-curing process of “ Samples (25 Experienced panellists (20) were recruited from the staff and students of the Miguel Hernández University, Orihuela, Alicante, Spain. Protocols for sensory analysis were approved by the local Ethics Committee for Clinical Research (ECCR Vega Baja Hospital, Orihuela, Alicante, Spain). Panellists were chosen on the basis of previous experience in consuming traditional “ Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to determine significant differences (p  pH levels showed no differences (p  About the evolution of total viable counts ( Dry-curing time also affected (p The results of chemical composition of dry-cured sausages are presented in Lipid oxidation was evaluated through the determination of TBARS values ( The physicochemical properties of “ Colour is one of the most important characteristics for consumers when selecting and purchasing foods and it is important to keep that in mind when attempting to modify or add a new ingredient to a traditional product, as in the case of the addition of TNF to “ Analysis of the TPA ( Sensorial analysis is a widely used method in order to test the organoleptic properties of food products ( The addition of TNF (5 and 7.5%) to a Spanish dry-cured sausage provides rich fibre and a healthier product (lesser percentage of fat and more total dietary fibre content). The addition of this type of fibre to the sausages does not modify the development of the dry-curing process, and improves the yield process and its physicochemical properties and also allows obtaining a product with a better nutritional profile, and with slight changes in the physicochemical properties but remaining its safety. The authors wish to thank Caja Mediterráneo (CAM) for supporting the pre-doctoral grant of one of the authors (Elena Sánchez-Zapata) and the research project