High-rate wastewater processes are receiving a renewed interest to obtain energy positive/efficient water resource recovery facilities. An innovative treatment train combining a high-rate moving bed biofilm reactor (HR-MBBR) with an enhanced flotation process was studied. The two objectives of this work were 1) to maximize the conversion of soluble organics to particulate matter in an HR-MBBR and 2) to maximize the particulate matter recovery from the HR-MBBR effluent by green chemicals to enhance biogas production by anaerobic digestion. To achieve these objectives, lab-scale MBBRs fed with synthetic soluble wastewater were operated at organic loading rates (OLRs) between 4 and 34 kg COD m−3 reactor d−1 corresponding to hydraulic retention times (HRTs) between 6 and 54 min.
                  Colloidal and soluble chemical oxygen demand (COD) removal efficiency in the HR-MBBR increased with HRT to reach a plateau of 85% at an HRT longer than 27 min. Carrier clogging observed at an OLR higher than 16 kg COD m−3 d−1 (HRT < 13 min) resulted in about 23% loss in colloidal and soluble COD removal efficiency. Thus, the recommended parameters were between 22 and 37 min and between 6 and 10 kg COD m−3 d−1 for the HRT and the OLR, respectively, to maximize the conversion of soluble organics to particulate matter.
                  Total suspended solids (TSS) recovery of 58–85% and 90–97% were achieved by enhanced flotation using green and unbiodegradable chemicals, respectively, corresponding to a TSS effluent concentration below 14 and 7 mg TSS/L. Among the synthetic polymers tested, a high molecular weight and low charge density cationic polyacrylamide was found to give the best results with less than 2 mg TSS/L in the clarified effluent (97% TSS recovery). Green chemicals, although performing slightly less for solids separation than unbiodegradable chemicals, achieved a mean TSS concentration of 10 ± 3 mg/L in the clarified effluent.anaerobic digestion activated sludge biochemical oxygen demand clarified effluent after separation process conventional AS colloidal biodegradable COD colloidal COD chemical oxygen demand colloidal and soluble COD dissolved air flotation MBBR effluent before separation process enhanced flotation filtered COD particulate COD to VSS fraction flocculated-filtered COD VSS to TSS fraction high-rate MBBR hydraulic retention time moving bed biofilm reactor metal molecular weight free ammonia ammonium ion nitrite (HNO nitrate (HNO organic loading rate polyacrylamide particle size distribution removal efficiency soluble biodegradable COD soluble COD total ammonia (free ammonia plus ammonium) oxidized nitrogen (nitrite plus nitrate) soluble phosphate specific removal total Kjeldahl nitrogen total phosphorus total suspended solids volatile suspended solids water resource recovery facility wastewater treatment plant particulate biodegradable COD particulate COD heterotrophic biomass stored particulate matter Wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) are now renamed water resource recovery facilities (WRRFs) to reflect the new processes requirements to recover not only water quality but also organic matter, nutrients, other compounds and energy. High-rate (HR) wastewater processes are receiving a renewed interest for their potential to obtain energy positive/efficient WRRFs. They are most often associated with the activated sludge (AS) process operated at a high food to microorganism ratio, a short hydraulic retention time (HRT) and a short aeration time ( The advantages of the moving bed biofilm reactor (MBBR) over the conventional activated sludge process (CAS) are to reduce footprint and eliminate sludge recirculation ( Biomass grown in HR processes transforms the rapidly biodegradable chemical oxygen demand (COD) that is soluble ( The MBBR HRT typically ranges from 30 to 90 min and is kept low partly to prevent Biomass grown under high-rate conditions is known for its poor settleability due the generation of un-flocculated biomass and pin flocs, which is often reported for MBBR effluent solids using the method of volume particle size distributions (PSDs) ( Innovative separation processes are needed to reduce energy costs, footprint, unbiodegradable chemicals addition and to promote the use of natural-based or The enhanced flotation process is an alternative to the conventional DAF process. This process uses low-density beads instead of air as flotation medium and works without the energy consuming air pressurization system of a conventional DAF. The beads may be recovered from sludge by hydrocyclones, centrifuges or vibratory screens and recycled for multiple utilisations ( The aim of this paper was to determine the efficiency of an innovative secondary treatment process train for achieving high-energy efficiency and low carbon footprint. This process train can be used for designing or retrofitting existing WRRFs. An MBBR operated at high-rate conditions for the biotransformation of colloidal and soluble chemical oxygen demand ( The two specific objectives of this project were to: Determine the optimal MBBR HRT and organic loading rate (OLR) to maximize Determine the efficiency of the innovative enhanced flotation process combined with Two 1 L lab-scale MBBRs operated in parallel were fed with a synthetic soluble influent. This was done to ensure constant influent characteristics to understand and describe the underlying phenomena of biotransformation and capture of organic matter throughout the treatment train ( The solution was pumped and diluted with tap water before entering the reactors to obtain a COD concentration of about 160 mg/L and an alkalinity of 150 mg/L as CaCO The biofilm carriers were AnoxKaldnes™ K5 (Veolia Water Technologies Canada) at a filling degree of 50% and were kept in suspension by aeration. The aeration flow rate was maintained at 1.5 Lpm. To minimize evaporation, the aeration consisted of 0.5 Lpm of fresh pre-humidified air and of 1.0 Lpm of recycled air from the airtight headspace. The temperature was controlled in the double-jacketed MBBRs by a refrigerated and heated circulator (Programmable Circulator 9712, PolyScience, USA). The MBBRs were inoculated with previously colonized K3 carriers sampled from the full-scale MBBR of Terrebonne/Mascouche WRRF to favor biofilm growth and the development of a microbial ecosystem resembling that of a WRRF. The full-scale MBBR is located downstream of the first aerated lagoon and is followed by three lagoons for sludge storage and phosphorus removal (with a coagulant added just prior to the last lagoon). The K3 carriers were added to the lab-scale MBBRs containing the un-colonized K5 carriers during five days and were removed prior to the experiments. Seven operating conditions were tested under pseudo steady state conditions with MBBR volumetric OLR and HRT varying concomitantly from 4 to 34 kg COD m Experiments were conducted at 20 °C except for two additional experiments at 10 °C to evaluate the effect of temperature (  The observed yield ( The theoretical yield for heterotrophic biomass was assumed to be of 0.66 g X Jar-tests were conducted using a six-paddle stirrer in 2 L beakers B-KER Lab-scale MBBR effluent samples were collected over a 2–10 h period depending on the required effluent volume for the jar-test experiments, which varied from 2 to 28 L, and were stored at 4 °C if not used immediately for analysis. First, the TSS recovery efficiency of unbiodegradable chemicals, alum as coagulant and charged/uncharged synthetic polymers, was compared to that of Regarding the unbiodegradable chemicals, the efficiency of high molecular weight (MW) cationic or anionic polyacrylamide (PAM) polymers was compared during the enhanced flotation process. Lab-scale enhanced flotation and conventional settling process efficiencies were compared at given chemical dosages using adapted jar-test procedures. Regarding the The enhanced flotation jar-test procedure included three periods: period 1. Addition of coagulant and mixing at 150 rpm (G of 170 s period 2. Addition of polymer and beads and mixing at 300 rpm (390 s period 3. Mixing stopped during 2 min - quiescent flotation period. Mixing energy had to be increased during the flocculation & beads-solids adhesion period to allow the low-density medium to be thoroughly homogenized in the sample. The enhanced flotation medium consisted of low density (d = 24 kg/m The conventional settling jar-test procedure included three periods: period 1. Addition of coagulant and mixing at 160 rpm (180 s period 2. Addition of polymer and mixing at 45 rpm (35 s period 3. Mixing stopped during 15 min - quiescent settling period. The characterization of the MBBR influent and effluent was done 2 to 5 times per week. Chemical oxygen demand (COD), total suspended solids (TSS) and volatile suspended solids (VSS) were measured according to The following definitions were used for COD size fractionation: soluble COD: S colloidal COD: C particulate COD: X Particle size distribution was measured using a Mastersizer 3000 (Malvern Instruments Ltd., GBR). Particles were considered non spherical and their distribution was expressed in volume equivalent. Visual observations were made using an Axioskop 40 (Carl Zeiss, DEU) microscope and a binocular (Portable Luminaire model 52343, Underwriters Laboratories, USA). Student's t-test analyses were conducted on the MBBR efficiency and sludge production sets of data. T-TEST function in EXCEL was used with bilateral and heteroscedastic distributions and the least significant difference was set at p < 0.05. The determination of the MBBR optimal operating condition(s) for maximizing the production of biodegradable sludge was based on three criteria: maximization of the specific removal efficiency of maximization of the observed yield and non-clogging of the carriers. A summary of the lab-scale MBBRs performance and effluent characteristics for the seven operating conditions is presented in  A maximum specific removal rate of 15 kg CS The observed yields ( Based on these results, the calculated The VSS to TSS ratio ( The DO concentration in the bioreactors was at its lowest for an HRT of 13 min and an OLR of 16 kg COD m It was found that stability was easier to reach for operating conditions with high HRT and low OLR (>13 min and <16 kg COD m MBBR effluent PSD as a function of HRT is presented in Previous experiments have shown that particles agglomeration is occurring by increasing HRT between 0.75 and 4 h ( Stability was difficult to reach for an HRT <13 min (OLR > 16 kg COD m The predominant COD fractions in the MBBR effluent were particulate (>0.45 μm) and soluble (<0.04 μm) COD, whereas the colloidal COD fraction (0.04–0.45 μm) was relatively small ( The solids settleability using static settling (no chemicals added during jar-tests) was greatly fluctuating and ranged from 35 to 78% (treated effluent TSS concentration from 10 to 23 mg/L) at 37 min HRT (results not shown). Thus, chemicals addition for coagulation and flocculation appeared necessary to ensure sufficient TSS recovery and reduce the impact of HR-MBBR effluent poor settleability ( High OLR and low HRT conditions (>16 kg COD m Microscopic observations of the biofilm accumulated on clogged carriers revealed the predominance of filamentous bacteria and rotifers. In addition, monitored parameters in the effluent showed high variations at that time, perhaps due to the instability of the reactors. Airflow rate was maintained constant throughout the different operating conditions and was possibly not sufficient to provide enough biofilm detachment at low HRT. For further lab-scale MBBR experiments at high-rate conditions, it is suggested to control the biofilm thickness by increasing the shear force applied on the biofilm by increasing the airflow rate. Two operating conditions were repeated at 10 and 20 °C to study the effect of temperature on the MBBR performance ( The temperature coefficient Θ was evaluated by comparing the mean The temperature coefficients obtained, 1.08 and 1.04 are within the typical range for organic matter removal systems of 1.00–1.08 (1.04 for AS) ( The temperature decrease of 10 °C was found to cause a significant reduction of 15–41% of When treating the lab-scale MBBR effluent with enhanced flotation, dosages used for alum and PAM polymer were respectively 0.2 mmol Al/L and 1 mg polymer/L. At 0.2 mmol Al/L and 1 mg polymer/L, the efficiency of several high MW anionic, non-ionic and cationic polymers were compared ( These results are in agreement with the ones presented by The high efficiency of cationic polymers to treat MBBR effluent with settling or DAF and to reduce coagulant dosage demand and consequently sludge production was demonstrated in previous experiments ( Using alum and a cationic polymer at 0.2 mmol Al/L and 1 mg polymer/L, conventional settling and enhanced flotation achieved similar efficiencies and effluent quality, 96% TSS recovery (3 mg TSS/L) and 97% (2 mg TSS/L), respectively. Alkalinity consumption was higher at a given alum dosage for enhanced flotation than settling (9% and a final alkalinity of 138 mg CaCO Dosages used for When The effect of HRT on enhanced flotation efficiency in terms of TSS concentration and COD fractionation is presented in Throughout the seven operating conditions, The evolution of COD fractionation throughout the treatment train, beginning by MBBR influent and effluent, COD contribution of The increase of Volume PSD of MBBR effluent at 6 min HRT indicated a major decline in particles larger than 200 μm after enhanced flotation process ( A summary of the jar-test performance for the seven MBBR operating conditions is presented in The objectives of this experiment were 1) to optimize MBBR HRT and OLR to maximize biodegradable sludge production and 2) to determine the potential of an innovative enhanced flotation separation process combined with natural-based  An MBBR HRT of 22–37 min (OLR between 6 and 10 kg COD m Bimodal PSDs were observed in the MBBR effluent without evidence of agglomeration taking place for HRTs < 37 min; The innovative enhanced flotation process combined with alum and charged or uncharged polymers allowed to reach a target TSS concentration of 10 mg/L in the MBBR clarified effluent. When An MBBR followed by an enhanced flotation process is a promising treatment combination that can result in a compact and sustainable process train for wastewater treatment and resource recovery. Further work using real wastewater containing solids with industrial size pilot units would allow to better consider mass transfer and media clogging phenomena and obtain more accurate design criteria to evaluate the sludge production of The authors thank the Terrebonne/Mascouche WRRF staff for their assistance with sampling. The authors thank Veolia Water Technologies Canada Inc. and Kemira Water Solutions Canada Inc. for supplying chemicals, and the city of Repentigny and Denis Bouchard for technical support. The authors thank the