Phosphate fertilizers are most commonly obtained from wet phosphoric acid, which contains a majority of impurities that were present in raw materials used during the production process. It is essential to limit heavy metal contents, including cadmium, in manufactured phosphoric acid for environmental protection purposes. This work investigates kinetics of cadmium removal from wet phosphoric acid by precipitation method. Precipitating agents used in this study are: zinc ethylphenyldithiocarbamate (ZnEPDTC), sodium ethylphenyldithiocarbamate (NaEPDTC), sodium cellulose xanthate (SCX), sodium dibutyldithiocarbamate (NaDBDTC) and sodium sulfide (Na2S). For each agent, a proper cadmium reaction model is fitted, the simplified kinetic mechanism is proposed and pseudo-kinetic parameters are derived. Analysed precipitating agents were found to perform following three different mechanisms – ZnEPDTC and NaEPDTC did not react with cadmium ions in investigated conditions, SCX and NaDBDTC were decreasing the concentration of cadmium ions over time and Na2S initially decreased cadmium concentration to almost zero and then created Cd(HS)x
                     2−x complexes.Phosphorus, nitrogen and potassium are three major biogenic macronutrients that are the most vital elements to ensure existence of all living organisms ( In the thermal route, vapour phosphorus is combusted in controlled conditions to yield phosphoric acid. The obtained product is of high quality, but it is also very expensive because of method's large energy consumption. In the wet route, phosphorus-rich minerals are digested with sulphuric acid, forming phosphoric acid and calcium sulphate (often referred to as ‘phosphogypsum’ to indicate its origins) as a by-product. This process does not require high energy input and therefore obtained product is relatively cheap in comparison to thermal phosphoric acid. It is, however, contaminated with most of the impurities present in minerals used as substrates in production process, including the most dangerous heavy metals for biological life, such as nickel, chromium and cadmium ( Because of its low quality, wet phosphoric acid was historically precluded from use in businesses requiring high-purity acid, such as fertilizer production. However, its low price and energy demand caused fertilizer industry to switch to wet phosphoric acid recently. Nevertheless, fully responsible and sustainable production of phosphate fertilizers from wet phosphoric acid requires developing an efficient method to remove impurities that contaminate the acid ( Due to legislative restrictions, cadmium is one of the impurities that particularly draws researchers' attention ( Only a few of above-mentioned methods have been tested in industrial practice. While sorption and membrane processes seem very perspective, they have not been tested on a large scale. They suffer from low selectivity towards cadmium removal. New materials need to be researched in order to improve them and only then pilot plants can be built. The biggest issue of the co-crystallization method is the quality of produced phospho-gypsum which is unmarketable and hard to use in other branches of industry ( Equilibrium thermodynamic data of CdS precipitation with Na This work presents a mathematical model for cadmium removal kinetics from wet phosphoric acid by precipitation method applying various precipitating agents. Up to this day there was no data available in the literature regarding this topic. Samples for experiments were prepared from wet phosphoric acid obtained from Moroccan phosphorite by a local producer. The characteristics of the acid used are shown in The colorimetric analysis using the colour reaction of the P Cadmium concentration was determined using the colour reaction of dithizone with cadmium in the chloroform layer. The measurement was carried out at the wavelength Before performing experiments, the wet phosphoric acid was clarified by an addition of a 2 wt% mineral‑carbon adsorbent and modified with an addition of appropriate amounts of cadmium ions due to their low concentration in raw wet phosphoric acid. Removal of cadmium ions was carried out via precipitation of cadmium sulfide, using zinc ethylphenyldithiocarbamate, sodium ethylphenyldithiocarbamate, sodium cellulose xanthate, sodium dibutyldithiocarbamate and sodium sulfide as precipitation agents. All reagents were produced by POCh Gliwice. The experiments were carried out in a thermostated water bath with a shaker model 357 produced by Unipan. The precipitate was separated on hard filters and the content of cadmium ions was determined in the filtrate. Five experiments were carried out for various cadmium precipitating agents – zinc ethylphenyldithiocarbamate, sodium ethylphenyldithiocarbamate, sodium cellulose xanthate, sodium dibutyldithiocarbamate and sodium sulfide. The temperature was set to 20 °C for each experiment and the agents were added in the amount of 0.5 wt% in reference to the wet phosphoric acid (except sodium cellulose xanthate – 1 wt% and sodium sulfide – 0.2 wt%). Additionally, oxalic acid was added to each sample (experiment with sodium sulfide as precipitating agent being the only exception) in the amount of 0.5 wt% in reference to the wet phosphoric acid. For each experiment, liquid samples were taken after 1, 5, 10, 30, 45, and 60 min and cadmium concentration was measured. Collected results are shown in An analogous model to Pareto distribution was then fitted to results of each experiment, applying the least squares method in order to derive the rate of cadmium reaction with the appropriate agent and a possible reaction mechanism. For zinc ethylphenyldithiocarbamate and sodium ethylphenyldithiocarbamate used as cadmium precipitating agents there was no visible correlation between time and cadmium concentration. The performed analysis showed that the model which can be fitted best to the experimental results is constant Therefore, for zinc ethylphenyldithiocarbamate and sodium ethylphenyldithiocarbamate the rate of cadmium removal: Cadmium concentration decreased gradually over time when sodium cellulose xanthate and sodium dibutyldithiocarbamate were used as cadmium precipitating agents. Mathematical model fitted to define cadmium concentration is presented below: Derived model parameters are presented in Therefore, for sodium cellulose xanthate: Sodium cellulose xanthate and sodium dibutyldithiocarbamate can react with cadmium ions according to the mechanism: Assuming Because the precipitating agent's initial concentration was many times greater than cadmium concentration it can be assumed that it is constant: The only source of Applying Eqs. Derived pseudo-kinetic parameters corresponding to kinetic Eq. Therefore, for sodium cellulose xanthate: As can be seen from comparing Eqs. Sodium cellulose xanthate was found to be a more efficient precipitating agent than sodium dibutyldithiocarbamate in investigated conditions. Calculated cadmium removal percentage over time according to Eqs. For sodium sulfide used as cadmium precipitating agent, cadmium concentration increased gradually over time. It can be assumed that an immediate reaction occurred: Cadmium sulfide precipitate was then progressively dissolving, forming a soluble complex ( Therefore, it can be assumed that the actual cadmium concentration in time Derived model parameters are presented in Therefore, for sodium sulfide: As stated before, the kinetic modelling can be applied only to Eq. Sodium sulfide dissociates in water: Sulfide ion then forms a series of equilibriums: Because the initial concentration of sodium sulfide (and therefore also the sulfide ion) is many times greater than cadmium concentration, it can be assumed that it is constant as well as its all derivatives (assuming that equilibrium conditions for H Applying Eqs. Derived pseudo-kinetic parameters corresponding to kinetic Eq. Therefore, for sodium sulfide: The performed analysis shows that ethylphenyldithiocarbamate and sodium ethylphenyldithiocarbamate do not react with cadmium in investigated conditions. Sodium cellulose xanthate and sodium dibutyldithiocarbamate gradually lower cadmium concentration in the liquid phase over time but observed reactions occur following different reaction mechanisms. Excess organic compounds remaining in the acid can be a subject to removal by adsorption or photocatalytic degradation ( Sodium sulfide can be regarded as an efficient precipitating agent for cadmium ions removal. Immediately after applying it to the system, cadmium concentration decreases to values near zero and then increases due to cadmium sulfide precipitate dissolving. Therefore, in order to achieve a high cadmium removal (η None. The work was supported by the