This study investigates the influences of pore-structure and mortar properties on the fracture behaviour of geopolymer foamed concrete. The discrete element method (DEM) is utilised to explicitly describe the internal pore-structure, while the mortar phase is modelled at the micro/meso-scale using a cohesive-frictional model. Numerical tests are conducted on numerous DEM foam concrete specimens with various porosities and pore-size distributions. The numerical results show that the pore-size can have a profound effect on the material’s fracture resistance. A decrease in pore size results in higher compressive strength and this influence is more significant for foam concrete with lower porosity. However, the elastic modulus seems to be less sensitive to the pore size variation. Further looking at the fracture process of the foam concrete at the micro-scale shows a gradual transition contact bonds from compressive to tensile modes, which is triggered by the breakage of contact bonds persisting as the loading continues. The study also demonstrates that the pore size distribution mainly affects the empirical power exponent of Balshin’s equation of compressive strength-porosity relationship, while the mortar properties have a profound influence on the strength of the material at zero porosity.Foam concrete is typically considered to be a lightweight, low strength concrete with excellent thermal and sound insulation, where its current structural applications range from construction to grade filling Many studies have been conducted to improve the nature of foam concrete and its usage in structural applications Although experimental characterisation is still a predominant method to investigate the mechanical behaviour of foam concrete, the measurement of porosity and pore character is extremely challenging in cement-based materials owing to its complex microstructure Through the understanding of the morphological features of foam concrete, this study seeks to investigate the influence of pore characteristics on the compressive strength of the material as there has been a heightened interest to increase the material load-bearing capacity. In particular, the influence of pore size and pore size distribution is considered to see how the internal distribution of air-voids further affects the materials mechanical behaviour. These investigations are carried out using DEM modelling - generating spherical pores within a finite volume and adding in mortar particles with set radii to create a numerical sample with a set porosity for a given density. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to systematically investigate the influence of the pore size and mortar properties on the mechanical behaviour of foam concrete, which is extremely difficult and expensive to resolve via laboratory tests. The content of this paper is set out as follows: In this section, the key concept of DEM modelling of foamed concrete and its validation against experimental data are briefly outlined to provide background for the numerical investigation. For further details of the numerical procedures, the readers are referred to the authors’ previous work The DEM was first proposed by Cundall and Strack To complete the above equations, the contact forces and moments, which arise from the relative movement of a particle and its neighbours at each contact, are needed. In the DEM, the force A constitutive model is then required to determine the stress components of the contact bond. In this study, the cohesive contact model developed by Šmilauer The framework of plasticity is then employed to calculate the shear stress increment The shear stress is governed by the following Mohr-Coulomb type yield function: The DEM models a concrete material at the grain scale level using bonding contact laws. Accordingly, a set of constitutive parameters at the contact level is needed for DEM simulations. The experimental macro parameters such as the compressive strength and modulus of elasticity could not be directly employed in the modelling. Thus, the conventional approach to determine constitutive parameters has been to follow a calibration procedure  As discussed above, the calibrated DEM constitutive parameters require further examination to ensure their suitability for predicting the strength of foam concrete (i.e. validation process). To this effect, three different sets of DEM samples with varying densities are generated and subjected to uniaxial compression using the same set of constitutive parameters. The numerical results are then validated against the experimental data for the same sample densities In this section, the influence of pore size on the mechanical behaviour of foam concrete is investigated. A number of DEM samples with varying pore sizes are generated. The process for generating the numerical sample is as follows. First, all pore particles with a given size are generated within the volume of a cubic specimen bounded by six rigid walls. Those pore particles are arranged in the same square lattice to isolate the influence of a random pore size distribution. Next, the mortar particles are randomly filled in the remaining space within the sample. The size of those particles is much smaller than the size of an air-pore to make sure they can fit in the space between the two closest pores. Finally, the pore particles are removed, thereby leaving the given space for the macro-pore system, while the mortar particles are bonded together using the cohesive zone model previously mentioned in In the first investigation, four DEM specimens of foam concrete with the air-pore arrangement following the same pattern are generated with the same density of 900 kg/m   To investigate the role of contact bond arrangement in foam concrete, we define two tensile contact ratios: The evolutions of the four ratios To investigate the efficiency of tensile contact bond system performance during uniaxial compression, the evolution of the  The failure evolutions in all specimens are illustrated in where The damage ratios are shown to be good indicators of the failure development within the specimens. As shown in The development of failure patterns in each of the four specimens are illustrated in To further investigate the influence of pore size on the mechanical behaviour of foam concrete, numerous DEM specimens with material density varying from 900 to 1100 kg/m The effect of pore size on the compressive strength, contact bond number and elastic modulus of foam concrete at different densities is illustrated in The above observations on samples with random pore arrangements are consistent with the results obtained from those with uniform pore arrangements discussed previously, which can be attributed to the better porosity distribution and thus a more efficient contact network achieved in the specimen with smaller pore size. Another important finding is that the relative scatter of the data is strongly dependent on the material density as well as the pore size. In particular, the relative scatters of the compressive strength and elastic modulus, indicated as their standard deviation values, are shown to be high in D10 and D11 samples while they are less significant in lower-density samples (e.g. D9). Also, at a specific density, the standard deviation for both the compressive strength and the elastic modulus seem to decrease as the pore size reduces. This can be explained due to the fact that specimens with a lower density and a smaller macro-pore size have a significantly higher number of air-pores compared to those of samples with a higher density and a larger pore size. Hence, with a higher number of air-pores, the pore system is distributed more consistent among these specimens. As a result, they share a strong similarity in their mechanical behaviour. However, different from the trend observed in the compressive strength, the elastic modulus is shown to be less sensitive to the variation of the pore size regardless of the material density as shown in It is well known that porosity has a profound effect on the compressive strength of foam concretes. In general, an increase in porosity leads to a decrease in the mechanical resistance of the material As discussed above, empirical formulations that relate the compressive strength of foam concrete to its porosity have been widely investigated. However, owing to the nature of the experimental work, it is almost impossible to create an explicit link between these formulations and the pore characteristics of foam concrete (e.g. pore-shape, pore-size and pore-size distribution). Nevertheless, numerical approaches can help to overcome this difficulty, and this has been proven in our recent study Three log-normal (LN) pore size distributions are considered in this study. All distribution laws, which are LN0.5, LN0.75 and LN1.0, have the same value of For the testing process, in each pore size distribution, numerous DEM samples with porosity in the range of 0.57–0.86 are generated. Five sub-samples for each porosity are created to imitate the heterogeneity of concrete formed under experimental conditions. For those sub-samples, although the number of mortar and air-void particles and their size were consistent, these particles were randomly distributed to create different porosity systems. As a result, 75 DEM specimens are created for each pore size distribution and thus in total 225 specimens under unconfined compression are simulated. All of them are subjected to the same loading rate and boundary conditions. The regression technique is employed to obtain the best-fit-curve of the strength-porosity equation for the foam concrete samples in each type of pore size distribution. The compressive strength-porosity equation for each type of pore size distribution is shown in To investigate the possible consequence of mortar properties on the strength-porosity equation, the data from the previous study   For the influence of tensile bond strength: For the effect of the combination of the tensile strength, elastic modulus and initial cohesion: Based on these above numerical results, it is suggested that the compressive strength of foam concrete should be a function of not only a macro variable (e.g. porosity) but also micro variables such as the mortar properties and the modal value of the pore radii distribution. Nevertheless, further studies are needed to derive such comprehensive strength-porosity equation capable of explicitly representing the influence of both macro and micro variables on the compressive strength of foam concretes. In this paper, a micromechanical study is conducted to investigate the effects of pore characteristics and mortar properties on the mechanical behaviour of foam concrete and to provide further insight into to how the microscopic properties affect the macroscopic behaviour of the material. Based on the numerical investigation, comparisons were made amongst numerous samples with various pore sizes and distributions. The role of the pore size, pore size distribution and bond strength (which can represent for the microscopic properties of the mortar) in the strength-porosity equation of the foam concrete were investigated. From the numerical results, the following conclusions were drawn: For a given porosity, the reduction of pore size increases the compressive strength of the material. There seems to have a linear relationship between the pore size and the compressive strength in foam concrete with a uniform pore size. The effect of pore size on the strength is evident in foam concretes with a higher density, but this influence is less significant in lower density materials. The elastic modulus is shown to be less sensitive to the variation of the pore size. Within a consistent range of pore size, the pore size distribution only has a minor effect on the compressive strength of foam concrete. In addition, the pore size distribution only slightly influences the power exponent ( The constitutive parameters, which may represent the microscopic property of the mortar phase, have a profound influence on the compressive strength of the material. For the investigated range of constitutive parameters, the coefficient This study also highlights the importance of characterising the influence of pore characteristics such as pore size and pore size distribution as well as the mortar properties on the compressive strength of the porous foam concrete. These are useful not only for the further understanding of the strength-porosity equation but also for the practical design of foam concrete with desirable properties. Funding support from the