The depolymerization of organic proteinaceous compounds is a critical step of nitrogen (N) cycling in many agroecosystems, but our understanding of this process and the overall effect on N cycling is still limited. We have investigated long-term (11 years) impacts of tillage practices (traditional tillage, TT vs. no-tillage, NT) and Ca-amendment on the activity of soil casein protease (an enzyme degrading high-molecular weight proteinaceous compounds), N-α-benzoyl-l-argininamide protease (BAA) (targeting low-molecular weight compounds) and β-glucosidase in relation with organic matter pools and the composition of extractable soil organic matter. While the adoption of NT increased the β-glucosidase activity and the total and extractable organic C contents in the soil, only casein protease was increased by NT in the 0–5 cm soil layer. In contrast, Ca-amended plots showed a 50% higher casein protease and a lower BAA protease activity while β-glucosidase was unaffected. The decrease of BAA protease activity could be due to the reduction of easily extractable glomalin-related soil protein caused by Ca-amendment and highlights the tight relations between soil protease and glomalin. The imbalance in enzymatic activity may result in an accumulation of intermediate metabolic products (i.e. monomers and amino acids), therefore involving reduced mineral N losses and/or changes in N acquisition preferences by plants. Our results further suggest that the combination of NT and Ca-amendment application does not have synergic effects on the studied enzyme activities. In addition, the effects of agronomic practices were limited to the upper soil layers because of soil stratification caused by NT and the higher effect of Ca-amendment in topsoil. Further targeted studies are needed to elucidate the impact of agronomic practices on N losses and on the N use by soil microbes and plants.The increase of nitrogen (N) use efficiency and the reduction of N losses are critical issues for enhancement of crop yields while reducing environmental harms in modern agriculture. To assess well informed recommendations on the use of N fertilizers, a deep understanding of the factors affecting organic N mineralization is crucial. Nitrogen mineralization is the major source of N supply for crops, especially in low-input agricultural systems [ The activity of protease enzymes, similarly to other soil enzymes, is usually induced by the presence of suitable substrate [ The sensitivity of soil protease activity to soil moisture, temperature, soil pH, plant cover, organic amendment or substrate availability has been studied extensively [ The positive effect of NT on soil biological properties have been reported by many authors [ The aim of the present study is to assess the combined effects of NT and Ca-amendment on the potential activity of enzymes involved in N (casein protease and BAA protease) and C (β-glucosidase) cycling in three different depths of the soil profile of a highly degraded acidic Acrisol devoted to agriculture in SW Spain. Furthermore, we related the enzymatic activity with soil extractable C and N contents and GRSP. We hypothesized that the amelioration of soil acidity (driven by Ca-amendment) and SOM accumulation (due to NT practices) will synergically increase the activity of the studied enzymes. In addition, we hypothesized that the effect of both NT and Ca-amendment are limited to the upper soil layers (5 or 10 cm), where most microbial activity takes place. The experimental area is located in a detritic “raña” formation in SW Spain (580 m.a.s.l.). The climate is characterized as Mediterranean with dry and hot summers (Csa) according to Köppen's classification. The mean annual precipitation is 798 mm and it is mostly concentrated in the period between October and January while the lowest precipitations and the highest mean temperatures are registered in July and August, leading to high evapotranspiration rates and strong water limitation. The soil is classified as Acrisol (IUSS Working Group WRB 2015) and was developed under subtropical climate in middle Pleistocene [ The experiment was established in 2005 in a split-plot design with four replicates and two factors, each plot with an area of 64 m The initial preparation of the plots and the long-term management has been described elsewhere [ Soil samples were collected on the harvest day (31st of May in 2016) when the microbial activity was expected to be high [ The activity of casein-hydrolyzing enzymes (hereafter, casein protease) and N-benzoyl- Soil microbial biomass C and N (MBC and MBC, respectively) were determined using the fumigation-extraction method by fumigating 15 g of soil with ethanol-free chloroform followed by 0.5 M K To evaluate the relationship between soil enzymatic activities and glomalin, the easily extractable glomalin-related soil protein (EE-GRSP) was extracted from 1 g of air-dried soil with 20 mM sodium citrate solution (pH 7.0) in autoclave (121 °C, 30 min) [ Before soil sample collection, one square meter was randomly selected for the harvest of the aboveground plant biomass. All standing biomass was cut at around 10 cm above the soil surface, packed in bags and transported to the laboratory where it was air-dried until constant weight (70 °C). Dry biomass was homogenized and a subsample was used for quantification of total C and N content using a LECO Instrument TruSpec CN (LECO Corporation, St. Joseph, MI, USA). Data were analysed statistically with a Linear Mixed Model using the SPSS 22 software (IBM SPSS, Inc., Chicago, USA). The Ca-amendment application (A), soil tillage (T) and the sampling depth (D) were used as fixed factors, while the plot (n = 16) and the field block (n = 4) were considered as random factors. When effect of sampling depth was significant, a post-hoc LSD test (p < 0.05) was performed. Data were checked for normality and homogeneity of variance prior to analyses and transformed (log+1) when necessary prior to linear mixed model analysis. To analyze the correlations between variables, we performed a principal components analyses (PCA), in which the Principal Components 1 and 2 (PC1 and PC2, respectively) were extracted through Varimax orthogonal rotation. Variables were also plotted in the orthogonal space defined by PC1 and PC2. Unless otherwise stated, the confidence level used was p = 0.05. The adoption of NT considerably increased the content of TOC, TN, PMN, C The potential activity of β-glucosidase was 40% higher under NT when compared to TT ( Tillage practice did not have any significant impact on the potential activity of soil proteases, but the interaction of tillage with depth revealed higher casein protease activity in the 0–5 cm layer under NT, while this effect was not observable in deeper layers ( Plant production was significantly higher in NT and amended treatments, showing the highest biomass production in NT-Ca treatment ( The activity of all three enzymes decreased with increasing soil depth, similarly to previous findings [ We found increasing C:N ratio with increasing soil depth, which has been found also in adjacent fields of the area of Cañamero's raña (unpublished data). This result contrasted with the common trend of C:N ratio decrease with depth observed in a global database [ The activity of casein protease decreased drastically with depth while the activity of BAA protease was less influenced by soil depth, which could be linked to an accumulation of large N polymeric compounds near the soil surface and to distribution of small molecular weight proteinaceous compounds within the soil profile. Furthermore, the composition of the extractable SOM changed drastically with the soil depth: while the content of plant biomass-derived compounds decreased with soil depth, processed microbial compounds tended to accumulate in the lower layers [ Increased TOC and TN contents following conversion to conservation agriculture is well accepted and has been largely observed [ Unlike initially hypothesized, none of the investigated proteases seemed to be affected by the tillage practice, similarly to results obtained by Panettieri et al. [ Tillage showed a strong impact on the content of PMN ( Long-term soil acidification is one of the main concerns of agriculture [ There are several mechanisms by which the application of Ca-amendment may affect the protease activity. The observed increase in the N For the BAA, the picture seems to be different, and its reduced activity is probably related to the observed decrease in MBC and MBN as found by Baraniya et al. [ The decrease of EE-GRSP in the 5–10 cm layer has been previously described in the same experimental plot by Gomez-Paccard et al. [ Our results point towards a shift in the N form available in the soil following liming, suggesting that the degradation of large proteinaceous compounds is triggered but they are not further degraded into NH We have evaluated the long-term impact of combined adoption of no tillage practices and surface application of sugar foam residues and red gypsum on the activity of three enzymes related to soil C and N cycling. While NT practices predominantly influenced C-related enzyme, the main effects of Ca-amendment were observed with regard to N cycling. We have strong indications that depolymerization of large proteins was triggered by liming, but mineralization to NH Authors declare no conflict of interests. This work was supported by project AGRISOST-CM ( The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at