Rolling dynamic compaction (RDC), which employs non-circular module towed behind a tractor, is an innovative soil compaction method that has proven to be successful in many ground improvement applications. RDC involves repeatedly delivering high-energy impact blows onto the ground surface, which improves soil density and thus soil strength and stiffness. However, there exists a lack of methods to predict the effectiveness of RDC in different ground conditions, which has become a major obstacle to its adoption. For this, in this context, a prediction model is developed based on linear genetic programming (LGP), which is one of the common approaches in application of artificial intelligence for nonlinear forecasting. The model is based on in situ density-related data in terms of dynamic cone penetrometer (DCP) results obtained from several projects that have employed the 4-sided, 8-t impact roller (BH-1300). It is shown that the model is accurate and reliable over a range of soil types. Furthermore, a series of parametric studies confirms its robustness in generalizing data. In addition, the results of the comparative study indicate that the optimal LGP model has a better predictive performance than the existing artificial neural network (ANN) model developed earlier by the authors.Rapid urban and industrial growth has created a demand for construction on ground which has previously been considered unsuitable, such as collapsible and loose natural soils, former landfills, fill from mine workings and sites with prior uncontrolled filling. Rolling dynamic compaction (RDC) has found to be useful to improve such problematic soils and is now widely used globally. This technique involves towing a heavy (6–12 t), non-circular (3-, 4- and 5-sided) module behind a tractor, where the module rotates about its corners as it is drawn forward ( Estimation of the influence depth of RDC is of prime importance, in particular, if multi-layered soil profiles are encountered. Although RDC has been studied experimentally through a number of field-based case studies, until recently as a result of work undertaken by the authors, there has been no rational means available for the prior estimation of the effectiveness of RDC in different ground conditions. Subsequently, current practice associated with estimating site-specific operational parameters relies heavily on the judgment of geotechnical engineering practitioners. In addition, field trials are often carried out, where a testing pad is arranged, which is representative of a large-scale operation of the compaction procedure. The efficacy of RDC is basically verified using a combination of surface settlement surveys, soil sampling and in situ tests, such as penetrometer, field density and geophysical testing, that are undertaken after different numbers of module passes. As such, field trials are valuable for ascertaining the relevant operational parameters, especially the optimal number of impact roller passes needed to achieve the required percentage of maximum dry density, but it incurs a non-trivial cost and time commitment. Until recently, as described below, no method was available to predict, a priori, the density improvement at a specified depth below ground due to RDC, based on subsurface conditions and the number of roller passes. With this in mind, this research investigates the feasibility of using linear genetic programming (LGP), which is one of the well-known machine learning techniques available to develop predictive models. Similar to artificial neural networks (ANNs), genetic programming (GP) can be considered as another alternative approach to conventional methods, due to its ability to approximate any linear/nonlinear relationship among a set of observed input and output data in the absence of prior knowledge of the underlying mechanisms of the system. Recently, the authors suggested an approach based on ANNs ( The developed LGP-based model in this study utilizes a reliable database consisting of DCP results obtained from several ground improvement projects, associated with the Broons 4-sided, 8-t ‘impact roller’. Since this dataset has also been employed previously in the ANN model developed recently by the authors ( GP is an evolutionary computational approach of nonlinear modeling, where the computer programs evolve automatically to optimize a solution towards a pre-defined goal. This machine learning technique aligns with the theory of Darwinian natural selection and was first introduced by In the traditional GP approach, which is also referred to as tree-based genetic programming (TGP), the computer programs (individuals) have a symbolic representation of a rooted tree-like structure with ordered branches in which the root node and internal nodes are comprised of functions whereas, external nodes (leaves) contain the input values or constants ( There is a special variant of LGP, named automatic induction of machine code by genetic programming (AIMGP), where the individuals are represented and manipulated as native binary machine code ( In general, the basic steps of the LGP evolutionary algorithm ( Initializing a population of randomly generated programs and evaluating their fitness; Running a tournament and selecting the winning programs; Transforming the winner programs into offsprings probabilistically subjected to genetic operations, i.e. crossover and mutation; Replacing the tournament losing programs with the offspring programs; and Repeating Steps 2–4 until the termination or convergence criteria are satisfied. The details of the database used to develop the LGP-based model, as well as the methodology adopted for model development, are discussed separately below. This study utilizes a comprehensive database that comprises in situ strength data in the form of DCP test results. The DCP ( Given the problem at hand, the model is established to predict the degree of soil improvement of the ground with respect to the number of roller passes. Thus, the single model output should necessarily define the ground density at a particular location resulting from several passes of the impact roller. However, in selecting the model input variables, it is essential to incorporate the factors that are most influential on the model output variable. There are several fundamental parameters that significantly affect soil compaction: the geotechnical properties at the time of compaction, such as ground density, moisture content, and soil type; and the amount of energy imparted to the ground during compaction. Consequently, the model input variables are defined so that they effectively address each of the aforementioned factors that influence soil behavior upon the application of RDC. Whilst the standard DCP procedure involves recording the number of blows for each 50 mm of penetration, a compromise must be achieved between model parsimony and predictive accuracy. In this study, the average DCP blow count per 300 mm is used to indicate the average density with depth. Therefore, the initial density at the point of interest is selected to be described by the input variable of initial DCP count (blow/300 mm), whilst the single output variable is described by the final DCP count (blow/300 mm). In addition, the amount of energy imparted to the ground during RDC is described in terms of the number of roller passes so that two input variables are specified: the initial and the final numbers of roller passes corresponding to the initial and final densities at a particular location, respectively. The average depth (m) is established as another input variable, whilst the soil type is also adopted. The soil type is defined in a generalized form at each DCP location by implementing a primary (dominant) and a secondary soil type. With the availability of project data in the DCP database, four distinct soil types are characterized as: (i) sand-clay, (ii) clay–silt, (iii) sand-none, and (iv) sand-gravel. However, it is worth noting that soil moisture content is not included as a model input due to the paucity of data, as it is usually not measured routinely in practice in ground improvement projects. However, the moisture content is considered to be described implicitly by the DCP data, given that penetrometer test results, including those from the DCP, are affected by soil moisture. The input and output variables involved in the LGP-based model development and their statistics are presented in Prior to model development, the entire dataset is subdivided into two subsets, i.e. calibration and validation data. The calibration dataset is further subdivided into training and testing sets, by which the models are respectively trained and the best program is selected by testing. The testing set provides an estimate of the prediction error for a set of unseen data during the model calibration phase and this information is useful when selecting the optimal program model. The validation dataset is not used during model development, and thus, it is optional to provide this separate and additional dataset. However, it is with the validation dataset that the selected optimal model is assessed for its generalization capabilities. Since the optimal model is evaluated with respect to an unseen dataset, the results are significant for the evaluation of model performance. In order to allow a fair comparison between the results obtained from the proposed LGP-based model and those from the existing ANN model ( In this study, the commercially available software Discipulus version 5.2 ( In this study, several LGP projects are carried out including only the arithmetic functions (+, –, ×, /). Furthermore, in order to permit the evolution of highly nonlinear models, inclusion of mathematical functions (sin, cos, exponential, absolute and square root), in addition to basic arithmetic operators, is also considered. This study applies the mean square error (MSE) as the fitness measure, which can be defined as The population size parameter is regulated at several different levels, i.e. 500, 1000, 2000, 2500 and 5000. However, it has been found that the evolutionary process converges faster in semi-isolated sub-populations, named ‘demes’ than in a single population of equal size ( Likewise, in this study, many numbers of LGP projects are carried out, where all the above described combinations of parameters are tested. Each LGP project is made up of a series of runs, which progressively increases in length during the course of a project. Each run is allowed to evolve in generations, while MSE is being monitored continuously. However, the projects are terminated manually, given a reasonable time (ranging from a few minutes to more than 20 h on a standard PC) to evolve into an accurate model and when no further improvement in model performance is likely to occur. Finally, the resulting LGP models are evaluated using several performance measures with respect to each of the three data subsets and compared to select the optimal program. The criteria used to evaluate the performance of the evolved program models include the coefficient of correlation ( The following sections summarize the results of the optimal LGP model along with a comparison with those obtained from the existing ANN model. Moreover, the details of parametric study and sensitivity analysis are also discussed. In addition, the selected optimal LGP model for predicting the final DCP (blow/300 mm) is presented in computing code in the C language in The performance statistics in terms of Given that the error values (e.g. RMSE and MAE) are minimum, when: | 0.2 < | | Accordingly, it can be concluded that there exists a strong correlation between the model's predicted results and the measured data since  In order to investigate further the model's performance, the LGP predictions and the measured data, with respect to the validation dataset, are assessed subject to several additional measures, as suggested in the literature. A comparative study is conducted between the results obtained from the LGP-based model and those obtained from the ANN-based model recently developed by the authors ( Further to the above assessment, the predictions of final DCP count from the LGP and ANN models are compared graphically with the measured final DCP count values, with respect to the testing and validation datasets, and the resulting histograms are shown in Although the LGP model yields satisfactory performance in terms of the measures as discussed above, it is essential to investigate the model's behavior in a parametric study to further test its robustness. To this end, the LGP model is implemented to predict the output for a synthetic input dataset which lies within the range that model is trained against, in order to examine whether the results conform to the known physical behavior of the system. Each of the model input variables is varied successively, while maintaining all other input variables at a pre-defined value. In this case, the model output of final DCP count (blow/300 mm), which expresses the post compaction condition, is examined given the different initial conditions as described by initial DCP count (i.e. 5, 10, 15, 20 blow/300 mm), soil types (i.e. sand-clay, clay–silt, sand-none and sand-gravel) and final numbers of roller passes (i.e. 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40 passes), while the initial number of roller passes is set at zero. The results of the parametric study are shown in It is informative to conduct a sensitivity analysis to evaluate the contribution of each input variable in predicting the target output. This is a common approach and has been utilized in a number of applications ( A similar sensitivity analysis has been conducted during the ANN modeling phase, as described by This paper presents a new approach based on GP for the predictions of the efficacy of RDC, which is considered to be an alternative to conventional soil compaction technology. A particular variant of GP, i.e. LGP, is used to develop the model. A comprehensive database consisting of in situ density data in terms of DCP test results is utilized, associated with various ground improvement project records involving the Broons' 4-sided, 8-t ‘impact roller’. In model development, five input variables, i.e. soil type, average depth (m), initial number of roller passes, initial DCP count (blow/300 mm) and the final number of roller passes, are considered to be the most influential with respect to predictions of the final DCP count (blow/300 mm), which is the sole output of the predictive models. The selected optimal LGP model is found to yield accurate estimates of the final DCP count, with a coefficient of correlation ( The LGP model presented in this study is expected to provide initial estimates of the effectiveness of RDC in different ground conditions, which are likely to be of particular value in the pre-design phase. It is, nevertheless, recommended that the model predictions be validated on site using a traditional field trial, as the data upon which the model is based incorporate a limited number of soil types. Moreover, this study has focused solely on the 4-sided, 8-t impact roller, and as such, the developed predictive models are valid only for that specific RDC module (BH-1300). We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This research was supported under The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at