Olecranon fractures, which make up 10% of upper extremity fractures in adults, often require anatomic reduction and stable internal fixation. Successful olecranon fracture osteosynthesis has classically been achieved via tension band wiring or plate fixation. This article reviews the indications, outcomes, and a surgical technique as an alternative construct for tension band wiring of olecranon fractures. The technique involves placement of an ulnar intramedullary partially threaded screw that is used as a proximal point of attachment for tension band wiring of the olecranon. Although infrequently used by orthopedic surgeons, this construct has been shown to be biomechanically and clinically superior to classic Kirschner wire tension banding techniques. This review is intended to familiarize surgeons with a surgical technique that can be applied to a variety of proximal ulna fractures.The ulnohumeral joint provides static mechanical stability to the elbow throughout a full range of motion. Multiple surgical treatments have been described for olecranon fractures, including tension band wiring (TBW), plate fixation (PF), intramedullary (IM) screw fixation, IM nail fixation, and fracture excision with triceps advancement. Although new implant designs are being implemented in the treatment of these injuries, olecranon fracture osteosynthesis has classically been achieved via TBW or PF. TBW constructs can be used in most simple olecranon fractures with minimal to no comminution and an intact articular margin (ie, Mayo Type I and Mayo Type IIA fracture patterns). Contraindications to TBW of the olecranon include olecranon fractures with significant articular comminution, fractures extending distal to the semilunar notch, and olecranon fracture dislocations (ie, Mayo Type IIB and Mayo Type III fracture patterns). TBW constructs convert tensile forces (generated by the contraction of the extensor mechanism at the elbow) into compressive forces at the fracture site. An alternative construct for TBW of olecranon fractures that introduces improved fracture compression has been described. Clinical outcomes following operative fixation of simple transverse olecranon fractures are favorable. Duckworth et al General anesthesia, regional anesthesia, or a combination can be used. A perioperative multimodal analgesic regimen is recommended. The authors use a technique previously described by Eglseder. A small longitudinal incision along the midsubstance of the triceps tendon at its insertion on the proximal ulna is made that must accommodate passage of a screw and 13-mm washer ( Olecranon fractures are common injuries that often require surgical management. Although multiple techniques are available for olecranon fracture osteosynthesis, IM screw TBW is biomechanically favorable, technically simple, and has fewer complications compared with more commonly used fixation constructs. The authors would like to acknowledge Elliot Herbold and Jeff Turpin for their assistance in the creation of this manuscript. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.