Mesoporous silica materials mainly of type MSU-X functionalized with simple amine and thiol (mercapto-) ligands, have been used to adsorb gold thiosulfate complex from ammoniacal copper-bearing solutions. Variation in major reagent concentrations was investigated for the determination of the appropriate dosages of ammonium, thiosulfate and cupric salts to obtain a high recovery of gold thiosulfate from simulated leach solutions. It was found that ammonium/ammonia concentration and specifically its ratio with respect to that of thiosulfate had determining effects on gold adsorption by functionalized mesoporous silica. The adsorbents performed well in both neutral and alkaline pH provided that the latter was provided by aqueous ammonia solution. There was significant interference with gold adsorption in presence of high concentrations of sodium ions in the solutions. Among the anionic species, chloride was found to cause the largest detrimental effect on gold thiosulfate uptake by the hybrid silica. Adsorption isotherms and kinetics of gold recovery by functional mesoporous silica were investigated. The material showed exceptionally high adsorption capacities reaching above 3mmol (∼600mg) gold per gram of amine-bearing adsorbent accompanied by an average maximum of 80% precious metal recovery.Despite the long-term use of cyanidation, there has been a growing interest in non-cyanide gold technology mainly due to the technical or economic failure of cyanidation process to extract gold from the so-called difficult-to-treat ores (including The chemistry of the ammonia-thiosulfate system, however, is found to be complicated due to the simultaneous presence of complexing ligands such as ammonia and thiosulfate, the inevitable existence of Cu(II)/Cu(I) redox couple and the presence of decomposition products of thiosulfate such as polythionates. In spite of this fact, the leaching of gold in thiosulfate solutions has been investigated extensively and is reasonably well understood, with thermodynamic studies indicating that More recently functionalized mesoporous silica and silica gel adsorbents (organosilicas) have been used as highly stable ceramic frameworks for recovery of gold(III) from single or multiple component solutions, and the adsorbents were studied with respect to their functionality, capacity and selectivity The current study is therefore devoted to assess the adsorption recovery of gold from such ammoniacal copper-bearing thiosulfate solutions taking advantage of functionalized mesoporous silica frameworks. The research is a development of a most recent initiative by the researchers at Laurentian University A group of mesoporous silica materials mainly of MSU- Mesoporous silica materials (of types HMS and MSU- Adsorption from gold thiosulfate solutions was performed in Erlenmeyer flasks containing 50 FTIR analyses were also performed using a Bruker’s Alpha instrument to obtain the infrared transmission spectra of the materials dispersed into KBr pellets. The effect of changing the concentrations of thiosulfate (denoted as “ThioS” on the graphs) by adding different dosages of the potassium salt (K In the next experiments, effect of adding copper ions in the form of sulfate and carbonate salts on adsorption of gold thiosulfate by hybrid silicas was examined. Complete dissolution of copper carbonate was confirmed by AAS analysis, which was also confirmed visually by inspecting the disappearance of the greenish brown coloration of the initial solutions after minutes from the addition of the copper carbonate salt. As observed in In the next step, while maintaining the copper concentration constant, the effect of increasing the molar From this point forward, due to the repeatability and similarities of the trends observed in the gold adsorption behavior of different mesoporous structures at different reagent concentration regimes, MSU2-S–N was selected as a representative of the highest capacity adsorbents. There was also no further justification to use quaternary ammonium (N In the next series of graphs that follow, the double and triple variation curves for the concentration of the three major components (i.e. copper, thiosulfate and total ammonia) on the material’s gold adsorption capacity in the thiosulfate system are plotted. The relevant data are also given in At higher total ammonia concentration levels (i.e. 0.5 The graphs in It was not the scope of the work in this research to perform ion speciation analysis of such complicated solution system. However, by visual monitoring, wherever the reagent concentrations were such that the resultant equilibrium mixture had a characteristic dark blue coloration (accompanied by ammonia scents normally at pH values toward 9 and above), copper(II)ammine formation was evident. On the other hand wherever the equilibrium solutions had clear colorless characteristic (commonly toward neutral pH in which ammonium ions rather than ammonia were considered to be dominant), it indicated the presence of copper(I) mainly as thiosulfate complex and possibly to a minor extent, the less stable copper(I) ammine complex Finally, as a conclusion to the above study on the simulated gold thiosulfate adsorption system, the most stable condition at 1.0 Different ammonium salts were used as major sources of ammonium/ammonia as a balance to the amount already present from dissolution of ammonium thiosulfate. Adsorption isotherms and recovery of gold thiosulfate were studied in each case. The results for MSU2-S–N adsorbent are presented in Sodium salts of three common anions in the thiosulfate leaching system were introduced into the adsorption solution. As shown in The results of pH investigations on gold thiosulfate uptake by MSU2-S–N material in the same experimental set-up and conditions as in the previous section are presented in When the pH was increased (toward 8 and above) by NaOH additions, the adsorption capacity was dramatically decreased so that gold recovery fell under 10% at pH In order to better elucidate this latter issue with respect to the possible interference of sodium in the adsorption of gold thiosulfate on ligand-functionalized silica at alkaline medium, another set of experiments was carried out the results of which are shown in In such simulated solutions as those in the current study, one might also regard the co-presence of nitrate anions in solution. Nitrate One assumption on the effect of sodium on the adsorption system is the possibility of certain electrostatic interactions (e.g. ion association/pairing) between sodium cation and (gold) thiosulfate anionic species. Ion association phenomena in such solution conditions might significantly affect the stability as well as the mobility of certain charged species. Such effects resemble the role of electrolyte (or salt) concentration in the stability of a colloid or dispersed systems. These interactions could be more significant especially if any clustering of the (gold) thiosulfate species was occurring in solution or toward adsorption sites. Although this is yet a hypothesis, exceptionally high gold adsorption capacity of amine ligands (as will be shown in the isotherms of adsorption) could also infer the possibility of such clustering of adsorbates to exist. The effect of sodium (and in general alkali salts) versus ammonium salt of thiosulfate on the behavior of gold leaching has been studied. In leaching of pure gold, it has been reported that thiosulfate concentration remained largely stable in the sodium thiosulphate solution indicating the oxidation of thiosulfate was much less than in case of ammonium thiosulphate in solution Adsorption of gold thiosulfate from solutions with different initial gold concentrations was investigated and adsorption isotherms were obtained. As is observed in In the kinetic tests, as observed in A review and application of some of the most common adsorption kinetics models ( In Adsorption of gold thiosulfate on organically-functionalized mesoporous silica from simulated thiosulfate leach solutions resulted in a high average 80% precious metal recovery in both neutral and alkaline pH conditions. Total ammonia concentration of 1.0 The neutral pH Excessive amounts (typically above 1000 Kinetics of the adsorption system showed that the precious metal uptake on the hybrid material had a rather slow rate especially during the initial minutes and hours until it reached its equilibrium capacity after about 18–20 The authors wish to appreciate the guides and the pioneering works and ideas to feed this project by Dr. L. Amaratunga and his co-workers. Thanks are also due to Dr. E. Guerra and Dr. J. Gray-Munro for scientific advice and L. Baudet and P. Guerin for technical assistance. Laurentian University is also acknowledged for the provision of the facilities to undertake this research.