The recovery of cyanide from waste effluents of the cyanidation process in gold extraction plants is important environmentally and economically. In this respect ion exchange is being tested as a possible economic and versatile method for gold ores containing copper minerals. The present study shows the potential of strong and weak base ion exchange resins, particularly the former, for separating copper cyanide complexes from these industrial effluents, and in particular the feasibility of elution with different eluants. Three possible reagents are proposed for use with these resins and the industrial effluents as load solutions: NaCN, NaSCN and NaNO3. The recovery of copper complexes from industrial effluents using a strong base resin, Lewatit MP-500, and NaSCN as eluant solution, is very high, with recoveries of over 90% in each step. Problems arise when several cycles of load and elution are carried out with the resin, and the performance of the resin decreases when working with unfiltered solutions after several operational cycles.The gold extraction process ( There is an important amount of cyanide in the liquid effluent from the adsorption stage, this being both a very important environmental as well as economic problem of the process. Its consumption depends on the mineralogy, particularly on the presence of certain metals, most importantly copper, which also form cyanide complexes. Diverse complexes can be formed in solution between copper and cyanide. Their nature depends on the physico-chemical conditions of the solution, such as cyanide concentration, pH, other components or temperature. Cu(II) complexes are usually unstable and decompose into Cu(I) complexes, existing as different species: Different cyanide species have quite different properties with respect to their loading adsorption capacity onto the activated carbon. The affinity of mono- and dicyanide copper complexes for activated carbon is greater than that of gold complexes. However, the affinities of the tri- and tetracyanide copper complexes are lower than those of gold cyanide complexes, so the formation of the former complexes is preferred in the CIL process. In any case, these facts produce major problems: increased cyanide consumption and adsorption of copper compounds onto the activated carbon, reducing its capacity to adsorb cyanide gold complexes. In addition to the methods normally used for the destruction of cyanide in wastewaters ( The aim of the present study is to evaluate the performance of an ion exchange operation to recover copper cyanide from residual effluents of the gold extraction process. With this aim, the behavior of different anionic resins in contact with real and synthetic waste effluents was studied. Several reagents were selected to carry out the key elution step and their effectiveness in the separation of the cyanide complexes in the resin was verified. Finally, the mechanical resistance of the selected resin was tested after several operation load/elution cycles in order to study the effect of attrition on the ion exchange capacity. Two anionic resins were tested, the strong base resin Lewatit MP500 with a quaternary amine (type I) functional group and the weak base resin Lewatit MP64 with ternary and quaternary amines. Both resins have a crosslinked polystyrene matrix and are manufactured by Bayer. The total ion exchange capacity given by the manufacturer is 1.1 eq/l for the Lewatit MP500, and 1.4 eq/l. for the Lewatit MP64. An industrial wastewater from a gold mine in Asturias (Spain), was treated with the resins. A characteristization of the effluent is shown in Based on industrial usage, product availability, economics, interaction chemistry and the literature ( Runs were carried out at room temperature in cylindrical stirred tanks of 600 ml volume at 125 rpm, monitoring the change in copper and cyanide concentrations in different solutions contacted with each resin. All the conditioning, loading and elution of the resin experiments were carried out with 4 g of resin and different volumes of liquid solutions. To prepare the resin, the initial Cl The resin was subsequently contacted with the loading solution. The L/S ratio (volume of liquid (ml)/mass of resin (g)) was adjusted by varying the volume of solution and maintaining the amount of resin. The resin and the solution were then separated, and the resin was finally washed with distilled water, in order to recover the solution retained in the pores. The method used to elute the resin was similar to the load step: the resin was contacted with the elution solution at different L/S ratios in each run, and loaded by washing. Copper analysis was carried out using an atomic absorption spectrophotometer PHILIPS PU9100 at a wavelength of 324.8 nm. Cyanide WAD analysis, which includes free and complexed cyanide, was carried out colorimetrically using the picric acid method, in which a PHILIPS PU8625 spectrophotometer was used to measure the change in coloration from yellow to orange of a cyanide solution in the presence of picric acid (trinitrophenol) at a wavelength of 520 nm. The loading of each ion in the resin was determined by a mass balance. In order to evaluate the behavior of the two selected resins, initial tests were carried out with the synthetic solution to determine the useful capacity; 4 g of each resin was loaded with the same volume of the synthetic solution (400 ml), L/S=100 ml solution/g resin. The concentration of copper was then monitored for 8 h and the results of these two total load stages are shown in The value of the useful load capacity with L/S=100 using the synthetic resin is 7.41 mg of copper/g resin for the weak resin (MP64), and 25.7 mg of copper/g resin for the strong resin (MP500). Some authors ( In order to evaluate the behavior of the MP500 resin under different L/S ratios, several runs were carried out, in which 4 g of the resin were loaded with different volumes of the synthetic solution, monitoring the copper concentration with time ( Load and elution tests were carried out with a L/S ratio of 50. The resin was loaded with the three effluents tested: the synthetic solution, the filtered effluent and the unfiltered effluent. After the load step the resin was washed with distilled water; the elution was then carried out on the three eluants proposed. The load percentage was over 90% of the initial copper in all cases. The NaCN and NaSCN were tested as eluants by The results of the runs can be seen in Recoveries of copper are summarized in After the elution step, the resin remains loaded with thiocyanate ions and the recovery of thiocyanate from the resin would be very important for the economic viability of the process, because of the recycling of this product as eluant and because of the potential for using the resin in several cycles of load and elution with no other reagent. The treatment of the resin in a column with a solution of ferric sulfate has been tested by other workers ( A very important factor when working in ion exchange operations is the mechanical resistance of the resin to attrition, especially when effluents with a high solid contents are treated, as in this case with 37% v/v of solids in the effluent. If the degradation of the ion exchange resin is high it must be changed after a short time of use with the consequent economic cost. So it is important in this case to know the resistance of the resin, in order to evaluate the mode of operation, or the feasibility of filtration before the ion exchange operation. In order to carry out these tests, several stages of load and elution were carried out using the two industrial effluents (unfiltered and filtered) as load solutions with the same resin during six consecutive stages of load and elution. The resin was eluted with NaSCN to try to simulate the real operation in the plant. The problems arising from the lack of mechanical resistance of the resin after several load/elution cycles can thus be studied. Results are shown in The capacity of the resin in the successive stages of load and elution has also been studied in these tests. Results can also be seen in Several microphotographs of the resin particles were taken after the runs so that the breaking of the spheres could be compared in each case. Some of these microphotographs (×30) can be observed in  The presence of the solids presents an important problem because of the breaking of the resin, hence a substantial mechanical requirement for the resin is needed. In order to avoid this problem, filtration or “cleaning” of the effluent should be carried out before column ion exchange industrial operations. The present study has demonstrated the possibility of using a strong anionic ion exchange resin to separate copper cyanide complexes from residual effluents of the gold extraction process. The use of these resins to carry out the load stage and subsequent elution with a NaSCN 1.25 M solution leads to very good results in the separation of the copper complexes. However, despite the good copper recoveries in the elution stage, the operation seems to be limited by the progressive decrease in the amount of copper complexes loaded in a certain volume of resin after successive load stages with the industrial effluent. The presence of solids in this effluent makes the ion exchange operation difficult, such that the capacity of the resin diminishes after several cycles of load and elution. Mechanical requirements in relation to the characteristics of the effluent are very important in improving performance.