Although the influence of gas sorption-induced coal deformation on porosity and permeability has been widely recognized, prior studies are all under conditions of no change in overburden stress and effective stress-absent where effective stresses scale inversely with applied pore pressures. Here we extend formalism to couple the transport and sorption of a compressible fluid within a dual-porosity medium where the effects of deformation are rigorously accommodated. This relaxes the prior assumption that total stresses remain constant and allows exploration of the full range of mechanical boundary conditions from invariant stress to restrained displacement. Evolution laws for permeability and related porosity are defined at the micro-scale and applied to both matrix and an assumed orthogonal, regular and continuous fracture system. Permeability and porosity respond to changes in effective stress where sorption-induced strains may build total stresses and elevate effective stresses. Gas accumulation occurs in both free- and adsorbed-phases and due to effective grain and skeletal compressibilities. A finite element model is applied to quantify the net change in permeability, the gas flow, and the resultant deformation in a prototypical coal seam under in situ stresses. Results illustrate how the CO2 injectivity is controlled both by the competition between the effective stress and the gas transport induced volume change within the matrix system and by the dynamic interaction between the matrix system and the fracture system. For typical parameters, initial injection-related increases in permeability due to reduced effective stresses may endure for days to years but are ultimately countered by long-term reductions in permeability which may decline by an order of magnitude. Models suggest the crucial role of stresses and the dynamic interaction between matrix and fractures in correctly conditioning the observed response.With the growing international concern over the issue of global warming, geological sequestration of CO For dual-porosity media the porous or micro-porous matrix is the principal reservoir for the interstitial fluid either as a liquid or a gas and the interconnected fracture network provides access to these matrix blocks. Dual-porosity representations ( All of these previous models were developed primarily for the flow of slightly compressible liquids without sorption, and are not applicable to the flow of compressible fluids such as CO The net change in permeability accompanying gas sequestration is controlled competitively by the influence of effective stresses and matrix swelling, again controlled by the boundary conditions applied locally between the end-members of null changes in either mean stress or volume strain ( CO In the following, a set of field equations for coal deformation and gas flow are defined. These field equations are coupled through new porosity and permeability models for coal matrix and fractures. These derivations are based on the following assumptions: Coal is a dual poroelastic continuum. Strains are infinitesimal. Gas contained within the pores is ideal, and its viscosity is constant under isothermal conditions. Conditions are isothermal. Coal is saturated by gas. Compositions of the gas are not competitive, i.e., only one gas component is considered at a time. In the following derivations, the coal is conceptualized as in For all equations, traditional conventions are used: a comma followed by subscripts denotes differentiation with respect to spatial coordinates and repeated indices in the same expression imply summation over the range of the indices. The strain–displacement relationship is defined as: The gas sorption-induced strain, Combining Eqs. This equation is the governing equation for coal deformation. In these equations, three variables, The mass balance equation for the gas phase is defined as Assuming the effect of gravity is relatively small and can be neglected, the Darcy volumetric flow rate can be defined as follows, In Eqs. Dynamic porosity evolution in the matrix Dynamic porosity evolution in the fractures Dynamic permeability evolution in the matrix Dynamic permeability evolution in the fractures The porosity model for the matrix is defined as ( Experiments also show that the permeability of coal matrix varies with porosity as ( Here, the subscript 0 denotes the initial value of the variable and subscript The porosity of the fracture system with cubic blocks is defined as ( For the fracture system comprising continuous orthogonal fractures, the cubic law for fracture permeability can be expressed as The dynamic permeability of the fracture system can be expressed as If the initial permeability of the fracture system is For this cubic fracture model, the initial porosity and permeability can be calculated by the initial size of matrix block and cleat aperture. Therefore, Eqs. For convenience, the governing equation for coal deformation is re-written as follows: In Eq. Therefore, Eqs. This DP model is more complex than some other single porosity models and those that do not explicitly accommodate displacements. However the required input data are not significantly greater than for “smeared” single porosity “invariant-total-stress models.” The input data can be categorized as four types.     These properties are the basic parameters needed by the model. Some other parameters can be calculated from these parameters. In the normal manner, process-based observations of response result from the application of measured and estimated parameters and their matching with field observations through calibration. For the Navier-type equation, the displacement and stress conditions on the boundary are given as Eqs. In order to investigate the dual poroelastic response of a coal seam to CO Appropriate boundary conditions must be applied to this coupled coal deformation and gas flow problem. For the coal deformation model, the left side and base are both rollered and in situ stresses are applied to the top and the right side. The ratio of the horizontal in situ stresses (along page to across page) is kept as 1.5. For gas flow, a constant pressure of 8 A series of injection conditions as listed in To investigate the impact of skeletal and grain modulii on the resulting response, four simulations were conducted with: (1) As shown in Eq. The relation between matrix permeability ratio and matrix pore pressure at a specific point is shown in The evolution of the matrix permeability ratio with time at a specific point is shown in The spatial and temporal variations of the pore pressure in matrix are shown in Four simulations were conducted: (1) These analyses demonstrate the competitive changes in permeability in the fractures and matrix as the coal matrix swells. As fracture pressures are initially increased, effective stresses are reduced and fracture permeabilities concomitantly increased ( For the case of CO The evolutions of spatial changes of pore pressure in the fracture are shown in Three simulations were conducted: (1) The evolution of ultimate permeability is weakly linked to initial stress magnitude, as illustrated in The pore pressure distributions within fracture at different points in time are shown in In this study, a novel dual poroelastic model is developed to quantify the dynamics of CO Unlike the flow of slightly compressible fluids where no sorption is included, the gas sorption for this study is the primary mechanism for either gas production or sequestration. In this dual poroelastic model, there are five contributing mechanisms to the storativity, namely: free gas compression, gas absorption, coal grain deformation, coal shrinkage/swelling, and bulk skeletal deformation of the coal. Our simulation results indicate that the volume of gas released (or sequestered) from the adsorbed-phase contributes about 90% to the total gas content. Unlike dual poroelastic models for the flow of slightly compressible fluids where the coal grain modulus can be assumed large in comparison to the skeletal modulus, the coal grain modulus for this study may have significant impacts on response. Model results indicated that the permeability of the matrix is mainly affected by sorption-induced coal deformation. The grain modulus is an important parameter that affects the evolution of permeability when adsorption is taken into consideration. The greater the ratio of coal bulk modulus to coal grain modulus, the more rapid the reduction in matrix permeability ratio. Unlike the flow of slightly compressible fluids in inert media where the fracture permeability typically increases with an increase in pore pressure in the fracture, this study illustrates a counter influence of sorption. Early-time increases in permeability in response to elevated fracture pressures are lost and ultimately reversed as sorption-induced changes in permeability swell the matrix, locally increase total stresses, and elevate effective stresses. The timing of this reversal in response is conditioned by the diffusive timescale conditioned by the ratio of fracture spacing squared to the sorptive diffusivity of the coal matrix. Changes in permeability are shown to be important and fast acting. Permeability may be reduced by an order of magnitude from the initial permeability and these changes act within the design lives of typical projects (days to years). End member behaviors for stress or displacement boundary conditions may be recovered directly from the constitutive relations. Where local total stress conditions are applied, permeability at steady state will increase for both matrix and fracture system in response to injection. Where strains are constrained, injection-induced permeabilities within the fracture will initially increase and subsequently decrease as sorptive stresses build. Where restraints are mixed, the response will be defined both by the constitutive behavior and local stress equilibrium, requiring that full solution of the coupled equations is completed. Thus, for accurate and reliable predictions of the response to gas injection in sorptive media, a fully coupled model linking transport, sorption and deformation must be employed. This work was supported by WA:ERA and by NISOH under contract 200-2008-25702. It was also supported by National Basic Research Program of China (2007CB209400) and by the State Key Laboratory for Geomechanics and Deep Underground Engineering, China University of Mining and Technology. These supports are gratefully acknowledged.