Safety inspection is an important ways to secure the safe production of coal mining enterprises. A host of scholars to date have focused on studying the safety inspection from the traditional game theory point of view, which is not consistent with the actual situation in terms of the assumptions of “fully rational participants” and “symmetric information”. Furthermore, the long-term dynamic game analysis under bounded rationality has not been considered. Therefore, in view of the insufficiency of the above mentioned research, this paper analyses the state inspection behaviour for coal mine safety from the perspective of an evolutionary game and combines the system dynamics (SD) with the concept of dynamic evolution to model and analyse the above long-term dynamic game process. The results show that there are three scenarios of the evolutionary game behaviour and two evolutionary stable strategies (ESS), and ESSs are closely related to the inspection cost, bribes, rewards, expected image loss, coal enterprise penalty, and the National Coal Mine Safety Administration (NCMSA) penalty. Furthermore, decreasing the bribes or inspection cost or increasing the rewards, image loss, coal enterprise penalty, or NCMSA penalty would help the NCMSA conscientiously perform its inspection functions.According to the In addition to clean production, a key to the coal mining industry is safe production. Underground coal mining is recognized as a high-risk operation in the whole world [ In view of the current situation, many Chinese and international scholars have begun to study the problem of safety inspection in coal enterprise safety production from the perspectives of different subjects, using traditional game theory to explain the reasons for the poor coal mine safety in China. Some scholars focus on the effectiveness of government coal enterprise safety inspection and regulation and believe that the incidence of coal mine accidents, the degree of workplace injury, and the production efficiency of coal mining enterprises are significantly related to the strength of government coal enterprise safety inspection and regulation. Therefore, these scholars advocate strengthening the inspection and regulation of the coal industry [ The remainder of this research is organized as follows. Section In this paper, the evolutionary game of state inspection behaviour is analysed according to the inspection responsibility of the NCMSA in It is assumed that the players are a single group composed of a number of indifferent coal enterprise safety inspection bureaus (NCMSA). The strategy of the coal enterprise safety inspection bureaus concerns whether or not to conscientiously carry out the inspection function. The ratio of conscientious implementation of inspection functions is Based on the above analysis, we also assume that the coal mine enterprises that violate the regulations will choose to bribe the coal enterprise safety inspection bureaus. The coal enterprise safety inspection bureaus that conscientiously carry out the inspection function will not accept bribes ( The above game of coal-mine safety inspection and its corresponding variables are shown below in On the basis of the evolutionary game theory, in the process of coal enterprise safety inspection, replicator dynamics are used to represent individual learning and evolutionary strategy. Therefore, the following coal mine safety inspection bureaus’ inspection fitness ( Therefore, the following average fitness of the coal enterprise safety inspection bureaus can be obtained. Assume that time is continuous and the coal mine safety inspection bureaus will tend to learn and imitate relatively high-reward game behaviour. More specifically, the more returns a strategic behaviour yields in a given behaviour distribution, the more it will be learned and imitated. According to the imitation dynamics, the following change rate of Make The replicated dynamic equation reflects the speed and direction of the strategy adjustment undertaken by the coal mine safety inspection bureaus. When the equation is equal to zero, the results show that the strategy adjustment speed equals zero, and the game gets a relatively balanced state. Therefore, make In addition, by analyzing the determinant and trace of Jacobian matrix, we can get the stability of equilibrium solution, which reflects the existence of evolution stable state. In the actual mine safety inspection process, with the increasing number of limited rational players, the game will become more complex, increasing the difficulty of analysing the evolutionary stable strategy among various strategies. Therefore, computer simulation technology [ The system dynamics (SD) is a science that combines system science theory with computer simulation and studies the feedback structure and behaviour of systems [ From the From Eq. From Therefore, three scenarios of the game behaviour can be derived as follows. Scenario 1: high inspection cost and high bribery, namely Scenario 2: low inspection cost and low bribery, namely Scenario 3: intermediate inspection cost and intermediate bribery, namely According to the evolutionary game SD model ( From From From Sensitivity analysis [ The results of the simulation of scenario 3, presented in This paper analyses the state inspection behaviour on coal enterprise safety from an evolutionary game point and combines SD with the concept of dynamic evolution to reveal the behaviour characteristics and stable state of the coal mine safety inspection bureaus. The following conclusions of this study are obtained: (1) When the sum of bribery by the illegal coal mine enterprises and the NCMSA inspection cost is greater than the sum of rewards, coal enterprises expected penalties, NCMSA expected image loss, and NCMSA expected penalties from superior bureaus, the ESS is ( (2) When the sum of bribery from the illegal coal mine enterprises and the NCMSA inspection cost is less than the sum of the average distribution rewards, coal enterprises expected penalties, NCMSA expected image loss, and NCMSA expected penalties from superior bureaus, the ESS is ( (3) When the sum of bribery from the illegal coal mine enterprises and the NCMSA inspection cost is in the interval of scenario 1 and scenario 2, the ESS is ( The above conclusions show that there are three scenarios of the evolutionary game behaviour and two evolutionary stable strategies (ESS), and ESSs are closely related to the inspection cost, bribes, rewards, expected image loss, coal enterprise penalty, and the National Coal Mine Safety Administration (NCMSA) penalty. Furthermore, decreasing the bribes or inspection cost or increasing the rewards, image loss, coal enterprise penalty, or NCMSA penalty would help the NCMSA conscientiously perform its inspection functions.  The authors report no declarations of interest. This research is supported by the