Heterotrophic fungi and their metabolic products have been used in extracting nickel and cobalt from low grade nickel lateritic ores. This study compared the potential of two commercial chelating resins based on iminodiacetate and aminophosphonate functional groups (Purolite S930 and S950) in recovering nickel and cobalt from pregnant bioleaching solutions. The sorption characteristics of these resins were examined using various metal concentrations (from 15 to 2000mg/L), chelating agents including citric, dl-malic and lactic acids, and solution pH. The solution pH was varied by preparing metal solutions using 0.01 and 0.1M of organic acids. Metals were recovered from loaded resins using 2M HNO3. To interpret the sorption behavior of the resins, the adsorption data were fitted to the Freundlich and Langmuir models. The results showed both nickel and cobalt organic complexes adsorptions were in a good agreement with the two empirical models suggesting that the adsorption mechanisms follow a combination of monolayer and multilayer. The adsorption performance of the aminophosphonate based resin (Purolite S950) was found to exceed that of the Purolite S930. Favourable adsorptions of nickel and cobalt complexes were achieved in weakly acidic solution. Purolite S950 also showed higher selectivity toward nickel and cobalt complexes compared to Purolite S930. The desorption efficiencies from Purolite S950 were about 90% for nickel and from 82% to 98% for cobalt.Current commercial extractions of nickel laterite ores including pyro- and hydrometallurgical processes are energy intensive and operational costs are high. Despite these difficulties, processing of laterite deposits continues to grow as high grade sulfide minerals continue to be depleted ( This study is concerned with the recovery of dissolved nickel and cobalt from the resulting complex solutions generated from the bioleaching process. Metals are currently recovered from solution by various techniques including precipitation, electrowinning and adsorption. In this study, metals were recovered using ion exchange resins. Ion exchange has become an important method for separating and extracting metals in hydrometallurgical processes ( The aim of this study is to examine the potential of two commercial chelating resins based on iminodiacetate and aminophosphonate functional groups (Purolite S930 and S950) in recovering nickel and cobalt from the pregnant solutions derived from bioleaching of nickel laterite ores. The use of resins in bioleaching processes will require a greater knowledge of equilibrium metal binding and its dependence on resin structure and medium conditions. This study thus included an investigation of the roles of complexing agents, solution pH and metal concentrations in the adsorption equilibria and stripping of nickel and cobalt complexes from S930 and S950 chelating resins. The chelating resins Purolite S930 and S950 (Purolite International Co., LTD) were used in this study. Purolite S930 and S950 are chelating ion exchange resins characterized by iminodiacetate and aminophosphonate functional groups respectively. These groups are bound in a macroporous polystyrene matrix (see All synthetic bioleaching solutions were prepared from analytical grade reagents. Metal solutions with concentrations from 15 to 2000 The sorption of single metals was studied by the batch technique. Adsorption tests were carried out at room temperature in 250-mL tank reactor. The general method of adsorption involved adding and equilibrating two grams of dry resins with 100-mL of metal–organic complex of various concentrations. Adsorption was carried out in a thermally controlled shaker. The reactors were agitated in an incubator shaker for 24 At the completion of the adsorption test, the resins were separated by filtration. Metals were then eluted from the resin with 100-mL of 2 In this study, two empirical adsorption models were considered, the Langmuir and Freundlich models. The Nickel adsorption isotherms of various organic acid complexes onto the two resins, Purolite S930 and S950, are compared in The The greater affinity of the nickel complexes to the aminophophonic resin may be associated with the reduced steric hindrance in comparison to that provided by the iminodiacetate resin. Comparison of the adsorption of nickel–organic complexes onto the resins in this study to those of nickel chloride (1.5 Similarly, the adsorption of cobalt–organic complexes onto the two resins, Purolite S930 and S950 are compared in The corresponding model parameters for the adsorption of cobalt from The effects of solution pH were investigated by using 0.01 and 0.1 Desorption studies were carried out in 2 High regeneration efficiencies were achieved for nickel complexes adsorbed in both Purolite S930 and S950 (about 90%). This is with the exception of adsorbed nickel–citrate complexes onto Purolite S930 which showed a regeneration efficiency of less than 80% (see The regeneration efficiencies for cobalt complexes are shown in In summary, the regeneration efficiencies from Purolite S950 were about 90% for nickel complexes and from 82% to 98% for cobalt complexes. These results suggest the nature of the complexes generated as a result of leaching conditions and efficiency (the extent of metal dissolution) has little effect on the efficiency of metal desorption from Purolite S950. The investigation of metal recovery from bioleaching of nickel laterite ores using two commercial chelating resins, Purolite S930 and S950, with iminodiacetic and aminophosphonic acid functional groups, respectively, can be concluded as follows: Purolite S950 showed a greater performance in comparison to Purolite S930 in recovering both nickel and cobalt from synthetic bioleaching solutions. Adsorptions of nickel and cobalt organic complexes onto Purolite S950 are in good agreement with both Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models. The mechanism for metal uptake follows a combination of monolayer and multilayer adsorption. Multilayer adsorption of nickel is likely to be associated with the competitive adsorption among the metal complexes, hydrogen ion and anions. It appears that the nature of the functional groups and steric hindrance affects the adsorption behavior onto the resin. The aminophosphonic based resin provides less steric hindrance in comparison to the iminodiacetic acid resin. The adsorption capacity of nickel and cobalt complexes onto Purolite S950 is lower in comparison to adsorption of metals from aqueous solution. These are reflected from the model parameters, The adsorption capacity of nickel and cobalt decreases as the bioleach solution becomes more acidic. Acidic conditions promote the adsorption of both the hydrogen ions and organic acid anions onto the resins. Optimal adsorptions of nickel and cobalt organic complexes onto Purolite S950 are achieved under weakly acidic condition. The regeneration efficiency suggests that Purolite S950 provided high efficiency for both nickel about 90% and cobalt from 82% to 98%. It also appears that the nature of the metal complexes derived from typical bioleaching conditions do not have a significant effect on the overall regeneration efficiency. The authors gratefully acknowledge the scholarship support of the Royal Thai Government and the Australian Research Council for the financial support toward this study.