Background
                  Measured shortening of midshaft clavicle fracture fragments is known to be influenced by multiple factors. The influence of radiographic projection on vertical displacement is unclear. The aims of this study were (1) to quantify the difference in measurements of vertical displacement in an absolute, relative, and categorical manner between 5 different projections; (2) to quantify the differences in interobserver and intraobserver agreement using a standardized method for measuring vertical displacement; and (3) to assess the association between categorical and continuous descriptions of vertical displacement.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A clinical measurement study was conducted on 31 sets of digitally reconstructed radiographs in 5 different projections (15° and 30° caudocranial, anteroposterior, and 15° and 30° craniocaudal views). Categorical data on vertical displacement in quartiles from 0%-200% were obtained followed by measurements using a standardized method by 3 observers at 2 points in time. Interobserver and intraobserver agreement for each of the 5 views was calculated.
               
                  Results
                  The absolute and relative vertical displacement showed no statistically significant difference between any of the caudocranial, anteroposterior, and craniocaudal views. Intraclass correlation coefficients for intraobserver and interobserver agreement were good to excellent. The correlation between categorical outcomes and both absolute and relative vertical displacement was very strong.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Unlike shortening, absolute and relative vertical displacement of the midshaft clavicle fracture is not significantly influenced by radiographic projection. Standardized measurements of vertical displacement may not be necessary for clinical use because the correlation between categorical and continuous measurements was found to be very strong.Multiple studies have commented on the lack of a standardized and uniform method of measuring shortening and displacement of the fractured midshaft clavicle. The influence of radiographic projection on measured vertical displacement, however, is unclear. Because the clinical consequence of vertical displacement of more than 100% between the fracture elements on the initial radiograph is associated with inferior clinical outcomes, it is important to evaluate the influence of projection on the measured vertical displacement. An unanswered question remains whether a categorical description of vertical displacement is sufficient to be used in the decision-making algorithm (rather than necessitating quantitative measurements) to identify patients who could benefit from operative intervention. Because vertical displacement may be influenced—just like shortening We conducted a clinical measurement study quantifying the difference in the absolute measurements of vertical displacement and in a categorical manner between 5 different views of the fractured clavicle. A previously used deidentified database extracted from the National Trauma Registration (NTR) in The Netherlands was used. The CT scans were obtained using a Toshiba Aquilion One (Tustin, CA, USA) or Siemens Somatom 16 or 64 (Erlangen, Germany) scanner, and scans were uploaded and analyzed with the hospital's IMPAX software (version 6.5.3.1005; Mortsel, Belgium). Digitally reconstructed radiographs (DRRs) were created for each CT data set at 5 equally spaced angles: AP, 15° and 30° craniocaudal, and 15° and 30° caudocranial views. Each DRR represented a 2-dimensional x-ray film of the fractured clavicle. First, categorical data on vertical displacement were obtained. The arbitrarily chosen categories were quartiles of displacement from 0%-200%: no displacement or displacement of 1%-50%, 51%-100%, 101%-200%, or more than 200% of the shaft's width. A standardized method for measuring displacement was used as follows ( All measurements were performed on the 5 different DRR projections of each patient. The 5 DRRs for each patient were evaluated in random order by 3 observers (2 trauma fellowship-trained orthopedic surgeons [A.N.E.N. and Z.M.W.] and 1 medical student [A.C.]), as described earlier. To calculate intraobserver agreement, the same observers performed a second evaluation of the same randomized DRRs 2-4 weeks after the first round of measurements was performed. Before the start of the study, a training session took place with each observer. The precise definition of the reference points was agreed on between the observers. Measurements were performed using the hospital's IMPAX software (version 6.5.3.1005). Descriptive statistics were used to summarize the data. Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) were used to assess the interobserver and intraobserver agreement for each of the 5 radiographic projections. Interobserver and intraobserver agreement for the categorical data concerning vertical displacement classification was reported using the Gwet AC Statistical analyses were performed using R (version 3.5.2; R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). Thirty-one patients with displaced midshaft clavicle fractures and adequate CT imaging were included, and for all 31 patients, DRRs in 5 different projections were created. The study population included 23 men and 8 women, and the average age was 39.7 years (range, 19-78 years). Of the fractures, 12 involved the right side and 19 involved the left. The ICCs were excellent for both the intraobserver measurements of absolute vertical displacement (range, 0.81-0.94) and the calculations of the relative displacement (range, 0.77-0.94) in all projections for the 2 trauma fellowship-trained observers ( The interobserver agreement was good for the AP view and both caudocranial views (range, 0.64-0.69). For the craniocaudal projections, the interobserver agreement was excellent (range, 0.75-0.79) ( The smallest measured median vertical displacement was 6.4 mm on the 30° caudocranial projection and 8 mm on the AP view ( The correlation between the categorical outcomes and the absolute vertical displacement (range, 0.83-0.94) and relative vertical displacement (range, 0.87-0.96) was very strong ( In this study, we aimed to quantify and describe the difference in measurements of vertical displacement in an absolute, relative, and categorical manner between 5 different radiographic projections of the midshaft clavicle fracture. We did not find a statistically significant difference in absolute or relative vertical displacement between the 5 different views. This is an important finding because together with shortening and comminution, vertical displacement is an important factor in the decision-making algorithm. We found excellent intraobserver agreement in measurements between the 5 different radiographic projections using a standardized method for measuring vertical displacement, signifying that the proposed method is reproducible and could be used for future quantification of vertical displacement. Concerning the interobserver agreement, we found the ICCs were higher for the craniocaudal views. These craniocaudal views also seem to be the projections that most accurately visualize the length of the fracture elements and shortening. Furthermore, we assessed the association between categorical and continuous descriptions of vertical displacement and found the correlation to be very strong. The Gwet AC coefficient for interobserver agreement was fair to good, and the intraobserver agreement ranged from fair to excellent for the fellowship-trained orthopedic surgeons. The intraobserver agreement was lower when evaluations were performed by the medical student. This is possibly caused by a lack of experience in evaluating radiographs and classifying fractures accordingly. It is interesting to note that the craniocaudal projections again seem to show a trend toward higher agreement. Jones et al One of the strengths of this study is that DRRs were used. These DRRs are not subject to magnification by diverging x-ray beams or influenced by patient positioning, patient movement between radiographs, or different distances of the fracture to the detector. This creates static conditions to truly evaluate the possible differences in vertical displacement per projection; however, it is also one of the limitations of the study because it is unknown how DRRs relate to standard radiographs, and further research on this topic is warranted. Another strength of this study is the use of a standardized method for measuring vertical displacement as proved by the good to excellent intraobserver and interobserver agreement. A potential limitation of this study is that all CT scans and, as a consequence, the DRRs were fabricated with supine positioning. This may lead to an underestimation of the measured vertical displacement in reality. Unlike shortening, absolute and relative vertical displacement of the midshaft clavicle fracture is not significantly influenced by radiographic projection. Although reproducible and possibly useful for research purposes, the standardized measurements of vertical displacement may not be necessary for clinical use because the correlation between categorical and continuous measurements was found to be very strong. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.