Suspension of wear particles in gear oil with respect to the diversity of particle size combined with filter mechanisms has been analyzed. Coupling of wear modes from tribology is combined with particle size bins to show how a mathematical model can be expanded to include information gained from sensors that can segment particles into size bins. In order to establish boundary conditions for the model based on real data, a filtration test is included.
                  Finally, the model is fitted to data from a gear in operation and differences between real data and the model are discussed.
                  The findings show that particles less than 14μm dominate the wear. Hence, it is concluded that abrasion dominate the wear, for the gear in operation, and it is concluded to be in quasi-stationary mode. The distribution of the particles is observed in conjunction with the particle quantity to determine a basis for normal operation.
                  Limitations to the model in lack of fitting to large and frequent signal spikes are suggested to be caused by measurement equipment and/or model constraints.
                  Predicting the transition from quasi-stationary (normal) mode to break-down mode is made possible by particle quantity detection as well as concentration distribution.Explaining the wear generation rate of any engine from the contamination present in the lubricating oil is a way of indirectly estimating the machinery condition. A model for wear generation would have to take into account the lubrication system as well as the concentration of particles. Prior work by Anderson, Driver and Kjer Further improvement to the wear model was contributed by Szymczyk In this paper we combine the work mentioned above into a single model, and add a way of calculating and simulating the wear debris in order to relate it to known wear modes for the system components. Additions to the model are presented as ways of looking at the filter coefficient and the wear generation mechanism. Reference and cited measurements in In order to relate the lubrication system theory to bin size reference measurements, an array representation of particle sizes is presented. The system differential equation for wear particle concentration rate is A sketch of the system described by Eq. System assumptions follow Simulation of the system in The run-in time for bearing elements and gear has been tested by Sayles and MacPherson Transition from quasi-stationary mode to break-down mode, as well as the break-down time, depends upon the equipment, its run conditions, and the cause resulting in the break-down pattern.  We define the terminology of break-down pattern as a significant positive change in relative wear debris for one or more particle sizes. The terminology of break-down is defined as the time where damaged parts of the equipment will be overhauled/replaced or when the equipment will stop to function as designed. A quasi-stationary wear mode model is used to determine the transition from normal operation to break-down. The main parameters for the quasi-stationary mode are wear generation and removal of particles. The rate of removal of particles, Besides introducing an array representation for the different particle sizes, it is also well known that settling time and filtration efficiency depend upon particle size, see Winkler et. al. A model for the different wear modes during system operation and lifetime (from normal mechanical wear to two- and three-body abrasion, erosion, adhesion, surface fatigue), as described by Williams Introducing the modified expressions from Changing the notation to a segmentation in particle size with array notation, where multiplication is element-wise: Eq. In order to classify debris in gear oil for wear mode estimation, techniques for measuring particles are compared with definitions of tribological wear mechanisms. The previously mentioned work all refer to ferro-analyzers (direct or by optical read-out) as reference equipment for particle estimation Current measurement techniques that can bin particles by sizes include optical scattering, optical blocking or magnetic field sensors of ferrous and non-ferrous particles. Scattering techniques can be applied within a narrow range of sub-micron to small micron particle sizes (0.1–10 Different wear generation modes combined with wear particle size, as described by From the size of wear particles listed in The segmentation of particles in bins should combine the expected wear particle sizes with techniques available for measurement of particle size and quantity. Smaller particles need to be segregated into narrower bins due to the exponential increase in quantity as illustrated in One segmentation for particle bins could be similar to The importance of particle bins and their measurement range has been investigated by Lu et al. Commercial scatter sensors for in-line measurements have a narrow measurement interval and are not expected to show the wear transition from normal to abnormal for particles of size 20 According to In the following, an optical blocking sensor technique is used, since the particle size sensitivity covers both the quasi-stationary wear mode and the abnormal wear (run-in/break-down) mode. Such sensors are cost-efficient and have been verified in comparative tests, see The removal of particles in the system described by the term M In this work, comminution of larger particles to smaller particles is not considered and the array notation in Eq. Settling rate of particles, as described in Settling time is expected to influence the quantity of particles sticking to surfaces. Since settling rate is considered very small compared to the filtration rate, particles sticking to surfaces are therefore omitted in M The filter coefficient β describes a filter׳s performance in terms of retaining particles. In Eq. Using filtration efficiency as a function of particle size requires a documented efficiency from the filter supplier or a strict test in order to evaluate the β values. A commercially available filter (cellulose depth filter) has been tested using standard certified medium test dust (ISO 12103-1, A3) The optical blocking sensors in the test measure on a partial flow ~ 0.018 The average filtration efficiency for four test runs is plotted in The The averaged In a full stationary mode, the graphs in The relatively large β values in Eq. For particles larger than 25 It is known from the standard ISO 16889 Under these assumptions the following conservative The model In Eq. The wear rate of the different particle sizes might be accelerated by the total particle quantity, or a sub-array of particles and not only the respective quantity of one particle size. One way of implementing The subscript Accordingly, In the following, the measured quantity (count of particles pr. 100 Three months of operational data is gathered from January 2014 to March 2014 and used in comparison. The sensor used for measurement is calibrated according to ISO 11171 The approximate mean spherical diameter can be seen in Wear particle concentration for the gear, The calculation of particle concentration is based on the assumption that the main composition of the surface material of the gear is made by steel. Model and equipment data for each particle concentration can be seen in The equipment is estimated to be in quasi-stationary mode, which reduces Eq. The variations in the model are described using a random variable Bin indexes 4, 6, 14, and 25 have a low frequency variation in the data whereas bin indexes 40 and 70 have a more dominant high frequency variation. The low frequency variation is likely to be caused by differences in applied gear load, ambient run condition or other external factors. The high frequency variation is to some extent explained by the model. Low frequency variation in bin indexes 40 and 70 is not significant due to the limited number of particle counts in these channels. The overall decrease in concentration from bin index 4 to bin index 70 as seen in The estimation parameters for the wear, The concentration density distribution for the particle bins can be informative in order to follow the progression from quasi-stationary mode towards break-down mode, or from one wear mechanism to another. The wear particle density distribution for the measured time span of three months can be seen in The estimated wear generation parameters for the model and data in Bin indexes 4 and 6 contribute with 74% of the total wear generation according to It is possible using both the relative concentration and the density distribution to estimate transition into break-down. An increase in the total amount of particles (with the same density distribution) indicates a transition. The same is the case when a change in density distribution occurs, without altering the total amount of particles. Verification of the complete model described by Eq. In this work, the filter efficiency has been measured with automatic particle sensors similar to The large concentration spikes seen in The low frequent drift observed in An improvement to the model could also include knowledge on the entire system layout as well as its run sequences. In this paper, the focus has been on data from quasi-stationary run conditions with no on/off transitions for the lubricating system. Further validation and improvement to the model could be done by including data from more than one ship or lubricating system. Combining the knowledge of filter performance, system setup and sensors, we suggest a model able to estimate the wear generated and, to some extent, wear modes. It has been shown that a particle concentration model can be fitted to a sensor system that segments particles into bin sizes. With the additional information gained from different particle sizes it has been shown how to correlate measurements to tribological wear. An interpretation of tribological wear modes and mechanisms from measured particle size bins has been suggested. The coupling of tribological wear modes and mechanisms to particle bins can be used to assess the equipment׳s wear generation during its quasi-stationary mode. Predicting the transition from quasi-stationary mode to break-down is possible by particle quantity detection as well as concentration distribution observation. Support to this research was provided by the