A new image analysis technique has been developed which allows maceral analysis of coal to be carried out. The technique is able to separate the liptinite component from the background resin by using two separate images of the surface captured with different camera exposure times. At normal exposure, the liptinite has a similar grey scale value to the surrounding resin, but at a higher exposure time, the resin remains black whilst the liptinite grey scale increases significantly enough to distinguish it from the resin. The method has been tested for repeatability and reproducibility and found to be within the ISO Standard requirements.Maceral analysis can be carried out using manual and automated techniques, although both have drawbacks. Manual analysis is time consuming and unavoidably subjective, especially when comparing results of different analysts. This is minimised by organisations with accreditation programs such as The Society for Organic Petrology and The International Committee for Coal and Organic Petrology, and the establishing of International standards There have been several published techniques for carrying out maceral analysis that are able to distinguish liptinite from background resin. These have included morphological techniques, using the association of liptinite to the other macerals A new technique has been developed which allows liptinite to be distinguished from the resin background. Whilst carrying out the analysis, sufficient data is collected to allow the maceral composition to be evaluated. Image analysis was carried out using the KS400 v3.1 software supplied by Imaging Associates Ltd and a Zeiss Axiocam Colour digital camera using a PCI interface card with thin fibre optic cable for data and control lines at 200 The basis of the program is founded on an observation made by the authors in a previous paper In the image analysis system used in this study, the light level remains constant and the system is calibrated by changing the exposure time of the Zeiss Axiocam digital camera. This is clearly shown in The Hamamatsu camera used by the authors in the previous work The above differences are utilised to separate the macerals from the surrounding resin in a program to perform maceral analysis. The program works by thresholding an image with an exposure time of 750  Two coal blocks were selected in order to test the repeatability of the program. Block A was prepared according to ISO standards A grid of 35 images by 35 images was captured on each block in order to see how the results changed with increasing numbers of images. Ten sets of 100 images were taken from both blocks and the maceral composition of each set compared in order to quantify the repeatability of the new technique. Whilst repeatability is defined by the difference between repeat analyses carried out by the same operator on the same sample with the same apparatus counting the same number of points, reproducibility is based on the differences between repeat analyses carried out by different operators on different blocks using different equipment. In order to check the reproducibility of the system against manual analyses, two different trials were carried out. Fifteen coals with particles less than 1 Ten coals with particles within the specification for pf were analysed manually and then using the image analysis program. The results can be seen in  According to the results obtained, the agreement between manual and automated results is within the error limits as defined by ISO standards. The technique described in the paper represents a new means of carrying out automated maceral analysis. The technique is possibly more practical than other methods that involve scans in white and blue light or techniques that involve preparation of blocks in coloured resins. When looking at pulverised fuel samples at least 75 images must be used and at least 150 images with samples containing particles less than 1