Bitumen–air bubble attachment is an essential element for bitumen recovery from oil sands by flotation. Effect of solvent addition to bitumen on bitumen–air bubble attachment in an industrial process water was investigated by determining the minimum time required to achieve the bitumen–air bubble attachment, known as induction time. Proper addition of solvent to bitumen significantly reduced the induction time of bitumen–air bubble attachment, more so for naphtha than for toluene and reaching optimal at 10wt% solvent added to bitumen. The measurement of bubble coalescence time and total organic carbon content in the resulting process water revealed a critical role in bitumen–air bubble attachment of air bubble interfacial properties controlled primarily by surfactants in the process water and water chemistry. Increasing the solvent addition to bitumen led to an increased migration of natural surfactants to the bitumen–water interface. At a given solvent dosage, more surfactants adsorbed at toluene–diluted bitumen–water interface than at naphtha–diluted bitumen–water interface. Interestingly, zeta potentials of diluted bitumen droplets in the process water exhibited a maximum at about 10wt% of solvent addition to bitumen for both toluene and naphtha. At an identical dosage of solvent, toluene–diluted bitumen in the tailings water possesses a more negative zeta potential than naphtha–diluted bitumen. Finally, a possible adsorption mechanism of ions and surfactants accumulating at the diluted bitumen–water interface under the impact of solvent addition is proposed.Increasing attention has been given to the production of oils from unconventional resources such as heavy oil, shale oil and oil (tar) sands, due to the enormity of these reserves that offer an alternative to satisfy the global energy needs ( The efficiency of bitumen–bubble attachment in an aqueous electrolyte is often characterized by the minimum time needed for the thinning of intervening water film to a critical thickness and spontaneous rupture to form a stable two-phase attachment of air bubble to bitumen, known as induction time ( To conserve the required thermal energy and hence reduce greenhouse gas emissions, great effort has been made to develop low-temperature technologies of bitumen extraction from mined oil sands. For instance, Hupka et al. investigated the effect of kerosene and MIBC (methyl isobutyl carbinol) addition on bitumen recovery from oil-wetted Utah tar sands, showing a significant reduction in the extraction temperature to about 50 Therefore, the aims of the current study are to (i) determine the optimal dosage of solvent, if there is any, for effective bitumen–bubble attachment (i.e., minimum induction time) in aqueous solutions; (ii) study the effect of solvent type and dosage on the interfacial properties of bubble and bitumen in aqueous solutions; and (iii) determine the mechanisms of improving bitumen–bubble attachment by solvent addition through correlating the amount of the natural surfactants adsorbed on diluted bitumen–water interface to the induction time of bitumen–air bubble attachment. Coker-feed bitumen provided by Syncrude Canada was used in this study. Toluene and naphtha were purchased from Fisher Scientific and used as solvents. The viscosity of toluene- or naphtha–diluted bitumen and interfacial tensions of the corresponding diluted bitumen–water interface as a function of solvent dosage to bitumen were given in our previous study ( To ensure that our study bears direct relevance to industrial applications, the industrial recycling process water supplied from Syncrude was used as the aqueous solution. The industrial process water contained approximately 22 A custom-built induction time device, namely Induction Timer, was used to determine the effect of solvent addition on the induction time required for the solvent-diluted bitumen–air bubble attachment ( Surface properties of bubbles are known to be highly dependent on the water chemistry, such as concentration of inorganic Ca To further understand how the solvent addition to bitumen influences the migration of natural surfactants, the total organic carbon (TOC) content in the aqueous phase was determined using a TOC Analyzer (CHS/CSN Model, Shimadzu Corp., Japan). To keep results comparable, the process water for both bitumen–bubble attachment induction time and two-bubble coalescence time measurements as mentioned in Zeta potential measurement was carried out with a Zeta phoremeter IV (CAD, France), which could trace 50–100 particles simultaneously and provide a distribution histogram of the corresponding zeta potentials. Bitumen or solvent–diluted bitumen (about 0.01 The concentrations of ions including Ca Results in The significant decrease in the I.T. of bubble attachment to bitumen containing less than 10 However, a further increase in the solvent dosage above 10 It is also possible that at higher solvent dosage, the bitumen surface becomes more deformable due to reduced viscosity as compared to the case of no solvent or less solvent addition ( As shown by the results in To quantitatively understand the role of natural surfactant concentration in controlling the bubble coalescence time, the bubble coalescence time was measured by diluting the process water with simulated process water to vary the concentration of natural surfactants in the process water. The results in To further understand the effect of solvent addition to the bitumen on the natural surfactant concentration in the bulk process water, the total organic carbon (TOC) of the water with the solvent-diluted bitumen being immersed was measured. The results in Similar measurements were carried out using industrial process water. Results in The above TOC results delivered the message that there was a balance for the organic carbon adsorption and release in water. When original concentration of organic carbons (COC) in the water was low (0 This finding suggests that the effect of decreasing surfactant concentration from process water by solvent addition to the bitumen on the bubble surface properties was negligible. As a result, the influence from the change of bubble surface properties on bitumen–bubble attachments could be considered to be negligible. When suspended in the aqueous electrolyte solution, droplets (or particles) would generate charges on their surfaces. Zeta potentials were measured to assess the effect of solvent addition to bitumen on the surface charge properties of diluted bitumen–water interfaces. It was reported that the bubble in the alkaline solution was usually negatively-charged, ( Although the increased mobility of natural surfactant in diluted bitumen is considered to be a reason for the observed variation of zeta potential of solvent diluted bitumen, the adsorption of ions including Ca Bitumen is known to be a complex mixture of natural organic molecules, containing different aliphatic, cyclic and aromatic building blocks with a number of heteroatoms (such as oxygen, sulfur and nitrogen) and heavy metals (e.g., V, Ni) ( With the addition of solvents to reduce the viscosity of bitumen, the molecules in the bitumen would have high mobility to move around, resulting in more natural surfactants on the bitumen surface. The surface active nature of these molecules keep them at the interface and their head groups react with the divalent cations to form cationic surfactants (i.e., R-COOCa The effect of solvents (toluene and naphtha) addition on the interactions between air bubble and bitumen in industrial process water was investigated. The minimum induction time of bitumen–bubble attachment under ambient conditions in the process water was obtained when the solvent dosage was at about 10 This work was financially supported by Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC),