Periprosthetic fractures around a total knee arthroplasty (TKA) are becoming increasingly more common. These typically occur in the distal femoral metaphysis above a well-fixed, previously well-functioning prosthesis. For loose implants, revision is typically performed. For well-fixed implants, some form of internal fixation, either a retrograde nail or a plate is chosen. The type of prosthesis (cruciate retaining or substituting) and the fracture pattern will influence fixation device selection. Retrograde nails are useful for fractures that have relatively long distal segments and are accessible through the intercondylar notch of the implant. Long nails should be used because they have the advantage of better alignment and fixation through diaphyseal engagement. Fixation with at least two distal locking bolts should be possible if a retrograde nail is chosen. Plating techniques are also effective for short distal fragments and fractures above an implant that do not allow intercondylar access. Modern locked plates can be inserted submuscularly and can provide excellent distal fixation options. Maximizing distal fixation is critical to successful treatment of these fractures and fluoroscopic vigilance is required to avoid malalignment regardless of whether a nail or a locked plating technique is chosen.Periprosthetic fractures are becoming more common as the number of total knee arthroplasties (TKA) performed in older patients increases. The most common scenario, however, is a patient with a total knee that has been functioning well and is well fixed, and then the patient falls and has a distal femur fracture that extends to the top of the anterior femoral flange. In the author's experience, this situation accounts for over 90% of the periprosthetic fractures encountered around a TKA ( There are generally two categories of internal fixation devices that are useful for these fractures: some form of retrograde nailing or some form of plating. The advantages of nails include the fact that they are tissue friendly, because there is no direct fracture site exposure, and they are mechanically sound. An ideal case for retrograde nailing would have a reasonable length of distal fragment, a cruciate retaining knee, and enough distal bone for two good distal locking screws in good alignment ( If a nail is chosen, a long nail should be used. A short retrograde nail can toggle back and forth like a pendulum in the osteopenic and capacious metaphysis and does not provide the aligning and fixation advantages of diaphyseal engagement that a long nail can. These nails should always be locked proximally as well. Plating techniques can provide excellent distal fixation, simply because they allow more screws to be placed in the distal fragment ( Locked plates have gained recent popularity because of the excellent coronal plane stability they offer. One can “miss” lugs and boxes and stems and other parts of the femoral component and still get multiple long locked screws in the distal fragment. With modern percutaneous application, these can be implanted as “minimally invasively” as nails can. The prototypical locked plate has corresponding threads in the screw head and the plate, so screws cannot toggle or back out. There is no need for allograft strut augmentation because the locking construct prevents varus collapse. One can obtain extremely distal fixation, something that is classically very difficult to do with a blade plate or DCS, because these older single point fixation devices do not provide any options if the surgeon hits an obstacle during plate application. With a comminuted fracture, a “bridge plate” technique should be used to obtain good fixation above and below without metaphyseal dissection ( The surgical technique of locked plating the distal femur is as follows: The author prefers prepping both legs into the field because it affords an immediate control for leg length, rotation, and alignment, because one can lift the well leg over the C-arm so one does not have to lift the fractured leg to obtain a fluoroscopic lateral view. A bump under the distal femur can improve the hyperextension in the distal fragment ( There are surprisingly few published series despite the widespread use of locked plates. Generally, good results have been reported with high union rates without the need for allograft struts or secondary bone grafting. In conclusion, stable distal fixation is paramount to success of internal fixation in the setting of periprosthetic fracture of the distal femur. The fracture pattern (specifically the length of the distal segment) and the type of arthroplasty will influence internal fixation device selection. With a long segment of distal bone in a knee with appropriate intracondylar access, a nailing strategy can be effective; however, a long nail should be used for better fixation and alignment. For TKAs without appropriate intercondylar access or those with short distal fragments, locked plating is preferred. Locked plating is effective, but malalignments are common and careful adherence to the principles of biological plating is important to a successful result. Fluoroscopic vigilance is recommended to avoid malalignments, regardless of fixation device chosen.