A colorimetric technique, originally developed for methyl iso butyl carbinol (MIBC) based on the Komarowsky reaction, has been extended to a wide range of common mineral flotation frothers. The procedure, which is briefly described, is suited to on-site determination as shown in a series of industrial case studies. Some observations described include: distribution of frother down a bank and between pulp and froth; evidence of alcohol contaminants; and mass balancing. The ability to monitor frother will help interpret cell hydrodynamics and should help optimize the type, amount and location of frother addition.Owing to lack of analytical methods, the task of determining frother concentration in flotation circuits is not routinely performed. Industrial sites seldom outsource analyses that are costly and inconvenient. A colorimetric method has recently been demonstrated for on-site characterization of common industrial frothers (  The ability to measure frother should help plants identify the amount and location of frother addition to optimize the process and to assess frother in reclaim water or in effluent streams. The information could be extended to help identify the type of frother to be used and to integrate frother use in control of cell hydrodynamics (the initial impetus for the work). To evaluate the colorimetric technique, the method was first tested on-site as part of a cell hydrodynamics evaluation campaign at Rio Tinto’s Copperton concentrator (Utah, USA) ( All chemicals in the analytical procedure were used as received from Sigma–Aldrich (USA). Note that only chloroform stabilized with ethanol can be used to avoid cross-reaction of the stabilizer. The alcohols methyl iso butyl carbinol (MIBC) and 3-methyl-1-butanol were also from Sigma–Aldrich (USA). (The butanol was included not as a frother per se but as it is a contaminant alcohol in the xanthate supply at one plant.) The polyglycol frothers F-150 and Unifroth 250C (U250C) were supplied by Flottec (USA) and Huntsman & Reliable (Canada), respectively. Standards are made-up of 0.05–0.2 The reaction is initiated by the addition of 0.1 After the sample has reached room temperature, it is transferred to a 1 Specific pulp volumes were extracted from selected flotation cells using a manual perch sampler, at a depth well below the froth surface. Froth samples were taken from concentrate overflows using a pan. This was the first survey, conducted at Rio Tinto’s Copperton concentrator. The plant uses MIBC, an aliphatic alcohol, as frother and the profile (concentration down a bank) and distribution between the pulp and froth phases in a rougher/scavenger row (recovering bulk copper/moly) is shown in The concentration in the pulp phase remains steady throughout the row. The profile in the froth indicates an increasing concentration down the bank. Some transfer of frother to the froth (via adsorption on the bubble) is anticipated, but the increase down the bank suggests unknown system interactions at play modulated by the presence of solids and variations in gas rate. While a concomitant decrease in pulp phase concentration should result the relatively small flow of froth product in this rougher stage compared to the pulp flow obscures any changes. Analysis of the process water showed the presence of 0.3 This campaign was conducted at Xstrata Zinc’s Brunswick Mine operation (New Brunswick, Canada). The layout of the rougher row is presented in The results corresponding to the cell locations indicate comparable concentrations at the top and bottom, suggesting frother is well mixed throughout a cell. The initial concentration is ca. 3.5 As part of a developing program to integrate frother use in control of cell hydrodynamics, a survey was conducted at Inmet’s Troilus Cu/Au concentrator (Québec, Canada). The results for cleaner cells 3, 7, and 12 show a sharp difference ( As part of the same program at Troilus a survey was conducted at Agnico-Eagle’s Laronde operation (Québec, Canada). The results for the distribution of MIBC at selected points around the Cu-circuit are presented on the flowsheet in The results do not correspond to the known amount of MIBC added which should give ca. 6 The next case study where a polygylcol frother was employed gave a chance to test this interference from contaminant alcohol. CVRD INCO’s Clarabelle concentrator (Ontario, Canada) uses Unifroth 250C frother (a polyglycol) and reports up to ca. 5% alcohol (3-methyl-1-butanol) in their xanthate supply. The objectives were first to demonstrate the two reagents could be de-coupled for independent analysis and, second, to collaborate with a mass balance exercise to try to account for both reagents around the circuit. Since polyglycol and the alcohol have different maximum peak absorption, this allowed conventional simultaneous analysis.  The de-coupling of the frother and contaminant alcohol is a positive for the technique but the practical concern whether the alcohol has any effect on the process remains. The finding led to including 5-carbon alcohols in frother characterization work which suggested an effect on bubble size cannot be ruled out at the concentrations detected here ( At the same time as the frother analysis work was being conducted plant personnel carried out a mass balancing exercise. Water flow rates were made available which permitted a first attempt at mass balancing the frother (and alcohol). The colorimetric technique for frother analysis was demonstrated in a series of on-site investigations, including simultaneous analysis in the case of an alcohol and a polyglycol. Findings of potential practical importance are: for MIBC and U250C (but perhaps not F-150) there is little evidence of frother depletion in the pulp liquor through a circuit which is an argument against sequential addition (that may cause problems of excess frother build-up); a corollary is that most frother remains in the pulp, exiting with tails; and, contaminant alcohols can be present from other reagent additions (the case of alcohol in xanthate is detailed) that may interfere with the analysis (and may have effects on the process). Together with the demonstrated ability to mass balance, the way is opening for more control over frother selection and addition. The funding for this work was initiated under a Collaborative Research and Development grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) with industrial sponsorship from (giving the original names, 2001) Inco, Teck-Cominco, Falconbridge, Noranda, COREM, and SGS Lakefield Research. The authors wish to thank the many personnel who enthusiastically collaborated in the site work and the companies mentioned for supporting the project and giving permission to present the findings.