Froth flotation is a widely used, cost effective particle separation process. However, its high performance is limited to a narrow particle size range between approximately 50 to 600μm for coal and 10 to 100μm for minerals. Outside this range, the efficiency of froth flotation decreases significantly, especially for difficult-to-float particles of weak hydrophobicity (e.g., oxidized coal).
                  This study was aimed at enhancing recovery of an Illinois fine coal sample using a specially designed flotation column featuring a hydrodynamic cavitation nanobubble generator. Nanobubbles that are mostly smaller than 1μm can be formed selectively on hydrophobic coal particles from dissolved air in coal slurry. Results indicate that the combustible recovery of a −150μm coal increased by 5–50% in the presence of nanobubbles, depending on process operating conditions. Nanobubbles also significantly improved process separation efficiency. Other major advantages of the nanobubble flotation process include lower frother dosage and air consumption since nanobubbles are produced from air naturally dissolved in water, thereby resulting in considerably lower operating costs.A 77% of the total global coal production is used by China, USA, India, Russia and Japan ( Froth flotation is commonly used in the coal industry to clean − Nanobubbles can be produced using ultrasonic or hydrodynamic cavitation principle ( The objective of this study was to develop an innovative cavitation nanobubble flotation process based on understanding of nanobubble froth flotation fundamentals for enhanced recovery of coal particles by improving bubble–particle collision and attachment and minimizing detachment. A 5 A total of four 55-gallon drums of coal slurry were acquired from a mine in Illinois. Upon arrival at the lab, the slurry was thoroughly mixed and then split into 5  Additional characterization of the coal sample was performed by taking representative samples, pulverizing them to 150 The flotation release analysis is a procedure used to obtain the best possible separation performance achievable by any froth flotation process which is analogous to the gravity-based washability analysis. The release analysis was carried out in a conventional laboratory flotation cell and its data was used as a yardstick for performance evaluation of the nanobubble flotation technology. The first stage of the release analysis separates the hydrophobic material away from the hydrophilic material by performing multiple cleaning steps with the original feed. The second stage has the goal of separating particles into fractions of different degrees of surface hydrophobicity by controlling air flow rate and impeller rotation speed under starvation reagent conditions. A column made of Plexiglas with a 5 The typical lengths of collection and froth zones used in the tests were 210 The cavitation tube and the static mixer are compact and have no moving parts. Frother was pumped into the feed stream while air was injected into the stream prior to the static mixer. Feed slurry entered the column in the upper pulp zone, 45 The slurry jet comes out of the neck of the Venturi cavitation tube at a speed of 6 to 10 Prior to each test, the feed slurry was conditioned for 5 Major process parameters were examined individually to investigate their effects on flotation recovery and concentrate ash content with and without the cavitation tube. They included frother concentration, superficial air velocity, superficial feed velocity, etc. Flotation performance was evaluated in terms of combustible recovery, ash rejection, and separation efficiency. Hydrodynamic cavitation integrated into the specially designed column shown in  Nanobubbles normally refer to tiny bubbles smaller than 1 Recent AFM studies have confirmed that nanobubbles are stable and can exist on a hydrophobic surface for several hours without discernible changes although the conventional Laplace equation suggests that the capillary pressure of a nanobubble is too great for the nanobubble to be stable. This is partly because nanoscopic contact angle is much larger than the macroscopic contact angle. Nanoscopic contact angle of nanobubbles with a hydrophobic surface is typically in the range of 150–160° as shown in An extensive evaluation of effects of nanobubbles on flotation performance of coal sample was carried out in a specially designed laboratory-scale flotation column at different operation parameters such as frother concentration, superficial air velocity and superficial feed rate velocity. Particle recovery by bubbles in froth flotation starts with the collision and adhesion of hydrophobic particles to the air bubbles followed by transportation of hydrophobic particle–bubble aggregates from the collection zone to the froth zone, drainage and enrichment of the froth and finally by their overflow from the cell top, whereas hydrophilic particles remain in the pulp and are discharged as tailings. The success of effective particle separation by froth flotation relies on the efficient capture of hydrophobic particles by air bubbles in three steps, i.e., collision, attachment and detachment. To investigate the role of nanobubbles in flotation recovery, a series of flotation tests have been performed under different conditions.  The probability of collision ( Higher frother concentration decreased the microbubble and nanobubble sizes and increased their concentrations in liquid which increased the probability of collision ( Different superficial air velocities of 0.4, 0.8, 1.2, and 1.6 Combustible recovery was much higher in the presence of nanobubbles at all superficial air velocities examined, as shown in  Many studies have confirmed that nanobubbles generated by hydrodynamic cavitation change the surface characteristics of minerals ( The probability of attachment (  Eq.  To investigate the influence of the feed flow rate on flotation performance, different feed flow rates of 0.25, 0.50, 0.75 and 1.00 The product ash content was lower or almost the same in the presence of nanobubbles than in their absence. The separation efficiency curve shown in The probability of detachment Particle detachment occurs when detachment forces exceed the maximum adhesive forces. Eq. A high froth flotation efficiency is limited to the narrow particle size range between 50  Nanobubble application to laboratory column coal flotation has proven very successful. It not only significantly improved combustible recovery, but also reduced reagent and air consumption. Laboratory flotation results have shown that nanobubbles significantly enhanced the coal flotation process efficiency with higher recovery and/or lower product ash. The flotation recovery of fine coal was increased by 5 to 50 absolute percentage points, depending on process operating conditions. The frother dosage was reduced by one-third because nanobubbles are mostly smaller than 1 This research project is supported by