Natrojarosite is a very important material. In this paper biosynthesis of pure natrojarosite by immobilized Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans was described. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), ICP-AES and XRD analysis revealed the character of natrojarosite. The process is principally influenced by extracellular substances. H+ reduction and the oxidation of Fe2+ can accelerate production of the precipitation. Monovalent cation of the precipitation depends on pH value, especially the type and concentration of monovalent cation in solution. This research thus shows a novel application of A. ferrooxidans.Natrojarosite is an excellent mineral pigment in mural paintings, tiles and ceramic products ( However, natural natrojarosite is very rare. It is usually associated with carbonaceous beds ( In the present work, a novel biosynthesis of pure natrojarosite by iron-oxidizing bacteria was investigated. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), ICP-AES, XRD and FTIR were analyzed to reveal the feasibility of this method and the character of natrojarosite. Pure culture of  The beads were transferred into 500 FeSO Powdered precipitate was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD). For scanning electron microscopy (SEM), all samples were mounted on specimen tubs with a silver paint, gold-coated, and examined by SEM under a Hitachi S4800 model. Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) analysis of samples was done with a BX System Perkin Elmer spectrometer in a spectral band ranging from 400 Biooxidation of ferrous iron is a principal factor for natrojarosite biosynthesis. During the reaction pale yellow precipitation was observed in the modified mineral salt medium. The precipitates were washed with distilled water and air dried. The mineralogical composition was determined by powder X-ray diffraction. X-ray diffraction (   Therefore, it is quite visible that the pH of the system has effect on the extent of the oxidation and hydrolysis reactions. Furthermore, there is a reaction in competition with the hydrolysis reaction giving products of jarosite as we discussed previously ( In Eq. The effect of pH value and the oxidation rate of Fe In this research, biosynthesis of pure natrojarosite by immobilized This work was supported by