The paper presents data on zinc extraction from sulfate solutions with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (HR, trade mark CYANEX 301) diluted with nonane and kerosene in the absence and in the presence of electron-donor additives (L). Trialkyl amine (TAA), trialkyl phosphine oxide (TAPO), tributyl phosphate (TBP), and n-octanol were used as additives.
                  Using the zinc distribution data and spectral methods, it was shown that, in the absence of additives, zinc extraction with CYANEX 301 proceeds by a cation exchange mechanism. The composition of the extracted compound in the organic phase was found to be ZnR2. In all cases, the introduction of additives into the organic phase results in a decrease in zinc extraction, which is probably due to a decrease in the extractant activity resulting from the interaction between HR and L. The degree of extraction decreases in the series HR without additives>HR+n-octanol>HR+TBP>HR+TAPO>HR+TAA.
                  In the HR+TAA system, with increasing aqueous acidity, a change in the mechanism of zinc extraction from cation exchange to binary extraction takes place. In this case, the counter ion (bisulfate ion) is extracted together with the cation (zinc).
                  The mixtures of HR with TAA could be of interest for zinc recovery from various industrial solutions, for example, in the processing of viscose rayon fibre solutions for the separation of zinc from calcium, for purification of zinc solutions from manganese, etc. Unlike the system containing only dithiophosphinic acid, both effective zinc extraction and its effective stripping with dilute solutions of sulfuric acid are possible for the HR+TAA system.Zinc extraction with oxygen-containing organophosphorus acids has been studied quite well and is used already in industry ( It is necessary to add that, although zinc is extracted quite easily with CYANEX 301, its stripping with sulfuric acid solutions is extremely difficult ( Published work on zinc extraction with CYANEX 301 has mainly been on practical applications while little attention has been given to the investigation of the chemistry of zinc extraction apart from the work on zinc extraction with commercial CYANEX 301 solutions in toluene ( It should be added that zinc extraction from solution with mixtures of CYANEX 301 and other reagents, which is obviously of both theoretical and practical interest, has not been studied at all. Only two studies reported on the binary extraction of zinc from sulfate ( This article presents the results of an investigation of zinc extraction from sulfate media both with bis (2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid alone and in the presence of additives which are used in industry as extractants and modifiers. CYANEX 301 containing 80% of bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid was used without further purification for the extraction experiments ( The reagents used as additives were a C The liquid–liquid extraction testwork was carried out by mechanical mixing of the phases for 1 The aqueous phases (initial aqueous solutions and raffinates) were analyzed for zinc while the zinc contents of the organic phases were calculated from the mass balances. In several cases, to ensure accurate results, the zinc-containing organic phases were completely stripped by mixing with 5.5–6.0 The zinc content, depending on its concentration, was determined trilonometrically ( The concentration of sulfuric acid in the aqueous solutions was analyzed by titration with sodium hydroxide – potentiometrically or in the presence of the indicator methyl orange. The concentration of sulfate ion in the organic phases was determined by titration with barium nitrate in the presence of the indicator nitchromazo ( Infrared (IR) spectra of the nonane-diluted dithiophosphinic acid and its zinc extracts were recorded using an IR-Fourier spectrometer Vector 22 from Bruker in the 400–4000 Taking into account the possible polymerization of the extracted compound in the organic phase, zinc extraction with the monomeric form of dithiophosphinic acid (HR) may be described by the following equation: When the activity coefficients of the components in the conjugate phases are constant and polymerization of the extracted compound is absent, Eq. As seen from the equation, at constant acidity of the aqueous phase, the slope of the logD The monomer concentrations depending on the total HR concentration have been reported ( The ratio of zinc in the organic phase to total HR concentration (Zn As noted above, the value of the slope closed to two is evidence of the absence of polymerization of the extracted compound in the organic phase. The dilogarithmic dependence of the zinc concentration in the organic phase on its concentration in the aqueous phase (taking into account the change in the free extractant concentration) at constant acidity (Eq. In the absence of polymerization, the value of the slope of this dependency, i.e., the degree of polymerization “x”, should be equal to one. As seen from The dependence of zinc extraction upon the acidity of the initial aqueous phase is presented in The values of the activity coefficients were taken from the published literature ( The absence of water in the extracted zinc complex was shown by means of IR spectroscopy. The IR spectrum of the zinc extract (with the nonane spectrum removed) has a weak absorption band in the range of stretching vibrations of the OH group with a maximum at 3210 The IR spectrum of the zinc extract in nonane, as compared to that of the initial extractant, has no S–H group stretching vibration absorption bands at 2578 In summary, considering the data on phase distribution and IR-spectra, the extracted zinc complex with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (HR) is shown to be an anhydrous monomer and to correspond to the composition ZnR The introduction of electron-donor additives (L) into the organic phase containing HR can essentially affect zinc recovery. Any interaction between HR and L will lead to a decrease in the extractant activity and, thus, to a decrease in the zinc distribution coefficient. On the other hand any interaction between L and the extracted compound should lead to an increase in zinc extraction. Since these processes act concurrently and in opposite directions, it is difficult to predict in advance the final result, i.e., whether a decrease or an increase in zinc extraction will result.  A decrease in extraction is observed in the series TAA As shown above ( As seen from Accordingly, an increase in the sulfuric acid concentration in the aqueous phase should result in an essential shift in the position of the reaction equilibrium (6) to the right. The data on zinc distribution into sulfuric acid solutions with increasing acid concentration are given in The presence of the amine in the organic phase leads to partial extraction of the sulfuric acid, however complete saturation of the extractant with mineral acid (at a H The data obtained, in particular the results for zinc extraction with the CYANEX 301 and TAA mixture, are of undoubted practical interest. In this system, both effective zinc extraction and its stripping with sulfuric acid solutions are possible, which is not possible for other CYANEX 301 mixtures and, particularly, when using CYANEX 301 alone. It should be recalled that CYANEX 301 was originally developed for selective zinc recovery from the effluent streams of viscose rayon plants and its separation from calcium. The major drawback of this process is that zinc stripping can be achieved only with concentrated hydrochloric acid solutions ( As seen from Another example demonstrating possibilities of the given system is provided below. Earlier work ( These examples do not obviously exhaust the application possibilities of this system. The HR and TAA mixtures can be efficiently used for zinc recovery from other zinc-containing solutions, in particular, from process liquors in zinc production, from leach liquors of laterite ores from which it can be recovered together with nickel and cobalt, from galvanic production solutions, etc. It is also obvious that definitive technological parameters (component concentrations in the extraction mixture, their ratios, sulfuric acid concentrations required for washing from impurities and for zinc stripping, etc.) will essentially depend on the composition of real technological solutions and should be developed accordingly. Zinc extraction from sulfate solutions with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (HR) in nonane has been studied. Based on the data on zinc distribution between the organic and aqueous phases and using IR spectroscopy, it is concluded that zinc extraction proceeds by a cation-exchange mechanism and the extracted compound is a complex of the composition ZnR In the mixtures containing HR and organic additives (L), the zinc distribution coefficients decrease. The degree of extraction decreases in the series HR without additives In the HR The mixtures of HR with TAA are of undoubted interest for zinc recovery from various industrial solutions. Unlike the system containing the dithiophosphinic acid alone, both effective zinc extraction and effective zinc stripping with dilute solutions of sulfuric acid are possible for the HR Our special thanks go to CYTEC INDUSTRIES INC. Canada for free samples of CYANEX 301. Appreciation for the valuable remarks is extended to Dr. D.S. Flett.