The vital task of the libraries attached to the educational institutions of higher learning is the collection development of information resources as per the requirements of the users. The Central Library of IITs have long been recognized their responsibility to support the study and research of their parent institutions with the rich collection development of information resources both in print as well as electronic format to cater the needs of the academic communities as per the multi-disciplinary and diverse academic program of the respective institutions where greater emphasis on collection of serials, the essential and integral component of updated scholarly communication. The study provides a vivid picture about the current status of serials collection in the libraries attached to the Premier Institutions of India in the field of science and technology to boost up the academic performances.The Indian Institute of Technologies owe their existence to the vision of late Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, who first mooted the idea of establishing institutions of excellence to impart teaching and to guide research in technical and professional education of higher learning in India so as to produce well-trained technical manpower of world class and engage them in building modern India. The academic activity in IITs are practically planned and implemented, depending on their available infrastructural facilities such as Laboratories, Work-shops, Libraries, etc. IITs have established libraries with adequate resources and physical facilities, as one of the most important central facilities, with an objective to make the academic program more vibrant and successful by way of supplementing classroom teaching and self-learning. Thus, the Central Library of IITs are considered as part and parcel of the academic set up for providing best support with the collection of precious documents and updated information, where a greater emphasis is given to collection and access to serials, which are considered to be the most convenient sources of scholarly communication essential for higher study and research. IITs are considered as the leaders of technological innovation in India. Seven IITs were set up at Kharagpur, Mumbai, Chennai, Kanpur, Delhi, Guwahati, and Roorkee up to Xth (5 Years) Plan of the Government of India. As per XIth (5 Years) Plan of the Government, eight new IITs in Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Orissa, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, and Gujarat have started functioning in temporary set up from the academic year 2009–2010 and the development of libraries in the new IITs are under progress. Thus, the study is restricted to seven IITs only, which are fully functional. The preliminary information on the location of seven IITs with years of establishment are briefed in A number of programs/courses are being offered by the IITs on various disciplines of science and engineering in different departments/centres/schools as given in Undergraduate programs Postgraduate programs Special programs Research programs The major disciplines in Engineering and Science available for study and research in IITs are depicted in According to publication data downloaded from the SCOPUS International Multidisciplinary Bibliographical Database during 1999–2008 highlights the research performance of IITs as given in Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) are regarded as the Premier Institutions of India for their dedicated efforts of higher study and research in the fields of science and technology. The Central Library of IITs, being the parts and parcel of the academic set up, are very much alert to upgrade themselves with the scholarly resources to support the academic activities, program, research, project, etc., and fulfill the requirements of (2634 faculties, 32389 students and research scholars as given in The collection building is one of the important functions of the library. Serials represent a major research resource for academic communities and treated as an important component of library collection. The objective of the study is to identify the status of collection development of serials in the Central Library of IITs with access to scholarly articles to achieve the desired academic performance. The Annual Reports of all the IITs have been consulted to find out the number of serials subscribed in last few years to fulfill the demand of the users. The usage statistics of some of the e-resources accessible to all the IITs through the INDEST Consortium have also been generated to understand the relevancy of the e-resources in study and research. To cater the unique academic requirements of the users, funds are allocated by the parent institutions (IITs) in every financial year for collection and infrastructural developments of the Central Libraries. Collection developments of serials in IIT Libraries are based on two sources ( Subscription of serials out of library grants Core member of the INDEST-AICTE Consortium Out of the fund granted by each IIT for the library, lion's share is spent for the collection development of serial both in print and electronic format, considering the importance of scholarly publication to the efficiency of research, dissemination of research findings, and diffusion of scientific and technical knowledge. The data given in The exponential growth of serials at the global level forced the IIT Libraries to wrestle with the problems of balancing the collection development with the unique needs of the intellectuals as well as Institutional Grants. Serials are subscribed as per the requirements of the faculties, researchers, and students of respective departments routed through the head of the departments/centres/schools. Upward movements in the graphical plotting represent serials subscription in different years which denotes the increasing demand of serials in IIT libraries. The Indian National Digital Library in Engineering Sciences and Technology (INDEST) was started from 2003 on the recommendation made by the Expert Group appointed by the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD), Government of India, under the chairmanship of Prof. N. Balakrishnan The e-resources accessible to the Central Library of IITs (core members) through the INDEST-AICTE Consortium are listed in The Central Library of IITs are considered as special libraries where the serials in print as well as online format are the vital sources of updated/required information in the respective areas of study and research as per the academic program of each institution. With the emergence of new discipline and multi-disciplinary areas of study and research, the demand for information resources also changes or increases. Within the last few years, some more new departments, centres, and schools have started functioning in each IITs. The libraries, being a service sector to academic set up, are also cautious to evaluate and upgrade their collection building increasing access to serials, the convenient sources of scholarly communications, to support academic curriculum of the parent institutions and maintain the increasing trends of excellent academic performances.