The United Nations Climate Change Conference took place at Copenhagen between 7th and 18th December 2009. One of the key issues to minimize the impact of our society on the Earth’s climate is the prudent, efficient and minimized use of its resources. Minerals engineering provides as a discipline a key technological, economically viable and engineering input into this endeavour! Optimizing the recovery, production and recycling of products, materials, residues and metals from various sources (be it primary or end-of-pipe) has always been a key driver of the minerals and metals industries! It has done this while also providing and developing the theory and fundamental engineering basis to do this, over many years using this to mitigate its impact of its environmental footprint. By doing so, the minerals engineering and recycling industries are actively providing the theoretical tools, technology and insights to help transform our society into the more sustainable use of materials while mitigating its own carbon, material and water footprints. This symposium addressed some of these key issues by discussing the optimized use of materials and minerals, water as well as cleaning up the historic impacts of the minerals and metals producing and recycling industry’s waste and residue creation. Succinctly this can be summarized by the figure below that depicts one of the objectives of this symposium, i.e. to harmonize the Web of Materials with the Web of Water. The minerals processing industry not only plays a key role in processing the residues from waste water treatment, but it is a key issue for the Minerals Industry to lower its water footprint in addition to its carbon footprint.  The three main themes of this conference were (i) measuring sustainability, (ii) sustainable materials and minerals processing and (iii) recycling, waste and end-of-pipe processing of residues from the mining industry. The first topic grouped papers in which the objective was to develop metrics for measuring sustainability to help and guide industry to improved processing, but also to show the importance of closing the material cycle by recycling, design for recycling, etc. These tools are of importance also to the general environmental community providing increased fundamental and first principles engineering approaches to measuring environmental impacts. The second topic of the symposium is a collection of papers that reflect efforts to improve the processing efficiency, which has always been a driver for the industry, while the third topic focuses on the processing of residues, analysing the impacts of residues and discussing methods to mitigate this, hence the focus is end-of-pipe solutions, however, the recycling options and more efficient processing discussed in this symposium try to mitigate this. These topics were discussed in a total number of 35 oral papers and poster presentations over the two days of the symposium. The around 50 delegates taking part in the symposium make this an excellent size to discuss these topics in often lively question session but also during the informal discussions around the lunches and poster sessions. The submitted peer reviewed papers that have passed the review process have been sorted in this special Edition according to these themes. The Editors are grateful for the following reviewers that took part in the reviewing the submitted papers: Drs./Profs. Broadhurst, Bruckhard, Cilliers, Clift, Chancerel, Collings, Corder, Doucet, Eloneva, Evans, Franzidis, Froelich, Giurco, Harrison, Kyoo, Lamberg, Langford, Mahlangu, Maris, Matusewicz, Mccallum, Morais, Oliveira, Petrie, Petrik, Pehlken, Ponting, Provis, Schneider, Van Deventer, Van Schaik and Von Blottnitz, with Heiskanen and Reuter doing overall reviewing. We trust this selection of papers in this special Edition will increasingly be part of a quest of the minerals and recycling industries to be an active part of the community that strives for rendering our industry and society more “sustainable”. We also hope that these papers assist and provide a solid engineering and economic basis to realize some of the objectives of the recent Copenhagen Climate Conference. Therefore, in conclusion, minerals engineering provides some of the tools to act now; convert ideas and global policies with regard to climate change into economically viable engineering practice.