In this study, phenomena behind recovery of Re by weak anion exchangers from sulfate solutions containing Mo and As as impurities were investigated. All the metals exist as different kinds of oxyanions or, at some conditions, cations, meaning that several phenomena need to be taken into account. Batch uptake kinetics and dynamic breakthrough experiments were conducted with three commercial resins, and a model based on competitive Langmuir isotherm and an approximate diffusion equation was used to describe competitive sorption of the oxyacids. The separation systems are also discussed in relation to thermodynamic properties of the related oxyanions.
                  The ability of the anion exchangers to adsorb Re from concentrated sulfate solutions is related to the size and degree of hydration of perrhenate anion, ReO4
                     −. Especially high Re equilibrium capacities of the Purolite A170 and gel-type A172 resins are related to their complex amine functional group, which favors less charged and more hydrophobic anions. However, the functionality did not explain the superior Re/Mo selectivity of the A172 resin detected especially in dynamic column experiments. Diffusion coefficients of all components were remarkably low in A172, and the measured moisture content of the resin was also low. These observations lead to a conclusion that the physical structure of the A172 is so dense that Mo species can only enter near the surface of the resin particle, which is the cause to a low uptake. Both of the Purolite resins also had a good Re/As selectivity, and are well suited for recovering Re from acidic sulfate solutions not containing Mo that are common in industrial applications. bed porosity, – density of resin, g/L axial dispersion coefficient, m pore diffusion coefficient in macroporous resins, m apparent diffusion coefficient in swollen resin gel, m affinity constant in NICA model, L/mol maximum adsorption capacity, eq/L radius of resin particle, μm volume of resin bed, mL liquid volume, L resin volume, L concentration in macroporous resin, mol/L average pore solution concentration in macroporous resin, mol/L concentration in liquid phase, mol/L pore diameter in macroporous resin, m diameter of resin particle for gel-type resin, m adsorbed amount, mg concentration in gel-type resin, mol/L concentration in resin bed, mg/mL volume-averaged concentration in gel-type resin, mol/L time, s or min interstitial flow velocity, m/s axial coordinate, m  equilibrium concentration in resin pretreatment elution results index for feed concentration indexes for metals' concentrations and sampling points intake values calculated from measured breakthrough curves simulated intake values Rhenium, Re, is mainly used in superalloys of turbine engines and catalysts of petrochemical industry. Re is found in molybdenum and copper ores, from which production was 53  Anion exchangers are used as ion exchange materials for Re, because it exists in aqueous solutions almost always as perrhenate anion, ReO Variety of potential industrial SO The aim of this work was to study the phenomena related to recovery of Re from industrially relevant sulfate solutions in column operation with different kinds of weak anion exchangers. Sulfate and molybdenum concentrations were varied. Also batch kinetics experiments were done. Modeling of the process with appropriate equilibrium and mass transfer models, and speciation calculations, were done to obtain more information about the adsorption mechanism and phenomena involved. Elution is an important part of an ion exchange unit process, and especially with the Purolite A172 resin it is known to be complicated ( All metal analyses of aqueous samples, both from batch and column experiments, were carried out from 10% HNO Three weak anion exchangers ( Batch uptake kinetics experiments were done at 25 Dynamic column experiments were done in 15 Metal and H Dynamic adsorption capacities were calculated with the following expression: Modeling and simulation of batch uptake kinetics and adsorption column dynamics was done in order to obtain a better understanding about the mechanisms and the phenomena related to the adsorption of Re and the impurities from the industrially relevant sulfate solutions. Though there has been discussion about these topics in the literature, there seems not to be unanimous agreement. Competitive uptake of rhenium, molybdenum and arsenic from sulfuric acid solutions is considered here as competitive adsorption of oxyacids (protonation Experiments were made in batch and fixed-bed systems and the mass balances are given in Eqs. The accumulation terms The equilibrium condition for competitive adsorption of several acids (competitive Langmuir) is given by Eq. In Eq. The differential mass balances were solved using the method of lines ( Value for the axial dispersion coefficient was estimated from the correlation of Before discussing the selectivities of the resins, the validity of the main experimental method and accuracy of the chemical analyses are briefly addressed. According to the conventional knowledge about the dissociation chemistry of the H Despite the differences in the Re capacities of the resins, all of them are able to take it from concentrated sulfate solutions ( Purolite A172 and A170 resins had clearly better Re adsorption capacities than the IRA-67 for all the studied feed solutions ( The conclusions above about the ReO Physical structure of anion exchanger has a significant role in Re/Mo selectivity. This can be clearly seen by comparing the ratios of adsorbed amounts of these metals and the breakthrough curves with the Purolite resins A170 and A172 with similar functional groups ( The model parameters ( Diffusion coefficients of HReO The gradual breakthrough curves of Mo with IRA-67 and Purolite A170 resins ( The free proton concentration in solution, which is not equal to stoichiometric sulfuric acid concentration, was calculated with computer program ( Another possibility of Mo adsorption to the N-donor type weak anion exchangers, which all of the resins studied in this research are, is chelation of the cationic Mo species. These include the ones shown in the The easier diffusion of the smaller hydrated ReO The breakthroughs for As in every experiment occurred almost immediately, and there were no differences in the curves between the resins. Thus the curves are not shown and the behavior of As was not included in the model. Arsenic exists as arsenic acid, H From the above discussion it can be concluded that the complex amine functional group in the Purolite resins favor more hydrophobic and univalent anions, whereas the tertiary amine functional IRA-67 favors larger, multivalent and more hydrophilic anions causing its poor Re/Mo and Re/As selectivities. As discussed earlier in this section, Re is seen as more hydrophobic than all the other species in the studied solutions, and the multivalent anions like sulfate, dissociation products of arsenic acid, and polymeric oxyanions and sulfate complexes of Mo are seen as the most hydrophilic species. The physical structure of the resins and the speciation of the metals were also identified as significant phenomena affecting both the equilibria and kinetics of the metals' sorption. The Purolite resins, especially A172, were found to be superior for the recovery of Re from SO The absence of Mo increases the dynamic Re capacity of Purolite A170 significantly but of A172 only slightly ( As it can be seen from Elution of Re with NH Elution of Re with NH Since the Purolite A172 is superior for Re adsorption from feed solutions containing Mo, overcoming the poor elution performance would be highly desired. In this work, recovering rhenium from molybdenum and arsenic containing H From the studied resins gel-type Purolite A172 with complex amine functionality was clearly the best for the studied solutions, though its slight drawback is an ineffective elution with desired NH The high Re capacities (good Re/SO The modeling results and batch uptake kinetics data indicated that the selectivities can be explained by differences in the equilibrium behavior. Though, the behavior of Mo in all the column adsorption experiments was not explained by the used models due to the complex aqueous speciation. The conclusion about the steric hindrance of the migration of the oxyanions in the gel-type Purolite A172 resin was verified by the fitted diffusion coefficients, which were several magnitudes smaller than the ones for the other studied resins. Possibility of another Mo binding mechanism, that is chelation of cationic Mo species, was also discussed. The results of this research show that very specific properties are required from resin for recovering Re from acidic sulfate solutions, especially if containing Mo. M.Sc. Javier Vasquez and M.Sc. Mikko Tyster are acknowledged for the experimental assistance.