Dense medium separation is also known as heavy medium separation or the sink-and-float process. It has two principal applications: the preconcentration of minerals, that is, the rejection of gangue prior to grinding for final liberation, and in coal preparation to produce a commercially graded end-product, that is, clean coal being separated from the heavier shale or high-ash coal. The history of the process, innovations, and failures are reviewed by Napier-Munn et al.. In principle, it is the simplest of all gravity processes and has long been a standard laboratory method for separating minerals of different specific gravity. Heavy liquids of suitable density are used, so that those minerals less dense (“lighter”) than the liquid float, while those denser (“heavier”) than it sink ( Since most of heavy liquids are expensive or toxic, the dense medium used in industrial separations is a suspension of particles of some dense solid in water, which behaves as a heavy liquid. The process offers some advantages over other gravity processes. It has the ability to make sharp separations at any required density, with a high degree of efficiency, even in the presence of high percentages of near-density material (or near-gravity material, i.e., material close to the desired density of separation). The density of separation can be closely controlled, within a RD of ±0.005, and can be maintained under normal conditions for indefinite periods. The separating density can be changed as required and fairly quickly, to meet varying requirements. The process is, however, rather expensive, mainly due to the ancillary equipment needed to clean and recycle the medium, and the cost of the medium itself. For preconcentration, DMS is applicable to any ore in which, after a suitable degree of liberation by comminution, there is enough difference in specific gravity between the particles to separate those which will repay the cost of further treatment from those which will not. The process is most widely applied when the density difference occurs at a coarse particle size, for example, after crushing, as separation efficiency decreases with size due to the slower rate of settling of the particles. Particles should preferably be larger than about 4 Providing that a density difference exists, there is no upper size limit except that determined by the ability of the plant to handle the material. Separation down to 500 Preconcentration is most often performed on metalliferous ores that are associated with relatively light country rock, such as silicates and carbonates. Lead–zinc (galena–sphalerite) ores can be candidates, examples being the operations at Mount Isa (Queensland, Australia) and the Sullivan concentrator (British Columbia, Canada (now closed)). In some of the Cornish tin ores, the cassiterite is found in lodes with some degree of banded structure in which it is associated with other high-specific-gravity minerals such as the sulfides of iron, arsenic, and copper, as well as iron oxides. The lode fragments containing these minerals therefore have a greater density than the siliceous waste and allow early separation. Heavy liquids have wide use in the laboratory for the appraisal of gravity-separation techniques on ores. Heavy liquid testing may be performed to determine the feasibility of DMS on a particular ore and to determine the economic separating density, or it may be used to assess the efficiency of an existing dense medium circuit by carrying out tests on the sink and float products. The aim is to separate the ore samples into a series of fractions according to density, establishing the relationship between the high- and the low-specific-gravity minerals (see Tetrabromoethane, having a specific gravity of 2.96, is commonly used and may be diluted with white spirit or carbon tetrachloride (s.g. 1.58) to give a range of densities below 2.96. Bromoform (s.g. 2.89) may be mixed with carbon tetrachloride to give densities in the range 1.58–2.89. For densities up to 3.3, diiodomethane is useful, diluted as required with triethyl orthophosphate. Aqueous solutions of sodium polytungstate have certain advantages over organic liquids, such as being virtually nonvolatile, nontoxic, and of lower viscosity, and densities of up to 3.1 can easily be achieved ( For higher density separations, Clerici solution (thallium formate–thallium malonate solution) allows separation at densities up to specific gravity 4.2 at 20°C or 5.0 at 90°C. Separations of up to specific gravity 18 can be achieved by the use of Many heavy liquids give off toxic fumes and must be used with adequate ventilation: the Clerici liquids are extremely poisonous and must be handled with extreme care. The use of liquids on a commercial scale has therefore not been found practicable. Magnetic fluids avoid the toxicity but attempts to use industrially also face problems of practicality, such as cleaning and recycling the expensive fluids. For fractionating low-density materials, notably coals, solutions of salts such as calcium chloride and zinc sulfate can be used where density is controlled by concentration. Commercial application has been attempted but the problems encountered reclaiming the salts for recycle have proven difficult to surmount. Below a concentration of about 15% by volume, finely ground suspensions in water behave essentially as simple Newtonian fluids. Above this concentration, however, the suspension becomes non-Newtonian and a certain minimum stress, or yield stress, has to be applied before shear will occur and the movement of a particle can commence. Thus, small particles, or those close to the medium density, are unable to overcome the resistance offered by the medium before movement can be achieved. This can be solved to some extent either by increasing the shearing forces on the particles or by decreasing the apparent viscosity of the suspension. The shearing force may be increased by substituting centrifugal force for gravity. The viscous effect may be decreased by agitating the medium, which causes elements of liquid to be sheared relative to each other. In practice, the medium is never static, as motion is imparted to it by paddles, air, etc., and also by the sinking material itself. All these factors, by reducing the yield stress, tend to bring the parting or separating density as close as possible to the density of the medium in the bath. In order to produce a stable suspension of sufficiently high density, with a reasonably low viscosity, it is necessary to use fine, high-specific-gravity solid particles, agitation being necessary to maintain the suspension and to lower the apparent viscosity. The solids comprising the medium must be hard, with no tendency to slime, as degradation increases the apparent viscosity by increasing the surface area of the medium. The medium must be easily removed from the mineral surfaces by washing and must be easily recoverable from the fine-ore particles washed from the surfaces. It must not be affected by the constituents of the ore and must resist chemical attack, such as corrosion. For ore preconcentration, galena was initially used as the medium and, when pure, it can give a bath specific gravity of about 4. Above this level, ore separation is slowed down by the viscous resistance. Froth flotation, which is an expensive process, was used to clean the contaminated medium, but the main disadvantage is that galena is fairly soft and tends to slime easily, and it also has a tendency to oxidize, which impairs the flotation efficiency. The most widely used medium for metalliferous ores is now ferrosilicon, while magnetite is used in coal preparation. Recovery of medium in both cases is by magnetic separation. Ferrosilicon (s.g. 6.7–6.9) is an alloy of iron and silicon which should contain not less than 82% Fe and 15–16% Si ( Milled ferrosilicon is produced in a range of size distributions, from 30% to 95%-45 Magnetite (s.g. ca. 5) is used in coal washing as separation densities are not as high as needed for metalliferous ores. Medium densities are up to 2.3 but work on spheroidized magnetite aims to reach bath densities up to 2.8 ( Several types of separating vessel are in use, and these may be classified into gravitational (“static-baths”) and centrifugal (“dynamic”) vessels. There is an extensive literature on the performance of these processes, and mathematical models are being developed, which can be used for circuit design and simulation purposes ( Gravitational units comprise some form of vessel into which the feed and medium are introduced and the floats are removed by paddles or merely by overflow. Removal of the sinks is the most difficult part of separator design. The aim is to discharge the sinks particles without removing sufficient of the medium to cause disturbing downward currents in the vessel. They are largely restricted to treat feeds coarser than ca. 5  The feed is introduced on to the surface of the medium by free-fall, which allows it to plunge several centimeters into the medium. Gentle agitation by rakes mounted on the central shaft (stirring mechanism) helps keep the medium in suspension. The float fraction simply overflows a weir, while the sinks are removed by pump (  The comparatively shallow pool depth in the drum compared with the cone separator minimizes settling out of the medium particles, giving a uniform gravity throughout the drum. Where single-stage dense-medium treatment is unable to produce the desired recovery, two-stage separation can be achieved in the Although drum separators have large sinks capacities and are inherently more suited to the treatment of metallic ores, where the sinks product is normally 60–80% of the feed, they are common in coal processing, where the sinks product is only 5–20% of the feed, because of their simplicity, reliability, and relatively small maintenance needs. A mathematical model of the DM drum has been developed by Once widely employed in the UK coal industry because of its high floats capacity, it is still in use ( Developed in South Africa, most installations are still to be found in that country. Raw coal is introduced into the Cyclonic dense medium separators have now become widely used in the treatment of ores and coal. They provide a high centrifugal force and a low viscosity in the medium, enabling much finer separations to be achieved than in gravitational separators. Feed to these devices is typically de-slimed at about 0.5 By far the most widely used centrifugal DM separator is the cyclone (DMC) ( DMC sizes have lagged in metalliferous operations, the largest being 0.8 The feed is suspended in the medium and introduced tangentially to the cyclone either via a pump or it is gravity-fed. Gravity feeding requires a taller and therefore more expensive building, but achieves a more consistent flow and less pump wear and feed degradation. The dense material (reject in the case of coal, product in the case of iron ore, for example) is centrifuged to the cyclone wall and exits at the apex. The light product “floats” to the vertical flow around the axis and exits via the vortex finder. In a DMC, there is a difference in density at various points. In general, DMCs have a cone angle of 20°, with manufacturers generally staying with one type of cone angle, as there has been shown to be no real benefit achieved by altering it ( Particles below ca. 0.5–1  This was developed to treat a wide size range of coal (−100 The first installation of the device was in the 250  It consists of a cylinder of predetermined length having identical tangential inlet and outlet sections at either end. The unit is operated in an inclined position and medium of the required density is pumped under pressure into the lower outlet. The rotating medium creates a vortex throughout the length of the unit and leaves via the upper tangential discharge and the lower vortex outlet tube. Raw feed entering the upper vortex tube is sluiced into the unit by a small quantity of medium and a rotational motion is quickly imparted by the open vortex. Float material passes down the vortex and does not contact the outer walls of the unit, thus greatly reducing wear. The floats are discharged from the lower vortex outlet tube. The heavy particles (sinks) of the feed penetrate the rising medium toward the outer wall of the unit and are discharged with medium through the sink discharge pipe. Since the sinks discharge is close to the feed inlet, the sinks are removed from the unit almost immediately, again reducing wear considerably. Only near-density particles, which are separated further along the unit, actually come into contact with the main cylindrical body. The tangential sink discharge outlet is connected to a flexible sink hose and the height of this hose may be used to adjust back pressure to finely control the cut-point. The capacity of the separator can be as high as 100  The device can be operated with two media of differing densities to produce sink products of individual controllable densities. Two-stage treatment using a single medium density produces a float and two sinks products with only slightly different separation densities. With metalliferous ores, the second sink product can be regarded as a scavenging stage for the dense minerals, thus increasing their recovery. This second product may be recrushed, and, after de-sliming, returned for retreatment. Where the separator is used for washing coal, the second stage cleans the float to produce a higher grade product. Two stages of separation also increase the sharpness of separation. Although the separating vessel is the most important element of a DMS process, it is only one part of a relatively complex circuit. Other equipment is required to prepare the feed, and to recover, clean, and recirculate the medium ( The feed to a dense medium circuit must be screened to remove fines, and slimes should be removed by washing, thus alleviating any tendency that such slime content may have for creating sharp increases in medium viscosity. The greatest expense in any dense medium circuit is for reclaiming and cleaning the medium, which leaves the separator with the sink and float products. A typical circuit is shown in The sink and float fractions pass onto separate vibrating drainage screens, where more than 90% of the medium in the separator products is recovered and pumped back via a sump into the separating vessel. The products then pass to wash screens, where washing sprays substantially complete the removal of medium and adhering fines. The finished float and sink (screen overflow) products are discharged from the screens for disposal or further treatment. The underflows from the drainage screens are combined and a fraction reports to the main medium sump and the remainder is densified by a centrifugal or spiral densifier. The underflows from washing screens, consisting of medium, wash water, and fines, are too dilute and contaminated to be returned directly as medium to the separating vessel. They are treated (together in this case) by magnetic separation to recover the magnetic ferrosilicon or magnetite from the nonmagnetic fines, which also Most large DMS plants include automatic control of the feed medium density. This is done by densifying sufficient medium to cause the medium density to rise, measuring the feed density with a gamma attenuation gauge, and using the signal to adjust the amount of water added to the medium to return it to the correct density. The major costs in DMS are power (for pumping) and medium consumption. Medium losses can account for 10–35% of total costs. They are principally due to adhesion to products and losses from the magnetic separators, though the proportions will depend on the size and porosity of the ore, the characteristics of the medium solids, and the plant design ( Correct sizing and selection of equipment, together with correct choice of design parameters, such as rinsing water volumes, are essential. As effluent water always contains some entrained medium, the more of this that can be recycled back to the plant the better ( Medium rheology is critical to efficient operation of dense medium systems ( The most important use of DMS is in coal preparation, where a relatively simple separation removes the low-ash coal (clean coal) from the heavier high-ash discard and associated shales and sandstones. DMS is preferred to the cheaper jigs when washing coals with a relatively large proportion of middlings, or near-density material, since the separating density can be controlled at much closer limits.  At the Landau Colliery in the Transvaal (operated by Anglo Coal), a two-density operation is carried out to produce two saleable products. After preliminary screening of the run-of-mine coal, the coarse (+7 In metalliferous mining, DMS is used in the preconcentration of lead–zinc ores, in which the disseminated sulfide minerals often associate together as replacement bandings in the light country rock, such that marked specific gravity differences between particles crushed to fairly coarse sizes can be exploited. A dense medium plant was incorporated into the lead–zinc circuit at Mount Isa Mines Ltd., Australia, in 1982 in order to increase the plant throughput by 50%. The ore, containing roughly 6.5% lead, 6.5% zinc, and 200 The plant treats about 800 DMS is also used to preconcentrate tin and tungsten ores, and nonmetallic ores such as fluorite and barite. It is important in the preconcentration of diamond ores, prior to recovery of the diamonds by electronic sorting ( Upgrading low-grade iron ores for blast furnace feed sometimes uses DMS. Both gravity and centrifugal separators are employed, and in some cases the medium density can exceed 4 ( Laboratory testing may be performed on ores to assess the suitability of DMS (and other gravity methods) and to determine the economic separating density. Liquids covering a range of densities in incremental steps are prepared, and the representative sample of crushed ore is introduced into the liquid of highest density. The floats product is removed and washed and placed in the liquid of next lower density, whose float product is then transferred to the next lower density and so on. The sinks product is finally drained, washed, and dried, and then weighed, together with the final floats product, to give the density distribution of the sample by weight ( Care should be taken when evaluating ores of fine particle size that sufficient time is given for the particles to settle into the appropriate fraction. Centrifuging is often carried out on fine materials to reduce the settling time, but this should be done carefully, as there is a tendency for the floats to become entrained in the sinks fraction. Unsatisfactory results are often obtained with porous materials, such as magnesite ores, due to the entrainment of liquid in the pores, which changes the apparent density of the particles. After assaying the fractions for metal content, the distribution of material and metal in the density fractions of the sample can be tabulated. It can be seen from columns 3 and 7 of the table that if a separation density of 2.75 was chosen, then 68.48% of the material, being lighter than 2.75, would be discarded as a float product, and only 3.78% of the tin would be lost in this fraction. Conversely, 96.22% of the tin would be recovered into the sink product (i.e., 100−3.78), which accounts for 31.52% of the original total feed weight. From this information we can quickly calculate the grade of Sn in the sinks by using the definition of recovery ( The choice of Heavy liquid tests are important in coal preparation to determine the required density of separation and the expected yield of coal of the required ash content. The “ash” content refers to the amount of incombustible material in the coal. Since coal is lighter than the contained minerals, the higher the density of separation the higher is the  The total floats and sinks products at the various separating densities shown in column 5 are tabulated in columns 6–11. To obtain the cumulative floats at each separation density, columns 2 and 4 are cumulated from top to bottom to give columns 6 and 7, respectively. Column 7 is then divided by column 6 to obtain the cumulative percent ash (column 8). Cumulative sink ash is obtained in essentially the same manner, except that columns 2 and 4 are cumulated from bottom to top to give columns 9 and 10, respectively. The results are plotted in Suppose an ash content of 12% is required in the coal product. It can be seen from the washability curves that such a coal would be produced at a yield of 55% (cumulative percent floats), and the required density of separation is 1.465. The difficulty of the separation in terms of operational control is dependent mainly on the amount of material present in the feed that is close to the required density of separation. For instance, if the feed were composed entirely of pure coal at specific gravity 1.3 and shale at specific gravity 2.7, then the separation would be easily carried out over a wide range of operating densities. If, however, the feed consists of appreciable middlings, and The amount of near-density material present is sometimes regarded as being the weight of material in the range ±0.1 or ±0.05 of the separating RD. Separations involving feeds with less than about 7% of ±0.1 near-density material are regarded by coal preparation engineers as being fairly easy to control. Such separations are often performed in Baum jigs, as these are cheaper than dense medium plants, which require expensive media-cleaning facilities, and no feed preparation (i.e., removal of the fine particles by screening) is required. However, the density of separation in jigs is not as easy to control to fine limits, as it is in DMS, and for near-density material much above 7%, DMS is preferred. Heavy liquid tests can be used to evaluate any ore, and combined with  Laboratory testing assumes perfect separation and, in such batch tests, conditions are indeed close to the ideal, as sufficient time can be taken to allow complete separation to take place. In a continuous production process, however, conditions are usually far from ideal and particles can be misplaced to the wrong product for a variety of reasons. The dominant effect is that of the density distribution of the feed. Very dense or very light particles will settle through the medium and report to the appropriate product quickly, but particles of density close to that of the medium will move more slowly and may not reach the right product in the time available for the separation. In the limit, particles of density the same as, or very close to, that of the Other factors also play a role in determining the efficiency of separation. Fine particles generally separate less efficiently than coarse particles because of their slower settling rates. The properties of the medium, the design and condition of the separating vessel, and the feed conditions, particularly feed rate, will all influence the separation. The efficiency of separation can be represented by the slope of a partition or Tromp curve, first introduced by The partition curve relates the The ideal partition curve reflects a perfect separation, in which all particles having a density higher than the separating density report to sinks and those lighter report to floats. There is no misplaced material. The partition curve for a real separation shows that efficiency is highest for particles of density far from the operating density and decreases for particles approaching the operating density. The area between the ideal and real curves is called the “error area” and is a measure of the degree of misplacement of particles to the wrong product. Many partition curves give a reasonable straight-line relationship between the distribution of 25% and 75%, and the slope of the line between these distributions is used to show the efficiency of the process. The The density at which 50% of the particles report to sinks is shown as the The lower the The The partition curve for an operating dense medium vessel can be determined by sampling the sink and float products and performing heavy liquid tests to determine the amount of material in each density fraction. The range of liquid densities applied must envelope the working density of the dense medium unit. The results of heavy liquid tests on samples of floats and sinks from a vessel separating coal (floats) from shale (sinks) are shown in Columns 1 and 2 are the results of laboratory tests on the float and sink products, and columns 3 and 4 relate these results to the total distribution of the feed material to floats and sinks, which, in this example, is determined by directly weighing the two products over a period of time. The result of such determinations showed that 82.60% of the feed reported to the floats product (and 17.40% reported to the sinks) (see the Total row). Thus, for example, the first number in column 3 is (83.34/100)×82.60 (=63.84) and in column 4 it is (18.15/100)×17.40 (=3.16). The weight fraction in columns 3 and 4 can be added together to produce the reconstituted feed weight distribution in each density fraction (column 5). Column 6 gives the nominal (average) specific gravity of each density range, for example material in the density range 1.30–1.40 is assumed to have a specific gravity lying midway between these densities, that is, 1.35. Since the −1.30 specific gravity fraction and the +2.00 specific gravity fraction have no bound, no nominal density is given. The partition coefficient (column 7) is the percentage of feed material of a certain nominal specific gravity which reports to sinks, that is: The partition curve can then be constructed by plotting the partition coefficient against the nominal specific gravity, from which the separation density and probable error of separation of the vessel can be determined. The plot is shown in The partition curve can also be determined by applying the mass balancing procedure explained in An alternative, rapid, method of determining the partition curve of a separator is to use density tracers. Specially developed color-coded plastic tracers of known density can be fed to the process, the partitioned products being collected and hand sorted by density (color). It is then a simple matter to construct the partition curve directly by noting the proportion of each density of tracer reporting to either the sink or float product. Application of tracer methods has shown that considerable uncertainties can exist in experimentally determined Tromp curves unless an adequate number of tracers is used, and Partition curves can be used to predict the products that would be obtained if the feed or separation density were changed. The curves are specific to the vessel for which they were established and are not affected by the type of material fed to it, provided: The feed size range is the same—efficiency generally decreases with decrease in size; The separating density is in approximately the same range—the higher the effective separating density the greater the probable error, due to the increased medium viscosity. It has been shown that the The feed rate is the same. The partition curve for a vessel can be used to determine the amount of misplaced material that will report to the products for any particular feed material. For example, the distribution of the products from the tin ore, which was evaluated by heavy liquid tests ( The curve can be shifted slightly along the abscissa until the effective density of separation corresponds to the The performance is evaluated in The total distribution of the feed to sinks is the sum of all the fractions in column 6, that is, 40.26%, while the recovery of tin into the sinks is the sum of the fractions in column 8, that is, 95.29%. This compares with a distribution of 31.52% and a recovery of 96.19% of tin in the ideal separation. In terms of upgrading, the grade of tin in the sinks is now 2.65% (solving This method of evaluating the performance of a separator on a particular feed is tedious and is ideal for a spreadsheet, providing that the partition values for each density fraction are known. These can be represented by a suitable mathematical function. There is a large literature on the selection and application of such functions. Some are arbitrary, and others have some theoretical or heuristic justification. The key feature of the partition curve is its S-shaped character. In this it bears a passing resemblance to a number of probability distribution functions, and indeed the curve can be thought of as a statistical description of the DMS process, describing the probability with which a particle of given density reports to the sink product. Tromp himself recognized this in suggesting that the amount of misplaced material relative to a suitably transformed density scale was normally distributed, and However, many real partition curves do not behave ideally like the one illustrated in It should have natural asymptotes, preferably described by separate parameters. It should be capable of exhibiting asymmetry about the separating density; that is, the differentiated form of the function should be capable of describing skewed distributions. It should be mathematically continuous. Its parameters should be capable of estimation by accessible methods. A two-parameter function asymptotic to 0 and 100% is the Rosin-Rammler function, originally developed to describe size distributions ( In this form, One of the advantages of  The six parameters of the function ( In this version of the function, representing percentage of feed to sinks, The parameters of  The This term is often used to express the efficiency of coal preparation plants. It is defined as the ratio (normally expressed as a percentage) between the actual yield of a desired product and the theoretical possible yield at the same ash content. For instance, if the coal, whose washability data are plotted in Organic efficiency cannot be used to compare the efficiencies of different plants, as it is a dependent criterion, and is much influenced by the washability of the coal. It is possible, for example, to obtain a high organic efficiency on a coal containing little near-density material, even when the separating efficiency, as measured by partition data, is quite poor.