Chlorination of reduced ilmenites of different grades (primary, secondary and HYTI 70) and synthetic rutile was investigated at 235°C. The main phases of primary and secondary ilmenites were Fe2Ti3O9 and FeTiO3; HYTI 70 contained TiO2; synthetic rutile consisted of titania with titanium suboxides and trace amount of iron. Iron oxides were reduced to metallic iron. Titanium oxides were reduced to titanium oxycarbide or oxycarbonitride; reduced samples contained a small amount of titanium suboxides. In chlorination of reduced ilmenite concentrates and synthetic rutile, titanium oxycarbide or oxycarbonitride, metallic iron, and Ti2O3 were chlorinated. The degree of chlorination of both iron and titanium oxycarbide/oxycarbonitride was 95–98%; chlorination of iron was faster than that of titanium oxycarbonitride. The removal of iron by leaching increased the chlorination rate of titanium oxycarbide/oxycarbonitride; it was close to completion in 35min.Titanium minerals are mostly processed into titanium dioxide white pigment, which is a valuable commodity used in paint, paper and plastic industries because of its exceptional scattering properties, chemical stability and lack of toxicity (   In the low temperature chlorination, impurities do not chlorinate or chlorinate very slowly ( Carbothermal reduction of ilmenites of different grades and synthetic rutile in different gas atmospheres was studied by Ilmenite concentrates of different grade (primary, secondary, and HYTI 70) and synthetic rutile were supplied by Iluka Resources Ltd. Their chemical compositions, provided by the supplier, are presented in As received ilmenite concentrates and synthetic graphite (< 20 Chlorination experiments were carried out in a transparent quartz tube in a horizontal electric furnace. The schematic of the reactor and detailed experimental procedures for sample preparation and chlorination were described elsewhere ( Commercially, iron is removed from roasted ilmenites by Becher process or Benelite process to produce synthetic rutile ( 22.5 The following conditions were tested to remove iron from reduced primary ilmenite concentrate: Leaching at room temperature with 0.1 Leaching at room temperature with 3.2 Aeration at 40 Aeration at 70 Aeration at 70 The best results for iron removal were obtained under condition (E). Oxygen, nitrogen and carbon contents in the reduced ilmenite concentrates and synthetic rutile were determined using LECO oxygen-nitrogen analyser (TC-436) and carbon-sulphur analyser (CS-444). The extent of reduction of ilmenite concentrates was calculated from the fraction of reducible oxygen removed. The total fraction of oxygen in raw material is defined as The extent of reduction of titania in ilmenite to titanium oxycarbonitride was calculated using the following equation: When titanium sub-oxides were not detected in a reduced sample by XRD analysis, all the oxygen was assigned to TiO, which allowed calculation of fractions of TiO and TiC in the TiC–TiO solid solution or fractions of TiO, TiC and TiN in the TiC–TiO–TiN solid solution. Samples taken from the gas scrubbers at different reaction time were diluted and then analysed by Inductive Coupled Plasma-Optical Emission Spectrometer, ICP-OES (Perkin Elmer Optima 3000) for Ti and Fe contents. Based on the Ti and Fe contents in the solution, the extents of chlorination were calculated as: The reduced pellets were characterised before and after chlorination by XRD (Siemens D5000), with Cu Kα X-ray ( Ilmenites and synthetic rutile were mixed with graphite in a C/TiO When reduction was carried out in argon ( Carbothermal reduction of ilmenites in nitrogen with the formation of titanium oxycarbonitride showed higher extent of reduction than in argon when titanium oxycarbide was formed. No titanium suboxides were detected in all the four samples reduced in nitrogen. According to Chlorination reactions for titanium oxycarbide and oxycarbonitride were discussed earlier ( The extents of chlorination of titanium oxycarbide and iron in ilmenites of different grades and synthetic rutile reduced with the same carbon to titania molar ratio of 4.5 and the corresponding change in the samples temperature are presented in XRD analysis of the residual samples after chlorination did not show peaks of titanium oxides and iron containing phases, which is consistent with high extent of chlorination presented in As shown in The temperature change in the process of chlorination of titanium oxycarbide obtained by reduction of rutile was measured accurately by attaching the sample pellet to the thermocouple tip ( Difference in chlorination of ilmenites of different grades can be attributed to the following factors: The sample morphology. The degree of ilmenite weathering and particle porosity increased with increasing concentrate grade and was the highest for synthetic rutile ( Different phase and chemical compositions of samples after reduction. Primary and secondary ilmenites reduced in argon contained small amounts of titanium suboxides Ti Simultaneous chlorination of titanium and iron in samples with different Ti/Fe ratio. It should be noted that, although chlorination curves for iron in synthetic rutile and HYTI 70 were very close ( Different amount of carbon in a reduced sample. The amount of carbon in the reduced samples increased with increasing ilmenite grade. Carbon in the reduced samples, particularly free carbon, was observed to have a retarding effect on the chlorination of titanium oxycarbide ( Combination of these factors makes the change in the titanium chlorination rate with ilmenite grade to some extent inconsistent; no difference was observed in chlorination of titanium in the reduced primary and secondary ilmenite, while the rate of chlorination of titanium in reduced HITI 70 was much higher and increased further in the chlorination of reduced synthetic rutile. The mixtures of ilmenites and synthetic rutile with graphite were prepared with carbon to titania molar ratio of 4.5. Chlorination experiments with reduced samples were performed using an alumina boat at 235 The extents of chlorination of titanium oxycarbonitride and iron are presented in Chlorination of titanium oxycarbonitride from reduced primary and secondary ilmenites was close to completion after 50 Chlorination of titanium oxycarbonitride was slower than chlorination of oxycarbide formed from the same ilmenite. Titanium oxycarbonitride is thermodynamically more stable than titanium oxycarbide, what explains the difference in their chlorination rate ( As described in The effectiveness of leaching was qualitatively assessed by the relative strength of iron peak in the XRD spectra of the leached samples. Leaching with higher concentration of hydrochloric acid and longer time was more effective (condition B vs A); increasing aeration temperature had a similar effect (condition D vs C). However, removal of iron by leaching or aeration under conditions A through D was not complete. After treatment under condition E which used higher concentration of NH  Leaching of iron from ilmenites reduced in nitrogen was tested only under condition E. XRD analysis of samples after leaching detected only titanium oxycarbonitride and graphite. The XRD spectra of these samples were similar to the leached samples of ilmenites reduced in argon. The carbon to titania molar ratio of the ilmenite–graphite mixture was kept at 4.5; reduced samples were chlorinated at 235 The main phases of primary and secondary ilmenites were Fe Low temperature chlorination of titanium oxycarbide obtained by carbothermal reduction of ilmenite concentrates is feasible at such low temperature as 235 The aeration of reduced samples in 0.372 The technical assistance of Rabeya Akter and Dorothy Yu in ICP-OES analysis is gratefully acknowledged. This research was supported under