Heavy metal contamination is an important problem that is encountered at many metallurgical sites. Solidification/stabilization is a widely applied remediation technology for heavy metal contamination. In the study, solidification and stabilization of zinc extraction residue containing some heavy metals (e.g. Pb, Zn, Cd, Mn) which can leach using Portland cement, fly ash and lime was examined. Zinc extraction residue was solidified and stabilized with different amounts of Portland cement, fly ash and lime for heavy metal immobilization. Leaching behavior of all solidified/stabilized products was tested by pH dependent batch leaching test, Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP) and Synthetic Precipitation Leaching Procedure (SPLP). The results were evaluated in order to determine if the solidified/stabilized products can be disposed of at a landfill site with domestic waste or at a segregated landfill. Mechanical strength decreases with increase in the waste content. Heavy metals in the waste could be considerably immobilized by the solidification/stabilization process.Zinc is one of the most important metals. It is generally produced from its sulphide, carbonate, oxide ores or electric arc furnace dusts, some metallurgical ash and residues by hydrometallurgical, pyrometallurgical or their combination processes. Hydrometallurgical processes are favorable for ZnO-rich materials, while pyrometallurgical and combination processes are preferred for sulphide or carbonate-base raw materials. In the hydrometallurgical zinc production processes, Zn is first leached with sulphuric acid solution and then pregnant Zn solution and solid extraction residue containing unextractable Zn and some heavy metal compounds such as Pb, Cd and Mn are obtained after liquid-solid separation by rotary filter. Pregnant Zn solution is purified and Zn is won by electrolysis, while solid extraction residue of the process is generally stockpiled. In the big hydrometallurgical zinc production plants, about 100 metric tons of zinc extraction residues can be generated daily. These residues are considered as hazardous waste due to their soluble heavy metal content ( Among the management ways of heavy metal containing waste, solidification/stabilization (S/S) is known as an effective remediation method prior to disposal. S/S technologies are widely applied for treatment of hazardous wastes such as sludges, slags and ashes containing heavy metals. Main purposes in the S/S processes are to reduce the hazard of a waste by converting the contaminants into less soluble, mobile or toxic forms and to encapsulate the waste in a monolithic solid of high structural integrity by using some additives such as metal stabilization additives and binding materials ( Zinc extraction residues contain mainly of zinc, lead, cadmium and iron. Since the concentrations of lead and cadmium leached from the residue exceed the US EPA's toxicity characteristic threshold for Pb (5 The main purpose of this study was to investigate S/S of the zinc extraction residue by using Portland cement, fly ash and lime and to decide whether the products solidified/stabilized could be landfilled or disposed of at a segregated site by pH dependent batch leaching test, TCLP and SPLP tests. As described in previous paper of this research, the ZER used in this study was obtained from a zinc plant located in Kayseri, Turkiye. It was dried at room temperature for 10 days prior to use and then stored in a tightly closed jar throughout the study. Details of the chemical analysis and mineralogical composition of the ZER have been given in the previous paper ( Ordinary Portland cement (PC), fly ash (FA) and lime (L) were used as S/S reagents. PC (PC 42.5 type) and FA were obtained from Altinova Cement Factory in Elaziğ and Afşin-Elbistan Thermal Power Plant, Kahramanmaraş, Turkiye, respectively. All samples were dried at 50 For the preparation of reference solutions, Merck standards for atomic absorption spectrometry were used. All working solutions were prepared with distilled water and analytical grade reagents. S/S of ZER was carried out by making mortar samples with ZER, PC, FA, L, sand and deionised water. For this purpose, twenty-three mortars having different compositions given in Leaching behavior and pollution potential of the solidified and stabilized samples were evaluated by batch leaching tests, toxicity characteristic leaching procedure (TCLP) ( All leaching experiments were performed in duplicate and mean values were taken into account. The values obtained in duplicates were found to vary within ± Philips PW-2404 electron X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy and Shimadzu XRD-6000 X-ray diffractometer were used for determination of chemical and mineralogical compositions of the samples, respectively. Perkin Elmer AAnalyst 800 was used to determine the metal ion concentrations released from the samples in to the test solutions. Chemical and mineralogical characterization is the first step in the examination of leaching behavior of wastes. Particularly, in order to clarify S/S mechanism, type and concentration level of the pollutants in the waste and crystal shape of their compounds are important. Therefore, all samples prepared were subjected to chemical and mineralogical analysis. The results have been given in As seen from It has been determined that the Pb in the form of anglesite which is the main contaminant in the ZER was transformed into susannite [Pb PC, FA, L and their mixtures were used for S/S of the ZER. The cracks and disintegrations were observed in the specimens prepared with only FA and L during the curing period. In order to obtain a monolithic solid of high structural integrity, PC was the best binding material among these materials. Therefore, compressive strength of the S/S samples prepared with PC and PC-based mixtures were measured. The results are shown in 0.34 In order to clarify dissolution properties of the solidified/stabilized samples in the solutions having different compositions, batch leaching tests were carried out in the solutions having pHs of which are in the range of 3–12. The results obtained are shown in Release of Pb and Zn showed different properties greatly depending on the S/S reagent used. The PC-based samples are more stable under the investigated conditions. The results of the tests applied demonstrate that relatively small additions of PC and FA or combination of them drastically reduce the heavy metal release. While dissolved Pb concentrations of all the samples are below the detection limits, Zn released lower than 0.48 In our previous study, it has been determined that the TCLP Pb and Cd concentrations for untreated ZER were 65.11 and 2.88 It has been determined that the Pb in the form of anglesite [Pb According to results obtained, it can be stated that the all S/S methods applied except for only lime and lower than 30% flay ash treatments are proper for S/S of the ZER. SPLP is frequently used to assess the risk to groundwater posed by contaminated soils ( Following conclusions can be drawn from the results of the present study dealing with the solidification and stabilization of the zinc extraction residue; In order to obtain a monolithic solid of high structural integrity, PC was found as the best binding material among the materials tried and the minimum amount of PC was 40% of the mixture. Release of Pb and Zn showed different properties greatly depending on the S/S reagent used. The ZER can be safely solidified/stabilized in the cement and cement-based S/S system. It has been determined that the lime was not proper as an S/S reagent and the S/S efficiencies decreased in the sequence PC When the PC and PC- based combinations and the minimum 30% FA were used as a S/S reagent, the extractable heavy metals could be successfully immobilized. Their concentrations decreased to less than TCLP limits. Pb in the form of anglesite which is main contaminant in the ZER was transformed into susannite [Pb This study was financed by the