This paper presents a comparison of numerical results obtained by two different approaches, the sectional methods and finite volume methods, of solving population balance equations. In particular, the cell average technique, recently proposed by the authors [J. Kumar et al. 2006, Improved accuracy and convergence of discretized population balance for aggregation: the cell average technique. Chemical Engineering Science, 61, 3327–3342] and the finite volume scheme developed by Filbet and Laurençot [2004, Numerical simulation of the Smoluchowski coagulation equation. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 25:2004–2028] are considered. The advantages and disadvantages are pointed out between the two different approaches of solving the population balance equations. It is concluded that the finite volume scheme predicts more accurate results for particle number density on fine grids, on the other hand quite reasonable results for number density as well as for its moments can be obtained using the cell average scheme even on coarse grids.Particulate processes are well known in various branches of engineering including granulation, crystallization, comminution, precipitation, polymerization, aerosol and emulsion processes. These processes are characterized by the presence of a continuous phase (gas) and a dispersed phase composed of particles, bubbles as well as droplets with a distribution of properties, see The particles may change their properties in a system due to several mechanisms. However, the most common mechanisms are aggregation, breakage, nucleation and growth, see Aggregation or agglomeration is a process where two or more particles combine together to form a large particle. The total number of particles reduces in a aggregation process while mass remains conserved. This process is most common in powder processing industries. Agglomeration of small particles reduces dust formation and therefore improves their handling properties. One other advantage of the agglomerated powder is a higher dissolution rate by reducing lump formation or flotation of the powder. In a breakage process, particles break into two or many fragments. Breakage has a significant effect on the number of particles. The total number of particles in a breakage process increases while the total mass remains constant. For a detailed description about breakage process, readers are referred to Iveson et al. As a result of the mechanisms mentioned above particles change their properties and therefore a mathematical model named population balance is required to describe the change of particle property distribution. Population balances describe the dynamic evolution of the distribution of one or more properties. In this work we are dealing mainly with aggregation or breakage problems and therefore it is convenient to consider the volume as a measure of size. The temporal change of particle number density, The first term represents the birth of the particles of size Several numerical techniques including the method of successive approximations The first general formulation of a sectional method consistent with the first two moments has been proposed as the so called fixed pivot technique by Kumar and Ramkrishna A completely different approach was proposed by Filbet and Laurençot The objective is to compare the numerical results obtained by the two different approaches: the cell average and the finite volume scheme. The cell average scheme is also a finite volume type method. The major difference between the two approaches lies on the form of the population balance equation used for discretization. The finite volume scheme is applied on a different form of the population balance equation obtained by transforming the equation into conservation laws so that the scheme conserves the total mass automatically. While the cell average formulation is derived directly from the standard form of population balance equation by modifying the formulation in order to fulfill the conservation properties. It is convenient to define the moments of the particle size distribution at this time. The The first two moments represent some important properties of the distribution. The zeroth ( This paper is organized as follows. Recently we have proposed the cell average technique Let us begin with a brief outline of the cell average scheme for solving combined aggregation and breakage problems. The first step is to divide the continuous size domain Integrating the Eq. Here the terms These terms are given as The totals of discrete birth and death in a cell due to breakage are computed by the following expressions Here the notation The discrete volume flux due to breakage is given by The corresponding terms for aggregation are as follows The Heaviside step function is a discontinuous function that is defined here by The function used for the distribution of particles is given as The set of Eq. As mentioned before, Filbet and Laurençot Let us begin with a general introduction to a finite volume scheme for solving a conservation law. A typical conservation law is given by the following equation Integrating the conservation law on a cell in space–time We will apply this idea of finite volume scheme in the next section. In this section, all formulations and propositions are directly taken from Filbet and Laurençot Denoting by The integer The new form of the breakage population balance equation analogous to Eq. Similar to the finite volume discretization for aggregation presented in Filbet and Laurençot All other details including the different form (Eq. The finite volume scheme for simultaneous aggregation and breakage can easily be obtained by adding the corresponding numerical fluxes of the two processes. Analogous to pure breakage and pure aggregation cases, we get the following formulation in this case Here the numerical flux Note that the finite volume discretizations predict the particle mass density Now we proceed to compare the numerical results obtained by the two different approaches, i.e. the cell average and the finite volume scheme discussed above. These approaches are tested and compared by solving several pure and combined problems to asses their accuracy and to give some guidelines for the preferred choice of the method. In order to illustrate the difference between the two approaches we compared our numerical results with known analytical results. Here we compare the two approaches in three different pure and coupled process separately as discussed above. For the numerical computation, the semi-discrete formulation of the finite volume scheme is considered. All computations are carried out in the programming software MATLAB on a Pentium-4 machine with 1.5 GHz and 512 MB RAM. The set of ordinary differential equations resulting from the discretized techniques is solved using a Runge–Kutta fourth and fifth order method with adaptive step-size control based on the embedded Runge–Kutta formulas. It has been observed that the computation with MATLAB standard ODEs solvers produce the negative values at the tail of number density at a certain time. Furthermore, due to negative values the integration becomes unstable and yields large oscillations. In order to avoid such instabilities in our computations we force in our code the non-negativity of the solution by continuing the time integration with a smaller step size. In this section we compare the numerical results obtained by discretized method and the proposed finite volume method for pure breakage problems. We investigate two test cases of binary breakage with linear and quadratic selection functions, see  Further comparison concerning the accuracy has been achieved by direct comparison of total number and particle number density in We conclude this section with the observation that the new numerical solution of a general breakage equation has been studied. It has been tested for two analytically solvable breakage problems. The numerical results obtained by the finite volume scheme have been compared with the cell average technique. It has been shown that the finite volume scheme predicts the PSD more accurately but the prediction of total number is quite poor. The individual effectiveness of the cell average and the finite volume schemes can be found in Kumar et al. We consider two types of kernels: size-independent and sum kernels. The analytical results can be found in Aldous The values In In We compared the two approaches with analytically solvable problems proposed by Patil and Andrews Note that next to conservation of mass these problems have the special properties that the processes of aggregation and breakage balance to conserve total number also. The data (Eq. The first test case is an unsteady state problem. The numerical results for the zeroth moments in this case are shown in The second test case is a steady state solution corresponding to the initial condition (Eq. We now compare our numerical results with some physically relevant problems where analytical solutions are not available. In particular, we have taken aggregation and breakage kernels from Sommer et al. Here,  The computations for both the finite volume and cell average techniques were carried out in the programming software MATLAB on a Pentium-4 machine with 1.5 GHz and 512 MB RAM. We have realized computation time for all cases discussed above. A comparison of CPU time taken for both the schemes under the same demands on accuracy and other conditions is drawn in We conclude this section with the observation that the consistency with respect to moments of the cell average technique dominates over the finite volume scheme. Moreover, from the preceding discussion, it is evident that the numerical results of the particle size distribution by the cell average technique using a coarse grid are more accurate than the finite volume scheme. More precisely, numerical results of the particle size distribution using a fine grid are comparable to that obtained by the cell average technique but the prediction of the zeroth moment and second moment by the finite volume scheme is quite poor. A more sophisticated finite volume formulation is needed to predict more moments of the distribution accurately. The numerical solutions obtained using the finite volume scheme are compared with the cell average technique. Although the number density distribution calculated by the finite volume scheme discussed in this work is more accurate than that obtained by the cell average technique, the finite volume scheme produces poor results for the zeroth moment. In order to assess the effectiveness of the finite volume and cell average schemes, the number density distributions computed by the two techniques for several pure and coupled problems have been compared. It has been found that the computation times for both the techniques are comparable in most of the cases. Finally, it can be concluded that the choice of method depends strongly on the priorities set by the applications. If one is interested to get high accuracy for the moments and moderate accuracy for number density distributions then it is recommended to use the cell average technique. On the other hand, in some applications numerical, results for the number density distributions need to be highly accurate and therefore in that case the finite volume scheme is preferable over the cell average technique.  Breakage function m Birth rate m Death rate m Error – Mass flux s Volume density function – Heaviside function – Total number of cells – Numerical mass flux s Number density function m Number m Initial number of particles m Limit of integral defined by the function Selection function s Time s Dimensionless time for aggregation – Dimensionless time for simultaneous processes – Volume of particles m Average volume m Initial mean volume m Rate of change of volume s Integer – Aggregation kernel m Dirac-delta distribution – Kronecker delta – Size of a cell – Fractions – Discretized domain – The Aggregation Breakage Index Mean or average values Index Cell Average Experimental Order of Convergence Finite Volume Ordinary Differential Equation Particle Size Distribution Ziff and McGrady   Here the function For the exponential initial distribution For size-independent kernel For the case where Patil et al. The kernel functions are Analytical solutions are obtained for the following two initial conditions  Now, Eq. By the simple use of the Laplace and inverse Laplace transform, they obtained the following equilibrium solution for the initial condition ϕ If the initial condition is φ( Here Obtaining the root of the above polynomial is difficult, therefore the roots will be obtained numerically. They also mentioned that after enforcing constraints on the number and volume of the particle size distribution, there are only two significant real roots of the polynomial. Lage The roots of the polynomial can easily be obtained as