The Mount Pleasant polymetallic deposits are located along the southwestern margin of the Late Devonian Mount Pleasant Caldera Complex in southwestern New Brunswick, Canada. The Fire Tower Zone (W-Mo-Bi) and the North Zone (Sn-Zn-In) comprise the main mineralized zones within the Mount Pleasant deposit. The rock units examined at surface in both zones are highly altered and are surface weathered to some extent. In order to classify these rock units with confidence, the Olympus X-5000 portable X-ray Fluorescence (pXRF) spectrometer was used in this study to rapidly obtain the geochemical composition of these rocks, identify lithologic discriminants, and find alteration/mineralization indicators in these areas. The immobile elements Ti, Zr, Nb, Y, and Th were selected to discriminate among various rock types. The Little Mount Pleasant Formation has the highest Ti and Zr and the Mount Pleasant Granitic Suite (MPGS, GI and GII) contains the highest Y, Nb, and Th. The McDougall Brook Granitic Suite (MBGS) has an intermediate composition between them. The element ratios of Zr/Ti, Nb/Ti, Y/Ti, and Th/Ti effectively discriminate these rock units and increase from the Little Mount Pleasant Formation, to the MBGS, and then to the MPGS.
                  Greisen and propylitic alteration are reflected by strong depletion of K and Rb in some samples. The Fe and Mn typically are leached out of the mineralization system during the greisen alteration. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on the pXRF datasets. The first principal component (PC1) of the pXRF data from both the Fire Tower Zone and the North Zone mainly extracts information on Ti, Zr, Ce, Cr, V, Nb, Y, U, and Th, and thus represents different rock units. The PC2 is characterized by high-positive loadings of K, Rb, Fe, and Mn and negative loading of As and Mo. It is interpreted as the W-Mo mineralization indicator showing by the enrichment in Mo and depletion of K, Rb, Fe, and Mn associated with quartz+topaz+sericite+fluorite alteration. The PC3 consists of positive loadings of Sn, Zn, Cu, and S and slightly negative loadings of Sr and Ba, and thus represents the Sn-Zn mineralization in this area.Portable X-ray fluorescence (pXRF) spectrometers are widely used in mining and exploration programs, because they provide the advantage of completing measurements in situ (non-destructive) and collecting large amounts of geochemical data rapidly at low costs ( The Mount Pleasant granite-related polymetallic (W-Mo-Bi in the Fire Tower Zone and Sn-Zn-In in the North Zone) deposit, located on the southwestern margin of the Late Devonian Mount Pleasant Caldera Complex in southwestern New Brunswick, Canada ( The regional geology of the Mount Pleasant area has been described in detail by The exocaldera sequence, in ascending stratigraphic order, is comprised of massive to amygdaloidal basalt and aphyric to plagioclase-phyric basalt underlain by rhyolitic crystal tuff and lithic tuff, and minor reddish polymictic conglomerate (the Hoyt Station Basalt); a sequence of ash flows with overlying reddish brown mudstone (the Rothea Formation); plagioclase phyric and amygdaloidal andesite flows, and brecciated andesite (the South Oromocto Andesite); an alluvial fan deposit, which grades from pebble- to cobble-conglomerate at the bottom to mudstone with intercalated calcrete at the top. An unwelded pumiceous lapilli tuff occurs in the lower part of the section and a basalt flow occurs in the upper part (the Carrow Formation); and a quartz- and feldspar-phyric lava flow that is characterized by large K-feldspar (≤ The intracaldera sequence, in ascending stratigraphic order, consists of greenish-grey sedimentary breccia and interbedded andesitic lava flows, but locally dominated by felsic pyroclastic rocks (The Scoullar Mountain Formation); pumiceous quartz-feldspar crystal tuff (The Little Mount Pleasant Formation); densely welded, pumiceous, lithic-crystal tuff (The Seelys Formation); and the McDougall Brook Granitic Suite ( The late caldera-fill sequence comprises the Big Scott Mountain and Kleef formations in ascending order. The Big Scott Mountain Formation has three units from bottom to top that consist of porphyritic to nearly aphyric rhyolite, lithic to lithic-lapilli tuff, and crystal tuff. The Kleef Formation, from base to top, includes conglomeratic redbeds, porphyritic to glomeroporphyritic basalt and pumiceous, lithic tuff to lithic lapilli tuff. ( The country rocks of the Fire Tower Zone and the North Zone of the Mount Pleasant polymetallic deposits include the Scoullar Mountain Formation and the Little Mount Pleasant Formation ( The ages of the MPGS and associated mineralizing systems have been inferred by dating of various rock units in this area. Fifty-four samples in the Fire Tower Zone and sixty-three samples in the North Zone were collected from surface exposures. All of the samples were photographed and their locations were recorded using a GPS in the field ( Six regularly spaced spots on flat surface of each sample were measured by the Olympus X-5000 pXRF spectrometer using ‘soil mode’ with three beams. In order to avoid mixed compositions of the breccia, six analysis spots were chosen on fragments of the felsic breccia samples and on matrix of the chloritic breccia samples. Beam 1 (50 Six regularly spaced spots on flat surface of each sample were measured by the Olympus X-5000 pXRF spectrometer using ‘soil mode’ with three beams. In order to avoid mixed compositions of the breccia, six analysis spots were chosen on fragments of the felsic breccia samples and on matrix of the chloritic breccia samples. Beam 1 (50 The precision is defined by the reproducibility of multiple analyses on the same sample and calculated as being twice the relative standard deviation ( The precision is defined by the reproducibility of multiple analyses on the same sample and calculated as being twice the relative standard deviation ( The accuracy of the pXRF data is constrained by the calibration. Plotting of certificated values against measured values of each element in the CRMs, linear regression equations for these elements can be calculated ( The accuracy of the pXRF data is constrained by the calibration. Plotting of certificated values against measured values of each element in the CRMs, linear regression equations for these elements can be calculated (Appendix A). The r-squared (r The rocks in the Fire Tower Zone and the North Zone are highly altered by hydrothermal fluids ( The primary subdivision of samples is based on original interpretation of geological map ( The primary subdivision of samples is based on original interpretation of geological map ( The analytical results show the unaltered Little Mount Pleasant Formation ( The least-altered granite porphyry (Granite II, The McDougall Brook Granitic Suite ( The fragments in the breccia are angular to subrounded, in places tabular, and typically range from 1 to 10 The chloritic breccia (  Principal components analysis (PCA) is a useful multivariate statistical technique for identifying complex associations, which has been used by geologists to study geochemical anomalies associated with various hydrothermal alteration and mineralization types ( For the whole pXRF data of the Fire Tower Zone and the North Zone, six PCs with eigenvalues larger than 1 and in this study ( This study has shown that the pXRF analysis has the potential to improve the understanding of stratigraphy and mineralization in the Mount Pleasant deposit area. The pXRF analysis gives geologists greater confidence in models than would have been possible without these data ( Rock units in the Fire Tower Zone and the North Zone are complicated due to variable intensity of episodic hydrothermal alteration. It is difficult to discriminate the visually similar textures and mineral assemblages in these samples, especially for the breccias. The portable XRF technology, which is able to obtaining large dataset efficiently, offered reliable chemical composition information for identifying different rock units. The raw pXRF data was calibrated by linear regression equations defined by plotting measure values against certificated values of seven certificated reference materials (CRMs). The results of this research include: 1) The immobile elements Ti, Zr, Nb, Y, and Th effectively discriminate felsic rock units in the Fire Tower Zone and the North Zone. The Little Mount Pleasant Formation is characterized by its highest Ti and Zr and the MPGS (GI and GII) has the highest Y, Nb, and Th. The MBGS has the intermediate composition between them. The element ratios of Zr/Ti, Nb/Ti, Y/Ti, and Th/Ti increase from the Little Mount Pleasant Formation, through the McDougall Brook Granitic Suite, and to the MPGS (GI and GII). 2) In comparison with the immobile elements Nb and Y, some rock units (mostly the breccia) have significant Rb and K depletion that was caused by greisen-type alteration close to the orebodies and distal propylitic alteration. The elements Fe and Mn might also be leached out from the mineralization system during the strong greisen alteration process in the breccia. 3) The PCA was used to simplify the whole pXRF datasets. The PC1 for the pXRF data from both zones represents the various rock units in these areas and thus the regression factor scores for each group are different. The PC2 accounts for the W-Mo mineralization in the Mount Pleasant area indicating by the enrichment of Mo and As and depletion of Fe, Mn, K, and Rb associated with greisen alteration in these felsic rocks. The PC3 has the positive loading of Sn-Zn-Cu-S and thus can be used as a Sn-Zn mineralization indicator in this area. The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at This research is funded by a