This study proposes a mode shape scaling and parameterization scheme for modal identification with known input. Through the derivation of the equations for known input modal identification using the proposed mode shape scaling and parameterization scheme, the study provides insight into the relationship between the identified modal parameters and information required in the forced vibration test. In typical applications of modal identifications, when there is sufficient amount of data, the formulation using the proposed mode shape scaling and parameterization scheme shows that it allows modal parameters to be determined efficiently in a globally identifiable manner. An illustrative example using synthetic data is provided in this study. The findings show that an appropriate mode shape scaling and normalization scheme could reduce the information required in the modal identification procedure for some modal parameters, i.e. natural frequencies, damping ratios and mode shapes. This significantly simplifies the procedure of the forced vibration test, and hence, it can be carried out in a more robust manner.Modal identification is a technique that allows extraction of the modal parameters, such as natural frequencies, damping ratios, and mode shapes, of a structure from measured vibration data Forced vibration test makes use of a special device, such as shaker or impact hammer, to produce vibration response of structures for identifying modal properties. Memari et al. Although more demanding in terms of budget and logistics, forced vibration test has several advantages over free The objective of this study is to demonstrate that an appropriate mode shape scaling scheme can reduce the information required in the modal identification procedure for some modal parameters, such as natural frequencies, damping ratios and mode shapes, allowing forced vibration tests to be performed in a more robust manner. A mode shape scaling and parameterization scheme is first proposed, which allows modal parameters to be determined efficiently in a globally identifiable manner. Based on this scheme, implications on the required information in the modal identification are discussed. A Bayesian context is assumed as it allows uncertainties to be fundamentally quantified, but the implications on identifiability are general and applicable to other non-Bayesian or deterministic approaches. Section Consider a multi-degree-of-freedom (MDOF) structure satisfying the dynamic equation: During testing measurement, suppose the structure is subjected to a single dominant source of artificial excitation that is also measured. Depending on the direction of the applied excitation on the structure, the force can be distributed to more than one dof. For convenience in analysis, assume without loss of generality that the force on the Eq. Using Eq. Conventionally, mode shapes may be scaled to be 1 at a particular dof or to have unit norm In addition to providing an effective formulation for modal identification, the mode shape scaling and parameterization scheme in Section To illustrate how the considerations in the previous sections enter into the formulation of a modal identification method, consider adopting a Bayesian approach for modal identification. Assume that the FFTs The MPV of Using Bayesian approach, the uncertainty of the set of modal parameters can be obtained from the posterior covariance matrix Suppose we want to obtain a mode shape scaled to have unit norm, i.e., The modal mass ratio In this section we discuss the insight and practical aspects based on the formulation of modal identification with known forced vibration data in Sections Since the modal identification is achieved by minimizing the NLLF in Eq. Within the context of Bayesian approach, since the covariance matrix, i.e. uncertainties, of the identified natural frequencies, damping ratios and mode shapes, is the Hessian of the NLLF at the MPV, this also implies that their uncertainties do not depend on the exciter configuration. This means that the accuracy of the exciter location and orientation does not affect the precision of the identified natural frequencies, damping ratios and mode shapes, and also the uncertainties of the results. However, as shown in Eq. In practice, this means the natural frequencies, damping ratios and mode shapes can be identified without precisely placing the exciter in the required location and orientation in the forced vibration test unless the modal mass ratio is of primary interest. It should be noted that although the modal identification procedure of the aforementioned modal parameters does not require knowing To illustrate the aforementioned practical aspects and insights in Section The modal identification is then carried out using the fast Bayesian FFT modal identification method with proposed mode shape scaling and parameterization scheme in Eq. To carry out the modal identification using the proposed mode shape scaling and parameterization scheme, it requires the FFT data of sensor and exciter accelerations within the selected frequency band. The The posterior uncertainty of the identified modal parameters can be obtained using Bayesian approach. Once the MPV of the modal parameters are obtained, the posterior uncertainties can be calculated from the covariance matrix with respect to the set of modal parameters The identified natural frequencies, damping ratio, modal mass ratio and the corresponding posterior coefficient of variation (c.o.v.) are summarized in In practical situation there is always error in the measurement and excitation direction. For example, the exciter may not be installed perfectly at the expected angle, i.e. not completely align with the expected dof. In this situation, the actual magnitude of the excitation applied at the expected dof is smaller than the expected magnitude by a factor of The identified modal parameters are summarized in The associated uncertainties of the identified modal parameters are quantified as posterior c.o.v. values and summarized in This paper has proposed a mode shape scaling and parameterization scheme for identifying modal parameters. Besides significance of computational nature, the formulation has provided insights into the relationship between the identified modal parameters and information required in a forced vibration test. An illustrative example using synthetic data has been provided in this study. It is found that only the sensor and exciter acceleration are required for identifying the natural frequencies, damping ratios and mode shapes. An appropriate mode shape scaling scheme could reduce the information required in the modal identification, and hence, the procedure of the forced vibration can be significantly simplified. However, to determine the modal mass ratio, accurate placement of the exciter is still essential. It is hoped that these findings can improve understanding of some practical aspects in carrying out forced vibration tests with known input, such as those with electrodynamic shaker or impulse hammer. This work was performed while the first author was on sabbatical leave hosted at the Center for Engineering Dynamics and Institute for Risk and Uncertainty,