Cyanide leaching is the most common method used for production of silver from gold/silver ores. Silver (and gold) can be recovered from pregnant leach solutions (PLSs) using Merrill-Crowe process (zinc cementation) and activated carbon adsorption. Due to their inherent limitations and paucity of selectivity, development of alternative processes for selective recovery of silver from PLSs is of great interest. In the current study, selective recovery of silver by precipitation from cyanide solutions using an environmentally friendly organic reagent i.e. Trimercapto-s-triazine (C3N3S3; TMT) was investigated. The results have shown that precipitation of silver by TMT is a rapid process in that 87.9% of silver could be precipitated at the initial period of 5min. Response surface methodology (i.e. central composite design) was adopted to examine the main and interaction effects of [TMT]/[Ag] ratio (0.09–36.52), [CN]/[Ag] ratio (3−10) and initial concentration of silver (1–40mg/L Ag) on the precipitation of silver in five levels. The statistical analysis of the experimental data revealed that ratio of [TMT]/[Ag] (i.e. concentration of TMT) was the key parameter exerting a profound effect on the precipitation of silver. However, effects of [CN]/[Ag] ratio and Ag concentration appeared to be statistically insignificant. Complete precipitation of silver was found to be readily achieved under suitable conditions. The precipitation process was proved to be highly selective for silver over gold and copper as also confirmed by the tests on real pregnant leach solutions. It was found that the presence of TMT had no discernible effect on adsorption of gold by activated carbon, which was observed to even improve from copper containing solutions. Silver-TMT precipitates were characterised using SEM/EDS, FT-IR and other techniques. The current findings demonstrate that this precipitation process can be exploited as a potent alternative for selective recovery of silver from cyanide leach solutions of silver and gold/silver ores or purified/concentrated solutions ahead of gold electro-winning.Silver is mainly produced from its primary resources (i.e. silver ores) and silver-containing gold ores as a by-product ( Silver in ores can be present as metallic (native) silver, alloyed with gold (e.g. electrum) and various silver bearing minerals including acanthite/argentite (Ag Gold/silver can be recovered from pregnant leach solutions (PLSs) by Merrill-Crowe process (zinc cementation) and activated carbon adsorption with the former being more suitable for silver-rich ores/concentrates ( Treatment of silver-rich gold ores (i.e. > The recovery of silver from cyanide solutions by precipitation using inorganic/organic reagents has received limited interest. Trimercapto- In this study, the selective recovery of silver from synthetic cyanide solutions using Trimercapto- A solution of Trimercapto- Synthetic silver-cyanide solutions were prepared using granular sodium cyanide (≥ The performance and selectivity of the process was tested on synthetic multi-metal cyanide solutions and real pregnant leach solutions. Synthetic solutions containing 20 Since the precipitation of silver could be used prior to activated carbon adsorption of gold, the effect of TMT (69–276 Preparation of TMT precipitate was performed by contacting 10-mL TMT solution with 5-mL concentrated sulphuric acid solution (96% H An electron microscope (Zeiss EVO LS10) coupled with an Energy Dispersive Spectrometry unit (EDS) (KTU, Dept. of Metallurgical&Materials Eng.) was used for characterisation of Ag-TMT precipitate. Images of the precipitate were also taken using a Leica MZ16 microscope. FT-IR characterisation of a precipitate sample was carried out using a Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) Spectrometer (Perkin Elmer Frontier) (KTU, Dept. of Chemistry) in the wavelength range of 550–4000. A laser sizer (Malvern Mastersizer Hydro 2000MU) was used for particle size analysis of the Ag-TMT precipitate. Response surface methodology (RSM) is a powerful tool to demonstrate the individual effect of parameters as well as interactions between these parameters. In this study, central composite design (CCD), a RSM type, was adopted to assess the influence of [TMT]/[Ag] ratio (0.09–36.52), [CN]/[Ag] ratio (3–10) and initial concentration of silver (1–40 The kinetics of the precipitation of silver was tested over a period of 120 The reaction between TMT (C Possible reactions of silver with TMT at different pHs can be expressed in Eqs. The effect of concentration of TMT (0.3–69 The effect of concentration of cyanide (0.1–1.5  The analysis of variance (ANOVA) for the regression model is shown in Response surface plots allow visual observation of the influence of dual parameters on the precipitation of silver ( Pregnant leach solutions (PLSs) obtained from cyanide leaching of gold/silver ores often contain gold as well as other impurities such as copper ( The performance and selectivity of the process was also demonstrated on the real pregnant leach solution ( These results ( Due to high selectivity of TMT for silver the process is also suitable for use prior to activated carbon adsorption stage (e.g. CIC) in order to improve gold loading on carbon. After precipitation of silver, the solution may well contain residual TMT. Therefore, the influence of TMT (up to 276 Particle size analysis Ag-TMT precipitates indicated fineness of the precipitate particles with 80% finer than 10  It is relevant to note that recovery of TMT from Ag-TMT precipitates would be of practical importance for reducing reagent costs of the process. In this regard, In this study, a potent alternative process for precipitation/recovery of silver from cyanide solutions was proposed using Trimercapto- The authors would like to extend their sincere thanks to The