Correct determination of void volume is essential for carrying out adsorption isotherm experiments accurately. This paper presents the void volume data of two as-received shales, namely Salanpur and KG shales, India. Void volume experiments are conducted using helium and argon at 40 °C and up to a pressure of ∼9.2 MPa. Difference in void volumes measured using helium and argon are lying in the range of 0.4–1.2 % and 0.2–1.6 % for KG and Salanpur shale respectively. The standard deviation percentage of argon is twice of helium, suggesting void volume estimation using helium to be more accurate than argon.Determination of methane adsorption capacity in porous shale is important for estimating the potential of a shale gas reservoir. Since a significant fraction of the gas in shale reservoirs is stored by adsorption mechanism, understanding of adsorption behavior of shale is important ( Two major sources of error involved in void volume determination as suggested by Ross and Bustin are: 1) averaging the void volume values for multiple pressure steps; and 2) selection of an appropriate inert gas ( As discussed above, the accuracy of the methane adsorption data is affected by the combined effect of the above two sources of error in calculation of void volume. The present study is intended to investigate the effect of change in the probing inert gas on the void volume value. The first objective of the investigation is to quantify the error in the void volume due to the averaging of the void volume data. The second objective is to study the variations in void volume of Indian shale samples, when two different inert probing gases, i.e., helium and argon are used, and to recommend the more suitable inert gas for void volume determination. Two samples namely Salanpur and KG shales are used in the study. The Salanpur and KG shale samples are collected from Gondwana and Krishna–Godavari basins, India respectively. The as-received samples are crushed in the size range of 150–425 micron and 25–30 g of samples is taken for void volume experiment. The void volume experiments are conducted on a high-pressure setup using helium and argon, up to a pressure of 9.2 MPa and at a temperature of 40 °C as shown in Blank tests (sample cell without sample) are performed to ascertain the precision of volume measurements by the experimental setup. Blank tests were carried out using both helium and argon. The error in terms of standard deviation of blank test for helium and argon are calculated to be 0.12% and 0.11% respectively. This suggests that volume determination by the setup is precise and independent of the gas type. The powdered sample is filled in SC and the SC is closed by tightening the nuts. The Swagelok SNOOP (Liquid Leak Detector) is applied on the fittings to detect any leakage in the setup. The RC is charged with the probing inert gas keeping the valve 1 (between the RC and SC) closed. In the first step, inert gas is filled in the RC to a pressure of approximately 1 MPa and the pressure readings are noted at intervals of 30 min until equilibrium pressure is achieved. If the consecutive readings are same then it is taken to be the equilibrium pressure. After the RC attains equilibrium, the valve 1 is opened. The pressure of the RC and SC is allowed to stabilize and the stable pressure is recorded. For the second step, valve 1 is closed and the RC is again charged with inert gas to a higher pressure (approximately 1 MPa higher than the previous value). This procedure is repeated for a number of times. For each step, the void volume is calculated using the real gas law. The void volume can be determined using the formula given below: The compositional analyses of the shale samples are performed. The TOC content of the KG and Salanpur shales are calculated to be 1.5% and 15.3% respectively. For KG and Salanpur samples, the clay minerals are estimated to be 41.8% and 12.5% respectively. It is clear that there is considerable difference in the TOC and clay mineral content between the two samples. The experimental void volume data using helium and argon for KG and Salanpur shale are shown in The theoretical error (due to least count of the components) in void volume measurement is calculated using the error propagation theory as suggested by Ozedmir ( The error in void volume is calculated to be in the range of 0.16–0.21 % in the pressure range of 0.68–9.1 MPa. The error in void volume is very low and acceptable. The error due to averaging is calculated in terms of deviations. The deviations in void volume data at each pressure step from the average void volume values are calculated for KG and Salanpur shales. In case of KG shale, the deviations (%) are found to be in the range of 0.06–0.53 and 0.12–0.88 for helium and argon respectively. For Salanpur shale, the deviations (%) are calculated to be in the range of 0.02–0.66 and 0.14–0.95 for helium and argon respectively. The standard deviations of helium- and argon-void volume for KG sample are estimated to be 0.32% and 0.60% respectively. For Salanpur shale, the standard deviation of void volume for helium and argon are calculated to be 0.36% and 0.59% respectively. It can be seen that the standard deviation percentage for argon is approximately twice that for helium for both the samples. The lesser void volume deviation for helium compared to that for argon suggests that helium is a better probing fluid for determination of void volume as compared to argon. For both helium and argon however, the standard deviations are less than 1% suggesting the measurements to be very accurate. Chareonsuppanimit et al. reported 0.5% deviation from the average void volume using helium ( The experimental void volume data for KG and Salanpur shales are shown in From The variation of deviation in void volume versus experimental equilibrium pressure for the KG and Salanpur shale samples are shown in The impact of changing void volume due to change of probing fluid (helium/argon) on the methane adsorption isotherms for KG shale sample is calculated. The methane isotherms for KG sample obtained using the helium- and argon-void volume data are shown in Overall, it can be suggested that the argon-void volume is higher than helium-void volume for both shale samples at similar pressure and temperature conditions. In between argon and helium, the void volume obtained using helium is found to be more stable and showed less variation. The experimental data suggested that the argon may be adsorbing onto the shale while there is negligible adsorption of helium. Therefore, it can be suggested that helium is more suitable for void volume determination. In the present work, void volume experiments of Salanpur and KG shale samples from India are conducted using helium and argon as the probing gas. The error due to averaging the void volume at different pressure steps is calculated and found to be <1% for both the gases. The error due to averaging is more in argon compared to helium. The difference in helium- and argon-void volume data is found to be in the range of 0.2–1.6%. However, this difference in void volume resulted in significant effect on the adsorption isotherm parameters (decrease of