Background
                  Zone 2 sacral fractures account for 34% of sacral fractures with reported neurological deficit in 21−28% of patients. The purpose of this study was to examine the risk factors for neurological injury in zone 2 sacral fractures. The authors hypothesized that partially thread iliosacral screws did not increase incidence of neurologic injury.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective review of consecutive patients admitted to a level 1 trauma center with zone 2 sacral fractures requiring surgery from September 2010 to September 2014 was performed. Patients were excluded if no neurologic exam was available after surgery. Fractures were classified according to Denis and presence/absence of comminution through the neural foramen was noted. Fixation schema was recorded (sacral screws or open reduction and internal fixation with posterior tension plate). Any change in post-operative neurological exam was documented as well as exam at last clinic encounter.
               
                  Results
                  90 patients met inclusion criteria, with zone 2 fractures and post-operative neurological exam. No patient with an intact pre-operative neurologic exam had a neurological deficit after surgery. 86 patients (95.6%) were neurologically intact at their last follow-up examination. Four patients (4.4%) had a neurological deficit at final follow-up, all of them had neurological deficit prior to surgery. 81 patients were treated with partially threaded screws of which 1 (1.2%) had neurological deficit at final follow-up.
                  Fifty-seven fractures (63.3%) were simple fractures and 33 fractures (36.7%) were comminuted. All four patients with neurological deficit had comminuted fractures. The association between neurologic deficit in zone 2 sacral fracture and fracture comminution was found to be statistically significant (p-value=0.016). No nonunion was observed in this cohort.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The use of partially threaded screws for zone 2 sacral fractures is associated with low risk for neurologic injury, suggesting that compression through the fracture does not cause iatrogenic nerve damage. The low rate of sacral nonunion can be attributed to compression induced by the use of partially threaded compression screws. There is a strong association between zone 2 comminution and neurologic injury.Sacral fractures occur in 23−45% of all pelvic ring injuries, and when found to be unstable, require operative stabilization Several fixation methods for of zone 2 sacral fractures have been examined: posterior plating One potential concern with partially threaded screws is the potential for compression and narrowing of the neural foramen particularly through comminuted fractures, which may result iatrogenic neurologic injury The purpose of this study was to define the incidence of post-operative neurologic injury and identify risk factors for neurological deficit after zone 2 sacral fractures. The authors hypothesized that partially threaded posterior screws (trans-sacral, sacral) would not result in iatrogenic neurologic injury, and that fracture comminution through the neural foramen would predict injury-related neurologic compromise. Following institution IRB approval, a retrospective review of all pelvic ring fractures and fracture dislocations fixed at a single level 1 trauma academic center from September 2010 to September 2014 was performed using CPT and ICD-9 codes. Patient inclusion criteria included: age We extracted patient demographic data including age and gender; as well as injury profiles (mechanism of injury, abbreviated injury score (AIS) and the injury severity score (ISS)). Neurological status at arrival, first available neurologic exam after surgery and last clinical follow-up neurological examination were obtained from consult, post-operative, in-patient progress, and clinic notes, respectively. Further data collection included: comminuted vs simple fractures, the surgical intervention of open vs closed reduction, and posterior tension band plate fixation versus percutaneous screws, as well as screw type (partially threaded vs fully threaded), and screw number. Neurologic deficit at final follow up was defined as motor strength of less than five (out of five) of the injured extremity. Statistical analysis was performed by an experienced biostatistician (A.H.) using SPSS © 23.0 (Chicago, IL, USA). Categorical data are presented as count (percent). Continuous data are presented as mean (±standard deviation). The data were divided to patients with intact and deficient neurological examination at final follow-up. All the collected variables were compared between these two study groups. Comparisons between continuous variables were done by the Wilcoxon−Mann−Whitney rank sum test. Comparisons between categorical data were done with chi-square test or the Fisher exact test. The later test was used if expected count was less than five in any cell. All Initial data review included 100 patients with zone 2 sacral fractures. After reviewing the patients’ data, seven patients were excluded because of lack of neurological examination at follow-up. These included one patient that died shortly after admission, five patients that were transferred intubated and followed at another hospital and one patient that had an above knee amputation the same side as the sacral fracture. Three additional patients were excluded because they did not have a neurological examination prior to surgery and had a neurologic deficit after surgery. The study population included 90 patients, mean age was 39.10 (±15.03). Of the 90 patients, 36 patients (40.0%) were male and 54 patients (60.0%) were female. The most common cause of injury was motor vehicle accident – 52 patients (57.8%) followed by fall from height – 12 patients (13.3%). There was no statistically significant difference in the demographic characteristics between neurologically intact and deficient patients ( Of the 90 patients, 86 (95.6%) had no neurological deficit at any time point. Four patients (4.4%) had a neurological deficit at final follow-up. None of the four patients with final neurological deficit had an intact examination at time of admission. These four patients presented with weak but present initial motor exam defined as 2−3/5 motor strength in the tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus, flexor hallucis longus or gastrocnemius–soleus complex. No patient presenting with an initially intact neurologic exam developed a neurologic deficit following operative fixation ( Of the four patients with deficit at final follow-up all had Tibialis Anterior (TA) and extensor halucis longus (EHL) motor strength of less than five (out of five). Two patients had either flexor hallucis longus or Gastrocnemius-soleus complex with strength of four or less (of five). One patient also experienced a sensory deficit. Most patients had some recovery of their initial examination (see Correlation of associated injuries and neurologic deficit after sacral fracture was performed using the abbreviated injury score (AIS, Fifty seven patients (66.3%) had simple pattern fractures ( Of patients with comminuted fracture those with neurological deficit were more commonly fixed open reduction and internal plate fixation (two patients 50.0%) than patients that were neurologically intact (five patients, 5.8%). This difference was found to be statistically significant ( Sacroiliac screws alone were used to fix the sacral fractures of 35 patients (42.16%). In 48 patients (58.84%), trans-sacral screws were used for fracture fixation, either combined with sacroiliac screws or as sole fixation. No statistically significant difference was found between these two groups ( The data presented supports a higher incidence of neurologic injury with comminuted zone II fractures than simple fractures. Surgical fixation with partially threaded sacral and trans-sacral screws did not result in iatrogenic neurologic injury even in communited fractures. Previous works described the incidence of neurological injury after sacral fractures to be as high as 21−28% It has been reported that all patients show improvement of at least one grade of muscle function and 53% have complete neurological recovery Vaccaro et al. and Routt et al. have suggested that zone 2 sacral fractures should be fixed using fully threaded sacral screws to avoid neuroforaminal compression generated by partially threaded screws and resultant iatrogenic nerve injury Min et al. reported on 35 patients with Zone 2 sacral fractures that were treated with partially threaded sacral screws. They did not find any new neurological deficit that could be attributed to the compression screws Our data suggest that neurologic deficit is injury related and that it depends on the comminution of the fracture that is determined at injury. Strengthening this conclusion is the fact that neurologically injured patients had higher scores of abdomen AIS and ISS. This suggests that these were more severely injured patients. We did not recognize a single patient that had an intact neurological examination upon admission and had a neurological deficit after surgery. Our study has several drawbacks; the first is that it is a retrospective study based on clinical records some of which some records might be incomplete or biased. Several patients were intubated upon arrival which makes it impossible to determine their neurological status at arrival. However, intubation upon arrival is inherent to a population of severely injured patients at a referral trauma center. These patients cannot be excluded if a true representation of the sacral fracture population is to be considered. Further studies are required to confirm our results. More specifically, we would be interested in a randomized trail comparing the results between partially threaded and fully threaded screws, focusing both on neurologic status and union rate after surgical fixation of zone 2 sacral fractures. None declared.