A “roadheader” excavator has a special set of characteristics among tunnel excavation machines and the determination of the stability states of a roadheader is important for effective and continuous excavation. For roadheaders having equal power, if one is more stable than another, it can respond to higher boom forces. A new computer program was developed to analyze the stability states of roadheaders. The developed method allows analysis for both longitudinal and transverse cutting head type machines either at one point on the excavation face or in terms of the whole face. Values of the four stability states of the roadheader, namely: turning around the vertical axis, turning to the side directions, turning to the back direction and sliding, can be obtained using this program. In this study, the effects of machine design parameters were investigated by applying this method to the stability of a longitudinal type roadheader. The studied machine design parameters are the machine weight, boom length, machine width, track width, distance between the back leg of the machine and the center of gravity, distance between the start of the boom and the center of gravity, distance between the horizontal point and the vertical rotation point of the boom, and the distance between the ground and boom axis when it is parallel to the ground. The effect of the machine design parameters on stability has been illustrated in detail.In today’s world, hundreds of kilometers of tunnels are being excavated for mining and construction purposes. Parallel to the rapid increase in urbanization, the need for tunnels in transportation and infrastructure has also increased. On the other hand, there is a tendency towards underground production methods in mining due to the environmental restrictions and the decrease of mining resources close to the surface of the earth. For economic reasons, early commencement of production is required in underground mining operations. Therefore, mechanized excavation systems have become more advantageous than the conventional methods in such mining projects. Roadheaders have an exceptional place among the other mechanized excavation machines. Besides driving tunnels, they have received widespread applications for production purposes in the excavating of coal, evaporates, industrial minerals and metallic ores ( Roadheaders are generally classified with respect to their weight as being light, medium, heavy, and extra heavy types. As their weight increase, they can be used in higher strength rock, since the weight is proportional to cutting head power and boom forces. Machine weight is increased for more powerful machines, due to the increased boom reaction forces. Otherwise, machine stability is affected negatively and instability may occur ( The stability of a roadheader during operation is vitally important for an effective and continuous cutting process. Some researchers have addressed the importance of stability and compared the longitudinal and the transverse head type roadheaders ( The newly developed method is based on the calculation of three moment values with respect to the Estimate the moment values with respect to point C on the Estimate the moment values with respect to point B on the Estimate the moment values with respect to point A on the Estimate the sliding state of the roadheader along the The parameters used, which affect the machine stability, are ( The forces exerted in the cutting process are used in the stability analysis of the roadheaders. One of these is created by machine weight that acts at the center of gravity ( Using these machine design parameters and the defined forces, three moment equations and an equation for sliding state have been established for transverse and longitudinal cutting head type roadheaders for all cutting modes. Changing the cutting modes alters roadheader stability because the directions of the boom force reactions are also affected. In the cutting process of a longitudinal head type roadheader, the machine first sumps into the tunnel face and then arcs horizontally and vertically. Under homogeneous face conditions, the boom axis is positioned parallel to tunnel axis and then sumps to the profile of the face. If the cutting head rotation is anticlockwise, the boom cuts towards the right (termed overcutting mode) because cutting is achieved over the cut face. If the head cuts under the face, this mode is termed the undercutting mode. If the cutting direction is downwards, it is called the lowering mode and if the direction is upward then it is called the lifting mode. These four cutting modes are illustrated in For the transverse cutting head type roadheaders, the cutting head excavates the face by moving horizontally or vertically, after sumping to the tunnel face. So the cutting modes of these roadheaders can be classified as arcing, lowering and lifting. As an example, the equations that were established to find the values of the stability states (A, B, C, D) of the longitudinal cutting head type roadheaders in the undercutting mode are given in Eqs. These equations show the difference between the maximum bearing moment/force capacity of the roadheader and the instantaneous operational moment/force value of the roadheader. If values from the equations are less than zero, then the machine will no longer be stable. When the values are greater than zero, the roadheader has higher stability.  The state of turning around the vertical axis of the machine The state of turning to the side directions of the machine The state of turning to the back direction of the machine The state of sliding of the machine  The state of turning around the vertical axis of the machine The state of turning to the side directions of the machine The state of turning to the back direction of the machine The state of sliding of the machine Based on the method explained above, a computer program was developed using the C++ programming language. With this program, quantitative values can be determined for the various stability states that are turning around the vertical axis, turning to the sides and the backwards direction and sliding states of transverse or longitudinal cutting head type roadheaders for any cutting mode. This analysis can be made either at a particular point of the tunnel face or along the whole face. As shown in the flow-chart given in Finally, the machine and tunnel parameters are entered into the program. To assess the effects of machine design parameters, each parameter is changed within a systematic manner while all the other parameters are constant. It allows the determination of the effect of each machine design parameter on the stability. Results of the stability states with boom position are written to an output file by the program. The program also estimates the tunnel profile that will be excavated by using boom length, distance between horizontal and vertical rotation points of the boom and maximum boom position angles in the horizontal and vertical planes. A longitudinal cutting head type roadheader has been analyzed along its maximum cutting profile by using the developed method. A spherical cutting head having 69° tilt angle of corner pick was used in the machine. Its design parameters and pick forces were taken from other studies ( The roadheader was analyzed for sumping, overcutting, undercutting, lifting and lowering modes. The stability states, which are turning around the vertical axis, turning to the side directions, turning to the back direction and sliding states; were calculated for all cutting modes for whole face while changing boom position angles by steps of 5°. The obtained minimum values of the four stability states of the analyzed roadheader for all cutting modes are shown in In order to analyze the effects of the machine design parameters on stability; the tested machine parameter was changed within a systematic manner while keeping all the other parameters constant. The original and tested values of the machine design parameters and tunnel parameters are given in The machine weight ( The effect of the parameter of boom length ( The machine width ( The design parameter of the width of tracks ( The effect of the distance between the start of the boom and the center of gravity ( The effect of the distance between the horizontal rotation point and the vertical rotation point of the boom ( Increased values of the distance between ground and the boom axis when it is parallel to the ground ( A new stability analysis method was developed for longitudinal and transverse cutting head type roadheaders by establishing stability equations for states of turning around the vertical axis, turning to the side directions, turning to the back direction and sliding for all cutting modes. A computer program based on these equations was written to analyze the machine stability for one point on the excavation face or across the whole face. Using this program, the effects of machine design parameters on machine stability were determined in a roadheader that is in operation in a Turkish coal mine. It has been concluded that the machine weight has a great influence on the stability as defined in the previous studies. The increased values of the machine width, the width of tracks, the distance between the back leg of the machine and the center of gravity have contributed positively to some of the stability states of the machine or vice versa. However, the stability of the specified roadheader was negatively affected by the increased values of the boom length and the other remaining machine design parameters. The method developed may be useful for the roadheader manufacturers and the machine users as the effects of the machine design parameters on machine stability and machine integrity can be determined for different tunnel conditions. This paper was developed from the Ph.D. thesis of O. Acaroglu. The research was realized through the support of Istanbul Technical University (ITU) Research Foundation (Project No: 30176). The authors are grateful for the support from ITU and Cayirhan Park Teknik Coal Enterprises.