The compression of granular materials has been traditionally modelled with the limitations of classical elasto-plasticity. The energy was implicitly assumed to dissipate from the frictional interaction of particles. However, the fact that brittle granular materials crush suggests that energy must also be dissipated from the fracturing of the grains, as in fracture mechanics. The concept of breakage as a thermomechanical internal variable was introduced in Part I [Einav, I., 2006. Breakage mechanics—Part I: theory. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 00,000–000] to describe the fracturing mechanisms. The theory allows to treat ideal theoretical materials that undergo dissipation purely from breakage with no other mechanism allowed for the energy consumption. However, as accounted for in elasto-plasticity, dissipation must also occur from the frictional rearrangement of grains. The combination of the two dissipative mechanisms of breakage and plasticity must therefore be investigated, as we do in this paper. Those two mechanisms are generally coupled, in the sense that one inevitably appears when the other develops. Plastic dissipation emerges as a by-product of breakage dissipation because after grains crush, local rearrangement must occur. This scenario may be termed an ‘active breakage mechanism’, and typifies compression deformations. In shear the plastic dissipation is dominant but breakage appears inevitably from grains abrasion. This scenario may be called a ‘passive breakage mechanism’. Based on the coupling assumption, models are developed for granular materials. In particular, we show that in compression isotropic hardening of sands may appear without involving plastic strains, i.e., independent of frictional dissipation. This interpretation of hardening is different from the one used in classical critical state soil mechanics. However, frictional dissipation leads to plastic straining that are necessary for the models to be predictive in unloading.Since the number of flaws within particles is relative to their sizes, the collective behaviour of the sand agglomerate is isotropically strength hardening under compression as particles get smaller (e.g., The growth of breakage describes the evolution of the grain size distribution from an initial to ultimate distributions. In Part I ( Those two mechanisms are generally coupled, in the sense that one inevitably appears when the other develops. Plastic dissipation emerges as a by-product of breakage dissipation because when grains crush local rearrangement must occur. This scenario may be termed an ‘active breakage mechanism’, and typifies compression deformations. In shear the plastic dissipation is dominant but breakage appears inevitably from grains abrasion. This scenario may be called a ‘passive breakage mechanism’. Based on the coupling assumption the CBM theory is taken further, and models are developed for granular materials. In particular, we show that in compression isotropic hardening of sands may appear without involving plastic strains, i.e., independent of plastic dissipation. This interpretation of hardening is therefore different from the one used in classical critical state soil mechanics. However, plastic dissipation leads to plastic straining that are necessary for the models to be predictive in unloading. In critical state soil mechanics plastic strains are assumed to commence when the mean effective stress,  The usual modelling scheme in critical state soil mechanics is to measure In this paper we follow a more recent approach, that was originally undertaken by In Part I of this paper the new theory of CBM was presented. The theory was limited for pure elastic-breakage models (total strain is also the elastic strain The general structure of pure elastic-breakage Helmholtz free energy is given by (P Therefore the parameter For example, assuming that the ultimate distribution is fractal (see P The stress is given by differentiating Eq. In P The second form may also be interpreted as a ‘breakage growth criterion’, stating that energy dissipation from breakage is fully attained from loss in residual breakage energy (see P Based on the Helmholtz free energy in the reference grain fraction in Eqs. Before yielding and commencement of breakage the relation between the pressure and volumetric strain is given by After yielding the breakage is given by combining Eq.   The unloading elastic modulus degrades with the growth in breakage, such that upon unloading back to the reference pressure The constitutive behaviour of brittle granular materials would mostly relate to two general dissipative mechanisms: dissipation from plasticity and dissipation from breakage. These two mechanisms are generally coupled in the sense that one inevitably appears when the other develops. Based on the coupling assumption, an elastic–plastic-breakage theory is developed for granular materials. However, we start by presenting the mathematical foundation of plastic dissipation and developing an uncoupled approach. This uncoupled approach will provide a good starting point before advancing to the couple approach. The frictional dissipation is most efficiently described in terms of the conventional plastic dissipation of plasticity. For rate independent materials the increment of plastic dissipation is assumed homogeneous first order function of the plastic strain increment The decomposition assumption is generally regarded as one of the most effective working hypothesizes in soil mechanics. It is important to mention, however, that there are theoretical grounds to question the validity of this hypothesis since the contact law between particles is non-linear in nature, (see The total increment of dissipation potential Considering Eqs. Combining the last equation with the increment of stored energy in Eq. Eq. The breakage energy may also be defined in two various forms: As in pure elastic-breakage models, we identify the breakage yield condition: A less trivial form of dissipation than Eq. However, combining this with Eqs. Eq. Again, the pure elastic-breakage relations This means, as opposed to Eqs. The general form of the yield surface may be extracted by eliminating the plastic strain and breakage increments from Eqs. Since The following flow rules are deduced: Combining the last equation with Eqs. Therefore, the dissipation Although more subtle than the uncoupled dissipation, the coupled dissipation allows to strongly connect between plastic straining and breakage. Any micro-mechanism that is chiefly in charge of stored energy release from breakage is supplemented by additional energy release from plastic dissipation, and vice versa. The difference between the two forms of dissipation is given by Eqs. In A convenient way to develop models is to start with an uncoupled dissipation, then advance it further to a couple model. The ambition in developing models is to be able to follow strong physical concepts that explain soil behaviour effectively. One of such physical concept is based on the postulate of breakage growth criterion (see Paper I). This criterion (see Eq. It is easy to see that with the definitions of To obtain a couple form of total dissipation the individual terms are being factorised by Since With the aid of the consistency condition We are therefore left with the interpretation of the ‘plastic-breakage coupling angle’ When  The first term of the yield surface in Eq.  For an initial uniform distribution with particles ranging from For The power function coefficient ‘ The agreement between the theory and the experiment is excellent when the plastic-breakage coupling angle The theoretical relation between the breakage and pressure, given by Eq. Crushing of particles occurs in shear, as well as in compression. The above models were aimed for compression deformations only. During shear, localised shear bands may emerge to minimise energy by transmitting most of the velocity changes. When the particles are sufficiently ‘strong’, they may carry the excess normal micro forces that arise from the confined dilation. However, when the excess normal forces exceeds the particle strength, internal crushing begins. Hence, the ability to describe particles breakage directly via the constitutive relations should make an important research aim. The purpose of this section is only to pinpoint a possible direction for adding shear strains, rather than attempting to develop a definite model. This step of the paper is important for illustrating that the CBM theory may enable the derivation of complete models. Within the framework of critical state soil mechanics, a general way to describe the dissipation in terms of shear and compression is given by (e.g., In relation to This highlights, however, an important limitation of conventional critical state models, where the overall dissipation ignores any fracture (or breakage) mechanisms. This aspect could be rectified by employing the CBM formulation; for example, by adding an additional shear plastic term into the square root of Eq. This time, however, the individual terms We note that The deviation of Eq. The shear dissipative term in Eq. The growth of breakage describes the evolution of the grain size distribution from an initial to ultimate distributions. In Part I ( Models are developed for brittle granular materials. The theory is validated against experiments. No other physical theory has been previously proposed that can link between the breakage and the stress–strain behaviour of brittle granular materials, although the breakage is frequently measured. The new Theory of CBM is capable to do that. For that purpose, a new average constant of granular material is defined, called the ‘breakage strain energy constant’, with which and a postulate of ‘breakage growth’, it is possible to explain the soil phenomenon of isotropic hardening directly from physical principles rather than from curve-fitting. This interpretation of hardening is rather different than the one used in classical critical state soil mechanics, and presented in a rather more rational-physical manner. The new interpretation has much in common with the interpretation given by A good approximation for the ensemble elastic behaviour of particulate aggregate may be given by a power function, representing the Hertzian contact law between particles ( Differentiating Eq. We note that when The above treatment does not account for the dependence of the material on the grain size distributions. To extend the above analysis we note, based on Eqs. P The influence of the grain size distribution could now follow by combining either one of the above relations with the general expression in Eq.