Objective
                  This study aimed to investigate the potential of Mg-based bioceramic scaffolds combined with human treated-dentin matrices (hTDMs) and dentinogenesis-related morphogens to promote odontogenic differentiation and dentin-like tissue formation by Dental Pulp Stem Cells-DPSCs.
               
                  Methods
                  DPSC cultures were established and characterized by flow cytometry. Experimental cavities were prepared inside crowns of extracted teeth and demineralized by EDTA (hTDMs). Zn-doped, Mg-based bioceramic scaffolds, synthesized by the sol–gel technique, were hosted inside the hTDMs. DPSCs were spotted inside the hTDMs/scaffold constructs with/without additional exposure to DMP-1 or BMP-2 (100ng/ml, 24h). Scanning Electron Microscopy-SEM, live/dead fluorescence staining and MTT assay were used to evaluate cell attachment and viability; Real time PCR for expression of osteo/odontogenic markers; Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometry-ICP/AES for scaffold elemental release analysis; ELISA for hTDM growth factor release analysis; SEM and X-ray Diffraction-XRD for structural/chemical characterization of the regenerated tissues.
               
                  Results
                  Scaffolds constantly released low concentrations of Mg2+, Ca2+, Zn2+ and Si4+, while hTDMs growth factors, like DMP-1, BMP-2 and TGFβ-1. hTDMs/scaffold constructs supported DPSC viability, inducing their rapid odontogenic shift, indicated by upregulation of DSPP, BMP-2, osteocalcin and osterix expression. Newly-formed Ca-P tissue overspread the scaffolds partially transforming into bioapatite. Exposure to DMP-1 or BMP-2 pronouncedly enhanced odontogenic differentiation phenomena.
               
                  Significance
                  This is the first study to validate that combining the bioactivity and ion releasing properties of bioceramic materials with growth factor release by treated natural dentin further supported by exogenous addition of key dentinogenesis-related morphogens (DMP-1, BMP-2) can be a promising strategy for targeted dentin regeneration.Several previous studies have provided evidence that dental restorative procedures are closely linked to a number of biological and technical complications, or adverse reactions, leading to unpredictable therapeutic efficacy In this context, the choice of suitable scaffold materials, providing the three-dimensional artificial matrix mimicking the extracellular microenvironment is crucially important. Many synthetic and natural scaffold materials have already been employed in dentin regeneration protocols, including long-lasting porous bioceramics (e.g. hydroxyapatite, β-tricalcium phosphate, bioactive glasses etc.), natural molecules of intermediate duration (e.g. collagen and chitosan) and short-lasting polymers, such as polyglycolic acid (PGA), polylactic acid (PLA), or their combinations Bioceramic scaffolds have shown several advantages over other materials, such as bioactivity (i.e. apatite-forming ability) and biodegradability, suitable porous structure In the present study, Zn-doped, Mg-based bioceramic scaffolds, tailored for controlled release of low concentrations of Mg Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the potential of Mg-based, Zn-doped bioceramic scaffolds, combined with hTDMs, to act as suitable hybrid scaffolding materials to induce odontogenic differentiation of DPSCs and regeneration of new mineralized dentin matrix. It was hypothesized that combining the properties of both types of scaffolds might provide the ideal microenvironment for targeted dentin regeneration. The second research hypothesis was that additional exogenous application of key dentinogenesis-related morphogens, such as DMP-1 and BMP-2, would further enhance odontogenic differentiation and biomineralization phenomena. The results of this study are expected to support growing evidence on the use of bioceramic materials combined with dentin pre-conditioning protocols for targeted dentin regeneration. DPSC cultures were established from third molars of young healthy donors using the enzymatic dissociation method, as previously described DPSCs were extensively characterized by flow cytometry for several mesenchymal (CD90/Thy-1, CD73, CD29/b1-integrin, CD49f/a6-integrin, CD81-TAPA, CD166/ALCAM, CD146/MUC18, STRO-1, CD34), neural (CD271/NGFR, nestin), endothelial (CD105/endoglin, CD106/VCAM), hematopoietic (CD117/c-Kit, CD14, CD45) and embryonic (Nanog, Oct3/4, TRA-1-60, TRA-1-81, SSEA-1, 3, -4, -5) stem cell (SC) markers, as previously described Ceramic scaffolds were synthesized with the foam replica technique using a sol–gel derived glass composition in the system (SiO hTDMs were prepared using crowns of impacted third molars of young healthy donors obtained after routine extraction. The extracted teeth were preserved in PBS containing 2x antibiotics/antimycotics, in order to reduce their microbial load and maintain their moisture level. Periodontal tissues were scraped away and the coronal part of the tooth separated from the root by a transverse section at the cemento-enamel junction. Dental pulp tissues and part of the pre-dentin were also removed by mechanical means. Experimental cavities (approx. 4 To verify the beneficial effect of EDTA treatment in growth factor release from the hTDMs, enzyme linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) were used. The prepared crown specimens were placed in 24 well-plates and fully covered with 1 To investigate whether EDTA treatment was effective in thoroughly exposing the dentinal tubules and collagen bundles for growth factor release, hTDMs were observed by SEM. Briefly, hTDMs were washed in PBS, fixed with 3% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 Scaffolds were placed in 24 well-plates and fully covered with 1 For the analysis a Perkin Elmer (USA) model 3100 XL Axial-Viewing Spectrometer was used. The plasma atomizer was configured to include a cross-flow nebulizer attached to a Scott-type spray chamber for nebulization, while the nebulizer gas flow rate was adjusted to 0.8 The scaffolds were adjusted into the prepared cavities in the hTDMs by minor trimming of their edges to achieve direct contact with the dentinal cavity walls ( After 3, 7 and 14 days (d), live/dead fluorescent staining (Calcein M/PI staining) was applied to evaluate cell viability inside the constructs using confocal microscopy, while cell morphology/attachment inside the scaffolds was evaluated by SEM. MTT assay was additionally used to evaluate cell viability/proliferation after 3, 6, 9, 12 and 15 by means of a metabolic-based test. Total RNA was isolated after 7 and 14 d and Real time PCR was performed to evaluate expression of several osteo/odontogenic differentiation markers, including Dentin Sialophosphoprotein (DSPP), Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP-2), Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP), Ostecalcin (Bone gamma-carboxyglutamic acid-containing protein- BGLAP), Runt- related transcription factor 2 (Runx2) and Osterix. Finally, protein lysates were collected from the constructs after 3, 7 and 14 d to evaluate ALP enzymatic activity. The constructs were double stained with Calcein AM and Ethidium Homodimer-EthD1 (live/dead respectively) staining. Stained complexes were observed under a confocal microscope (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). Approximately 20 depth dependent serial sections were taken and the projection images were produced. Quantification of the percentage of live and dead cells was performed by pixel analysis using the Image J color pixel counter plugin. hTDMs/SC/CELL complexes were also examined at the same time-points (3, 7 and 14 d) in higher magnifications regarding cell morphology and attachment by SEM, as described in Section Cell viability/proliferation was determined using the MTT [3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] assay. The hTDMs/SC constructs were spotted with 2.5 Total mRNA was isolated from each of the CELLS, SC/CELL and hTDMs/SC/CELL constructs using a Nucleospin RNA isolation kit (Macherey Nagel, Düren, Germany) and reverse transcribed (1 ALP activity was detected using a commercial kit (Abnova, Taipei, Taiwan) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, the cell/scaffold constructs were homogenized in 100 ul of the lysis buffer supplied by the kit. The lysates were centrifuged at 13,000 For this set of experiments DPSCs were seeded into the hTDMs/SC constructs, as described in 2.6 and exposed to CCM, additionally supplemented with 1.8 All experiments were run with 2–4 replicate samples and repeated at least three times. Statistical analysis of the data was performed using two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Follow-up comparisons between groups and treatment times were performed with Tukey's post hoc test. Analysis was performed with Prism 6.0 Software (GraphPad, CA, USA) and the level of statistical difference was 0.05 ( The DPSCs cultures used in this study were highly positive (>95% of the population) for Mesenchymal Stem Cell-MSC markers, including CD90/Thy-1, CD73, CD29/β1-integrin, CD49f/a6-integrin, CD81/TAPA, CD166/ALCAM. Lower expression was observed for the MSC markers CD146/MUC18 (66.6 The synthesized Zn-doped, Mg-based bioceramic scaffolds showed a slightly fluctuating, but virtually stable release of Si ELISA assays showed a time-dependent release ( SEM microphotographs also revealed that the applied protocol for dentin matrix demineralization was effective in sufficiently exposing the dentinal tubules [ SEM microphotographs showed proper adhesion and spreading of DPCSs inside the 3D porous scaffold structure [ Live/dead fluorescent staining and confocal microscopy, confirmed that the majority of cells remained viable throughout the entire culture period (up to 14 d), as they appeared green by the calcein AM, in contrast to the few dead cells (ranging from 3.4 MTT assay confirmed a time-dependent ( A parallel analysis at the mRNA expression level of several osteo/odontogenic differentiation-related genes was performed for DPSCs cultured on 2D plastic surfaces in the absence of any inductive media (i.e. cultured with CCM) (termed as CELLS), as compared to DPSCs cultured inside the bioceramic scaffolds (SC/CELLS) and DPSCs cultured inside the hTDMs/SC constructs (hTDMs/SC/CELLS). The influence of the exogenous application of hr-DMP-1 or hr-BMP-2 (single exposure to 100 Overall, it was shown that incubation of DPSCs inside the hTDM/SC constructs was much more effective in inducing a time-dependent ( Incubation of DPSCs with CCM without any additional supplements, such as dexamethasone, was associated with expression of all differentiation-related genes at similar levels to their baseline expression, with the exception of ALP, that showed a statistically significant, time-dependent increase in expression up to 4.6-fold after 14 d of continuous incubation in confluency ( Incubation of DPCSs inside the bioceramic scaffolds was associated with much higher expression of all differentiation markers compared to DPSCs cultured on plastic under the same conditions (i.e. comparison between CELLS vs. SC/CELLS, CELLS Exogenous addition of hr-DMP-1 or hr-BMP-2 led to further time-dependent upregulation of DSPP and BMP-2, as shown in Incubation of DPCSs inside the hTDMs/SC constructs was associated with much higher expression of all differentiation markers, compared to DPSCs incubated on plastic or SC/CELL constructs exposed to the same conditions (i.e. ±hr-DMP-1 and hr-BMP-2). Specifically, a time-dependent ( Exogenous addition of hr-DMP-1 or hr-BMP-2 led to further time-dependent upregulation of DSPP and BMP-2 expression values, as shown analytically in To shed more light on the decreased mRNA expression levels of ALP in SC/CELLS and hTDMs/SC/CELLS constructs, as compared to CELLS seeded on plastic, an additional assay measuring ALP enzymatic activity was performed. The results of this assay were in complete accordance with the real time PCR data, showing time-dependent ( SEM-EDS analysis of the hTDMs/SC/CELL constructs after 28 d incubation in phosphate-rich CCM (with or without exogenous addition of hr-DMP-1 or hr-BMP-2) revealed that newly-formed tissue consisting of calcium and phosphorous was generated to overspread almost the entire structure of the scaffold. DPSC bodies were thoroughly encapsulated inside the mineralized matrix and could be sparsely visible in all cases [ XRD analysis further showed a transformation of the initially amorphous Ca/Mg-rich phase of the cell-free scaffolds to apatite, as revealed by the characteristic peak of biological apatite in the respective diffractograms. However, this peak is of low intensity indicating a low percentage of apatite formation, which was calculated between 1 and 12% among the samples, while the rest tissue was amorphous (88–98%). In parallel, reduction of the Ca/Mg-rich amorphous phase was observed, overall providing quite similar XRD profiles to those of the natural dentin [ To the best of our knowledge, the present study was the first to combine the favorable properties of Zn-doped, Mg-based bioceramic scaffolds with hTDMs acting as a reservoir of dentin morphogens for targeted odontogenic differentiation and biomineralization by DPSCs. The scaffolds were designed with tailored biointeractivity to allow a constant release of low concentrations of Mg Mg-based bioceramic scaffolds have previously shown adequate biocompatibility by favoring DPSC adhesion and viability/proliferation In the present study, the scaffolds stably released low concentrations (13–17 The scaffolds also constantly released low concentrations (7.6–8.9 The present study combined bioceramic scaffolds with hTDMs to provide hybrid constructs for targeted dentin regeneration. Earlier studies used TDMs in regenerative procedures attempting to regenerate dental pulp, dentin and tooth roots DPSCs were selected as the most suitable MSC type for targeted dentin regeneration. Previous studies confirmed their high capacity for odontogenic differentiation and potential to reconstitute dentin-pulp complexes when transplanted into immunocompromised mice The scaffolds alone induced a more pronounced upregulation of osteo/odontogenic differentiation markers, mainly DSPP, BMP-2, BGLAP and to a lesser extent ALP, compared with cells grown on 2D plastic surfaces, with little effect on expression of the transcription factors Osterix and Runx2 ( Although BMP-2, BGLAP and ALP are not specific markers, their pivotal role during dentin matrix mineralization enables their use as indicators of odontogenic differentiation Runx2 expression remained relatively stable in cells and SC/CELL but downregulated in hTDMs/SC/CELL constructs, particularly after addition of growth factors (hr-DMP-1 and hr-BMP-2); in conjunction with parallel upregulation of Osterix. Runx2 (Cbfa1) is a key transcription factor essential for skeletal and tooth development, acting at very early stages to drive the expression of mineralization proteins, like DSPP, BSP, ALP, OCN etc. Single exposure of hTDM/SC/CELL constructs to hr-DMP-1 and hr-BMP-2 accelerated the expression of odontogenic markers in DPSCs. Previous studies showed that DMP-1 may act as a transcription factor binding to the DSPP promoter and activating transcription EDS analysis of the mineralized tissue in the present study showed that newly-formed tissue enriched in Ca and P was generated inside the hTDMs/SC/CELL constructs. However, the apatitic nature of the mineralized tissues can only be accessed through XRD analysis. In order to compare the characteristics of the mineralized tissues formed In conclusion, the results of the present study validate the use of Zn-doped, Mg-based bioceramic scaffolds for targeted odontogenic differentiation and dentin-like tissue formation, especially when used as hybrid constructs in combination with hTDMs as an abundant source of dentin morphogens. The scaffolds presented favorable biocompatibility by supporting long-term attachment and viability of DPSCs, controlled biointeractivity, by releasing elements (Mg This study was conducted under the action Excellence II (Project: 5105) and funded by the