In-situ formed AlN hollow sphere reinforced Al matrix syntactic foam parts have been fabricated by metal injection moulding, partial nitridation and a subsequent “open-closed pore transformation” without using pre-fabricated ceramic hollow spheres. The in-situ Al matrix systactic foams feature highly controllable pore size of <20 μm and exhibit high strength of ∼200 MPa, which is superior to conventional Al matrix syntactic foams having pre-fabricated ceramic hollow sphere reinforcements.Metal matrix syntactic foams (MMSFs) refer to a kind of novel composite materials in which ceramic hollow spheres are embedded in a metal matrix (e.g. aluminium, magnesium, titanium or iron) as reinforcements In-situ fabrication is a new process used widely to produce metal matrix composites (MMCs) The metal powder used in this research is a mixture of Al 6061 (gas atomized, D50 = 13.4 μm, AMPAL) and 2 wt.% Sn (<43 μm, Atlantic Equipment Engineers). The binder is composed of 3% stearic acid, 52% palm oil wax and 45% high density polyethylene (in wt. pct.). The addition of binder was fixed at 38.0 vol.% (or 17.1 wt.%) following a preliminary study. The feedstock for MIM was prepared in the following way. First, metal powders of Al 6061-2%Sn and the binder were pre-mixed in a Turbula mixer for 30 min. Second, the mixture was compounded in a Barbender kneader at 30 rpm and 160 °C for 60 min. Finally, the compounded mixture was extruded using a Haake MiniLab twin screw extruder and pelletized into granules. Injection moulding was realized using an Arburg moulding machine to make the “green samples”. They were debound in hexane at 45 °C for 48 h to transform the green parts into “brown parts”. Sintering of brown parts is a two-stage process, including partially nitridation and “open-closed pore transformation” treatment. The brown samples were first placed in a stainless steel container with a blanket of Al Cuboid specimens (5 × 5 × 10 mm  The brown samples were then subjected to partial nitridation, where each Al 6061 particle in the brown samples reacts with nitrogen to form an AlN shell enveloping the particle. In the as-nitrided structures, AlN shells are interconnected, forming a rigid skeleton to impart strength to the sample, while the spaces outside the AlN shells are also interconnected, forming an open pore structure. Recent high resolution transmission electron microscopy has revealed that the AlN shells formed during nitridation are actually an AlN–Al composite structure where AlN whiskers, which are aligned almost perpendicularly to the shell–core interface, are distributed in the un-nitrided Al matrix  A schematic model illustrating the unique fabrication process is shown in In the in-situ formed Al MMSF, the pore size and distribution are closely related to the Al particle size and distribution. They are readily controllable through the selection of the Al powder. This study used fine Al 6061 powder giving rise to micro-sized closed pores (∼10 μm) with a narrow size distribution. These pore features are difficult to achieve by other means.    In-situ formed AlN hollow sphere reinforced Al MMSF parts containing ∼30% closed pores of <20 μm in diameter have been fabricated by MIM, in-situ nitridation reaction and a subsequent open-closed pore formation process without using pre-fabricated ceramic hollow spheres. The in-situ Al MMSF exhibits a high compressive strength of ∼200 MPa, which is superior to conventional Al MMSFs having pre-fabricated ceramic hollow sphere reinforcements. The work was funded by the