The surgical and therapeutic management for total elbow arthroplasty is reviewed. Surgical overview and techniques, stability issues, factors affecting therapy, and a proposed postoperative treatment plan are presented. Specific therapy management following total elbow replacement has not been published before in a peer-reviewed journal. Further study is needed to obtain patient outcome data following the proposed therapy plan.End-stage elbow arthritis was historically managed with resection or interposition arthroplasty. Early attempts at hemiarthroplasty were largely unsuccessful. In 1972, Dee and Sweetnam were the first to report the use of total elbow arthroplasty. Contemporary Advances in Good results have been reported after total elbow arthroplasty for both linked and unlinked designs. Patient satisfaction and implant survival approaches that of hip and knee arthroplasty in the rheumatoid population. In an attempt to allow for intraoperative decision making between linked and unlinked designs, the concept of prosthetic convertibility has been addressed by two systems, the Tornier Latitude and DePuy Acclaim. These implants allow for the postoperative conversion of an unstable unlinked device to a linked articulation without the need for extensive implant revision. Alignment jigs and modular components can assist in more accurate replication of the native center of rotation and soft tissue balance required for proper component tracking. The Latitude system can also accommodate the retention or replacement of the radial head ( Total elbow arthroplasty, whether linked or unlinked, is the most definitive functional procedure for end-stage elbow arthritis. Advanced rheumatoid arthritis with disabling pain, stiffness, or instability that continues despite conservative treatment is the most common indication for total elbow arthroplasty. Complex nonunion, gross instability, periarticular tumors, and both primary and posttraumatic osteoarthritis have also been successfully managed with total elbow arthroplasty. Complex intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus in elderly low-demand patients with osteopenia and comminution have become more frequent indications for total elbow arthroplasty. Linked prostheses are indicated in most primary situations as well as when significant osseous or ligamentous deficiency exists. Aseptic loosening and bearing wear are primary causes of failure, especially in the younger patient population. Linked arthroplasty should therefore be performed reluctantly in patients aged under 65 Unlinked arthroplasty has enjoyed success, primarily in Europe and Asia. The maintenance of bone stock and the potential for decreased polyethylene wear and aseptic loosening have made the unlinked design a favorable alternative for younger patients who are likely to require future revision. Patients with insufficient bone stock, advanced osseous deformity, gross instability, or capsuloligamentous insufficiency are poor candidates for unlinked arthroplasty. If intraoperative or late instability is recognized with unlinked arthroplasty, ligamentous reconstruction or conversion to a linked articulation is indicated. The decision to use a radial head replacement, when available, or keep the native radial head, when possible, should be based on the intraoperative assessment of radiocapitellar and proximal radio-ulnar alignment. Proximal radial anatomy is complex and difficult to re-create with current prostheses. The precise surgical technique depends on the prosthesis used. The patient is positioned supine with the arm across the chest. A tourniquet is used, and prophylactic antibiotics are administered. A straight posterior incision is used centered just medial to the tip of the olecranon. The ulnar nerve is identified, carefully mobilized, and transposed anteriorly into a subcutaneous pouch. The management of the triceps tendon varies at the surgeon's discretion. A triceps-on approach prevents postoperative extension weakness but sacrifices visualization for the surgeon when bone loss is minimal. The triceps can be elevated from medial to lateral off the olecranon, as in the Bryan–Morrey “triceps-sparing” approach, or lateral to medial, as in the extended Kocher approach. The triceps-splitting approach divides the muscle–tendon unit centrally to the tip of the olecranon and distally over the proximal ulna. Sharp, subperiosteal dissection releases Sharpey's fibers from the olecranon, reflecting the tendon medially and laterally, maintaining continuity with the flexor carpi ulnaris and anconeus, respectively. The medial and lateral collateral ligaments and their corresponding muscular sleeves are sharply released from the epicondyles and are tagged with a suture for later repair. At this point, the joint is dislocated. The reproduction of the native flexion–extension axis is crucial to balancing an elbow arthroplasty. The central portion of the distal humerus is resected to the level of the proximal olecranon fossa using a sagittal saw. Cutting blocks are used to make precise distal humeral cuts, and the humeral canal is broached to the appropriate size. Preparation of the radius and ulna is facilitated with a cutting guide or done freehand in some systems. The decision to keep, excise, or replace the radial head is based on the implant design, the condition of the radial head, and the ability to precisely align the radiocapitellar joint. Trial reduction of the components and replacing the triceps in an anatomical position should allow for an assessment of elbow alignment, stability, range of motion, and component tracking. A decision to proceed with unlinked or linked insertion is made based on the implant design, patient factors, and the pathoanatomy and stability of the elbow. If the radial head implant is maltracking or malaligned with the capitellum and this cannot be corrected, radial head replacement should not be performed. Antibiotic-laden cement is injected into the humerus, ulna, and radius and the implants inserted. Locking nonabsorbable sutures are used to repair the collateral ligaments and muscular origins. If detached, the triceps is repaired with heavy braided suture in locking fashion through drill holes in the ulna. The tourniquet is released prior to closure to achieve hemostasis. Drains are placed and a sterile dressing is applied. The elbow is placed in a well-padded splint in full extension and elevated for a few days. There are very few papers written that advocate for the use of occupational therapy (OT) or physical therapy (PT) services for elbow pathology. At the time of this writing, there are no scientific papers that show the benefits of OT or PT following total elbow arthroplasty. Some surgical texts and papers even directly state that therapy is not required after total elbow arthroplasty. Communication between the surgeon and therapist upon initial referral is essential for appropriate therapy management. Therapists should be aware of several factors that will affect postoperative management. The main factors that affect rehabilitation include the type of implant used, the status of the triceps tendon, the overall stability assessed in the operating room, and the status of the ulnar nerve. Patient goals and activity level also play a role in determining therapy guidelines and expectations after total elbow arthroplasty. Despite stringent guidelines for patient selection, there is still a variance in patient goals and expectations for range of motion, strength, and desired activity level following surgery. While all patients must be educated regarding the limitations of the prosthesis (i.e., a 5-lb lifetime weight limit for lifting), the patients with more active lifestyles often have to be reminded of these restrictions. They usually require slightly longer periods of protective splinting to prevent overuse. These patients often tend to have increased expectations for range of motion and tend to remain in therapy longer for passive stretching and static progressive splinting programs because of these increased expectations. Rehabilitation varies based on the type of implant used in surgery. As previously mentioned, linked designs are typically used in low-demand patients and do not require significant ligamentous support. For this reason, the elbow tends to be more stable postoperatively and therapy can proceed without the need to restrict extension. When extension is restricted, it provides protection for collateral ligament repairs. Therapy following an unlinked arthroplasty requires communication with the surgeon to determine ligamentous integrity and to get an overall picture of general stability. If stability is a concern during surgery, the implant can be changed to a linked prosthesis. If the surgeon chooses to maintain the unlinked implant and stability is a concern, then patients are restricted from extending past 40° initially and this is increased by 10° per week. If patients do not meet these weekly goals for extension, extension splinting can be initiated at weeks four to six. Regardless of the type of implant used, active forearm pronation and supination exercises are performed with the elbow in at least 90° of flexion to protect the repair of the collateral ligaments. Adequate exposure of the ulnohumeral joint in surgery can be achieved by reflecting the triceps off its insertion or by a triceps-sparing approach. Flexion must also be monitored closely in patients who have had triceps reflected and repaired in the operating room. There is the potential of triceps rupture or gapping of the repair if patients are too aggressive with flexion. This can lead to triceps insufficiency, thus limiting active elbow extension, which poses a significant functional problem for upper extremity function and often requires further surgery to repair or reconstruct. Ideally, patients will achieve 100° of flexion one week postoperatively and increase this by 10° per week. If patients are progressing faster than this pace, they are asked to scale back the frequency and intensity of their exercise sessions. If patients are stiff and are not accomplishing these goals, passive stretching for flexion and static progressive flexion splinting can be initiated after week six. Celli et al. The triceps-sparing approach allows patients to initiate active elbow extension immediately post-op without fear of gapping or rupture. This is the preferred technique because it likely limits atrophy of the muscle and limits adhesions. Patients are also able to work on flexion without restriction and are able to use their upper extremity for light functional activity immediately as long as ligamentous stability is not a concern. Management of the ulnar nerve during total elbow arthroplasty is controversial. Some surgeons do not expose the nerve during the operation. Patient referral is delayed for two to three days to allow for early wound healing prior to initiating elbow motion. They are fitted with the appropriate splints as outlined in the splinting section of this paper. Patients are then educated on edema control techniques (icing, elevation, and/or compression), and their home exercise programs are reviewed. The exercises vary depending on the type of prosthesis, triceps status, and overall stability as outlined in previous sections. At two weeks post-op, sutures are removed and patients begin scar massage once the wound is fully closed. Patients then begin superficial heat modalities prior to exercises to increase tissue extensibility and the effectiveness of stretching as long as edema has decreased sufficiently. Heat also helps decrease co-contraction of the muscles crossing the elbow, which can be a significant obstacle to increasing range of motion. Gentle passive stretching can begin for both flexion and extension around weeks seven to eight if a functional arc of motion has not been achieved, and even as early as week six in the event of a very stiff elbow. Static progressive splinting can also be initiated at this time, but this is rarely required. Gentle strengthening exercises within weight limit restrictions of 2 Splinting following total elbow arthroplasty varies depending on the type of prosthesis used. Linked arthroplasties are inherently more stable than unlinked designs. Daytime use of a collar and cuff is prescribed for linked arthroplasties that have had a triceps-sparing approach or for low-demand patients who will place less stress on the replacement ( Forearm position varies depending on whether ligamentous reconstruction was performed. The forearm is placed in pronation for patients with a lateral reconstruction, supination if the medial collateral ligament was repaired, and neutral if both were addressed in surgery. Extension is limited to 30–40° initially and increased by 10° per week. Patients are then fitted with a nighttime extension splint anywhere from three to five weeks postoperatively if extension does not meet these weekly goals. Nighttime extension splinting programs are continued for up to 12 An elbow extension splint is commonly fabricated on the anterior aspect of the arm and extends from 3–5 The effectiveness of elbow extension splinting is an issue that requires randomized trials and further research study to clarify. We use nighttime extension splinting following linked arthroplasty on the first postoperative visit to therapy to prevent flexion contractures. An extension splint is also beneficial because it reduces tension on the surgical incision. The selection of an extension splint for patients with unlinked arthroplasty is done on a case-by-case basis, depending on ligamentous stability, which is assessed in the operating room. If stability is in question, patients wear the prefabricated flexion splint at all times and work on extension to the limit set by the therapist during supervised therapy visits and during home exercise sessions. Several dynamic and static progressive splints have been devised to regain motion of the elbow that has become stiff due to trauma and immobilization. For total elbow arthroplasty, these splints are not used until at least six to eight weeks postoperatively. They are only used for patients who demonstrate significant stiffness and are not making adequate gains in range of motion while in therapy. The splints that we have found to be most effective are the static progressive flexion cuff and the static progressive turnbuckle. A turnbuckle can be made for both flexion and extension. The static progressive elbow flexion cuff is a device used by the patient to maintain elbow flexion for the purpose of obtaining a low-load, prolonged stretch ( The static progressive elbow turnbuckle extension splint is an elbow extension splint with some added hardware. The extension splint is cut at the cubital fossa, two hinges are added, and a turnbuckle is fixed to the anterior portion of the splint. The patient then adjusts the turnbuckle to increase the extension stretch applied by the splint. Offset hinges on the turnbuckle kit prevent the hardware from coming loose from the splint ( Proximal radio-ulnar joint stiffness can occur with a variety of pathologies around the elbow joint. Fractures of the proximal ulna, radial head, and dislocations are often causes of proximal radio-ulnar joint stiffness. It is rare to encounter this problem after total elbow arthroplasty. Splinting for this stiffness usually involves some form of dynamic or static progressive splint holding the forearm in either maximal pronation or supination four to six hours per day (see Davila article in this issue). The success of any procedure is largely dependent on providing a sustained relief of symptoms and on the avoidance of complications. Elbow arthroplasty has historically been plagued by a high rate of complications. While some complications, such as intraoperative fracture, wound breakdown, deep sepsis, triceps insufficiency, and ulnar neuropathy, are inherent in most elbow arthroplasty procedures, other complications are specific to implant design. Linked arthroplasty is more frequently associated with aseptic loosening and mechanical failure, while unlinked designs are more prone to instability. Triceps insufficiency, ulnar nerve irritation, and instability are complications that therapists need to monitor and address when appropriate. Despite the complications that can occur with total elbow arthroplasty, it has become a primary choice for the treatment of low-demand patients with complex fractures or advanced elbow arthritis. We feel that therapy can play an important role in postoperative management of total elbow arthroplasty. Communication between the surgeon and therapist is essential because management varies depending on the type of prosthesis used, the status of the ulnar nerve, intraoperative management of the triceps, and overall stability assessed in the operating room. If therapists are aware of these factors prior to initiating treatment and provide appropriate splinting, exercise programs, and patient education, complications will be minimized and success can be achieved in the rehabilitation of total elbow arthroplasty.  The fully constrained hinge elbow arthroplasty has been shown over time to: remain stable lead to silicone synovitis frequently loosen provide full range of motion in 90% of cases The linked, semiconstrained elbow prostheses have the advantage over fully constrained models because: they more accurately replicate normal kinematics the technical demands of surgically installing the prosthesis are greatly reduced the risk of post-op infection is greatly reduced the incidence of iatrogenic ulnar nerve injury is greatly reduced To date, unlinked arthroplasty has: not been recognized outside the United States and Canada has been excluded by the UK and Canadian health providers been more accepted in the United States than in Asia been more accepted in Europe than in the United States The evidence supporting OT/PT following total elbow arthroplasty is: moderate abundant scant unnecessary The most important element of post-op rehab following total elbow arthroplasty is: strengthening patient education pain management proper application of PAMs 