Background
                  Operative fixation of displaced, mid-shaft clavicle fractures has become an increasingly common practice. With this emerging trend, data describing patient outcomes with longer follow-up are necessary.
               
                  Patients and Methods
                  We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of subjects treated with plate fixation for displaced mid-shaft clavicle fractures from 2003 to 2009 at a Level I trauma hospital. All subjects were greater than 12 months post-index surgery. Treatment involved ORIF with either a low-contact dynamic compression plate (LCDC) or a contoured plate (pre-contoured or pelvic reconstruction plate). Our primary outcome was reoperation for any indication.
               
                  Results
                  143 subjects were included. The mean age was 36±14 years and the mean time to reoperation or chart review was 33 months. Contoured plates were used in 64% of cases and LCDC plates were used in the remaining subjects. Twenty-nine subjects (20%) underwent reoperation: 23.5% of subjects treated with LCDC plates and 18.5% of subjects treated with contoured plates (p
                     =0.52). Indications for reoperation included implant irritation (n
                     =25), implant failure (n
                     =2), and non-union (n
                     =2). There was near statistically significant association with reoperation and female gender (p
                     =0.05) but no association between reoperation and age (p
                     =0.14), fracture class (p
                     =0.53), plate type (p
                     =0.49), or plate location (p
                     =0.93). The mean QuickDASH score for the population surveyed was 8.8 (5.5–12.1; 95% CI) with near statistically significant and clinically relevant difference between those considering reoperation and those not 22.3 (8.6–36.0; 95% CI) versus 6.7 (3.6–9.8; 95% CI).
               
                  Conclusions
                  This study represents a large series of displaced clavicle fractures treated with open reduction and plate fixation. Reoperation following plate fixation is relatively common, but primarily due to implant irritation. No difference in reoperation rates between plate types or location could be detected in our current sample size. Also, excellent functional outcomes continue to be observed several years after clavicle fracture fixation.Clavicle fractures are a relatively common shoulder girdle injury, with the majority of these fractures occurring in the middle third of the bone. Although the COTS study demonstrated several benefits of ORIF compared to non-operative management, the operative group still reported an overall 37% (23 of 62) adverse event rate, including implant failure, wound dehiscence, and implant irritation Institutional review board (IRB) ethics approval was obtained to conduct this study. Contacting patients to prospectively collect functional outcome data was deemed evaluative in nature by the IRB and hence full board review and approval was not required for this portion of the study. Potential subjects were identified by searching hospital and operative records. All clavicle fractures treated between November 1, 2003 and July 1, 2009 were reviewed; only AO/OTA type 15-B (mid-shaft) clavicle fractures were included in this study Our operative indications included acute, mid-shaft clavicle fractures that were open, showed significant skin tenting (impending open), displayed evidence of neurovascular compromise, were in poly-trauma patients, or were significantly displaced (both shortened and translated >100% of the shaft width superiorly). Our primary indications for reoperation typically include hardware failure, non-union, or deep wound infection. At our institution, we do not routinely remove clavicle plates. Patients can request removal of symptomatic hardware (i.e. pain or prominence) but in general, hardware removal is deferred until one year post-operatively to ensure adequate fracture healing/remodelling. Patients undergoing ORIF of their clavicle fracture received preoperative antibiotic prophylaxis. Access to the fracture site was achieved using a surgeon-specific longitudinal or oblique incision. Care was taken to preserve the supraclavicular nerves and the adjacent periosteum when able. When possible, inter-fragmentary lag screw fixation was obtained followed by rigid fixation with either a LCDC or contoured plate in the superior or anterior-inferior positions. The plate location was at the discretion of the treating surgeon. Comminuted fractures were bridged with plates long enough to span the area of comminution and allow adequate fixation on both sides. Post-operatively, patients were placed in a sling for 1–2 weeks for comfort and followed clinically and radiologically at regular intervals until evidence of bony union was ascertained. The primary outcome evaluated was revision clavicle surgery for any surgical indication. Secondary outcomes compared the reoperation rates between the LCDC and contoured plate groups, as well as the superior and anterior-inferior plate positions. Comparison of QuickDASH scores for patients receiving reoperation versus not or intending to undergo reoperation or not were also performed. The statistical analysis was performed using JMP 8.0 software (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). Descriptive statistics were generated for all variables of interest. Categorical variables were summarized with counts and proportions; continuous variables were summarized with the mean and standard deviation. The primary outcome was summarized with descriptive statistics only. Secondary univariate analyses were performed to explore relationships between reoperation and the following variables: age, gender, fracture type, plate type, and plate location. Finally, a Kaplan–Meier survival analysis was performed to graphically display the time to reoperation and to calculate the median follow-up for the cohort. The study population was comprised of 143 subjects and their demographic data are summarized in Twenty-nine patients were identified whom underwent reoperation, representing a 20% incidence within our cohort. The initial indications for reoperation included 25 cases due to implant irritation, two cases of implant failure, and two cases of non-union requiring revision ORIF with bone grafting ( Differences in reoperation based on plate type or plate location were not detected. Reoperation occurred in 23.5% of patients treated with LCDC plates compared to 18.5% of subjects with contoured plates ( Seventy six patients (53%) were successfully contacted for completion of the telephone survey and QuickDASH questionnaire. All 76 contacted patients completed the custom questionnaire and 73 completed the QuickDASH. Results are summarized in Since the median time to reoperation (14 months) was greater than the minimum length of follow-up for study inclusion, a post hoc sensitivity analysis was performed to determine if the incidence of reoperations would vary when the minimum follow-up was increased. A minimum 18 month duration from the time of plate fixation to chart review increased the incidence of reoperation to 22% (25 of 112 subjects). 24 month follow-up was associated with a 24% reoperation rate (21 of 86 subjects). Our study demonstrates a 20% reoperation incidence following ORIF for displaced, mid-shaft clavicle fractures. No difference in reoperation was detected based on plate type or plate location. Most importantly, our data demonstrates that the majority of reoperations were due to implant irritation, with only two cases each related to implant failure and non-union respectively in the cohort. Also, patients considering reoperation have worse functional outcomes than those not considering subsequent surgery and those that have had their plate removed have similar functional outcomes to those without reoperations. Despite the recent increasing trend towards operative fixation of mid-shaft clavicle fractures, data regarding the longer-term outcomes of plate fixation remains limited. Although reports of post-operative sequelae, particularly describing non-union and hardware failure rates, are appearing in the literature, the complete picture of all-cause reoperation rates over a longer follow-up period is still infrequently explicitly reported. Our results appear consistent with the COTS and UK randomised clinical trials The overall post-operative QuickDASH scores from our cohort are comparable to most studies in the current literature There are several strengths of the present study that help extend the previous literature. We present a large cohort of consecutively treated displaced mid-shaft clavicle fractures with plate fixation. Furthermore, the mean time from the index surgery to reoperation or chart review was 33 months – extending beyond the duration of follow-up for many previously published studies examining plate fixation of these fractures Our study, however, is limited by the inherent nature of a retrospective chart review and phone survey. This design has the potential to underestimate revisions due to a number of patients lost to follow-up. A 53% retrospective survey response rate is not atypical for a largely young, male, trauma cohort, but the inability to contact a sizeable proportion of our cohort prevented direct inquiry into subsequent re-operations at outside institutions. Given the nature of our country's gate-keeper based single-payer health care system with limited operating room resources, regionalisation of health care, and the tendency of primary care providers to re-refer patients to their original surgeon, we believe the number of reoperations performed at other institutions is minimal. This also reflects our experience, as we are rarely referred previously operated patients from other sites in the province. Additionally, the incidence of reoperation for implant irritation likely varies between centres and patient populations. Our more stringent indications for hardware removal clearly differ from some centres, accounting for their significantly higher reoperation rates Although a secondary objective, this study was not adequately powered to detect small differences in the incidence of reoperation between the plate types or locations. With only 13 cases utilizing anterior plating, no conclusions can be made regarding differences in plate position. Notably, Collinge et al With ORIF of displaced mid-shaft clavicle fractures becoming more common in clinical practice, it is important that orthopaedic surgeons be able to properly inform their patients about the risks and benefits of the proposed surgical treatment. Several randomised control trials have demonstrated improved outcomes with ORIF; however, ORIF is also associated with several adverse events Our retrospective study of subjects undergoing ORIF of displaced, mid-shaft clavicle fractures represents a large series treated with plate fixation and medium to long-term follow-up. We found the incidence of reoperation for any indication following initial clavicle fixation to be 20%, with most cases secondary to implant irritation. Based on the current sample size, we were unable to demonstrate any difference in reoperation based on plate type or location. These results extend the current knowledge on sequelae of plate fixation for mid-shaft clavicle fractures, aid surgical decision making and informed consent, and demonstrate that excellent functional outcomes are still observed several years after operative fixation. None of the authors received any subsidised sources of funding or grants that assisted in this study. We gratefully acknowledge and thank Ms. Mauri Zomar, Ms. Karyn Moon, and Ms. Raely Moon for their assistance with this study.