Nickeliferous pyrrhotite tailings, from Vale's Clarabelle Mill, were oxidized at 140°C and 690kPa (using compressed O2) in an electrolyte with an initial composition of 50g/L H2SO4 and 2.25g/L of Fe2(SO4)3. These conditions are similar to those employed in the Sherritt Zinc Pressure Leach Process that promotes the formation of elemental sulfur. The kinetics of oxidation was tracked by measuring the extraction of nickel to the electrolyte as a function of time. As expected, the pyrrhotite oxidation kinetics under these conditions was inhibited by the occlusion of the pyrrhotite particles by molten elemental sulfur formed during the leaching process. Addition of a commercially available granular form of PTFE increased the degree of leaching of nickel from the pyrrhotite, increasing the ultimate extraction of nickel at low and high impeller speeds from ca. 65% to over 90% after 90min. This effect was attributed to the PTFE particles acting as a solid sorbent for the molten sulfur, which mitigated the effect of pyrrhotite occlusion and allowed oxidation to continue. The results of the use of PTFE on pyrrhotite oxidation kinetics are similar to those with addition of lignin sulfonate.Pyrrhotite is an iron sulfide mineral, Fe The leaching conditions are similar to those of the Sherritt Zinc Pressure Leach Process ( A solid-reusable sorbent for molten sulfur might improve the economic viability of pressure oxidation of nickeliferous pyrrhotite. The use of a solid dispersant for molten sulfur is not new; A sample of pyrrhotite tailings, having a d80 size of approximately 100 The pressure oxidation experiments were performed in a 1.8 Titanium autoclave, Parr floor-stand Model 4574, equipped with a standard temperature/speed controller, Parr Model 4843. All wetted parts of the autoclave were made of titanium. All experiments employed one ampoule of ore, which was carefully placed at the bottom of the bomb, and 1 Iron and nickel concentrations in the solution samples from the pressure leaching experiments were observed to follow similar trends with time. However, at times some iron was observed to precipitate making iron concentration in the leach solution a less reliable indicator of the extent of leaching. Since nickel extraction would be one of the main economic drivers for the adoption of an industrial process to treat nickeliferous pyrrhotite tailings, it was selected as the more suitable indicator of leaching performance. As each experiment employed 1 As mentioned, pressure leaching experiments were performed using 10 The pressure leaching experiments were repeated with the addition of 10 SEM-EDS analysis of the PTFE-sulfur rich residues, as illustrated in However, contrary to the results in the absence of PTFE, increasing rotation speed did not necessarily improve leaching performance; This observation is also supported by the fact that several attempts were made to perform an experiment at 600 The pressure oxidation experiments were repeated with the addition of lignin sulfonate in order to compare its effect on nickel extraction with that of PTFE. By inspection of PTFE improves the extraction of nickel during pressure oxidation of nickeliferous pyrrhotite tailings. The effect of PTFE is likely due to its action as a solid sorbent for molten sulfur, which draws sulfur away from sulfide mineral particles to permit their further oxidation. Improvements in leaching performance are comparable with those from use of lignin sulfonate. However, the proposed use of PTFE as a sorbent for sulfur is based on the assumption that the sulfur and/or any other reaction by-products could be removed from the PTFE so that it would be reusable. The authors would like to express their gratitude to the