We have followed the responses of the properties of a sandy soil (0–50 mm), including carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) concentrations, to 10 years of ambient and elevated (475 μl l−1) CO2 in a FACE (Free Air CO2 Enrichment) experiment in a grazed pasture in North Island, New Zealand. We have previously reported results for the first 5 years where, at this relatively low level of CO2 enrichment, most soil properties changed gradually and non-significantly. Here we add data from a further 5 years of enrichment and find that most soil properties had changed significantly. Soil moisture was greater under elevated CO2 but we could find no evidence that this was the cause of changes in other properties, suggesting that increased inputs of C and N in the high CO2 regime were driving soil differences. When soil total C and N were adjusted to account for differences in starting concentrations there was evidence of increased pool sizes and increased C/N under elevated CO2. Microbial C and N pools also increased with CO2 as did heterotrophic respiration and labile C and N fractions. There were few changes in N mineralization but no evidence for reduced rates under elevated CO2. There was little evidence for a direct effect of changes in soil properties on plant biomass responses to CO2 but the changes we observed relate to pools and fluxes that are known to be important in both production and environmental outcomes in grassland systems.The response of terrestrial grasslands to increasing concentrations of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO Long-term experiments make an essential contribution to understanding the impacts of elevated CO Here we report on changes in soil processes in a grazed grassland exposed to elevated CO There is strong evidence for changes in soil properties in herbaceous communities exposed to elevated CO We have previously reported on changes in soil properties after 5 years of enrichment ( The trial was on a grazed, mixed-species pasture located on a seasonally dry, hydrophobic sandy soil near Bulls (40° 14′ S, 173° 16′ E), Manawatu, New Zealand. Mean annual temperature at the site is about 12.9 °C and annual rainfall about 870 mm. The pasture had been established for at least 50 years and contained a mixture of C3 and C4 grasses, legumes and forbs ( Details of the soil sampling procedure are given in Pasture herbage was sampled using eight randomly placed quadrats (1 m × 0.078 m) in each ring and cutting to 20 mm above-ground level just before grazing events. The herbage was dissected to the species level and then dried to constant weight at 60 °C before weighing. Soil texture was determined by the pipette method according to All soil biochemical measurements began within a few days of sampling, with the methods used being described, with references, in Extractable C, extractable organic N, and microbial C and N were determined by extracting 10.0 g soil at 60% of water-holding capacity (WHC) with 25.0 ml 0.5M K Potential rates of C and net N mineralization were determined by incubating soil at a standardised temperature (25 °C) and moisture content (60% of WHC). Samples were also incubated at their field-moisture content to assess the effects of moisture limitations on mineralization processes. Production of CO The data shown in the figures are means and standard errors (s.e.m.) from the three replicate plots of the ambient- and elevated-CO The Data for total soil C, total N and C/N were subject to a further analysis to account for a difference in starting values between CO There was a trend for greater biomass production under elevated CO Soil texture did not differ in the two treatments with mean (s.e.m.) values under ambient and elevated CO Total C and N concentrations, on a soil dry weight basis, increased during the trial ( Due to the difference in initial concentrations, we then conducted an analysis for total C, total N, and C/N using year 1 data as a covariate. Minimum values for C and N occurred in year 4 ( Extractable C increased markedly at the start of the second 5 years then declined in both treatments, but the decrease was greater in the ambient treatment leading to a significant CO Microbial C increased over the experiment with the increase being greater under elevated CO Soil CO There was no difference between treatments in net N mineralized when the incubation was over 14 days; however, under a 56-day incubation more N was mineralized under elevated CO Measurements of net mineral-N production were also extended to an incubation period of 0–112 days for the second period (data not shown). Mean values were higher ( After the first 5 years of this study the only changes evident in soil properties were marginally significant increases in microbial N ( There was a significant increase in water content to 50 mm depth in years 6–10 ( Greater uptake of NO The effects of elevated CO Total N also increased when normalised to the same starting point; the rate of change was 0.77% increase per year due to CO From our data we are unable to estimate the extent to which net C and N concentrations might ultimately increase under elevated CO The increase in extractable C under elevated CO Both microbial C and N were significantly higher under elevated CO As previously observed ( One of the key factors influencing plant performance in long-term trials under elevated CO The answer to this question is categorically yes. We saw significant changes in pools and fluxes despite the enrichment being only to 475 μl l We found a significant increase in soil moisture content under elevated CO One moisture-related factor that was of particular interest was the severe drought in 2003 (year 6). It has been suggested ( We saw many more changes to soil properties in years 5–10 than in years 1–5 but there was no evidence for any consistent shift in plant biomass response ( We do not have long-term data from this experiment that enables us to directly test the effects of grazed vs non-grazed situations. However, the comparisons made earlier in the Discussion section with other studies indicate that we have comparable results. For example, our data match the direction and size of the meta-analysis results reported in In summary, we have found that a low level of CO The senior author (Dr Desmond J. Ross) had completed a first draft of this paper when he died. Without his dedication to making meticulous measurements over the decade-long experiment, this paper would not have been possible. We now dedicate this revised version to his memory.