This paper presents an ultrasonic piezoceramic sandwich transducer (UPST), utilised for ultrasonic field generation in water and cavitational effect achievement. This device will be used to produce enlargement of the bubbles, initiated by the incident shock wave on the calculus in the lithotripsy process. The piezoceramic sandwich transducer powered by a function/pulse generator type IWATSU SG-4511 converts the electrical signal in mechanical vibrations, which are propagated in water. A PZT disc sensor converts the underwater waves in electrical signals, displayed by LeCroy 9310 AM oscilloscope. The purpose was to realise an ultrasonic piezoceramic sandwich transducer with low resonance frequency, tuneable energy and broad bandwidth. The UPST transducer, integrated to an ESWL electromagnetic lithotripter, yields enhancement of the cavitation effects, utilised in the comminution of kidney stones.When a shock wave generated by extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) interacts with a solid, it can produce cavitation bubbles at the interface between the solid and the surrounding liquid. The implosion of the cavitation bubbles plays an important role in the disintegration of renal calculi An ultrasonic piezoceramic sandwich traducer has been designed and manufactured, in order to study the cavitation bubble process, generated by the UPST transducer integrated to an ESWL electromagnetic lithotripter. The UPST traducer is a projector, used near its resonance frequency, where yields the highest acoustic output power and efficiency. A signal power generator supplies the UPST transducer, which converts the electrical oscillations in mechanical vibrations. The vibrations produce ultrasonic waves into the water, which propagate to the target surface. Gas bubbles yield when acoustical intensity level of filed is greater than water cavitation threshold. The implosion of bubbles on the target surface produces material dislocations. The acoustical performances of the UPST piezoelectric transducer are dependent on the dielectric, piezoelectric and elastic properties of the piezoceramic tores, the number of tores and the shape of metallic radiator. The piezoelectric transducer, which operates with short ultrasonic pulses should have low mechanical factor For sensing the underwater acoustic fields, we utilised a piezoelectric disc sensor, which converts the underwater waves in electrical signals, displayed by LeCroy 9310 AM oscilloscope. The ultrasonic piezoceramic sandwich transducer is a tonpilz (sound mushroom) resonator with low frequency and high acoustical power. The concept can be traced back to Langevin, who sandwiched a quartz resonator between two massive plates to reduce resonant frequency The ultrasonic piezoceramic sandwich transducer components are: one central and active vibration source (piezoceramic tores) and two end-metal masses. The active element of the device is made by even piezoceramic tores stack. The electromechanical transducer works on the basis of the inverse piezoelectric effect, converting electrical power into a mechanical displacement in the range of tens microns. All elements of the device are set-up and pre-stressed by a stainless steel bolt, which induces an initial polarisation to the piezoceramic stack. The vibration amplitude of the sandwich radiator depends on PZT tore number, PZT material elasticity coefficients and the metal elasticity coefficients. The maximum peak-to-peak displacements of the radiating transducer face would be in order of tens microns, when operating at resonance frequency. A simple metal–piezoceramic–metal sandwich transducer resonates at If the metal plates are assumed to be identical and the ceramic placed symmetrically between them, the calculation of the transducer dimensions can be greatly simplified by approximation. A graphical representation of the general solution is shown as being a rapid and easy solution of the transducer equation The Δ The UPST technological manufacture requires special mechanical processes to realise the piezoceramic stack (four piezoceramic tores), metallic elements (steel cylinder reflector and exponential hard aluminium radiator) and then to pre-stress all together ( PZT-5A piezoceramic material was used for tore stack because presents the following suitable characteristics: high permitivity, small quality mechanical factor The fourth PZT tores were connected mechanically in series and electrically in parallel. The displacement of each transducer element adds to the total displacement. Therefore, the displacement of the whole stack assembly is equal to the sum of the individual displacements. The exponential acoustical radiator yields a higher vibration magnification factor than the linear one. The models of the piezoelectric transducer approximate the resonance frequency for the entire device. Many variable factors have influence in the final resonance frequency (PZT material, metal type of the end masses, shrinking value of the whole assemble, size and shape of the component elements, etc.). Practically, we realised experimental sandwich samples with different dimensions (diameters and lengths). The PZT-5A soft piezoceramic material for the active piezo stack confers suited properties to the UPST transducer (high ultrasonic power, broad bandwidth and a low The electrical properties of the UPST transducer were measured with the set-up equipment from The transducer has high electroacoustical efficiency, whether the acoustic impedances of its components are close. KrautKrämer–BRANSON USIP 12 was utilised to measure the The PZT-5A tore sizes are: The frequencies at minimum and maximum impedance (resonance and antiresonance) and the impedances are determined using the set-up montage shown in A Hewlett Packard HP 4284A analyzer, USA, interfaced to a PC ( UPST transducer acoustical tests were performed into water by the set-up montage presented in The UPST transducer was integrated inside a lithotripter and its hard aluminium radiator was immersed into the water tank. The function/pulse generator type IWATSU SG-4511 supplied the UPST with burst signals ( The acoustical waves, received by the PZT disc sensor ( In experiments, the UPST was not tested at high-power conditions, but we can approximate the vibration amplitude at the radiator end. For instance, by utilising relation The experimental UPST transducer exhibits a large frequency bandwidth, approximately 20 The transducer exhibits the following advantages, suited for our research purposes, magnifies the vibration amplitudes by utilising an exponential radiator horn, increases the acoustical power by utilising four PZT-5A tores with large surface, presents a large frequency bandwidth. The acoustical impedance of the water and air mediums are different; therefore, the ultrasonic transducer yields different resonance frequencies in air and water. Therefore, it is necessary to take into account that the ultrasonic transducer is manufactured in air, but it works in water medium As an important conclusion, the UPST transducer ultrasonic acoustical power can be increased in the following ways: PZT material with low quality factor, big size of piezoceramic tores, many tores, exponential acoustical radiator and directive beam pattern. The acoustical power and vibration amplitude of the sandwich radiator transducer depends on PZT tores number, voltage amplitude, PZT material elasticity coefficients and the metal elasticity coefficients and the ratio between the diameters of the horn ends. The experimental UPST allows integration into a shock wave device (ESWL lithotripter). The ultrasonic UPST generator transducer, together with the incident shock wave of the ESWL yields cavitation bubbles into water tank, in order to make the communition of kidney stones. Our future research will be the study of bubble size changes under variable frequency ultrasound field, generated by the new modified ESWL system. The authors wish to appreciate the good collaboration, concerning the electrical measurements, with the researchers of Prof. Dr. Jan THOEN, Prof. Dr. Christ GLORIEUX especially, Dr. Ghanshyam SINA and Dr. Asako OKA from the Laboratory of Acoustics and Thermal Physics, K.U. Leuven are acknowledged. The authors would like to thank Eng. Johan Vanhulst and Bart Pelgrims for precious technical assistance.