In the present study the potential of the earthworm Eisenia fetida to process large amounts of waste was evaluated through continuous feeding reactors in which new layers of rabbit manure were added sequentially to form an age gradient inside the reactors. An optimal moisture level, ranging from 66% to 76%, was maintained throughout the process using an automatic watering system. The pH was close to 8.3, but decreased to 7.6 after 200d of vermicomposting. No changes in electrical conductivity through the profile of layers were detected. Based on comparisons of phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) profiles and microbial activity measurements (basal respiration), a decrease in the levels of bacteria and fungi in layers corresponding to vermicomposting times of more than 200d occurred. This points to a higher degree of stabilisation in the final product, which is of utmost importance for its safe use as an organic amendment.Appropriate management techniques can mitigate the health and environmental risks associated with the overproduction of animal manure by stabilising it prior to its use or disposal ( Vermicomposting systems sustain a complex food web ( Overall, the vermicomposting process includes two different phases regarding the earthworm activity: (i) an active phase during which earthworms process the organic substrate, thereby modifying its physical state and microbial composition ( Rabbit manure was used as the food source for the earthworms and was collected from the facilities of the vermicomposting company Todo Verde in Ourense (Galicia, NW Spain). Specifically, the annual production of this type of manure is approximately 407 The vermicomposting system consisted of polyethylene reactors (1.2 Electrical conductivity and pH were measured in aqueous extracts (1:10, w/v) using a Crison conductometer CM35 and a Crison MicropH 2000 pH-metre, respectively. Total C and N contents were analysed in oven-dried (60 Soluble organic C was extracted from fumigated and unfumigated samples with 0.5 Bacterial and fungal biomass was assessed by PLFA analysis. The sum of Gram-positive (i14:0, i15:0, a15:0, i16:0 and a17:0); and Gram-negative bacteria (16:1ω7c, 17:1ω7c, 18:1ω7c, cy17:0 and cy19:0) PLFAs was chosen to represent bacterial PLFAs; and the PLFA 18:2ω6c was taken to indicate the fungal biomass ( Total microbial activity was assessed as basal respiration, by measuring the rate of evolution of CO Data were analysed by ANOVA, with depth of sampling (i.e. how processed the substrate was) as the main factor. Significant differences in the main effects were analysed by paired comparisons with the Tukey HSD test. A principal component analysis was also used to analyse the PLFA data in order to assess overall differences in the microbial community structure of rabbit manure through the profile of the vermireactor layers. The normality and the variance homogeneity of the data were tested prior to the ANOVA and the principal component analysis. All the statistical analyses were performed with the Statistica software program v9. The earthworm Epigeic earthworms are known to accelerate the rate of decomposition of organic matter during vermicomposting ( In the present study, Epigeic earthworms possess a diverse pool of digestive enzymes which enables them to digest bacteria, protozoa, fungi and partly decomposed plant debris ( The present study demonstrates the potential of This research was financially supported by the