The separation of In(III), Ga(III) and Zn(II) from sulfate solution has been studied using an extraction resin containing 2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid mono(2-ethylhexyl) ester (P507 extraction resin). The effect of pH on the extraction of each metal was determined. Extraction isotherms were then constructed at selected pH. Results show that In(III) is first extracted from aqueous solutions at pH 2.0 using this resin while Ga(III) and Zn(II) are co-extracted at pH 3.0. Their separation can be carried out using HCl of different concentrations as eluants. The saturation adsorption capabilities of indium(III) and gallium(III) were evaluated as 47.2 and 31.0 mg/g or 0.41 and 0.44 mmol/g, respectively. The molar ratio of metal ion: P507 reagent on resin was about 1:3. Loaded resins can be regenerated, and the metals can be recovered selectively. Two fixed-bed columns arranged in-series were successfully used for the separation and recovery of these three metal ions from a multi-component solution.The demands for indium and gallium have increased in recent years because they can be used in semiconductor materials such as InP or GaAs. However, there are no discrete reserves of In and Ga, and their global distributions are very sparse. The two metals show similar chemical behavior, and one significant source for them is zinc refinery residue ( Since the mid of 1970s, extraction resins (previously called Levextrel resins) have acquired great importance as a technique with interesting features for the recovery and chromatographic separation of metal ions because they bridge the gap between two separation techniques of solvent extraction and ion exchange ( In the past few years, the application of extraction resins in metal extraction and separation processes has focused on hydrometallurgical and analytical applications, and in most cases related to rare metals applications ( P507 extraction resin was obtained from Beijing Research Institute of Chemistry Engineering and Metallurgy, Ministry of Nuclear Industry, China. The chemical structure of this extractant is as follows: The elemental analysis of P507 extraction resin showed that the amount of phosphorus contained in the tested resin was 4.02% or 1.30 mmol/g. Indium, gallium and all other chemicals used were of analytical grade and purchased from Shanghai Chemical Reagent Company, China. The concentration of indium(III) or gallium(III) in a single-component solution was determined spectrophotometrically with a GBC UV–Vis 916 spectrophotometer(Australia) ( In the case of solid/liquid extraction, experiments were performed using solutions at a concentration of 200 mg/L of metals. The ionic strength was adjusted with sodium sulfate (0.1 mol/L). The liquid/solid ratio was maintained at 0.2 L/g, dry weight. In the case of extraction isotherms, the initial metal concentration was varied, and the contact time was fixed. The solution was mixed and shaken in a stoppered glass flask submerged in a thermostatted water bath ( For continuous extraction, extraction resins were packed in columns (i.d. 10 mm). A total of 3.0 g of resin was introduced (packing depth: 90 mm). The columns were fed by upflow using a peristaltic pump: the flow rate was 30 mL/h. Preliminary experiments were performed using single-component solution at a concentration of 200 mg/L of metal in 0.1 mol/L sodium sulfate and the pH was controlled at the optimum pH for selective separation established in previous experiments. The columns were preconditioned at the optimum pH by flowing sodium sulfate solution (0.1 mol/L) at the selected pH. In the case of column systems, before the elution step, the column was rinsed with 20 mL of a 0.1 mol/L sodium sulfate solution. Eluant solutions of HCl were used for the recovery of metals from loaded resins. Finally, the extraction was performed in ternary solutions (200 mg/L metals in 0.1 mol/L sodium sulfate controlled to selected pH) using a pair of columns filled with the extraction resin (5 g). The residual metal concentration in the aqueous phase was determined by ICP and the amount of metal extracted was obtained by mass balance. All the experiments were carried out at room temperature (298 K) except for the study of temperature effect on capacity.  The selectivity coefficient is usually determined using multi-component solutions and calculating the ratio between the distribution coefficients of each metal. In the present work, we used previous results (extraction efficiency vs pH with single-component solutions) to get a separation power coefficient (SP %). This coefficient was calculated using the following equation: Where SE When necessary, the values of the distribution coefficients were extrapolated in order to obtain the corresponding values of the separation power. This parameter enables the optimum pH range for metal separation to be predetermined simply and quickly.  The effect of temperature on the adsorption of indium(III) and gallium(III) was investigated at the temperature range of 283–313 K. The results are shown in It was found that both distribution coefficients increased with an increase of the temperature. The relationship between temperature and the extraction equilibrium constant was examined to estimate the apparent thermodynamic function Δ Both of the plots of log  In order to evaluate the amount of metal in the column, the column experiment was carried out using the P507 extraction resin in a fixed-bed column with a single metal solution at 0.2 g/L metal concentration. The columns were preconditioned by flowing Na  From the results above, the saturation adsorption capabilities of indium(III) and gallium(III) were evaluated as 47.2 and 31.0 mg/g or 0.41 and 0.44 mmol/g respectively. Since the elemental analysis of P507 extraction resin showed that the amount of phosphorus contained in the tested resin was 4.02% or 1.30 mmol/g, the molar ratios of indium(III) and gallium(III) to P507 on the resin were determined as 1:3.18 and 1:2.95, respectively. Both are nearly 1:3. Accordingly, the sorption reaction of metal ions by the resin can be described with the following general reaction (Eq. As indicated in As mentioned above, indium(III), gallium(III) and zinc(II) show different extents of extraction according to pH and different extents of stripping according to HCl concentration. Such differences can be exploited to devise a technique to extract and separate these ions with P507 extraction resin in multi-component mixtures. Discontinuous extraction of indium, gallium, and zinc was investigated using the flowsheet given in If this type of resin is applied in industrial scale, it is important to investigate the possibility of resin regeneration and multiple re-use. Therefore, taking indium adsorption and stripping as an example, the cyclic operation of P507 extraction resin was examined. One continuous operation to adsorb and strip indium is regarded as one cycle. The results are shown in The results show that P507 extraction resin gave a theoretical separation of In(III), Ga(III), and Zn(II) from dilute solutions by controlling pH and using different concentrations of HCl eluant. The results obtained in batch systems were confirmed using fixed-bed systems for the continuous recovery of the metals in single component solutions with this resin. In multi-component solutions, this resin placed in columns in series, enabled In(III) to be successively collected at pH 2.0 in the first column while Ga(III) and Zn(II) passed through without being adsorbed and were collected at pH 3.0 in the second column. The saturation adsorption capabilities of indium(III) and gallium(III) were evaluated as 47.2 and 31.0 mg/g or 0.41 and 0.44 mmol/g, respectively. The molar ratio of metal ion: P507 reagent on resin was about 1:3. In(III) was desorbed from the first column with 2 mol/L HCl while 0.1 and 0.25 mol/L HCl solutions desorbed Ga(III) and Zn(II) from the second column, respectively. The system produced a complete and selective recovery of the three metals. This work was supported by the Key Project of Natural Science Foundation of Yantai Normal University.