The known resources of nickel sulphide ores are quickly diminishing and in order to satisfy future nickel demands, nickel laterite deposits are being investigated as an alternative. Currently, expensive leaching and smelting processes are used to process the nickel laterite ores. The objective of the present research was to produce a high grade nickel concentrate via microwave carbothermic reduction roasting followed by magnetic separation. A thermodynamic model was developed for the roasting process in order to determine the optimum experimental conditions. The experimental variables investigated were: microwave energy and argon shrouding for the reduction tests and the magnetic field strength for the concentration stage. The behaviours of nickel and cobalt were studied in the reduction and magnetic separation processes. By optimizing the reducing and magnetic separation conditions, a high grade concentrate containing 9.2% nickel with a nickel recovery of 88.8% was achieved.Nickel sulphide deposits are formed by either volcanic or hydrothermal processes and are mined at depth. Nickel laterite ores on the other hand, occur near the surface as a result of weathering in tropical climates, and are recovered using open pit mining. In 2004, laterite ores accounted for 72% of known nickel resources, yet only 42% of primary nickel metal production ( Nickel laterites can be classified into two main groups: limonites (60%) and saprolites (40%) ( In most pyrometallurgical processes the major sources of energy remain carbonaceous or hydrocarbon based. Ultimately, the carbon in these materials is converted into carbon dioxide, which contributes to climate change. In this regard, microwave/millimeter wave processing techniques have potential applications in mineral processing and metal extraction systems ( The objective of the present research was to carbothermically reduce the ore in a microwave system and then magnetically concentrate the resulting ferronickel product. Firstly the literature is reviewed regarding the microwave carbothermic reduction of nickel laterites. Secondly, an equilibrium model created using HSC Chemistry® 6.1 is discussed in order to determine the predicted nickel grades and recoveries as a function of temperature and the carbon to ore ratio. Thirdly, an experimental procedure is described for the microwave reduction and magnetic separation process for a low grade nickel silicate laterite ore. Fourthly, the effects of operating variables on the grade of the magnetic concentrate and also the recovery of the nickel to the concentrate are reported. Finally, the optimized conditions for the production of a high grade concentrate with a high nickel recovery are discussed. The heating behaviour and the permittivities of a limonitic laterite ore have been investigated by     In previous research, thermodynamic models have been developed using the Equilibrium Composition program of HSC® 6.1 for both the sulphidation ( Unless specified, the Equilibrium Composition program assumes an activity coefficient of unity for each species. In the previous research on the modelling of nickeliferous limonitic laterite ores, activity coefficients for the spinel ( The nickel laterite ore used in this research was from Minara’s Murrin Murrin deposit located in Western Australia. The average analysis as determined by X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) is provided in An X-ray Diffraction (XRD) plot of the as-received ore is shown in The as-received nickel laterite ore and charcoal were separately ground using a ring pulverizer. Their respective size distributions were then determined using screens for the ore and a Fritsch particle size analyzer for the charcoal. The as-received ore had a p Activated charcoal from Ward’s Science was used as the reducing agent for the microwave reduction tests. The proximate analysis of the activated charcoal was as follows: 44.11% fixed carbon, 9.69% ash, 35.40% volatile matter and 10.80% moisture. The charcoal was ground using a ring pulverizer before being mechanically mixed with the appropriate amount of nickel laterite ore. The experimental procedure is summarized by the flowsheet in  After the microwave experiment, the reacted briquette was pulverized for 40 X-ray Diffraction (XRD) analysis was used to determine the different mineralogical phases present in the concentrate. ICP analysis was used to determine the grades of either Fe, Co, or Ni in the concentrate. A FEI Quanta 650 FEG ESEM was used to study some of the concentrates. This apparatus has backscattered electron imaging capabilities and fast X-ray analysis. After taking losses into account during pulverising and sample handling, the metal recoveries were calculated as follows:     The SEM and XRD analysis indicate that the majority of the nickel is present in the ferronickel. Some iron is found in the ferronickel and also in the pigeonite (Fe, Mg, Ca)SiO   The effect of energy input on the nickel grades and recoveries for the tests in argon are shown in Grade versus recovery plots for nickel and cobalt are shown in    A thermodynamic model was utilized to predict the nickel recovery and grade of the ferronickel produced by the carbothermic reduction roasting of a low grade nickeliferous silicate laterite ore. The model predicted a nickel grade of 8.5% and nickel recovery of 98% at 880 For the microwave carbothermic reduction tests with magnetic separation using the DTT, a maximum nickel recovery of 98% and a nickel grade of 2.4% at an energy input of 600 A comparison was made between DTT and WHIMS for the production of a magnetic concentrate from the reduced product. The nickel recoveries were higher with DTT, whereas the nickel grades were higher with WHIMS. An analysis of all the tests for DTT and WHIMS showed that for both cobalt and nickel, the grades increased with increasing recovery. Also, this data showed that the nickel and cobalt recoveries exhibited the same behaviour, indicating that the cobalt and nickel oxides coexisted together in the host rock. Optimum nickel and cobalt recoveries were achieved at a higher energy input for DTT than WHIMS. The highest nickel grade of 9.2% was achieved in argon, with a corresponding high recovery of 89%. In argon, high recoveries could be achieved at lower energy inputs than in the absence of argon. This was attributed to a lower reduction temperature and also the limited oxidation of the sample after the reduction process. The enrichment ratios achieved in this work were higher than those reported previously in the literature. The authors would like to thank the