The question of ultimate recovery in heap leaching operations is always of particular concern with respect to economic considerations. Of course, the particle size distribution is a critical factor which determines ultimate recovery and which must be established based on a balance between the extent of mineral exposure and transport phenomena. Now it seems that the ultimate recovery for a given particle size distribution can be established from mineral exposure analysis by X-ray microtomography (XMT). Using recently developed software, micro-computed tomography (CT) data can be used to determine the fraction of mineral exposed and thus the ultimate recovery. Examples of mineral exposure analysis are given for the copper heap leaching operation at Zaldivar, Chile.Considerable advances have been made in the practice of heap leaching. Technical progress was revealed in the recent “International Technical Meeting on the Development of Copper Bioleaching Technology” sponsored by Compañı&#x0301;a Minera Zaldı&#x0301;var (CMZ) and held in Antofagasta, Chile, 12–14 March 2001, during which time heap leaching at CMZ was reviewed. Discussion at the meeting indicated that further advances in copper recovery at the CMZ operation would require an improved understanding of the heap leaching system. This objective can be achieved with the use of an advanced diagnostic technique, namely high resolution 3D X-ray microtomography (XMT), together with advanced simulation of flow through a packed bed of particles. These results can be coupled with the results from more traditional column leach experiments and solution chemistry considerations in order to identify heap leaching conditions for improved copper recovery. Optimum design of the chemistry, utilization of reactants (acid, air, microorganisms, bacteria population, and iron), is limited by our current understanding of the mechanics of the system. The mechanics of the copper heap leaching system include such issues as particle breakage/exposure/liberation, particle texture/composition, and fluid flow phenomena inside the packed bed of particles, which constitute the heap. Once these issues (such as how particle size distribution influences both mineral exposure/liberation and flow behavior) are resolved, optimal chemical conditions can be established and a schedule designed for the utilization of the various reactants. In the copper heap leaching process, inclusions of the desirable valuable minerals (copper-bearing minerals) are to be dissolved from ore particles. The copper-bearing minerals have some unknown grain size distribution, texture/exposure, and spatial distribution in the ore particles. The procedure is to crush the ore so that the valuable mineral grains are exposed and can be extracted during the heap leaching process. If we can determine the relationship between the percentage of the exposed valuable mineral with respect to particle size for a given ore type, the ultimate recovery in the heap leaching process can be predicted for a specific particle size distribution. It is therefore extremely important to characterize the percentage of exposed valuable mineral grains in the ore as a function of particle size. XMT is currently the only direct measurement technique for mineral exposure analysis. The object of this research is to determine the expected ultimate recovery based on 3D mineral exposure analysis from XMT data. The application of the principles of cone-beam computed tomography (CT) at the microscale level (microtomography) allows for the quantitative examination of objects in three dimensions. Practical microtomography systems only recently have been developed. As the resolution and the techniques for 3D geometric analysis have advanced in the last decade, it is now possible to map in great detail the mineralogical texture of ore particles in three-dimensional digital space. High-resolution 3D X-ray microtomography (XMT) can be used for the direct determination of the percentage of exposed valuable mineral grain in multiphase particles which vary in size from 100 mm down to a few hundred micrometers. Spatial resolution on the order of 10 μm can be achieved with the use of microfocus X-ray generators. For cone-beam CT, a whole 3D data set is acquired with only one rotation of the sample. This provides for fast data acquisition and better X-ray utilization. In a cone-beam design, each projection of the object is, in essence, a radiograph. Attenuation measurements are simultaneously made for the entire object rather than for a single slice. Clearly, cone-bean CT has the best prospects for true 3D liberation/exposure analysis and should be able to provide the necessary accuracy to quantitatively describe these micron-sized multiphase systems such as the 3D distribution of mineral phases in multiphase particles. A unique cone-beam X-ray micro-CT system has been designed, assembled, and installed at the University of Utah a system geometry optimized to obtain high resolution 2D and 3D CT images of small samples but with the flexibility to examine larger objects as required; a detector with the resolution, efficiency and dynamic range required to obtain high quality data from a broad spectrum of samples; a reliable X-ray source which will allow us to focus on research rather than maintenance; and a high accuracy positioning system required to maintain the spatial resolution provided by the X-ray imaging component. In this regard, the University of Utah micro-CT system was designed and assembled to obtain 2048×2048 pixel reconstruction over a 10-mm diameter, while allowing for the imaging of somewhat larger (40 mm) objects. Specifically, the specimen positioning stage system can be manually mounted at one of three different locations, providing system magnifications of 5, 2 or 1.25 and spheres of reconstruction with respective diameters of 10, 25 or 40 mm. The system consists of a microfocus X-ray source, a specimen positioning stage, and a digital X-ray detection camera. These hardware components are integrated inside an interlocked radiation-safety enclosure. This container is mounted on a vibration-isolated stand, which also supports the power supplies, drivers and controllers for the X-ray source, CCD camera and positioning system. A photograph of the cone-beam X-ray microtomography system is shown in The mine site selected for sampling was that of Compañı&#x0301;a Minera Zaldı&#x0301;var located about 160 km east of Antofagasta, Chile. Representative samples from selected composites were screened into 10 size fractions (+25.4, 25.4×19.1, 19.1×12.7, 12.7×9.5, 9.5×6.36, 6.36×3.18, 3.18×1.7, 1.7×0.425, 0.425×0.150, 0.150×0.075 and −0.075 mm). These samples, as much as 10 kg for the coarse particle size classes, were prepared by personnel at Zaldı&#x0301;var and were shipped to the University of Utah after the chemical and mineralogical analyses of the various size fractions had been completed. X-ray tomographic reconstruction produces a three-dimensional map of X-ray attenuation coefficients of the irradiated cross-section of the specimen. Differentiation of features within the sample is possible because the linear attenuation coefficient ( In the first experiment, natural copper-bearing mineral particles (known to exist in the ore deposit) were selected as standards for CT scans. The energy settings were 50 and 130 kV. High spatial resolution and the direct processing of raw volumetric data are the two important benefits offered by this new method. To illustrate the potential of XMT for exposure/liberation analysis, an example is given here as shown in  Exposed grains can be identified only through the analysis of the 3D data set of particles. For instance, one slice of a cross-sectional image from a total of 512 slices of the 3D data set for the original CT image is extracted and shown in As mentioned previously, the ultimate recovery in the heap leaching process can be predicted for a specific particle size distribution, if we can determine the relationship between the percentage of the exposed valuable mineral with respect to particle size for different ore types. It is therefore extremely important to characterize the percentage of the exposed valuable mineral grains in the ore as a function of particle size. In this regard, three types of copper ore from different parts of the deposit were collected, sampled and sized to 10 size intervals following the procedures mentioned previously in the sample preparation section. Representative samples of particles from different size intervals were taken and put into a cylindrical container for XMT analysis. Scanning time was varied depending on the resolution and the number of views. For example, for 20-μm resolution and 512×512×512 data set, the scanning time is about 1 h and full three-dimensional reconstruction requires approximately 2.5 h. Since the reconstruction algorithm is coded for multithread (parallel processing), it is expected that the time for reconstruction can be reduced significantly with the use of computers equipped with multi-processors (currently a workstation with dual, 275-MHz MIP-12000 processors). As Moore's Law marches on, so 18 months from now, processors will be doubled in power. In fact, at the present time, it is possible to reduce the reconstruction time to less than 10 min with an eight-processor board.  The copper mineral inclusions have a certain size distribution (grain size distribution), Relationship between the percent of copper exposed with respect to particle size provides the basis for the prediction of copper recovery for a known particle size distribution. In this regard, three different particle size distributions were selected and 1.5-m column tests were run for about 70 days. The first particle size distribution is the one currently used at the Zaldivar plant site. The second and third particle size distributions are designed maintaining the same As expected, the smaller the particle size, the higher the percentage of copper mineral exposed. However, in addition to exposure analysis, the fluid flow phenomena inside the packed bed of particles is an important issue that needs to be investigated. It is known that the smaller the particle size, the lower the permeability of the packed particle bed. Once these issues (such as how particle size distribution influences both mineral exposure/liberation and flow behavior) are resolved, optimal chemical conditions can be established and the chemistry designed for the optimum utilization of the various reactants. In any event, based on these initial results, it is evident that ultimate recovery for any specific particle size distribution can be estimated from mineral exposure analysis by XMT. In heap leaching operations, the particle size distribution is a critical factor which determines ultimate recovery and which must be established based on a balance between the extent of mineral exposure and transport phenomena. Development of mineral exposure analysis by X-ray microtomography (XMT) for determination of ultimate recovery from a given particle size distribution has been presented. Examples of mineral exposure analysis can be used to define the most appropriate particle size distribution for the copper heap leaching operation at Zaldivar, Chile. Support for this research program has been provided by CMZ, a subsidiary of Placer Dome.