Recently there has been renewed interest in the cyclic deformation behavior of planar slip solid solution alloys In order to clarify whether the plateau associated with strain localization exists in the CSSC of planar slip f.c.c. metals, it is important to know if the saturation of cyclic peak stress or cyclic softening occurs in these materials. If there is no saturation of peak stress or softening before final fracture, it is reasonable to assume that there is no plateau associated with strain localization since the final peak stress should be more related to fracture process. Before examining conflicting results on the presence or absence of cyclic saturation more carefully, the difficulties involved in fatigue experiments of planar slip f.c.c. alloys should be discussed. The following characteristics of planar slip Cu-alloys might make it much more difficult to decide if the saturation of cyclic peak stresses is reached: (1) extremely low cyclic hardening rates Early 90s, Lukas and coworkers investigated the cyclic deformation behavior Hong and Laird In early 90s, Hong and Laird Brown Hong and Laird The slip mode of Cu base alloys strongly depends on the solute content. Lukas et al. investigated the cyclic deformation behavior of Cu-22 wt. % Zn (21.5 at. % Zn) single crystals and criticized some of the results on Cu-16 at. % Al During cyclic deformation, the chances of mutual trapping and/or annihilation of dislocations increases due to to-and-pro motion of dislocations. Therefore, the low energy clustered dislocation structures such as cells, loop patches and ladder structure can be gradually formed from the initially planar microstructure if the strain amplitude is high enough to induce more active to-and-pro motion of dislocations during cycling (when the stacking fault energy is not too low) Since the most intensive investigations concerning the effect of solute content on slip mode have been done on Cu base alloys (especially Cu-Al alloys), Cu-Al alloy can be used as our model alloy to predict the slip mode in other alloys (especially Cu-Zn). Based on the result of Abel et al. Lukas et al. An analysis of cyclic deformation in f.c.c. solid solution alloys leads the following conclusions. Some controversies about the cyclic hardening behavior in planar slip f.c.c. metals partly originated from extremely low work hardening rate and frequent strain bursts, which maintain the stress level close to the critical resolved shear stress for a long period of time. The critical stress for the annihilation of dislocations, which may need for cyclic saturation increases with decreasing critical spacing. Since the critical spacing is much smaller in low stacking fault energy planar slip metals, the cyclic saturation stress would be much higher in planar slip Cu base alloys (>60 MPa) than that of Cu (28 MPa). The correlation between the cyclic saturation stress τ The critical solute contents predicted by the present model for the transitions from wavy slip to semi-planar slip to planar slip are in good agreement with the observations for Cu-Zn and Cu-Al alloys.