Dissolution of magnesite in acetic acid solutions was investigated. The influence of various parameters such as reaction temperature, particle size and acid concentration was studied in order to elucidate the kinetics of magnesium carbonate. The leaching rate increased with decreasing particle size and with increasing temperature. Initially, the dissolution in terms of acid concentration increased until a definite concentration and then fell with increasing concentration. A kinetic model was researched to describe the dissolution and to analyse the kinetic data, basically. Dissolution curves were evaluated in order to test shrinking core models for fluid–solid systems. Consequently, it was determined that the dissolution of natural magnesite was controlled by chemical reaction, i.e., 1−(1−x)1/3=kt. The apparent activation energy of leaching process was found as 78.40 kJ mol−1.Magnesite ore, still, is the basic raw material for manufacturing of magnesium and its compounds. Also, these products have rather wide usage fields and their costs are high ( In this direction, as leaching agent, generally used are the chemical compounds such as inorganic/organic acids or bases and their salts. Although magnesite dissolution has been examined with inorganic reagents ( Organic acids have high selectivity although their dissolving abilities are weak. Therefore, it is advantageous for particularly dissolution of carbonaceous compounds. Also, in scale-up studies conducted with inorganic acid, high CO In aquatic solutions, acetic acid is weakly dissociated (p Numerous studies for the dissolution of magnesite were found in the literature (  The present research aimed to study the leaching kinetics of natural magnesite in the acetic acid solutions. The magnesium carbonate ore used in the work was provided from Erzurum-Oltu in Turkey. After crushing and washing, the sample was ground, and its chemical composition was analyzed by standard gravimetric and volumetric methods ( The acetic acid, CH Dissolution experiments were carried out in a well-mixed spherical glass batch reactor (500 mL) heated by a constant temperature bath and equipped with a mechanical stirrer having a digital controller unit, a thermometer and a back cooler. After adding 250 mL of acetic acid solution to the reaction vessel and setting the temperature at the desired value, a charge of 2.0 g of magnesite was approximately added to the reactor while stirring the content of the reactor at a certain speed. After each test, an amount of sample taken from the leach slurry was filtered immediately, and the Mg Dissolution behavior for samples of natural magnesite was tested under reaction conditions which were as follows: temperature from 40 to 70 °C, concentration of acetic acid from 1 to 10 M and particle size from 138 to 855 μm. When magnesium carbonate is added into the acetic acid solution, the reactions taking place in the medium can be written as follows: The overall reaction can be written as follows: The experiments were performed for four different particle sizes (138, 215, 478 and 855 μm) in solutions containing 3.0 M acetic acid at stirring speed of 500 rpm. Because a little dissolution occurred at 40 °C, the effect of particle size was studied at 60 °C. From Experiments were carried out at the 40–70 °C temperature range in 3.0 M acetic acid at stirring speed of 500 rpm for 215 μm. Typical rate curves were shown in The effect of acid concentration, in the range of 1.0–10.0 M, was performed at 40 °C with an agitation speed of 500 rpm for 215 μm. From Fluid–solid heterogeneous reaction systems have applications in chemical and hydrometallurgical processes. A successful reactor design for these processes depends basically on kinetic data. In the fluid–solid systems, the reaction rate may be generally controlled by one of the following steps: diffusion through the fluid film, diffusion through the ash or the chemical reaction at the surface of the core of unreacted materials ( In order to determine the kinetic parameters and rate-controlling step about leaching of magnesite in acetic acid solutions, the experimental data are analysed on the basis of the shrinking core model. This reaction model between a fluid and a solid may be represented by: If no ash layer covers the unreacted core as the reaction proceeds, there could be only two controlling steps, namely, fluid film diffusion or chemical reaction. If the process is controlled by resistance of fluid layer, the Eq. If this is controlled by resistance of chemical surface reactions, the Eq. The fit of all the experimental data into the integral rate was tested by using a computer program, and the multiple regression coefficients obtained for the integral rate expression were calculated. In the calculations, it was seen that the best value of regression coefficient correcting the rate expression was for surface reaction control. The coefficient value was calculated as 0.9972. To confirm the results of these statistical analyses, the experimental data for each parameter were analysed by graphical methods. From the results of the statistical analysis, it was found that the leaching of magnesite in acetic acid solutions was controlled by chemical reaction. Also, it was determined that the integral rate expression obeyed the following equation: Eq. For the reaction temperature, particle size and the concentration, the plots of 1−(1− As shown in Such a value for the activation energy indicated that the leaching of magnesite with acetic acid solutions was controlled by chemical reaction. Thus, Eq. The kinetics of the liquid–solid reaction between natural magnesite and acetic acid, an organic acid, solutions is studied. Based on the results obtained in this research, the following conclusions can be drawn: In the dissolution process, it is observed that the reaction rate is very sensitive to temperature in the range of 40–70 °C. Thereby, the solubility increases with increasing reaction temperature and reaction period, and with decreasing particle size. In terms of acid concentration, it is shown that the dissolution rate increases for the acid concentration range 1.0–3.0 M and decreases for range 3.0–10.0 M. The dissolution kinetics follows a shrinking core model with the surface chemical reaction as the rate-controlling step. The apparent activation energy of leaching is found to be 78.40 kJ mol During dissolution, when it is studied at large scale, the abundant amount of CO In the leaching of magnesite, it is found that a little calcium and iron also dissolve.