The decline of commodity prices in 2014 and 2015 left commodity-reliant countries searching for ways to fill holes in their government budgets. For many of these countries, the speed of this decline left the most reliant countries among the most paralyzed to act. The feasible and politically palatable options available to these governments were few; possible options included funding budget shortfalls via debt or sale of public assets. While these strategies may have served to insulate citizens from the impact of lower prices, governments issuing debt to address tenuous macroeconomic situations would expect to pay more for that debt than if they had borrowed when commodity prices were higher. Similarly, countries selling assets in the face of economic pressure are unlikely to receive full value for these assets as buyers recognize the pressures faced by liquidating governments. As well, many commodity-reliant countries had been diligent during the first decade of the 2000s to minimize their government debt-to-GDP ratios and were likely hesitant to reverse this progress. Regarding privatization, the literature suggests that, in many cases, privatization is not solely based on economics and is influenced by domestic politics ( Another option available to countries, one that would have negatively impacted citizens and domestic businesses, was to raise revenues via tax increases. Without delving into the institutional barriers that may be associated with such a decision, tax increases are rarely popular, even when institutional impediments can be overcome ( The limited options facing these countries highlighted the value of proactive decisions taken by some governments to save their previous economic surpluses; decisions that permitted these governments and their citizens to dampen the full effects of the commodity price decline on their respective economies. The commodity price downturn was, for some economies, the best demonstration of the value of sovereign wealth funds (SWFs). Despite the evident usefulness of SWFs, there has been insufficient analysis of the types of countries that create them. Explanations as to why countries create SWFs have remained steeped in the theoretical benefits of SWFs with limited statistical testing for factors common to SWF-creating countries. Individual case studies have provided insight into SWF operations, SWF allocations, and the relationship between governments and their SWFs; however, without an understanding of the dynamics of the population of SWF-creating countries, case studies have limited external validity. This article provides a quantitative investigation of the forty-six countries that created their first SWF over the 1970 to 2017 time period. While confirming that countries dependent on extractive exports are the most likely to create a SWF, this article also finds that countries with higher rates of GDP growth are also apt to create a SWF. The conventional wisdom that SWFs are created by countries with higher levels of international reserves no longer holds and the belief that countries with chronic current account surpluses must be reevaluated. These shifts are due to the changing economic profile of countries adopting SWFs. These findings are corroborated by secondary statistical testing that splits the sample of SWFs to only focus on SWFs that were created after 2005. This analysis is important to the body of SWF literature because the primary focus of the literature on SWF creation has been on the benefits sought by SWF-creating countries. Previous works employing quantitative analyses to explain the determinants of having a SWF only captured the economic conditions of SWF-having and non-SWF-having countries in a specific year ( This article is organized as follows: ‘SWFs: Explanations for their existence’ discusses previous research and assertions as to why countries have SWFs and the limits of these works. ‘Methodology’ describes the methodology of this article's main model and outlines the different estimates used to test for robustness. The ‘Findings’ section presents the results from the main model and the robustness of these findings. Finally, the ‘Conclusion’ considers how this work may be utilized by academics and policymakers. The creation of a SWF is a political decision to address a perceived economic imperative. The main economic argument for SWFs stems from an adaptation of Countries vulnerable to commodity price risk tend to lack options. Traditional methods for countries to self-insure have been to accumulate foreign reserves to smooth fluctuations of extraction royalties and to attempt to diversify their domestic economies to develop other export sectors and, thus, decrease the economy's reliance on one sector. Although these strategies can be pursued in tandem, accumulating foreign reserves can be accomplished more rapidly than encouraging the other non-extractive sectors of an economy to develop an international comparative advantage as a basis for diversified exports. Speaking to this difficulty is the mixed success of import substitution strategies and export-oriented development initiatives from the 1950s onward ( Prior to Andrew In many cases the discussion of the types of countries that create SWFs has been conflated with the benefits sought by the countries creating them. Aside from the previously mentioned desire to insulate government budgets, Rozanov stated that SWFs may be created to help monetary authorities sterilize unwanted liquidity, build up savings for future generations, or earmark funds for economic and social development. Adding to these benefits, Shields and Villafuerte also pointed to SWFs providing a policy tool for countries to control macroeconomic influences that may negatively impact real exchange rate appreciation and real exchange rate volatility. SWFs have been cited in various literatures as a means to mitigate Dutch Disease symptoms associated with this volatility and appreciation ( The benefits sought by countries that create SWFs, for some, are not solely economic. Returning to CRSFs, In their comparative case study of Kuwait, Abu Dhabi, Singapore, and China, As stated previously, much of the SWF literature focused on the benefits, economic and political, that accompany SWF creation. While these outcomes are undoubtedly a motivation for countries to create a SWF, there has been less study of the types of countries that create SWFs. If these benefits are available to all countries that have SWFs, then why do not all countries create SWFs? There must be conditions that make SWF creation more sensible for some countries than others. In their statistical analysis of SWFs, Including non-economic variables to explain SWF creation, One similarity between the Chwieroth's work and the statististical analysis of SWF creation by Another article looking to overcome this volatility issue was The SWF literature on the sustained conditions prior to SWF remains inadequately tested. Arguing that SWFs are created to respond to macroeconomic factors or to maintain political power may be convincing, but these assertions have yet to be quantitatively verified. Rather, the collective understanding of conditions common to countries before SWFs remain based on qualitative case studies and theoretical understandings of the benefits of a country having a SWF. The following sections test these ideas by finding the conditions common among SWF-having countries in the years prior to the SWF being created and how these conditions have changed as SWFs have become more popular as a policy choice. To investigate country conditions of SWF-creating countries prior to creating an SWF, data was gathered from 1970 until the year of SWF creation. For countries that did not create a SWF, data was gathered from 1970 until 2017. Three SWF-having countries – Kuwait, Kiribati, and Saudi Arabia – were eliminated from the population as their SWFs were either created prior to 1970 or, in the case of Saudi Arabia, it is not known when the Saudi Arabia Monetary Authority commenced investment activities. To assess if the increased attention on SWFs that followed Rozanov's article in 2005 changed the dynamics of the types of countries creating SWFs, the population was altered to only capture the 2006 to 2017 time period. For this altered population, only countries that had not already created a SWF prior to 2006 were included. As mentioned, this paper looks to determine the macroeconomic conditions that lead a country to create its first SWF. While other statistical analyses of SWF creation employed data from the year of creation, or the year immediately before, it is the contention of this paper that SWFs are a response to longer term macroeconomic trends. Although difficult to know if policymakers react to 3-year trends, to 5-year trends, to 7-year trends, or to some other time period to make their decisions, testing the 5-year averaged data does have precedent ( Before data modifications, data was gathered for 217 countries for the 1970 to 2017 period. For the five-year averaged data, this means that each country would potentially have data for 42 years as the first year for the averaged data is 1975, an average of the 1970 to 1974 data. Therefore, the potential size of the five-year averaged data sample is 9,114 observations; 42 years for 217 countries. The dependent variable for all statistical testing is a binary variable that is coded “1” in the year during which the country created the SWF. This data was sourced from Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute in January 2019. For countries which created SWFs in the past, but whose SWFs are no longer in operation, they were not included as having created a SWF. For simplicity and replicability, the Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute listing was considered definitive. To test if the findings of previous SWF analyses still hold given the increased number of countries having SWFs, this article mirrored previous works by including current account to GDP ratio, The linkage between GDP growth and SWF creation is based on the belief that as a country begins to prosper, the leadership in that country looks for different ways to maintain that prosperity; what Friedman may have deemed ‘transitory income’. While it is likely that this prosperity may be a result of trade imbalances and chronic current account surpluses, it is plausible that GDP growth is also supported by domestic demand ignited by capital investment and technological progress. To perpetuate GDP growth, a government may put this prosperity to work in the form of foreign investment or domestic reinvestment. Instead of simply spending this growth, it is conceivable that a country and its citizens embrace the idea of a SWF because they feel there is a risk that this growth will not continue in perpetuity. The Polity IV and leadership turnover variables were included to investigate the political dynamics that relate to SWF creation. In their work on the political economy of natural resource funds, The population of the statistical analysis contained 214 countries: 46 of which had SWFs and 168 that do not. As mentioned, Kuwait, Kiribati, and Saudi Arabia were eliminated from the original 217 country population. The data used in the analysis was predominantly sourced from the To avoid biased results arising from one-year spikes in the data, five-year moving averages of the variables were calculated. There are two variables that were not included in this analysis that have been common in others statistical analyses of SWFs: a country wealth variable, usually GDP per capita or GDP, as an independent variable ( Regarding altering the estimation to capture whether some variables more accurately capture the conditions common among countries creating a certain type of SWF, this presupposes that creating governments are willing to hold to these mandates. If a country creates both a stabilization fund and a savings fund, is it always clear that one fund will always be used for stabilizing near-term government budgets and the other for future government projects? What happens if the stabilization fund is emptied due to chronic lower commodity prices; would the government not then turn to the savings fund? The world's largest SWF, Norway's Government Pension Fund – Global (GPFG), indicates that its fund was set up to “set up to give the government room for manoeuvre in fiscal policy should oil prices drop or the mainland economy contract”, but also “as a tool to manage the financial challenges of an ageing population and an expected drop in petroleum revenue” ( Given that creating a SWF is binary decision, this paper followed The results from the initial panel regression testing offer four main conclusions that should serve as the new conventional wisdom for the type of countries creating SWFs. The first conclusion, one which is unsurprising, is that countries for which fuel, ore and mineral exports account for a large proportion of their merchandise exports are the most likely countries to create SWFs. This finding not only corroborates the statistical testing done by For fuel, ore and mineral exporting countries, a one percent increase in the average proportion of fuel or ore and mineral exports over the past five years means a country would be one percent more likely to create a SWF. Although this incremental change may seem insignificant, it is important to remember that the value of a country's fuel, ore and mineral exports is not simply tied to the quantity of these natural resources within a country, but rather the price the country receives for them. Given the volatility of commodity prices, it is predictable that this variable has a large standard deviation translating to larger fluctuations in the possibility that those countries would create a SWF. A second key finding, and one that has not yet been discussed in the SWF literature, is the statistically significant and positive relationship between GDP growth and SWF creation. This relationship is particularly interesting because, as mentioned, the majority of previous statistical testing found that GDP per capita does not significantly alter the possibility of establishing a SWF. While one may think that a certain level of economic wealth is a necessary condition to SWF establishment, previous works, as well as auxiliary testing for this analysis, informs that GDP per capita is not nearly as important as GDP growth. This finding indicates that countries are looking to SWFs as a way to perpetuate growth; that the best option for a growing economy is to create a fiscal rule that calls for the saving and reinvestment of growth. Anecdotally, the increase of SWFs with a domestic development element in their mandates, the Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority being one example, supports this conclusion. This finding of GDP growth influencing SWF creation is particularly important when considered with the third key finding; that a country's level of international reserves is not a statistically significant explanation of SWF creation. This third finding contradicts the statistical testing and conclusions reached by Aizenman and Glick's analysis. There are two main reasons for this dissonance; first, the differences in the international reserve data included, and second, the changing profile of SWF creating countries. To the first reason, Aizenman and Glick included international reserve-to-GDP data from 2007 to ascertain whether this data could explain a country Interestingly, The other piece of conventional wisdom associated with SWF creation has been that SWFs are created by ‘chronic surplusers’—countries that have persistent, high current account balances. On their face, the results from Of the variables included to address the political factors that may influence the SWF creation decision, it is notable that the coefficients of the average Polity IV rating, the duration of the Polity IV rating, and the number of leadership changes in the years leading up to the SWF decision were not consistently statistically significant. In one of the equations not presented, the Polity IV duration variable was positive and statistically significant, but this finding did not hold in other tests. The fact that Polity IV variable's coefficient was not statistically significant corroborated By 2005, prior to Rozanov's coining of the term “SWF”, 27 countries already had funds that would later carry this label. From 2006 to 2017, another 22 countries would create new funds. With their growing popularity, the profile of countries creating SWFs changed. One major change was that the countries creating SWFs in the post-2005 period were less dependent on fuel and ore and mineral exports than prior SWF creators. From the testing, the coefficient of the fuel and ore and mineral export variable was no longer consistently statistically significant over all tests. Upon further investigation, it was noted that it may not be that the post-2005 SWF creating countries were less dependent, but rather that their exports were fueling GDP growth due to the higher prices of the commodity supercycle and that the GDP growth variable had more statistical explanatory power. The correlation between the fuel, ore and mineral extraction variable and GDP growth variable for countries that created SWFs prior to 2005 was −0.22; for countries that created after 2005 it was 0.21. Evidently, the influence these exports had on GDP growth was higher for the 2005 to 2017 period than the previous period; an unsurprising conclusion given the increase in commodity values over the latter period. The post-2005 testing also underlined the fact that the conventional wisdoms of SWFs being created by ‘chronic surplusers’ or by international reserve hoarders no longer held. The current account and international reserves variable coefficients were not statistically significant in any of the regression equations. This finding could simply highlight that these countries with higher levels of international reserves or which were ‘chronic surplusers’ already created SWFs and were, thus, no longer part of the sample. It could also mean that SWFs are now being viewed as a tool for fiscal responsibility, not a reaction to a static fiscal state. The testing suggests that in the past, SWFs were created in response to having perpetual current account surpluses or having more international reserves than potentially needed. Newer SWFs seem to not meet this requirement but are rather taking the prudential step to ring-fence extraction revenues or a certain amount of GDP growth to preserve it for the future. This new iteration of SWFs seem far more proactive to their underlying macroeconomic structures, whereas previously created SWFs were the result of reactive policy. Returning to the full sample, the robustness testing using the three-year averaged data confirms the main findings. Both the coefficients for the extraction export variable and for the GDP growth variable were positive and statistically significant for all tests using the entire sample ( It is interesting to note that the coefficient of the duration of the Polity IV rating variable was positive and statistically significant when looking at the three-year averaged data. In previous tests, the coefficients were statistically significant in one of two equations in which it was included. This finding lends credence to the The analysis of post-2005 using the three-year data offered a very surprising result in that only the coefficients of the resource export variable remained statistically significant in the regression testing; GDP growth coefficients were not. This shift was largely attributable to the smaller sample size. On average, SWF-creating countries’ average GDP growth in the three years leading up to SWF creation was 3% higher than non-creating countries during the 1970 to 2005 time period. The average difference was the same for the 2006 to 2017 time period, but the number of observations included in the regression testing was one-third the number of those employed in the previous tests. The robustness testing employing the data averaged over seven years confirms the main findings: the coefficients for the resource exporting and GDP growth variables are statistically significant and the coefficients of the international reserve variable are not ( While being dependent on resource extraction remains the most common condition among countries that create SWFs, creating a SWF to manage and prolong GDP growth should also be considered a motivation. The coefficients of the GDP growth variable were statistically significant in 15 of 18 tests in which it was included. As well, despite the belief that countries create SWFs to manage international reserves, this belief is based on two reserve-building countries (Botswana and Libya) that created SWFs and skewed previous data. In the years that Botswana and Libya created their SWFs, each country had international reserves worth almost as much as their annual GDP, far surpassing any other SWF-creating country. Therefore, while their large international reserves may have induced Botswana and Libya to create a SWF, it should not be held up as an explanatory variable for all SWF-creating cases. With respect to current account levels, the coefficients of the current account to GDP ratio variables were not statistically significant in most of the main equations and conclusions were very sensitive to model specification. Again, it is important that this idea of the international reserve hoarding country or the chronic current account surpluser be challenged when speaking of the entire population of SWF-creating countries. In some cases, it may be true that these economic factors played a role in the SWF decision-making process, but this article proved the necessity of reassessing the characterization of the SWF countries. Following the fall in commodity prices in late 2014, it was There are two issues that undergirded the speculation of the reasons behind actions taken by SWFs: concerns regarding SWF transparency and a lack of understanding SWFs. To the former, speculation and, in some cases, suspicion over SWFs investments are fueled by the fact that the largest SWFs in the world remain among the least transparent with regard to their investment strategies, mandates, and institutional linkages to their respective governments. While transparency has been improving over the past decade, SWFs remain mysterious in many respects. However, there are many financial institutions, private and public, which operate with even less transparency that do not garner the same attention. This atmosphere may be the remains of previous worries regarding the ability of SWFs to exert their financial might on the markets of Western economies ( These findings emphasize the need for a greater awareness among those who discuss SWFs in the media or recommend the creation of SWFs behind closed doors. Although SWFs may be seen as a virtuous policy tool, they are not appropriate for all countries and the actions of one SWF may not be appropriate for another SWF. The discussion of SWFs needs nuance and a clear understanding of the motivations of the countries that create them. Without these, policymakers, journalists, commentators, and the people they inform will remain without the proper base to understand and assess the efficacy of SWFs. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The author would like to thank the insightful comments of Dr. Dane Rowlands, Dr. Patrick Schena, and Dr. Shahrokh Fardoust. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at     