Rockbolt and surface support systems such as shotcrete and thin spray-on liners (TSLs) are widely used as underground support elements to resist the convergence and maintain the stability of excavations. In order to evaluate the bearing capacity of combined reinforced rockbolt and surface support systems in preventing sliding along discontinuities, double shear tests (DST) was carried out using fully grouted rockbolts installed in three separate blocks. These blocks were covered with a 5mm layer of TSL followed by a 50mm layer of shotcrete. Two rockbolts were installed at an inclined angle of 45°, and 20kN lateral constraining force was applied to clamp together the three blocks. Three different support combinations were tested: 50mm shotcrete only, 5mm TSL only, and combined shotcrete and TSL, with and without rockbolts. It was confirmed that the shotcrete plays a mechanical role in resisting the shear load, and TSLs increase the bond strength between shotcrete and substrate replicating the side wall of an excavation. The contribution of rockbolt and surface support system in resisting joint movement was also compared. The failure mechanism of rock substrate, rockbolt and surface support system was also analysed.Design, installation and monitoring support systems are a major consideration in underground mining operations. The use of rockbolts dates back to the late 1900 Rockbolts when combined with shotcrete and/or TSLs can cope with almost any ground condition encountered during mining and tunnelling. Thin spray-on liners (TSLs) are multicomponent polymer materials that can be applied to the rock mass surface as a sealant or as a surface support ( Over the past four decades, research has confirmed that shear performance can be just as significant as tensile performance. This is evident by a high proportion of rockbolts that have been found to fail in shear in high stress rock masses ( Many experimental tests have been performed in order to study the mechanical behaviour of rockbolts in resisting the shear force based on single shear tests ( Rock mass condition: joint aperture/roughness/dilatancy, Strength and size of rock, The reinforcement elements system: type/diameter/mechanical properties of anchoring systems, Grout type/thickness, Inclination of bolt and joint plane, and And loading conditions: pretension, normal pressure, confinement condition.  An analysis of double shear testing results shows that the behaviour of a rockbolt under load follows three distinct stages, linear behaviour, non-linear behaviour and unconstrained plastic deformation. The contribution to shear strength is defined as the difference between the applied shear force and the frictional strength normalised to the ultimate tensile load of the bolt. The first and second stage refers to loading up to 75% and 90% of maximum load capacity respectively for a full scale rockbolt ( Polypropylene-fibre is used to increase the ductility of shotcrete, leading to stress redistribution ( These studies examined shear resistance capacity associated with the movement of rock mass; however, they are insufficient to provide an integrated approach for combined underground support systems. It is common practice that surface support systems are often used in combination with rockbolts. Accordingly, this paper aims to address the mechanical behaviour of combined support systems quantitively, including rockbolt, TSL and shotcrete, through double shear tests. Double shear test is a laboratory test widely used for measuring the shear resistant of support systems in jointed rockmass, including rockbolt, shotcrete, TSLs, and their combinations. In this paper, double shear tests refer to an arrangement of three blocks reinforced with a fully grouted rockbolt at different angles. The two end blocks are fixed and a load is applied to the middle block causing shear loading. Shotcrete and TSLs were applied to the surface of the test blocks, a schematic view of this test is shown in Blocks used in double shear tests were prepared using a cement mortar to ensure consistency of the test condition. The cementitious mixture was poured into plywood moulds, each measuring 300 The cast samples were left to cure initially in the mould for the first 24 The top surface of the blocks was roughed to ensure good adhesive strength of the shotcrete and TSL. An acrylic-based commercially available TSL was uniformly applied on the surface, that provides a tensile strength of 3.0 The mechanical properties of the test materials are shown in A hydraulic universal testing machine with a capacity of 3600 kN was used for double shear testing under static loading, as shown in Four continuously threaded rods, each 24 A series of tests were conducted to determine the contribution of the rockbolt and surface support system in resisting shear load in double shear test. Three tests were conducted with the rockbolt installed at 90° to the applied load with varying confining pressures of 0, 20 The test condition involving different surface support systems (shotcrete only, TSL only, combined shotcrete and TSL) applied to the top of the block with and without inclined rockbolts, are shown in Two 2.5 tonne capacity load cells were installed at both ends of the blocks. They were used to monitor the initial axial confining load of 20  Energy absorption capacity increased nearly fourfold due to the application of the shotcrete and TSL. The variation of energy absorption characterises the role of surface support. The energy absorbed at 20  The energy absorbed with a rockbolt only is 2.3 Under the same confinement condition, During testing, it was observed that the test block was crushed on both sides of the joint plane. A gap or void was created around the rockbolt, as shown in It is worth noting that the measured vertical displacement is not the rebar shear deformation as the crushed test block was unable to provide confinement to the rockbolt. Double shear test is more reliable than the single shear test, as it avoids asymmetric loading. It can also improve the stability of the sample. According to the test design, two side test blocks were fixed and cannot move during the test. In order to analyse the behaviour, the average deformation result was used to produce the deformation curves, as seen in  Rockbolt extruding is a common phenomenon It should be noted that only 16 Shotcrete and TSLs are chemically bonded to the rock surface, allowing for earlier mobilisation of support. The role of surface support is complementary to reinforcement as it helps the rockmass to support itself ( In this study, surface support is activated as a reaction to block movement between the blocks. Although there were problems in achieving a consistent TSL thickness, the test was successful. Different failure mechanisms were identified for the shear test.  Reinforcement and surface support systems interact with each other and are usually combined to form an integrated ground support system. Each element in this system has a different role to play because of differences in the manner in which it interacts with a rockmass. Reinforcement elements such as rockbolts and cable bolts are inserted within a rockmass to provide resistance to any internal rock movement and thereby preserve the integrity of the rockmass as a structural material. Surface support systems such as TSL and shotcrete are applied to the surface of a rockmass linking the reinforcement elements together and thereby resist surface deformation, preventing rock fragments from falling or being ejected.  In The second stage of the integrated support system is characterized by a non-linear behaviour corresponding to yielding of the rockbolt and crushing of the rock immediately surrounding the rockbolt need to the joint planes as well as cracking the surface support. During this stage of non-elastic deformation, failure begins to occur between the rockbolt and grout as it detaches near to the joint plane. Once the peak load has been reached, yielding occurs and no further increase in shear load is necessary to deform the rockbolt. In addition, while the load bearing capacity of the surface support has been reduced due to cracking, it still retains some capacity to resist shear due to fibres contained in the shotcrete. In the third and final stage, the integrated system maintains a constant level of resistance to shear. This is due to a combination of the lateral confinement of the blocks and surface friction along the joint planes. Despite a constant residual load being applied, the rockbolt continues to yield as evident by the increase in displacement along the rock joints with crushing of the grout and rock immediately surrounding the rockbolt. Hence in a rock support system, each of the elements will behave differently whereby the rockbolt will initially undergo elastic deformation and with sufficient load will yield leading to plastic deformation. Whereas with the test block, loading will cause it to fail in a brittle manner with very little deformation before failure occurs. Consequently in the case where there is no external confinement and load is applied to the test block, the rockbolt will yield while the surrounding block (representing rock) will remain undeformed. Eventually with sufficient load, the rockbolt will split the block causing the whole test system to prematurely fail. A double shear testing facility was developed to assess differences in the behaviour of individual and combined rock support systems including rockbolt, shotcrete and thin spray-on liner (TSL). Each test sample comprised three blocks made from cementitious material that represented rock. Measurements were made of applied shear load and vertical displacement using a load cell and LVDT with subsequent determination of the energy absorption and maximum load bearing capacity. Differences were observed in the behaviour between the various support systems applied to the test sample. Overall it was found that the best performance was achieved when all three support elements were combined in terms of energy absorption and load bearing capacity. It has been found that use of shotcrete and TSL enhanced the absorption of energy. The use of shotcrete increased the initial stiffness in a combined support system. Improved performance was achieved with use of TSL when placed between the test sample and shotcrete as it improved the adhesive properties of the shotcrete leading to greater shear resistance. Rockbolt shear deformation is a function of the stiffness of rock-support system. The application of surface support reduces the magnitude of deformation of the rockbolt in shear. A high stiffness rock-support system is essential in maintaining stability by resisting any initial deformation and loss of strength. In the tests, displacements of up to 60 The first author would like to thank the China Scholarship Council (CSC) and UNSW Australia’s School of Mining Engineering for supporting her study in Australia. Special thanks are due to Mr Kanchana Gamage and Mr Mark Whelan for their help in conducting the tests.