A significant ‘size effect’ is observed in ice failure strength: the ice strength is not independent of ice fragment size, but decreases with increasing size. The fractal approach to the ice mechanics with a multiscale microstructure provides an elegant and unified explanation of the size effect on ice failure strength. Ice fragments are found to have a fractal size distribution, with a fractal dimension (D) close to 2.50 over a remarkably wide range of ice fragment size. The size effect on ice strength can be well predicted using the fractal dimension D=2.50 of the ice fragment size distribution.Large ice forces occur when wind and current drive floating sea ice against a fixed structure, such as an artificial island for offshore petroleum exploration. The ice forces on a full-scale structure can be determined by several methods ( Smaller size pieces of sea ice can cause large forces upon impact with offshore structures. It is very important to have information about the probability of encountering these small ice pieces in the neighborhood of the parent iceberg. A lot of measured data on the ice fragment size distribution were reported using aerial photographs and satellite images ( According the Korzhavin equation, the size effect of the ice force on structure implies that the failure strength of ice decreases with the ice size. Many researchers have interpreted the size effect on ice strength using fractal theory ( A fractal, particularly suited to the analysis of fracture networks, is defined as a box-counting measure According to the constrained comminution model, all ice fragments are not equally to fracture at any given time. Rather, a fragment's fracture probability is completely determined by the relative size of its nearest neighbors. The fracture process thus tends to eliminate fragments which have the same-sized neighbors. The finial result is a distribution in which no two fragments with the same size are neighbors at any scale. Such a distribution is fractal ( This process is repeated at successively higher orders. The volume of the Generally, the operation to applying the generator consists of dividing the initiator into The number of granular particles is very difficulty numbered in practice, while the mass of particles is easily measured. The power–law mass relation is related to the fractal number relation (Eq. The particle-size distributions of the ice fragmentation are shown in It is seen from It is natural to ask about a possible scale effect as a result of fractal geometry, because the concept of scaling is linked to fractal geometry through scaling laws. In general senses, a size effect is defined as a variation with size of physical and mechanical parameters, which “should not” depend on size according to classical theories or convention. The ice pressure on structures was measured in details using laboratory tests, model tests and model- and full-scale in situ tests by The apparent failure strength of ice is given by Due to the existing of flaws (cracks and voids), the apparent failure strength of ice changes with the ice fragment size: the apparent failure strength decreases as the ice fragment size. The fractal dimension of the ice fragment size distribution is From Eqs. The intrinsic failure strength The experimental data of the ice strength are shown in It is seen from The following two conclusions are obtained from this study: The fractal model for ice fragmentation is constructed, and the fractal dimension of the ice fragment size distribution is 2.50 when The size effect on the fracture strength is explained using the fractal model for ice fragmentation. The ice failure strength is found to be generally proportional to (size) The National Nature Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 40201024 is acknowledged for their financial support.