The effects of Ru additions on the hardness and fracture toughness of WC-VC-Co alloys were investigated on the following compositions: 80WC-10VC-(10-x)Co-xRu (0 ≤ x ≤ 3) (wt%), (89.6-x)WC-10Co-0.4VC-xRu (0 ≤ x ≤ 2) (wt%), (89.2-x)WC-10Co-0.8VC-xRu (0 ≤ x ≤ 2) (wt%) and 89.6WC-(10-x)Co-0.4VC-xRu (0 ≤ x ≤ 3) (wt%). Hardness increased with increased Ru additions in all alloy series due to a combination of decreased grain size and increased solid solution strengthening. Ruthenium additions generally compromised fracture toughness, although there was improvement for some compositions.Tungsten carbide-cobalt hardmetals are used widely due to their good toughness and wear resistance [ It was found that increasing the weight proportion of the hard constituent (WC) and contiguity, results in increased hardness [ Fracture toughness is a measure of the resistance of the material to crack propagation and should be virtually independent of specimen size, geometry and surface finish [ Cobalt is therefore still the most widely used binder. Due to the disadvantages of Co and the limitations of Fe and Ni, mentioned earlier, other researchers [ Constituent powders of 80WC-10VC-(10- Archimedes' principle was used to measure density in accordance with the ISO 3369 standard [ The hardness tests were done at 30 kg with reference to the ISO3878:1983 standard [ The Palmqvist fracture toughness, W The results for density and the corresponding densification are shown in Apart from the density of the component elements, alloy density also depends on the effectiveness of the sintering process. Thus, densification (actual/theoretical) of the alloys was determined ( The theoretical density is a function of the density and mass proportion of all the constituents of a composition, and is calculated using Eq. All Vickers hardness indentations had diagonals which differed by <1% as recommended by the ISO 28079:2009(E) standard [ Shing et al. [ The grain size also had some effect on hardness since there was an inverse relationship between the general grain size of the alloy series and the corresponding hardnesses. For the 80WC-10VC-(10- Therefore, hardness increased by a combination of decreased grain size, and to a greater extent, by solid solution strengthening. The 80WC-10VC-(10- According to Engqvist et al. [ where: H The inverse relationship between hardness and free path can thus be deduced from Eq. where: H From Eqs. Contiguity, C The carbide hardness, H The binder hardnesses for each alloy series were calculated and plotted against Ru content as shown in Since Co substitution with Ru resulted in lower binder volume fractions than when Ru replaced WC, almost all the (89.6- For the 80WC-10VC-(10- The inverse variation of coercivity with hardness for 80WC-10VC-(10- Most hardness indentations had cracks which did not originate from the indentation apex ( The results of Palmqvist fracture toughness for the alloys are also shown in It is known that improving the hardness of the binder phase by modification also helps to improve fracture toughness of the overall alloy, and for a particular binder type, fracture toughness decreases with hardness [ Generally, there was an inverse hardness-fracture toughness relationship among the alloy series ( Ruthenium additions improved hardnesses of all the WC-VC-Co-Ru alloys at both high (10 wt%) and low (0.4 and 0.8 wt%) VC contents. Hardness increased by a combination of grain size decrease, and to a greater extent, solid solution strengthening. Ruthenium additions were more effective in improving hardness when substituting Co than when replacing WC. There was a general decrease in fracture toughnesses of WC-VC-Co-Ru alloys with Ru additions. However, Ru additions improved fracture toughness of WC-VC-Co-Ru alloys up to 0.4 wt% Ru for the 80WC-10VC-(10-