This study is aimed to realize evolution of microstructure and mechanical properties of aluminum 6061 alloy tube subjected to Severe Plastic Deformation (SPD) and subsequent annealing. For this purpose, the tube is initially processed by different passes of an SPD process called Tube Channel Pressing (TCP) and then subjected to a subsequent annealing at 473°K for 2h. Afterwards, tension test is used for the evaluation of mechanical properties while Electron Back-Scattered Diffraction (EBSD) equipped Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) are utilized for the microstructural characterizations. Results show that the Continuous Static Recrystallization (CSRX) is the main restoration phenomenon during annealing of aluminum 6061 alloy, even after imposing a moderate plastic strain. For instance, CSRX has been observed during annealing treatment after imposing an equivalent plastic strain as low as 1. However, the used annealing treatment causes different microstructural variations in specimens depending on the pass number of TCP. As an illustration, while the average grain size impressively decreases due to annealing of 1 pass TCPed specimen, it moderately increases after annealing of 5 passes TCPed specimen. This is due to development of a bimodal microstructure after 5 pass of TCP which leads to a different evolution of microstructure during successive annealing. It is also notable that TCPed and annealed specimens show higher strength and ductility compared with as TCPed specimens which is attributed to the occurrence of precipitation hardening besides restoration phenomenon during the annealing treatment.One of the most common methods for grain refinement of materials is application of Severe Plastic Deformation (SPD) processes in which reduction of the grain size takes place by imposing intense plastic strains (e.g. equivalent strain of 1-100) without a significant change of outer dimensions. For instance, Very-Fine Grained (VFG) and Ultra-Fine Grained (UFG) materials can be produced using SPD method which their grain sizes are between 1 and 10 As shown before, the grain refinement of metals subjected to a cold/warm SPD process ( Multiplication and Migration of Dislocations (MMD): homogenous multiplication of dislocation as a result of deformation, migration and rearrangement of dislocations to form homo-shaped sub-grains (or LABs), rotation of these sub-grains to form main grains characterized by HABs. Intersection of Micro-Shear Bands (IMSB): appearance of LABs due to propagation of Micro-Shear Bands (MSBs) as a result of deformation, evolution of LABs to HABs due to intersection of MSBs by further deformation. It is noteworthy that the IMSB usually results in a bimodal necklace shaped microstructure while the MMD results in a relatively homo-shaped microstructure as illustrated in Although a cold/warm SPD treatment can result in a reduction of the grain size, the kinetic of this phenomenon is relatively slow. For example, high strains in range of 8–12 are needed to develop an UFGed material by a cold/warm SPD treatment. In addition, the strain hardened materials obtained after a cold/warm SPD treatment reveal relatively low ductility It is estimated that about 90% of aluminum extruded products are made from Al–Mg–Si alloys since these alloys have attractive characteristics such as the precipitation hardening capability and the excellent workability. Therefore, multiple studies have focused on SPD of these alloys The schema of TCP is shown in An Al–Mg–Si alloy tube was received in extruded form. The inner and outer diameters of tube were 19 Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) samples were prepared by mechanical polishing to 100  Annealing of 1TCP specimen results in arise of finer grains as shown in    It is well-known that the morphology of GP-I zone is spherical while the morphology of β′′, β′ and β are needle-like (elliptical), rod-like and platelet-like, respectively. As can be seen, precipitations appeared in 1TCPA and 5TCPA specimens have an elliptical morphology which has been related to β′′ precipitations  From what told above, it can be inferred that TCP results in development of a bimodal necklace-shaped microstructure similar to what illustrated in As mentioned in explanations of As illustrated in Considering the presented results, it can be concluded that: The development of a bimodal microstructure during TCP results in occurrence of different trends during subsequent annealing of TCPed specimens. Continuous static recrystallization is the main restoration phenomenon during annealing of the aluminum 6061 alloy at 473 The average grain size is impressively decreased by annealing after 1 pass of TCP due to occurrence of continuous static recrystallization. Despite so, annealing after 5 passes of TCP causes a moderate increase of the average grain size which is related to elimination of finer grains by occurrence of grain growth during annealing. Since the restoration and the precipitation hardening occur together, both of the strength and ductility of the aluminum 6061 alloy improve by 2 The authors wish to thank the research boards of Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Sharif University of Technology and Doshisha University for the financial support and the provision of research facilities used in this work.