The present volume contains a compilation of papers presented at the 6th International Flotation Conference (Flotation ’13), held on 18–21 November 2013 in Cape Town, South Africa. The event was a great success and gathered a total of 257 delegates from 28 countries, a well-balanced attendance between froth flotation researchers and practitioners. The coffee and lunch breaks, as well as the social programme, provided excellent opportunities for networking. The Vineyard Hotel was once again a fantastic venue for the conference. The technical programme was divided into two, 2-day symposia: ‘Flotation Fundamentals: Physics and Chemistry’ and ‘Flotation Applications and Plant Practice’. Each symposium was kicked-off with excellent keynote lectures that introduced some of the challenges the discipline is facing. Prof. Kari Heiskanen of Aalto University, Finland, gave the first keynote, and discussed how a consistent framework is still required to take flotation modelling to the next level. This would involve the development of fundamental models to describe physical and chemical sub-processes that are not completely understood yet. He presented a framework that contributes towards a multi-physic flotation model and noted some of the areas that require further fundamental research. For the second keynote, Dr. Dariusz Lelinski of FLSmidth, USA, examined the changes faced by the mining industry over the last five years, identifying two approaches to increase value added in froth flotation: increasing production and increasing efficiency. The trend for larger equipment, some novel flotation machines for specific processes, as well as the quest for the next breakthrough technology, were explored. The technical sessions and poster papers presented during the two symposia covered almost every aspect of current flotation research, both fundamental and applied. This special issue contains 30 of those papers. The manuscripts describe investigations on froth recovery and transport, flotation modelling, small scale experiments to better understand fundamental aspects, laboratory tests to predict performance or develop flowsheets, and also on novel equipment. Other papers report on surface chemistry, the effect of reagents and electrolytes, important aspects during regrinding that impact flotation and also on cyanide chemistry effects and techniques to map hydrophobicity. More applied papers cover flotation plant trials at copper rougher flotation banks, studies at copper and copper–gold concentrators, optimisation at a talc operation and a review of potash flotation practice. I would like to thank all the authors for their valuable contributions and also the referees, whose time and efforts have been instrumental in producing this special issue of Minerals Engineering. I think we all look forward to Flotation ’15 in Cape Town, South Africa, from November 16–19 2015.