Sour cherry (Prunus cerasus L.) is rich in polyphenols, and like its processed products, is especially rich in anthocyanins. We have applied HPLC, spectrophotometric and on-line antioxidant detection methods to follow the fate of cherry antioxidants during an entire multi-step industrial-scale processing strategy. This was performed for 22 sampling points, with five independent repeats from a commercial cherry nectar production process. Anthocyanins contributed to >50% of the total antioxidant capacity of the samples. An in vitro gastrointestinal (GI) digestion system was used to investigate serum availability of antioxidants. In this system anthocyanin bioavailability was much higher in the processed nectar than in the fresh fruit. Together these results indicate that processed sour cherry nectar is a rich source of stable antioxidants with high bioavailability, auguring well for the potential health-promoting capacity of sour cherry products.Sour cherry ( Sour cherries are generally consumed after processing into various products, such as jams, frozen fruits and fruit juices. Juices are consumed/preferred the most. However, sour cherry fruit cannot be processed into 100% fruit juice because of its characteristic sour taste. Sour cherry juice is not palatable in its natural form and the addition of water and sugar is required to obtain a drinkable juice, which is classified as “nectar” ( Definitive studies regarding the bioactivity of polyphenols require Sour cherry nectar was produced at an industrial-scale fruit juice company, Aroma-Bursa Fruit Juice and Food Industry Inc., in Bursa, Turkey. The sour cherry fruit used as raw material was a local variety “Kutahya” obtained from the regions Afyon, Isparta, Kutahya and Kayseri in Turkey. Each of the 17 steps of nectar processing were monitored, giving a total of 22 samples for analysis ( Moisture content analysis was performed using the protocol below. Approximately, 2 For the estimation of the total phenolic (TP), total flavonoid (TF) and total monomeric anthocyanin (TA) contents, as well as the total antioxidant capacity (TAC) using spectrophotometric assays, 1 The TP content of the sample extracts was estimated using Folin–Ciocalteau reagent as described before ( The TF content of methanolic extracts was measured using the method detailed by The TA content was determined using the pH-differential method ( The TAC of the methanolic extracts was estimated using three For the identification and quantification of specific sour cherry (poly)phenolics by HPLC, 28 The contribution of each identified antioxidant compound to the total antioxidant capacity of the extracts was determined with the same HPLC-PDA system coupled to postcolumn on-line antioxidant detection ( Vitamin C measurements, (reduced form; ascorbic acid (AA) as well as its partially oxidized form; dehydroascorbic acid (DHAA)), were performed as described by Vitamin C extraction was performed using 0.5 Samples were analysed on an HPLC-PDA system with a YMC-Pro C18 150 An LC-PDA-QTOF–MS system was used to investigate the presence of possible derivatives of vitamin C, using 75% aqueous-methanol extracts of sour cherry samples. Chromatographic and mass spectrometric parameters applied as described previously by For the determination of the free soluble polyphenols in sour cherry fruit and nectar samples, which might be potentially available for uptake under GI digestion conditions, Statistical analyses were performed using the general linear model (GLM) followed by Duncan’s new multiple range test, using the data of all five biological replicates for each nectar processing sample ( All the steps for industrial-scale sour cherry nectar processing (represented schematically in Six different spectrophotometric analyses were performed on methanolic extracts of the samples, and values were compared on a dry-weight basis. The data obtained for TP, TF, and TA contents of all nectar processing samples are given in The individual sour cherry antioxidant components were identified using targeted HPLC analysis ( Dedicated vitamin C extraction and analysis by HPLC-PDA revealed that the total ascorbic acid (AA) content in the original fruit (FF-St) sample contained only dehydroascorbic acid (DHAA). Contents varied between 1.6 and 3.7 The impact of The recovery values of serum available material (IN fraction) represented a 10-fold higher ( In the current study we have characterized the main sour cherry antioxidant compounds and investigated how they are affected during an industrial-scale sour cherry nectar production process, in terms of both quantity and bioavailability. We studied the effects of different individual nectar processing steps on sour cherry (poly)phenolics using a range of spectrophotometric methods, HPLC-PDA and LC-QTOF–MS analyses and an The fate of the antioxidant components, monitored using spectrophotometric assays, during the nectar-making process, revealed significant changes observed in two of the applied treatments. Firstly, processing the original fruit (FF-St) to the initial pressed juice (PrJ) gave rise to a substantial increase (≈2 to 3-fold) in TP, TF, TA contents and TAC values, as determined on a dry-weight basis ( Antioxidant activities of individual sour cherry polyphenols, as determined by an on-line HPLC antioxidant detection system, is represented in Our HPLC results of vitamin C content revealed that the original fruit (FF-St) samples contained only the oxidized form of ascorbic acid, DHAA (8.3–16.0 An Comparisons between individual processing steps of an entire industrial-scale sour cherry nectar production chain reveals that anthocyanins are the major antioxidant compounds in sour cherry samples throughout processing. They provide the highest contribution to total antioxidant activity, and recovery in the final nectar was remarkably high. Another remarkable finding was the identification of an ascorbic acid glucoside in sour cherry for the first time. The factors playing a role in the observed, enhanced This work was primarily funded by the EU 7th Frame ATHENA Project (FP7-KBBE-2009-3-245121-ATHENA). RDH and RCHdV acknowledge additional financial support from CBSG and NMC, both of which are part of the Netherlands Genomics Initiative. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 