The effects of spark plasma sintering (SPS), NbC as a major carbide phase and Ni as a Co binder substitute on the microstructure, mechanical properties and cutting insert wear during face-milling of grey cast iron (GCI) BS1452, grade 17, were investigated. Spark plasma sintering refined microstructures increasing the hardness, but lowered the fracture toughness, due to poor binder distribution. Both SPS and liquid phase sintered (LPS) WC based samples had higher hardness than all the NbC based samples. Substitution of Co with Ni in the NbC cemented carbides significantly increased the fracture toughness (by ~5.5MPa·m1/2). During face-milling using inserts produced from the NbC and WC based cemented carbides, the cutting speed (v
                     c) was varied between 100 and 300m/min and the depth of cuts (ap) between 0.5 and 1mm. Face-milling was done under dry and minimum quantity lubrication (MQL) conditions. Wear was evaluated by optical microscopy and high angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM). The spark plasma sintered NbC1.0-12Co (wt%) insert had lower flank wear rates than the SPS and LPS WC-0.8Cr3C2-12Co inserts in all machining tests, due to the combination of good chemical stability, attrition and abrasion wear resistance from the refined microstructure. The lower flank wear rate was also attributed to the shorter chamfer width. Use of MQL at a v
                     c of 300m/min and ap of 0.5mm, reduced the cutting temperatures, but increased the cutting force and flank wear rates of all the inserts.Cemented carbides are types of cermets that consist of a hard carbide phase (WC, TiC) embedded in a ductile metallic (Co, Ni and/or Fe) binder matrix. Due to their good combinations of high hardness, heat stability, fracture toughness, strength and wear resistance Tungsten carbide-based cemented carbides are mainly used in the cutting tool industry, and are approximately 70% of the cutting tools Niobium carbide (NbC) has good mechanical and physical properties, such as high hardness (19.6 Cobalt is the most used metal binder because of its very good solubility of WC at low and high temperatures, good wettability of WC and excellent comminution during milling The machining performance of NbC cemented carbides can be improved by the use of coolants with good lubrication properties such as minimum quantity lubrication (MQL) The effects of complete substitution of WC with NbC, Co with Ni and spark plasma sintering on the densification, microstructure and mechanical properties were investigated. Additionally, the cutting tool performances of NbC-Co and NbC-Ni based inserts during dry and MQL face milling of grade 17 grey cast iron (GCI) (BS 1452; EN-GJL-350 or GG35) were investigated and compared to WC-10Co (wt%) based inserts produced by SPS and LPS. The starting powders and their characteristics are given in The milled composite powders were consolidated in a SPS furnace (HP D5, FCT Systeme, Germany). The powders were poured into cylindrical graphite dies with inner and outer diameters of 20.9 A cooling rate of 200 Liquid phase sintering (HIP, Ultra Temp, USA) was done by heating the compositions in a vacuum (0.04 Archimedes' principle was used to determine the density of the sintered samples (ED224S, Sartorius, Germany). Microstructures of the cemented carbides were examined in a field emission scanning electron microscope (SIGMA, Karl Zeiss, Germany), with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (X-act, Oxford Instruments, United Kingdom) and a high angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) (JEOL 2100, with a LaB Square cutting inserts (12.7 The average resultant force (F The flank wear and crater wear were evaluated using an optical microscope (VHX-5000, Keyence, Japan) with a digital camera (VHX-Z20R, Keyence, Japan), a field emission scanning electron microscope (SIGMA, Karl Zeiss, Germany), with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (X-act, Oxford Instruments, United Kingdom) and high angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) (JEOL 2100, with a LaB Adhered workpiece material was removed from the cutting edges using dilute hydrochloric acid (HCl) For analyzing wear of the insert cutting edges, high angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) was used. The cross-sections through the worn regions of the flank were cut using a FIB SEM to reveal the interface between the workpiece and cutting edge. During preparation of the FIB-SEM cross-sections, areas of interested on the worn cutting edges were identified and covered by a carbon based protective layer. Gallium (Ga) ion beam energy (30 All the samples, irrespective of sintering process, had high relative densities (at least 99%) and negligible open porosity ( The SEM micrographs of WC-0.8Cr Although the LPS WC-0.8Cr Similar to the LPS NbC The samples produced by LPS had lower hardnesses than similar samples produced by SPS ( The LPS NbC The flank wear rate (FWR), average resultant force (F Although the WC based LPS and SPS WC-0.8Cr The LPS NbC Increasing the The change in a Spark plasma sintering (SPS) resulted in higher hardness than liquid phase sintering (LPS). The WC-0.8Cr The authors would like to thank the