Nickel pig iron (NPI) production has been experiencing robust development recently in China. For NPI production by smelting technology in either a blast furnace or an electric arc furnace, sintering is imperative to supply a qualified feedstock. In this research, the sintering behaviors of saprolitic nickel laterite with various quaternary basicities ((CaO+MgO)/(SiO2
                     +Al2O3) mass ratio) were investigated in terms of phase transformation, microstructure and fusion temperature. Experimental results show that the main minerals formed during sintering with natural basicity are refractory materials such as spinel ((Mg,Ni)(Fe,Al,Cr)2O4), forsterite ((Mg,Fe)2SiO4) and enstatite ((Mg,Fe)SiO3). With increasing basicity from natural basicity (0.50) to 2.0, all the three fusion characteristic temperatures decrease initially and then increase with a valley at the basicity of 1.0. It's revealed that the addition of an appropriate amount of CaO could lower the liquid temperature and increase the amount of melt, improving the sintering consolidation of saprolitic nickel laterite.Nickel is one of the most important strategic metals, which is mainly used as refined nickel and ferronickel with variable iron content in the industrial world, and roughly two-thirds of global nickel production goes to stainless steel manufacture NPI is a low grade ferronickel used as a cheaper alternative to electrolytic nickel for the production of stainless steel Nickeliferous laterite accounts for about 70% of the world's land-based nickel resources, while only holds 40% of the global nickel output Therefore, it's necessary to investigate the sintering behavior of saprolitic nickel laterite and facilitate the formation of melt phase for consolidation. Until recently, there is a lack of knowledge about the sintering behavior of laterite ore. Lv et al. find that forsterite (Mg,Fe) The saprolitic nickel laterite used in the present work was taken from Sulawesi Island, Indonesia. The sample was dried at 110 CaO of analytic grade was used as flux in this work to adjust the basicity of sinter, and its particle size is less than 74 Simulative sintering experiment was conducted in a horizontal resistance furnace, and the schematic diagram of the furnace was shown in The preparation of the mixture and the heating equipment are the same as those of the sintering tests. The mixture was shaped by a mold into a pyramid with a bottom side length of 12 TG-DSC analysis of raw ore sample was performed using a thermal analyzer (Netzsch STA 449 C, Germany) in the temperature range of 30 Phase transformation of the saprolitic nickel laterite without the addition of CaO (natural basicity) sintered at different temperatures for 10 XRD results of the sintered briquettes are shown in Optical micrographs and ESEM–EDS results of the polished cross-section of briquette with natural basicity sintered at 1300 Experimental results of saprolitic nickel laterite without the addition of CaO sintered at 1300 Therefore, regarding the sintering of saprolitic nickel laterite, an alternative bonding phase rather than the calcium ferrite is needed compared with high-grade iron ore. The CaO–MgO–SiO Based on the analysis of CaO–MgO–SiO Briquettes with various basicities were sintered at the temperature of 1300 The ESEM–EDS analyses of briquettes with basicities of 1.0 and 1.2 sintered at 1300  Experimental results ( The mineral with low melting point is crucial for the formation of primary melt phase. Diopside with the lowest melting point of 1391 The sintering behavior of saprolitic nickel laterite with varying basicity adjusted by the addition of CaO was investigated in the air, attempting to find a way to improve the sintering performance of the saprolitic nickel laterite. The following conclusions are obtained: Mineralogical constituents of saprolite nickel laterite sintering with natural basicity (R Quaternary basicity ((CaO CaO has a significant effect on the phase transformation, microstructure and fusion temperatures during the sintering of the saprolitic nickel laterite. With the basicity rising from natural basicity (0.5) to 1.0, diffractions of enstatite taper off while diopside increases gradually. Moreover, an excessive basicity results in the akermanite and merwinite. With the basicity increasing from natural basicity (0.50) to 2.0, the fusion characteristic temperatures of the laterite ore decrease initially and then increase with a valley at the basicity of 1.0. An appropriate amount of CaO addition is able to facilitate the formation of melt phase and improve the consolidation of the sintering of saprolite nickel laterite, and the optimal basicity for the sintering of saprolitic nickel laterite is 1.0. The authors wish to express their thanks to the