One of the major challenges during subsea tunnel construction is to seal the potential water inflow. The paper presents a case study of Xiang'an subsea tunnel in Xiamen, the first subsea tunnel in China. During its construction, different grades of weathered geomaterials were encountered, which was the challenging issue for this project. To deal with these unfavorable geological conditions, grouting was adopted as an important measure for ground treatment. The grouting mechanism is first illustrated by introducing a typical grouting process. Then the site-specific grouting techniques employed in the Xiang'an subsea tunnel are elaborated. By using this ground reinforcement technique, the tunneling safety of the Xiang'an subsea tunnel was guaranteed.The geological conditions of subsea tunnels are rather difficult to accurately explore because of the close proximity of an infinite amount of seawater. Therefore subsea tunnels are greatly affected by the geological uncertainties and are more risky than most other tunneling projects ( Grouting is critically important in tunnel engineering. The compaction grouting mode or hydro-fracture grouting mode can be used depending on the local geological conditions of the given project ( Stage 1: backfill grouting and permeation grouting A grouting pipe is first filled with pressurized grout, and the grout enters the ground from holes preset along the pipe. The injected grout fills the cavities in the loose soil; this is referred to as backfill grouting. Meanwhile, the injected grout may also permeate the voids between the soil particles, which is referred to as permeation grouting ( Stage 2: compaction grouting The continuously injected grout expands the soil outwards and forms a grout bulb around the pipe. With the increase in the grouting pressure, the size of the grout bulb increases until the grouting pressure accumulates up to the fracturing pressure. The formation of the grout bulb displaces and compacts the surrounding soil ( Stage 3: primary fracture grouting When the grouting pressure reaches the first peak value, a plane of fracture is formed in the soil by hydraulic fracturing ( Stages 4 and 5: secondary compaction grouting and secondary fracture grouting When the grout flow is confined, the grouting pressure starts to increase. With the increase in the grouting pressure, the injected grout can enlarge the width of the primary fracture. When the grouting pressure increases to a certain value, a secondary fracture may be initiated and then filled. More secondary fractures may be initiated due to the subsequent grouting. The initiation location and propagation path of the secondary grouting fractures vary significantly. It should be noted that not all grouting applications necessarily consist of all the above-mentioned five stages. For example, the permeation grouting effect in clay is very limited due to the low permeability of clay. The primary fracture and especially the secondary fracture do not always appear during a grouting process. In a subsea tunnel project, multiple boreholes are drilled for grouting in unfavorable geological conditions. In this case, the grouting serves as a method to strengthen the ground as well as to reduce the ground permeability. The Xiang'an subsea tunnel is the first subsea tunnel constructed in Mainland China. It connects Xiamen Island with Xiang'an District, reducing the travel time by road from about 95 min to 15 min. This triple-tube tunnel project has two vehicular tunnels with an excavation cross-sectional area of 170 m The undersea tunneling of this project encountered four weathered granite slots, naming F1, F4, F2 and F3 respectively, in the direction from Xiamen to Xiang'an. These types of unfavorable geological conditions could lead to sudden water inrush and were the most challenging parts in this project. The longitudinal geological profiles of the left and the right lines are shown in The weathered slot F1 is located from YK8 + 324 to YK8 + 460 along the right line with a total length of about 136 m. It is about 1756 m away from the tunnel portal on the Xiamen side. In this section, the overburden thickness above the tunnel crown to the sea bed varies from 30 m to 35 m, and the sea depth ranges from 10 m to 18 m. Samples collected at various depths from the same borehole before construction of the tunnel are shown in A center cross diaphragm (CRD) sequential excavation method was adopted for this project when the tunnel construction was performed in the unfavorable geological conditions under sea. The construction process and support parameters are shown in During tunnel construction through the weathered slot F1, the CRD excavation method was employed. Full-face grouting was adopted to reinforce the ground before excavation. The construction process for the weathered slot F1 along the right line consisted of four rounds. The first two and final rounds of tunneling were mainly performed through completely and highly weathered granite formations. The third round was excavated through the core of the weathered slot, where the geological conditions were much worse. The construction process is illustrated as follows ( (1) The first round of excavation started on 20 June 2007. During this round, a total length of 25 m of rock was full-face reinforced by grouting, and then a 20 m long tunnel was excavated and supported. (2) The second round of excavation started on 22 October 2007 with a total length of 30 m of rock full-face reinforced by grouting. Subsequently a 25 m long tunnel was excavated and supported. (3) The third round of excavation began on 21 March 2008. At this time, 40 m of the rock was full-face reinforced by grouting, and a 35 m long tunnel was excavated and supported. (4) The fourth round of excavation started on 18 July 2008; 41 m of rock was full-face reinforced by grouting, and then the weathered slot F1 was excavated through with support. It should be noted that in the first two rounds the full-face grouting was performed through the upper bench and lower bench, respectively, where the upper bench of the tunnel was first grouted and excavated, followed by the lower bench. In order to improve the construction efficiency, grouting was only performed through the upper bench in the final two rounds, during which the full-face ahead of the tunnel cutting face was reinforced by grouting from the upper bench first and then the ground was excavated sequentially. The layout of the grouting boreholes in the second round and the third round is shown in A chemical grouting product called Marithan and a grout mixture composed of ordinary Portland cement (P.O 42.5R) and sodium silicate (Na2O·3SiO2, 30–45 Baume degrees) were selected for injection when tunneling through most sections of the weathered slot F1. Marithan is a two component polyurethane product, which has high adhesive strength and outstanding mechanical properties. It can create a bond with the rock and can remain intact through the lifetime of the project. When the product is injected into the ground, the low-viscosity mixture remains liquid for several seconds and penetrates easily into the fissures, where it expands, sets and seals the threaded zone. Some Marithan injection samples obtained after excavation are shown in Grouting mainly serves to improve the water-tightness, strength and stability of the surrounding ground when it is used in a subsea tunneling project. These three effects are extremely important in guaranteeing the safety of the tunnel construction. The grouting effects of the Xiang'an subsea tunneling through the weathered slot F1 are elaborated below. A total of 22 inspection boreholes were drilled after the third round of grouting was performed in the weathered slot F1. These boreholes were mainly used to determine water inflow after grouting, two of which were also selected to provide core samples. Due to the grouting reinforcement, the maximum water inflow from a single borehole was reduced from 50 m Some representative mechanical properties of the rock samples obtained before and after grouting are shown in Because grouting was carried out through multiple boreholes, the ground was fractured and the grout propagated into the induced cracks (or the existing discontinuities were filled by grouting). Therefore, both the integrity and stability of the surrounding ground were significantly improved. The potential cavities during construction could be effectively controlled. Some photographs of the grouting fractures taken after excavation are shown in This paper presents a case study to illustrate the grouting techniques adopted in the Xiang'an subsea tunnel construction in China. First, a conceptual model of grouting is proposed to introduce the five stages of a typical grouting process, i.e. backfill and permeation grouting, compaction grouting, primary fracture grouting, secondary compaction grouting, and secondary fracture grouting. Then, the grouting techniques that were used during the construction of the Xiang'an subsea tunnel in highly weathered rock under the seabed are introduced. A cement grouting was used to reinforce and seal the rock, and the permeability was further reduced by Marithan injection. This reinforcement technique significantly reduced the permeability, strengthened the ground and guaranteed stability of the excavation. It is noted that due to the inherent uncertainties of the geotechnical and geological conditions and the complex interactions between the ground and grouting material, the grouting parameters (e.g. grouting pressure, grouting material, and the amount of grouting) employed during construction were mainly determined from field tests. Some further studies should be performed to facilitate the determination of the grouting parameters. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support given by the