Intrathoracic dislocation of the shoulder is a rare condition that usually occurs after high-energy trauma. Etiology, mechanism of injury and associated lesions are diverse. We present the case of a patient who suffered a great height fall, treated with removal of the humeral head and implantation of a shoulder hemiarthroplasty. One year after the surgery, the patient was pain free and the Constant score was 70 points.Intrathoracic fracture-dislocation of the humeral head is a very rare entity. The early description belongs to Watson-Jones, The aim of this paper is to review the published cases to determine etiology, mechanism of production, associated injuries and treatment of this serious injury. Below, we present the case of a 60 years old woman who suffered an intrathoracic fracture-dislocation of the humeral head after a great height fall. We present the case of a 60 years old woman who suffered an accidental six meters fall in the countryside. She injured her left shoulder presenting local tenderness and loss of function. Also blunt chest trauma occurred with respiratory distress. She did not address any prior medical history. On arrival at our hospital the patient was awake and oriented, hemodynamically stable, with an oxygen saturation of 89%, without oxygen therapy. Furthermore, subcutaneous emphysema was detected on the left costal grill and pain increased concomitantly with breathing movements. In the nerve examination of the extremity no alteration was found. Radial and ulnar pulses were present. Laboratory studies showed mild leukocytosis with neutrophilia and hemoglobin level of 11 g per deciliter, as only significant findings. In a standard radiographic study of the left shoulder, a four-part fracture-dislocation of the proximal humerus was observed, being the humeral head displaced intrathoracically ( Following forty-eight hours in the intensive care unit where the patient was stabilized, we proceeded to the surgery. Firstly, through axillary thoracotomy, the humeral head was removed and a chest tube was left in collaboration with a thoracic surgeon. No rib fixation was performed. Afterwards, through deltopectoral approach, a cemented hemiarthroplasty (Global-FX. DePuy One year after the surgery, the patient was pain free. Her shoulder range of movement (ROM) consisted of: flexion 120°, abduction 100°, internal rotation 30° and external rotation 50° ( The early description belongs to Watson-Jones, Intrathoracic fracture-dislocation of the humeral head is a rare injury that requires the conjunction of a high energy trauma, combined with a specific mechanism. Enumerating the mechanism of injury, we can review 16 falls from height (same mechanism of our case), The fracture mechanism was raised by Hardcastle et al. in 1981, who suggested two stages for the injury to occur. Karr et al., suggested another possible mechanism of injury. It is a fall on the hand with the elbow extended that causes the fracture and dislocation of the humeral head, followed by a lateral impact on the shoulder resulting in fracture of the ribs and the entry of the head fragment into the chest. There are others even more exceptional cases, with intraperitoneal displacement of the humeral head, This mechanism produces a four fragments fracture dislocation of the proximal humerus. As an exception, two examples with an isolated greater tuberosity fracture and intrathoracic displacement of the complex shaft – head – lesser tuberosity (two parts fracture – dislocation) have been reported. As for injuries associated with proximal humerus fracture-dislocation, there is a wide variety, mainly determined by the mechanism of trauma. The pneumo or hemothorax and other pulmonary lesions are virtually constant. Also in the literature, tibial plateau, humeral shaft, elbow, scapula, wrist and pelvis fractures are described. Several neurological complications have been identified. There are many reports of axillary nerve palsy, median and ulnar nerves neuroapraxia and secondary trunks of the brachial plexus lesions. In the majority of the cases described, they made a spontaneous recovery without needing surgery, although others ended with incomplete recovery. Regarding the management of this injury, there is no consensus in the literature. In the early publications and some subsequent ones, conservative treatment was performed. Du Plessis et al. considered in his paper whether to remove the humeral head was really necessary. One author has chosen fixing rib fractures advocating a more rapid recovery of lung function. The treatment of the intrathoracic fracture dislocation of the shoulder requires the participation of a multidisciplinary team. The impact of thoracic trauma and severity of the associated injuries must be treated individually. Because of the rarity of this injury, a lack of understanding exists to choose the optimal treatment. However, given our experience with the case described and the literature review, we advocate shoulder hemiarthroplasty as a better treatment due to the high risk of osteonecrosis, except for very young patients. Doubts about the need for removal of the humeral head still remain, although the majority of authors choose the extraction. None.