Particles can pack to give progressively increasing suspension viscosity, and, once packed beyond some critical value, the bulk sample exhibits elasticity due to steric interactions between the volume-occupying particles. Comminuted and hydrated plant-based foods are particularly interesting because they comprise “particles” in the form of plant cells, cell clusters & cell pieces and released cell contents such as starch granules, which can hydrate, swell and thereby interact. Here, we present rheological data for boluses made by mixing comminuted fried carrot chips, raw uncooked carrots or fried potato chips with water. These example foods comminute into non-spherical particles with a range of sizes, e.g., above 2 mm to less than 700 μm, yet the underlying physics controlling the bulk rheology are the same in all cases, namely that of volume occupying interacting particles. If particles are considered hard spheres with a known density, the calculation of particle phase volume is trivial; however, this is not the Case for comminuted plant tissues. Thus, measuring the phase volume for most food particles and model soft particles has been historically difficult due to swelling/de-swelling. We describe here how a gravity-controlled settling experiment, using only Earth's natural gravity, can be used to determine a settling parameter, SR, which can then be used to adjust weight fraction thereby providing a measure of phase volume. We show its utility by estimating the random close packing phase volume of ideal hard spheres, which compare favorably with known and independently measured values. Finally, we use our settling technique to measure the settling parameter then perform a mathematical adjustment to the solids mass fraction, which we show results in a collapse of the rheological data for boluses comprising non-ideal soft food particles.A particle alters the velocity field in its vicinity. Einstein ( Soft particles packing will also affect the bulk rheology, but, in this Case, the particle modulus as well as the moisture content of the particles can impact the rheology of the system: some examples of studies of soft particle suspensions include agar microgels ( For soft particles that can de-swell from thermodynamic or compressive forces or particles that can hydrate and swell, the particle phase volume can be a difficult property to measure accurately. Researchers have used techniques such as centrifugation ( We present the measurement and application of a pseudo swelling factor, which we call the swelling ratio, S   Glass ballotini of, nominally, 1 mm diameter (2.6 g/mL) and 100 μm diameter (2.4 g/mL) were used to illustrate and validate the settling procedure. The 1 mm beads were sieved between 1 mm and 850 μm sieves; the 100 μm beads were sieved between 300 μm and 90 μm sieves. The density of the beads was measured using a Helium pycnometer (AccuPyc, Micromeritics) set to 20 purges followed by 10 repeats at ≈20 psig.     The particle phase volume is the appropriate independent variable to use when relating the amount of packed particles to the bulk rheology. For absorbing solids like boluses comprising comminuted solid food particles (e.g., carrots or potato chips), the interstitial liquid cannot be easily removed (if at all) and absorbed moisture cannot be measured without centrifugation, which thereby restricts the calculation of phase volume. The settling experiments detailed here, performed with the assumption of equilibrium swelling and no de-swelling prior to measurement, can be used to convert the solids mass fraction into a form dependent upon phase volume without removal of the interstitial liquid. We provide a mathematical discussion and experimental rheological data to illustrate the use and benefit of our proposed settling method. There are some weaknesses to the proposed method, however. For the samples tested, there were cases where a small portion of hydrated particles floated, and there were cases with non-zero turbidity (shown in  In the present study a less invasive approach was taken to correcting for swelling. The total water mass associated with a hydrated, swollen bed of comminuted food particles was measured, which was then corrected to the solids weight fraction using the ratio of associated water mass to solids mass (  To calculate the Settling Ratio, S At random close packing, i.e., ϕ  In this Case, m  At this point, one substitution is made to account for the oil accompanying the solids. From past research ( In this Case, m Equation Continuing the mathematical analysis, the settling ratio is used by multiplying it with the solids weight fraction, making the assumption that the settling experiment achieves random close packing. The critical aspect of this approach is that the dry solid density does not need to be known. One simply need measure the density of the hydrated bulk material, ρ It is important to note that, in the present Case, it is not necessary to know the actual density of the structuring solid material, i.e., plant cell or cell clusters or starch granules, because we use the settling ratio. The settling ratio provides the benefit of cancelling the effective solid density, ρ With equation  Using the settling ratio for each system of interest, the weight fraction was adjusted and plotted with the matrix elastic modulus ( From the data, it was found that the asymptotic limit in G′ is slightly larger for the carrot samples compared to PC. Considering the Evans and Lips model ( Particles, in a liquid medium, packed above a critical phase volume, provide elasticity to the bulk sample. In the Case of soft particles that might swell or de-swell, accurately measuring the particle phase volume is difficult. One must resort to “effective” phase volumes or simply use mass fractions. It was shown that gravity-mediated settling can be used to determine a settling ratio, S The authors identify no conflicts of interest. All authors contributed an equal portion to the research and manuscript, and all authors have approved the final version of the manuscript. Michael W. Boehm and Stefan K. Baier are employees of PepsiCo Inc. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position or policy of PepsiCo Inc. This work was carried out as a part of the M.B. acknowledges Jim Litster for providing the glass ballotini, Gleb Yakubov and Mauricio Bonilla for fruitful discussions on porous particles and Heather Shewan for discussions on particle packing and suspension rheology. The authors would like to acknowledge Anthony Moulin for his help in the laboratory.