The main purpose of this study was to characterize and to extract germanium from the copper cake of Çinkur Zinc Plant. The physical, chemical and mineralogical characterization of the ground copper cake sample obtained from Çinkur showed that it was 84% below 147 μm containing 700 ppm germanium. The copper cake also contained 15.33% Cu, 15.63% Zn, 1.66% Cd, 1.33% Ni, 0.64% Co, 0.35% Fe, 2.62% Pb, 12.6% As, 0.18% Sb and 3.42% SiO2. The mineralogical analysis indicated the complex nature of the copper cake which was mainly composed of metallic and oxidized phases containing copper, arsenic, zinc, cadmium, etc. The sulfuric acid leaching experiments were performed under the laboratory conditions. The optimum collective extraction of germanium and other valuable metals was obtained at a temperature range 60 to 85 °C for a leaching duration of 1 h with sulfuric acid concentration of 150 gpl and using a solid–liquid ratio 1/8 g/cc. Under these conditions, the recovery of germanium was 92.7% while the other metals were leached almost completely. The optimum selective leaching conditions of germanium was determined as half an hour leach duration, 1/8 g/cc solid–liquid ratio, 100 gpl sulfuric acid concentration and a temperature range 40 to 60 °C. Under these conditions the leach recovery of germanium was 78%. The dissolution's of other metals like cobalt, nickel, iron, copper, cadmium and arsenic were almost low. So, germanium would be separated more selectively at the following precipitation by tannin stage.None of the germanium minerals is mined solely for its germanium content. All of the germanium recovered worldwide is a by-product of other metals, mostly zinc, copper, and lead. In electrolytic zinc plants which are becoming increasingly important for environmental reasons, germanium is separated chemically during the purification of the electrolyte prior to electrolysis. Germanium is one of several impurities that have an adverse effect upon zinc electrolysis. If the germanium concentration is high enough in the separated solids, economic recovery is possible ( Essentially, all hydrometallurgical germanium recovery processes involve getting the germanium into the solution and the treatment of pregnant leach solution with various chemicals in order to extract the germanium values from the solution selectively. Thus, two important topics are discussed below concerning the recovery of germanium from leach solutions; solvent extraction, and precipitation. The selection of the most suitable technique depends highly on the type of the solution, i.e., concentration of germanium in the solution and other constituents of the solution. Generally, the input to solvent extraction is a leach solution containing relatively high concentrations of germanium (i.e., 1 gpl Ge). But KELEX-l00 was found promising even at relatively lower germanium concentrations (i.e., 0.2–0.3 gpl). On the other hand, tannin precipitation would be employed to treat those solutions with much lower concentrations of germanium ( Chemical precipitation methods are used to treat the leach solution containing relatively low concentrations of germanium, i.e., less than 1 gpl ( Where T represents the Tannic Acid (C After the precipitation is complete, the germanium–tannin compound is filtered and collected. The efficiency of this process varies between 78 and 100%. On the other hand, upon addition of tannin, the solution becomes contaminated whereby creating problems in the following zinc electrolysis. In addition to tannin; H World production of germanium, which is used widely in the chemical, electronic and optical materials industries, estimated by the U.S. Geological Survey to be 100 metric tonnes in 2006. It is obtained mainly as a by-product of the extraction of other metals, and zinc smelter flue systems are the principal source. Çinkur zinc plant in Kayseri, Turkey produced electrolytic zinc requiring the leach solution to be purified prior to electrolysis from the impurities such as, Co, Ni, Cd, Ge, Cu, etc. Therefore solution purification was done by precipitation in two step; cobalt and nickel were removed from leach solution by using CuSO In this study the possibility of recovery of germanium and the other metal values (Cu, Zn, Cd, etc.) from Çinkur solution purification precipitates (copper cake) has been studied. The first step in the metals recovery experiments was the characterization and sulfuric acid leaching of copper cake samples. After obtaining the pregnant leach solution with the optimum leach recoveries, the solution was treated by tannin in order to recover germanium by precipitation. The optimum precipitation conditions with tannin were determined by this study. But the results of precipitation of germanium by tannin from pregnant leach solution of copper cake will be given in next paper. On the other hand, the metal values other than germanium could be precipitated by zinc dust or scrap iron while the remaining solution could be advanced to leaching unit or to the electrolysis unit. The copper cake obtained from Çinkur in ground form was characterized physically, chemically and mineralogically. The dry screen analysis of the Çinkur copper cake show that about 84% of the ground sample was below 100 mesh (147 µ). The Çinkur copper cake was leached in this form without further grinding. A representative sample of the copper cake was taken and ground before chemical analysis. Most of the chemical analysis of the copper cake was done by AAS except SiO Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis of the copper cake was done by the Jeol JSM-6400 model scanning electron microscope and EDS Tracor Series II Analysis System on specimens previously prepared for the optical microscopic investigation. SEM analysis confirmed the findings of X-ray diffraction and optical microscopy studies. The metallic copper particles were oxidized on their surface. On the other hand, substantial number of oxide or sulfate phases containing copper, arsenic, zinc, nickel, cobalt and cadmium were found. Lead was generally present in oxide or silicate form. Due to the scarcity of germanium, neither its presence nor its distribution among various phases could be determined. In conclusion, it can be said that the copper cake was containing a high percentange of oxidized metallic copper and oxidized complex metallic phases having Zn, Cu, As, Ni, Co, Cd in their structure. The degree of oxidation was dependent on duration of storage of the cakes in the stock yard at Çinkur. In the leaching experiments a hot plate with contact thermometer and a magnetic stirrer was used. The leaching was done in 250 cc glass balloons using Teflon coated magnets. A condenser attached to the balloon prevented the vaporization losses and with the aid of the contact thermometer, the temperature of the system was controlled within ± In the leaching tests the procedures followed were as follows: A measured amount of distilled water and calculated amount of pure Merck quality sulfuric acid were put into the glass balloon and heated to the desired temperature while magnetically stirring. Then, the weighted amount of copper cake was added to the dilute sulfuric acid solution and the timing was initiated. The stirring speed which gave sufficient mixing was kept constant in all the experiments. At the end of leaching duration, solid–liquid separation by filtration followed as explained above. The washed leach residues were dried, weighted and analyzed by Perkin Elmer Model 2380 AAS for germanium (Nitrous oxide (N Çinkur copper cake samples were treated with dilute sulfuric acid solution. The copper cake used in the leaching experiments was previously ground to 84% minus 100 mesh (147 µ). Throughout the leaching experiments duration of leaching, acid concentration, temperature of leaching, solid–liquid ratio and effect of addition of chemical oxidants have been examined in order to determine the technical optimum conditions. Stirring speed was kept constant in each test. Also, in order to overcome solid–liquid separation problems after leaching a series of preliminary experiments were done by changing the experimental procedure used and the findings are reported. In the first leaching experiment, the leaching reagent was chosen to be water for dissolution of 50 g copper cake, while the other variables were 85 °C for leaching temperature, 3 h for duration of leaching and 1/4 for solid–liquid ratio. As given in The major aim of this study was the production of germanium oxide as pure form as possible, therefore selectivity of leaching was important. The experimental durations were varied between 0.5 and 3 h. As shown in The second group of experiments was carried out by keeping constant the solid–liquid ratio at 1/4, the leaching duration at half an hour and the temperature at 85 °C while changing acid concentration between 75 and 150 gpl H The following third series of experiments were carried by varying the leaching temperature in the range of 40 and 85 °C. All the obtained data are presented in graphical form in Experiments of the fourth group were made to examine the effect of solid–liquid ratio over the leach recoveries of germanium and the other valuable metals present in the copper cake. These experiments were carried out at solid–liquid ratio changing from 1/2 to 1/8. The results obtained are given in The last three experiments of leaching were carried out in order to find out the effect of addition of a chemical oxidant like MnO Due to the formation of silica gel during the leaching of copper cake, the solid–liquid separation was found to be difficult after the completion of leaching operation. In order to overcome this problem various leaching procedures were tried in order to minimize the difficulty. The aim was to minimize or avoid the formation of silica gel by following the most suitable leaching procedure. For this purpose, the three different leaching procedures tried were as follows: The copper cake was added to 184 cc of distilled water at room temperature. Then, 16 cc of sulfuric acid was added and the mixture was heated to 85 °C while stirring magnetically for leaching purposes. The distilled water of 184 cc volume was initially heated to 85 °C and then the copper cake was added into this water while stirring. Later, 16 cc of sulfuric acid was added and leached. The distilled water of 184 cc volume and 16 cc of sulfuric acid were mixed at room temperature and then heated to 85 °C. Finally, the copper cake was added to the heated dilute acid solution and leached. In all of these leaching experiments, the acid concentration was chosen to be 150 gpl H The laboratory scale leaching by dilute sulfuric acid and precipitation by tannin experiments were performed in order to produce some valuable products from Çinkur ZPR obtained by solution purification. Most of the valuable elements were dissolved in pregnant leach solution. Transferred germanium to the leach liquor was selectively precipitated by addition of tannin, so main product was obtained. The waste water, which was obtained after germanium precipitation, includes huge amount of valuable metals, copper can be precipitated by a second precipitation by adding of zinc dust or steel scrap from the waste water, so a copper rich precipitate can be produced. After copper precipitation, zinc can be recovered from solution by precipitation or after solution purification by electrowining. Moreover the solution could be recycled to zinc clinker leaching stage to recover more zinc and cadmium in the second cycle. The characterization of the copper cake or solution purification precipitate of Çinkur indicated that the ground cake was about 84% below 100 mesh. The chemical analysis of the cake showed that there was 700 ppm Ge, 15.33% Cu, 15.63% Zn, 1.66% Cd, 1.33% Ni, 0.64% Co, 0.35% Fe, 2.62% Pb, 12.62% As, 0.18% Sb and 3.42% SiO The sulfuric acid leaching experiments were then optimized for selective and collective leaching and the optimum conditions for them were determined as follows: For selective leaching: Leaching temperature range of 40 to 60 °C. 100 gpl sulfuric acid concentration. Half hour duration of leaching. A solid to liquid ratio of 1/4. No chemical oxidant and air pumping. Under the optimum conditions specified above the leach recovery of germanium was 78%. The dissolutions of other metals like cobalt, nickel, iron, copper, cadmium and arsenic were almost low. So, germanium would be separated more selectively at the following precipitation by tannin stage. For collective leaching: Leaching temperature 85 °C. 150 gpl sulfuric acid concentration. 1 h of duration of leaching. A solid to liquid ratio of 1/8. With air pumping. Air pumping into leach solution helped the oxidation and faster dissolution of copper cake. Under the optimum conditions specified above the leach recovery of germanium was 92.7%. The dissolution's of other metals like zinc, copper, nickel, cobalt, cadmium, etc. were almost complete. After the optimization of leaching conditions of copper cake, the precipitation of germanium with tannin was optimized. The precipitation with tannin was preferred for the germanium recovery since the pregnant leach solution obtained after leaching had less than 1000 ppm germanium. The chemical analysis of the stock leach solution was determined as: 169 ppm Ge, 29.3 gpl Cu, 24.0 gpl Zn, 7 ppm Pb, 867 ppm Ni, 491 ppm Co, 4.6 gpl Cd, 4.2 gpl Fe and 3.5 gpl As. The pH value of this solution was measured as 1.3. The tannin precipitation experiments indicated that 94% of germanium in leach solution could be precipitated selectively. Then a germanium oxide concentrate with ∼ The experimental findings indicated that selective precipitation of copper and germanium with zinc powder was not possible. So, it was concluded that it would be better to precipitate the germanium first by tannin addition which could be followed with the precipitation of copper by zinc powder or steel scrap. As the final step the precipitation of zinc in the solution or recovery by electrowining could be done. Moreover the solution could be recycled to Zn clinker leeching stage to recover more zinc and cadmium in the second cycle.