Objective
                  We evaluated the effect of tamarind (Tamarindus indicus) on ingestion and whether it provides additional beneficial effects on mobilization of fluoride from the bone after children are provided defluoridated water.
               
                  Methods
                  A randomized, diet control study was conducted in 30 subjects from a fluoride endemic area after significantly decreasing urinary fluoride excretion by supplying defluoridated water for 2 wk. Subjects were then assigned to one of two groups, with 15 in each group. One group was supplemented with tamarind (experimental group) for 3 wk and the other (control) group was given only defluoridated water for the same period.
               
                  Results
                  The mean changes in urinary components after tamarind ingestion (volume, pH, fluoride calcium, copper, and magnesium) in the control and experimental groups were compared. There was a significant increase (P < 0.01) in fluoride excretion and urinary pH and a significant decrease in urinary calcium (P < 0.01) and copper (P < 0.05) excretion in the experimental group as compared with the control group. There was no change in urinary volume between groups.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Tamarind intake appears to have an additional beneficial effect on the mobilization of deposited fluoride from bone, by enhancing urinary excretion of fluoride.Chronic exposure to excessive fluoride may cause toxic damage to osseous tissue, which manifests as dental and skeletal fluorosis. The toxic effects interfere with the mineralization process, and the defects that result are generally irreversible. In most affected communities, fluorosis is attributed to ingestion of excessive fluoride from drinking water. The effect of cereals on fluoride retention has been studied in normal humans. Fluoride excretion in urine was significantly high on rice-based diets as compared with a After approval by the Institutional Human Experiment Ethics Committee, 10 Social Welfare Boys Hostels from the Nalgonda district of Andhra Pradesh, South India, were surveyed for fluoride levels in drinking water. All surveyed hostels had bore well water as the source of drinking water. In all hostels, the fluoride content in water was less than 2 ppm; in the Choutuppal hostel, fluoride content was 2.77 ppm. The students of the eight and ninth classes residing in the Social Welfare Boys Hostel were selected, and oral examination of each student was carried out by a dental specialist (from the local dental college) in the common hall of hostel, with subjects seated in ordinary chairs in bright daylight. The dental specialist used a sterile mirror and a dental probe for oral examination. The presence and severity of dental fluorosis was recorded, as was any other observed dental conditions. Dean's index Fluoride contents of water and urine samples were estimated with an Orion ion-specific electrode Statistical analysis was carried out with SPSS 7.5 for Windows (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). To study the mean differences of various parameters (urinary volume, pH, fluoride, calcium, copper, and magnesium) between groups, unpaired Subjects' baseline anthropometric characteristics, including body mass index, fat fold thickness, dietary intake, and hematologic parameters, are shown in Calcium, magnesium, and copper levels in drinking water were very low and conductivity was very high when compared with municipal (normal) drinking water ( The urinary fluoride and pH of subjects before and after 2 wk on defluoridated water were measured and compared. There was a significant decrease ( Urinary parameters were compared after randomly assigning the 30 subjects to one of two groups ( There was significant reduction ( After 3 wk of tamarind ingestion, there were significant increases ( Renal fluoride excretion includes glomerular filtration and tubular reabsorption. About 60% of the filtered fluoride is reabsorbed by tubules. Some studies have suggested a relation between fluoride clearance and urine flow rate under some restricted conditions in dogs and rats. A significant correlation between fractional fluoride clearance and urinary pH was shown by Whitford et al. The present study in humans substantiates our previous observations in dogs Change in the pH of urine toward alkaline range with tamarind ingestion as observed in our previous human study In our animal experiments (unpublished observations), fluoride ingestion enhanced urinary calcium and copper excretion. The present study and a previous human study Thus, it can be seen that tamarind ingestion in the diet increases fluoride excretion in urine and decreases copper and calcium excretion significantly. It appears to have an additional beneficial effect over defluoridated water on the skeletal health of children from fluorosis endemic areas.