Three commercially available nanofiltration membranes (PES-2, NF-1 and NF-2) were employed for selective concentration of uranium from a bioleach liquor of low-grade uranium ore. Performance of the membranes under a variety of operational conditions was evaluated by dead-end and cross-flow filtration experiments. Results showed that the NF-2 membrane had high uranium rejection (˃85%), appropriate permeate flux, and acceptable fouling propensity. Also, NF-2 was more selective than the two other membranes. In general, the nanofiltration process is recommended to be applied in practice for extraction of uranium from the bioleach liquor of low-grade uranium ore.The fundamental element of the nuclear power industry is uranium ( Nanofiltration is defined as a pressure-driven membrane process which intermediates between the reverse osmosis and the ultrafiltration that provides higher fluxes than the reverse osmosis at lower operating pressures and also higher rejection of organic and inorganic solutes than the ultrafiltration ( The literature review revealed that the nanofiltration process has been highly successful in uranyl ions removal from aqueous solutions such as drinking water ( The previous researches have highlighted the potential of nanofiltration process for designing selective ion separation. In these researches, the same process was followed for uranyl ions separation from aqueous solutions with very low concentration. However, solutions containing uranium in higher concentration ranges are also generated at some stages of the nuclear fuel cycle (e.g., leach liquor of uranium ore) ( Feed solution was a bioleach liquor of low-grade uranium ore of Saghand mine in Iran. It should be noted that the bioleaching is used to turn different species of uranium from low-grade ores into uranyl (UO Three commercially available polymeric nanofiltration membranes were employed in this study. The basic properties of these membranes are presented in The research procedure followed two steps: in the first step, separation potential of three nanofiltration membranes (PES-2, NF-1, and NF-2) was evaluated in a dead-end filtration mode. The dead-end filtration mode was used in the first step since it is simple to operate and it uses a small volume of feed solution. Nevertheless, owing to its several disadvantages it is not employed for the large scale nanofiltration processes. In the next step, one of the best-performed nanofiltration membranes was selected for further evaluation. An experimental cross-flow filtration setup was manufactured to evaluate membrane performance under more realistic conditions. This step was taken to determine whether the separation potential of the nanofiltration membranes shown in the first step could be used into an industrially-feasible separation process. The experimental setup for the dead-end-type cell had the volume of 0.5 l and the effective membrane area of 7.07 cm The experiments were performed at room temperature. The concentrations of uranium, potassium, calcium, and iron were determined by an inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy (ICP, Optima, Model 7300 DV) at wavelengths of 409.014, 766.49, 317.933, and 259.939 nm, respectively. Commonly used pore models assume that the pores of the membranes are of the same size. If the membrane pores are considered as parallel capillaries, the permeate flux ( The observed rejection coefficient of component From a process point of view, the membrane selectivity of the two solutes The dead-end filtration equipment was operated to evaluate the rejection of uranium, potassium, calcium, and iron by the three nanofiltration membranes and their permeate flux as a function of the operating pressure. The obtained results are shown in Generally, the pressure effect can be described by two mechanisms which control the ions separation. First, an increase in the TMP leads to an increase in the water flux, but the ions transport is hindered by the steric and charge effects (the ion flux and water flux are uncoupled). Therefore, the higher water flux results in a dilution of permeate, and consequently a higher rejection. Second, increasing the pressure will cause more ions transport to the membrane surface; consequently, the concentration polarization will increase leading to a decrease in ions rejection by decreasing the charge effect. The results of these two mechanisms that occur simultaneously will determine the rejection behavior at different applied filtration pressures ( Uranium rejection from bioleach liquor by the NF-1 and NF-2 membranes was high but it was low for the PES-2 membrane. The same trend was observed for rejection of the other ions. These results were expected because PES-2 is a loose nanofiltration membrane. In most cases, the UO Generally, the nanofiltration membranes have larger rejection of multivalent ions than that of monovalent ions. But, From the selectivity point of view, a relatively low membrane selectivity of uranium was observed with the NF-1 and NF-2 membranes. The results showed that the NF-1 membrane had maximum membrane selectivity values of 1.23, 1.57, and 2.53 for potassium over uranium, calcium over uranium, and uranium over iron, respectively. Also, the maximum membrane selectivities of NF-2 membrane were 1.51, 1.70, and 2.71 for potassium over uranium, calcium over uranium, and uranium over iron, respectively. Moreover, no membrane selectivity in terms of potassium and calcium over uranium was observed by the PES-2 membrane, but this membrane was relatively selective in terms of selectivity of uranium over iron (more than 1.80). Moreover, no clear trend in change of membranes selectivity was observed with increasing the pressure. In another research ( An important parameter in designing the nanofiltration membrane processes is permeate flux of membrane ( The influence of volume reduction, defined as the ratio of permeate volume ( As noted before, the PES-2 membrane has more open structure than the NF-1 and NF-2 membranes. Consequently, the rejection of ions by PES-2 was lower than that of the two other membranes and this nanofiltration membrane did not have suitable performance under studied operating conditions. The uranium rejection by PES-2 changed from 14 to 38% with increasing the volume reduction from 10 to 80%. On the other hand, the uranium rejection by NF-1 and NF-2 membranes decreased from 70 to 58% and from 77 to 61%, respectively. It is clear that the increase of volume reduction leads to increase of concentration of retentate solution. When the concentration of retentate solution increases, it can be assumed that the concentration of feed solution increases. Increasing of ions rejection as the concentration of feed solution increased was also found by It is interesting that the rejection of uranium by NF-2 membrane was higher than the NF-1 membrane. It is likely that the charge exclusion plays a critical role for rejection of uranium at high feed solution concentration rather than the steric exclusion. Therefore, the NF-2 membrane has higher rejection of uranium than the NF-1 membrane while NF-2 has the less compact structure than NF-1. The membrane selectivities of potassium and calcium over uranium and also the membrane selectivity of uranium over iron by PES-2 membrane increased with increasing the solution concentration. The maximum values of membrane selectivity of potassium and calcium over uranium and membrane selectivity of uranium over iron by this membrane were 1.54, 1.42, and 2.90, respectively. However, the polyamide membranes had complex behavior against increasing the solution concentration. For example, the membrane selectivity of potassium over uranium by NF-1 membrane increased with increasing the solution concentration, while the membrane selectivity of calcium over uranium and the membrane selectivity of uranium over iron by this membrane decreased. It is obvious from the obtained results that the permeate flux of PES-2, NF-1, and NF-2 membranes declined with an increase in the volume reduction. These results can be described by two phenomena. First, adsorption or deposition of the solute on the membrane surface leads to a decrease in the effective membrane pore size. Second, the increase of solution concentration results in an increase in the osmotic pressure ( The permeate flux under constant TMP, through the fouling layer and the nanofiltration membrane was calculated by the following equation ( In this research, the fouling resistance ( The SEM pictures of the surface of the membranes before and after contact with the bioleach liquor are shown in Investigation of the effects of applied pressure and volume reduction on the membranes performance showed that the NF-2 membrane has the better performance than the two other membranes. Accordingly, the behavior of this membrane against the existence of some complexing agents in the solution was investigated by means of the dead-end filtration experimental apparatus. The operating pressure was held constant at 20 bar. The solutions containing 10 mM citric acid, diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA), and oxalic acid and also 10 wt% chitosan were prepared by dissolving the appropriate amount of analytical grade of citric acid, DTPA, oxalic acid, and chitosan (medium molecular weight) in the solutions. The results ( According to the membranes selectivity results, the maximum membrane selectivities of potassium and calcium over uranium were obtained in the presence of chitosan. The consequential calculation revealed that the membrane selectivity of potassium and calcium over uranium and the membrane selectivity of uranium over iron by NF-2 membrane were 2.72, 3.38, and 2.48, respectively. Among the complexing agents, chitosan had better performance. Chitosan is one of the most available biopolymers in nature and has been described as an appropriate biopolymer for the metal ions removal from the aqueous solutions ( and high iron rejection is definitely due to this big compound. It should be noted that the main technical problem associated with the usage of complexing agents in the nanofiltration process is regeneration of complexing agents. Reuse of complexing agents can be achieved by electrolysis of the solution or by filtration of free metal ions after the proper pH adjustment. Also, inexpensive chelates such as industrial grade complexing agents, industrial by-products, and natural polymers which do not need regeneration can be applicable ( As already mentioned, the obtained results from the dead-end filtration experiments showed that the NF-2 membrane has better performance in terms of rejection coefficient, membrane selectivity, and permeate flux than the two other membranes. Therefore, the experimental cross-flow filtration setup was used to evaluate the performance of NF-2 membrane under more realistic conditions. Furthermore, the influence of the operating pressure and feed solution flux on the rejection of ions and the membrane permeate flux was scrutinized. Rejection of uranium, potassium, calcium, and iron from the bioleach liquor by the NF-2 nanofiltration membrane and its permeate flux as a function of the operating pressure are shown in These outcomes are due to the fact that at lower operating pressures a diffusive transport of ions occurs which accounts for the lower rejection coefficients, and at higher operating pressures convective transport of ions through the NF-2 membrane is dominant. When the pressure was increased further (˃10 bar) the ions rejections decreased because the concentration polarization effects started to become significant. The NF-2 membrane had the maximum membrane selectivity values of 1.27, 1.47, and 7.18 for potassium over uranium, calcium over uranium, and uranium over iron, respectively. Also, no clear trend in change of membrane selectivity was observed with increasing the operating pressure (like dead-end filtration mode). According to It is known that one major operational parameter of the pressure-driven membrane processes is feed solution flux or tangential velocity of solution on the membrane surface, which influences the ions transport through the membrane. Therefore, the effect of feed solution flux has been investigated here at 10 bar. The variation of rejection coefficients of ions and permeate flux by NF-2 membrane with the feed solution flux is shown in As can be seen from From the selectivity point of view, the maximum values of the membrane selectivity of potassium and calcium over uranium and the membrane selectivity of uranium over iron by this membrane were 1.44, 2.05, and 5.50, respectively. Also, the membrane selectivity of potassium and calcium over uranium by NF-2 membrane increased with increasing the feed flux while the membrane selectivity of uranium over iron was different. Finally, in the wake of the dead-end and cross-flow filtration experiments, the nanofiltration process (in general) and the NF-2 membrane (in particular) are recommended to be applied in practice for the extraction of uranium from the bioleach liquor of low-grade uranium ore. A conceptual process flowsheet for the concentration and purification of bioleach liquor of the low-grade uranium ore by the nanofiltration process is shown in Obviously, in order to determine the concentration factor (CF) in the nanofiltration system, a well-established equation has been deduced as ( Generally, some of the obtained results and the relevant discussions are similar to the results of other studies conducted in this field. But, the real solution of bioleach liquor of low-grade uranium ore was used in this study. It seems that the results (in general) and the presented flowsheet (in particular) from the point of view of process and process engineering is interesting. Furthermore, it can help in the future to uranium extraction from low-grade resources, economically. The selective concentration of uranium from the bioleach liquor of low-grade uranium ore was studied under various operating conditions of nanofiltration. The behaviors of PES-2, NF-1, and NF-2 nanofilters were found to be different with regard to the effects of the applied pressure, the volume reduction, and the existence of complexing agent. The results showed that the permeate flux of these membranes increased linearly with increasing the pressure from 5 to 20 bar. The PES-2 membrane had relatively constant value