Two types of ball milling methods, wet planetary ball milling and dry tumbling ball milling, were used to grind fused silica powders for the preparation of silica-based suspensions in this experiment. The effect of surface hydration and particle shape caused by the two milling methods on the slurry rheology was investigated. The results showed that, with similar particle size distribution, the viscosity of the suspensions prepared from the powders milled by wet ball milling ranged from 275mPas to 311mPas within 20min and the suspension exhibited a continuous shear thickening behaviour whereas the viscosity of the suspensions prepared from the powders milled by dry ball milling ranged from 69mPas to 74mPas and the suspension exhibited a shear thinning behaviour first, and then exhibited a slightly shear thickening behaviour. The reasons were attributed to the differences in surface hydration and particle shape. It was postulated that the two factors affected the slurry rheology through the modification of particle interactions during the flow of high concentration suspensions.Silica ceramic is a kind of promising material, which is widely used in aircraft materials, metallurgy, thermal protection system, etc. In all types of shape forming techniques of ceramic materials, such as slip casting and gel casting, suspensions with low viscosity and appropriate fluidity are highly desired, because the rheological property of the concentrated suspensions plays a major role in controlling the shape forming behaviours and optimising the properties of a green body Currently, the most widely used fabrication method in wet shaping techniques for silica ceramic is the slip casting technique. The slip casting is characterised by simple devices and low cost, and can be applied for the fabrication of large and complex products. For this kind of forming technique, much work has been done considering the effects of particle size, particle size distribution and solid loading on the rheological property and densest particle packing. Olhero and Ferreira At present, the most simple and economic method for the preparation of powders is ball milling. In general, conventional ball milling can be divided into two types, namely wet ball milling and dry ball milling. Wet ball milling with higher milling efficiency is the most common method for the preparation of the powders The present study is intended to illustrate the effect of surface hydration and the particle shape of SiO The fused silica (SiO Two types of milling methods, wet planetary ball milling and dry tumbling ball milling, were adopted to prepare finer SiO The powders W-6 The particle size analysis of the fused silica was performed with a Malvern Laser Particle Size Analyser (Mastersizersiong BED, Malvern Ltd., UK). A scanning electron microscope (Nanosem 430, FEI, Inc., USA) was employed to observe particle morphology and estimate the size of the particles prepared from wet and dry ball milling. MATLAB software and concerning image processing software were used to estimate the average roundness of the particle. The surface charge density of silica was measured with a zeta potential analyser (Zetasizer Nano ZS, Malvern Ltd., UK) to research the effect of milling and lactic acid on the zeta potential of SiO Rheological measurements were carried out using the rotational viscosimeter (NDJ-8S, China). The measuring configuration adopted was a 2# rotator considering the viscosity range of the silica-based slurry and the rheological measurement was performed with the spindle rotation speed from 3 Although there are differences between wet planetary ball milling and dry tumbling ball milling in milling efficiency, particle size and particle size distribution, similar particle size distribution can be achieved by controlling the milling time and the milling conditions. The particle size distribution curves of fused SiO Besides the particle size and particle size distribution, the particle shape is another important factor for rheological behaviour and the maximum solid loading The average roundness is a number characterising the particle shape. In many cases, the average roundness is derived from a microscopic image of the particle, but it can also be obtained in other ways The values of average roundness of W-6 The SEM micrographs presented in Zeta potential is an important factor for the analysis of the slurry performance, since it is a significant indicator for the stability of the slurry. Therefore, the zeta potential measurement is carried out to research the effect of the milling and the amount of lactic acid on the zeta potential of SiO We employed infrared spectroscopy to test and verify the state of surface hydration of SiO On account of the limitation of sample preparation method in FTIR, we cannot estimate the amount of functional groups in SiO It is known that silanol groups and the formation of hydrogen bond play a great role in the rheological properties of the suspensions. In order to get more complementary information to support the above result in However, if we want to investigate the relationship between the particle shape and rheological property of the suspensions, the difference in the amount of silanol groups existing in these two powders should be eliminated. In this case, more lactic acid was added in W powders to inactivate the surface silanol groups existing in W powders, considering the following chemical reactions: By several parallel experiments, the amount of lactic acid was fixed at 0.43 The presence of silanol groups on silica is important for the analysis of slurry rheology as it influences the reactivity and performance of SiO Silanol groups are formed on the silica surface as a result of rehydroxylation of thermally dehydroxylated silica when treated with aqueous solutions. Three typical surface silanol groups were found experimentally on silica surfaces The variations of the slurry viscosity with the amount of lactic acid are shown in The evolution of the viscosity curves with time for the 65 It should be noted that the viscosity of the suspension prepared from W powders with 0.43 The viscosity-spindle rotation speed curves of suspensions presented in The reason is that silica is an amorphous and hydrophilic material that easily hydrolyses in aqueous solution This result can be also given good explanation by the formation of hydrodynamic clusters theory. At low spindle rotation speed, intermolecular force dominates over the viscous forces. At higher spindle rotation speed, the viscous forces are the main influence in the suspension structure and the shear thinning behaviour occurs In addition, the suspension prepared from W powders with 0.43 Based on the results presented in In this work, the importance of surface hydration and particle shape caused by two milling methods on the slurry rheology has been investigated. Results showed that the viscosity of suspension prepared from powders milled by wet ball milling was much higher than that of the suspension prepared from the powders milled by dry ball milling, due to the differences in the state of surface hydration and particle shape. On one hand more silanol groups were formed on the surface of particles milled by wet ball milling, resulting in the reduction of free water and the increase of the viscosity; on the other hand, the shape of the particles milled by wet ball milling was more irregular, leading to the increase of the viscosity. Moreover, compared with surface hydration, particle shape had a more significant impact on the slurry rheology, which had not gained enough attention in the previous studies. Besides, results also showed that the existence of surface silanol groups could enhance shear thickening behaviour of the silica-based suspensions. The authors would like to acknowledge the