Displaced pelvic fractures, combining an anterior lesion and sacroiliac disruption, most often require multiple surgical approaches. The technique we describe here allows these lesions to be treated by a single approach. It combines a Stoppa approach to address the anterior lesion and a pararectus approach to the sacroiliac joint through the same incision under the rectus abdominis muscle. This pararectus approach is done by passing laterally to the external and common iliac vessels. The entire anterior surface of the sacroiliac joint is exposed by the same passage through the abdominal wall. No neurological or vascular complications occurred in a 7-patient case series. Reduction was achieved in all cases. This approach is an interesting alternative to traditional approaches and enriches the surgeon's therapeutic arsenal for managing these complex fractures.Surgical treatment of pelvic fractures is complex because of the number of structures damaged and the amount of displacement. Multiple surgical approaches may be needed, either simultaneously or sequentially. One typical scenario is the combination of an anterior lesion with complete sacroiliac joint disruption The surgical approach consists of combining the modified Stoppa approach for treating the anterior lesions and a pararectus approach for treating the sacroiliac joint The patient is supine on a traction table ( On the muscular level, passage through the abdominal wall occurs between the two rectus abdominis muscles, which allows both injuries to be exposed through a single Pfannenstiel-like skin incision. On the vascular level, the anterior lesion is exposed in a “window” between the internal and external iliac vessels after ligating the corona mortis. The sacroiliac joint is exposed in a window located lateral to the iliac vascular bundle ( Various techniques can be used in combination to reduce the sacroiliac joint: application of a reduction clamp resting on two screws on either side of the joint; insertion of external fixation pins into the alar aspect of the sacroiliac joint that act as joysticks to manipulate the hemipelvis; small incision on the anterior portion of the iliac crest to manipulate the hemi-pelvis using a Farabeuf clamp; posterior counter-incision to apply compression with a ball spike. This incision will be used to insert the sacroiliac screw. If reduction is challenging, especially in larger patients, the exposure can be supplemented by an alar approach. Primary fixation is done with two plates that bridge the anterior portion of the sacroiliac joint, making sure to stay a safe distance away from the lumbosacral trunk. It is recommended to add an iliosacral screw inserted percutaneously using surgical navigation ( Seven patients have been operated using this technique. Their mean age was 22 years (16–35) and their mean BMI was 25 The aim of the modified Stoppa approach is to expose the medial intrapelvic surface of the iliac bone More recently, Keel described another intrapelvic approach that passes lateral to the rectus abdominis muscles The special feature of the approach that we describe here, in comparison with the TIMI, is that it only has one skin incision. The vertical transmuscular approach at the oblique muscles is replaced by a retroperitoneal approach under the rectus abdominis muscle by the same supra-symphysis skin incision. This anatomical variation has the main benefit of allowing a surgeon to treat all the pelvic ring injuries, except sacrum fractures. When reduction is difficult to achieve, this approach can easily be supplemented by the two lateral windows of the ilioinguinal approach on either side. We observed no additional risks, particularly vascular or neurological, compared to the alternative described above This anterior approach is an alternative to the standard approaches for treating select pelvic fractures. While it requires a learning curve and should only be used in smaller patients, it enriches the surgeon's therapeutic arsenal for the optimal management of these complex fractures. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. None. G. Riouallon contributed to the conceptualisation of the approach, surgical procedures, data collection, data analysis, writing of article, and submission of article; L. Chanteux to the writing of the article; P. Upex, M. Zaraa and P. Jouffroy to the surgical procedures and critical review of the article.