Hydrogen sintering and phase transformation (HSPT) is a press and sinter process used to produce titanium alloys with engineered microstructures in the as-sintered state. During HSPT, titanium alloys are sintered under a dynamically controlled hydrogen partial pressure. HSPT utilizes phase transformations in the Ti–H system to refine the microstructure during sintering. Therefore, this process is capable of producing titanium alloys with strength and ductility in the as-sintered state that exceed ASTM standards for wrought titanium. HSPT circumvents the energy-intensive thermomechanical work that is compulsory for other titanium production technologies without sacrificing mechanical properties. Therefore, the performance-to-cost ratio of titanium alloys produced by this method should be greatly increased versus wrought processing and traditional PM. It has been projected that HSPT offers about an 80% energy savings per ton of titanium alloy produced versus wrought processing.Hydrogen sintering and phase transformation (HSPT) is a blended elemental (BE) press and sinter process for the production of titanium alloys  HSPT should not be confused with hydrogen sintering processes used commercially for other alloy systems such as steels, tungsten alloys, etc. During sintering of Hydrogen embrittles titanium and is, therefore, generally an undesirable component in titanium alloys. However, because of rapid diffusion and the reversible nature of the hydrogenation reaction, hydrogen can be easily removed by annealing in vacuum or inert gas atmospheres. Additionally, the presence of hydrogen has several benefits for a PM titanium process. As such, there is a long history of using hydrogenated titanium in a PM process. The hydride–dehydride (HDH) process is a well-known, commercial process for titanium powder production. HDH takes advantage of the brittleness of titanium hydride to improve comminution behavior in powder production The first patent to use hydrogenated titanium in a sintering process, filed by Gregory, dates back nearly 50 years to 1967 Utilizing the phase transformations in the Ti–H system as a means to refine microstructure and improve mechanical properties of titanium alloys has a history in the literature as well. Thermo-hydrogen processing (THP) and thermochemical processing are the names given to a group of processes during which hydrogen is used as a temporary alloying element. In some processes, hydrogen is used to improve the workability of titanium. In others, THP utilizes the phase transformations in the Ti–H system to refine the microstructure of titanium alloys. During THP, bulk titanium alloys are hydrogenated, subjected to heat treatments and/or hot working, and subsequently dehydrogenated. The use of hydrogen as a temporary alloying element was first patented in 1959 by Zwicker et al. as a means to improve the workability and deformability of titanium during hot working When studying the Ti–H phase diagram ( As mentioned above, the Ti–H system contains a eutectoid transformation. Therefore, when cooling the material below the eutectoid temperature at a controlled rate and with a controlled concentration of hydrogen in the system, a eutectoid decomposition of the β-phase will occur. If this is done at a sufficient rate, a high degree of undercooling will provide significant driving force to precipitate α-Ti and δ-TiH The hydrogen concentration within titanium changes as a function of both temperature and hydrogen partial pressure. As an example, the equilibrium hydrogen partial pressure of β-Ti(H), β phase with dissolved hydrogen, is given in Because hydrogen is a volatile alloying element, using the phase diagram to design heat treatments is not as straightforward for Ti–H as it is with other eutectoid systems, such as Fe–C. To subject a steel specimen to a purely eutectoid reaction, one would simply prepare an alloy of the eutectoid composition, austenitize the material by holding above the eutectoid temperature, and then cool the material below the eutectoid temperature. However, since the composition of the Ti–H system is dependent on hydrogen partial pressure, the phase equilibria and transformation kinetics change as a function of hydrogen partial pressure as well as temperature. Therefore, controlling phase transformations in the Ti–H system requires dynamic control of the atmosphere in addition to temperature. Example: Assume a titanium specimen was held above the eutectoid temperature in the β-Ti(H) phase field under a hydrogen partial pressure and temperature that corresponded to the eutectoid composition. Upon cooling, the hydrogen concentration within the specimen would increase if the atmosphere was unchanged. Therefore, a cooling curve superimposed on the phase diagram would fall to the right of the eutectoid point, and pro-eutectoid δ-TiH This additional process parameter, coupled with the rapid diffusion rates of hydrogen, is a unique advantage to working with the Ti–H system. While this certainly makes designing an HSPT process more complicated, it also offers an additional The phase diagram shown in Multiple studies have endeavored to generate the (Ti-6Al-4V)–H pseudo-binary phase diagram as a reference tool for THP studies To address the difficulty in obtaining a reliable phase diagram for the (Ti-6Al-4V)–H system, extensive experimentation has been performed by Sun et al. to observe the phase evolution of this system in real-time as a function of temperature and hydrogen concentration Another important consideration regarding microstructural evolution during HSPT is the kinetics of the phase transformations. It has been reported that the kinetics of the phase transformations in (Ti-6Al-4V)–H change as a function of hydrogen concentration. Qazi et al. reported that as the hydrogen concentration is increased, the nose temperature is decreased and the nose time is increased for the time–temperature–transformation (TTT) curve of the eutectoid reaction The dependence of hydrogen concentration on temperature and atmosphere adds an additional degree of complication to the problem of kinetics as well. If the hydrogen partial pressure is held constant, according to Typically, HSPT is a BE PM process. Of course, PA powders could also be used with HSPT. However, PA powders are generally more expensive and are unnecessary based on current results from the BE method. The most common HSPT practice is to blend a commercially pure titanium hydride (CP-TiH During HSPT, the partial pressure of hydrogen is dynamically controlled throughout the thermal cycle. The desired hydrogen partial pressure is produced either by mixing hydrogen gas with an inert gas at atmospheric pressure or by creating a partial vacuum on a pure hydrogen atmosphere. The thermal profile for an HSPT process consists of three general steps, detailed below:    The microstructure of the as-sintered material can be further modified by incorporating simple heat treatments following dehydrogenation. Heat treatments of titanium are widely used commercially For all experimental results discussed in this section, compacts were prepared by BE methods to produce the most widely used titanium alloy, Ti-6Al-4V. For Ti-6Al-4V sintered from TiH  Both samples expand during the initial stages of the heat-up due to thermal expansion. As the temperature reaches approximately 450–500°C, the hydride begins to rapidly decompose, causing the samples to begin to shrink. It should be noted that Before dehydrogenation, the densities of samples sintered under higher hydrogen partial pressures are slightly less due to a slightly greater hydrogen concentration. However, after dehydrogenation, the relative density is generally greater than 99% regardless of hydrogen partial pressure during sintering. Sintering of CP-TiH The micrographs shown in       It should be noted that all data presented in this section are for specimens with ∼0.2 wt% oxygen. However, Ti-6Al-4V samples have also been produced from CP-TiH Fatigue data for titanium alloys produced by HSPT are currently limited. However, an active study is currently progressing, and preliminary results seem promising. Based on current fatigue results, endurance limits similar to those seen in wrought titanium alloys are expected. However, a definitive correlation between fatigue properties and microstructures produced via HSPT is currently unavailable. For a PM process, studying fatigue is much more challenging than quasi-static mechanical properties. A single large pore or “rogue pore” will significantly decrease fatigue strength. Therefore, avoiding pressing defects and identifying pore structure of green compacts and sintered samples is imperative to understanding fatigue performance. An extensive study is currently underway to determine the fatigue performance of samples produced via HSPT. In addition, X-ray tomography is being used to map the structure and distribution of pores in green compacts and sintered specimens. Chemical analysis techniques, such as inert gas fusion for oxygen and nitrogen and combustion for carbon, are also being employed to determine interstitial concentrations of fatigue specimens. The data from these studies should give a comprehensive understanding of the fatigue performance of HSPT and the relative effect of each contributing parameter. To estimate the cost and energy savings of HSPT versus wrought processing, an energy model has been developed by Paramore et al. and is currently being prepared for publication For HSPT, the energy required per ton of bar stock produced was calculated using the following three equations: Unfortunately, data for the energy consumed during wrought processing of specific titanium components and alloys is not available in the literature. Therefore, for this energy model, the energy required to produce 2-in. round bar stock via wrought processing was also calculated from basic thermodynamic equations and adjusted using published efficiencies of typical equipment. From these calculations, it was determined that wrought processing required approximately 5.5 times the equivalent tons of coal per ton of titanium produced. From this cost model, it was determined that HSPT offers about an 80% energy savings versus wrought processing for the production of 2-in. round bar stock. For the sake of being conservative and to simplify the calculations, a typical mill product was chosen as the geometry used in this model. However, it should be noted that for any PM process, the cost and energy savings are maximized for a complex geometry because of the ability to produce near-net-shape (NNS) components. The impetus of HSPT research is the desire to maximize the performance-to-cost ratio of PM titanium alloys by eliminating thermomechanical work that is compulsory to other processes. During HSPT, the hydrogen content of titanium alloys during sintering is controlled as a function of temperature and hydrogen partial pressure. Because the phase equilibria and transformation kinetics of the Ti–H alloy systems vary as a function of hydrogen content, these parameters can be used to control microstructural evolution during sintering. Therefore, HSPT is capable of producing titanium alloys with engineered microstructures and application-tailored mechanical properties in the Predicting microstructural evolution during HSPT has generated a need to further the fundamental understanding of phase transformations in hydrogen-containing titanium alloy systems. However, the volatile nature and rapid diffusion of hydrogen in titanium creates unique challenges when studying these processes. As such, HSPT research has endeavored to develop new methods to produce reliable data such as phase diagrams, TTT curves, and relationships between microstructure and mechanical properties of these systems. Current studies are aimed at furthering the capabilities and fundamental understanding of HSPT. The goals of these efforts include producing a wider array of microstructures by incorporating simple heat treatments after sintering, eliminating the currently less than 1% residual porosity after sintering through novel powder processing and sintering methods, and understanding the relationship between dynamic mechanical properties and microstructure of HSPT-produced titanium alloys. Additionally, the feasibility of scaling up this process and incorporating novel production technologies such as green machining and additive manufacturing are also being investigated.