Removal of kaolinite particles from their synthetically prepared suspensions was studied by electrocoagulation and coagulation to investigate the effect of such operating parameters as initial pH, coagulant dosage, applied voltage, current density, and time. Coagulation was more effective in a wider pH range (pH 5–8) than electrocoagulation which yielded optimum effectiveness in a relatively narrower pH range around 9, where, in both methods, these pH values corresponded to near-zero zeta potentials of kaolinite particles. The mechanism for both coagulation methods was aggregation through charge neutralization and/or enmeshment in aluminum hydroxide precipitates. The kinetics of electrocoagulation was very fast (<10min) in approaching a residual turbidity, which could be modeled with a second-order rate equation.The drainage of slurry streams containing a considerable amount of ultrafine particles, such as clay particles, is becoming important due to the growing demand for high density disposal of mining slurries and tailings. They are generally discharged into tailing dams as slurries due to their high water content (e.g. >75 Coagulation is the most common and practical method of removing colloidal solids from wastewater. This is a process of destabilizing colloids, aggregating them, and binding them together for ease of sedimentation When aluminum is the anode material, Al Besides these, polymeric Al species such as Al However, these are not likely to be significant given the low concentration of the metals usually used in coagulation. In practice only the monomeric forms and the hydroxide precipitate are likely to be important The adsorption of monomeric and polymeric hydrolysis species on particle surfaces leads to electrical double layer compression and surface charge neutralization. In addition, another coagulation mechanism, i.e. sweep flocculation, is observed at sufficiently high electrolyte dosage In this paper, the effects of the key parameters, involving initial pH, coagulant dosage, applied voltage, current density, and time were studied on the turbidity removal efficiency for synthetic aqueous suspensions of kaolinite. Furthermore, studies on pure kaolinite were included to understand the coagulation mechanism in electrocoagulation and coagulation. Electrocoagulation and coagulation tests were conducted with aqueous suspensions of kaolinite (Al Elemental composition of the kaolinite was determined with Spectro IQ Benchtop X-ray Florescence Spectrometer ( Kaolinite suspensions used for electrocoagulation and coagulation were prepared by mixing appropriate amounts of powdered material with 250 The batch electrocoagulation cell used in the experimental study was constructed of plexiglas with the dimensions of 65 Conventional coagulation tests were conducted using standard jar testing technique ( Detailed information about experimental devices ( The efficiency of turbidity removal, The amount of aluminum dissolved in an electrocoagulation experiment was theoretically calculated using Faraday's Law. Faraday's law can be written simply between current density and the amount of substance dissolved. pH is an important factor influencing the performance of electrocoagulation and coagulation processes In the coagulation case, the effect of initial pH on the turbidity removal efficiency is shown in Regarding the effect of initial pH on electrocoagulation and coagulation, cationic monomeric species Al The charge neutralization and/or the enmeshment of the particles into a precipitate are the main coagulation mechanisms in the treatment of kaolinite from suspension. The charge neutralization can be achieved by the adsorption of cationic aluminum species or by the precipitation of charged aluminum hydroxide precipitates onto the surface of kaolinite particles. The generation of a growing aluminum hydroxide precipitate takes place in the system at high concentrations of aluminum and pH values close to neutrality (sweep flocculation) In order to compare the electrocoagulation and coagulation processes on the basis of the amount of aluminum, either released from the electrodes into the suspension or added as aluminum sulfate, experiments were conducted under the optimum conditions of each process. In order to examine the effect of applied electrolysis voltage on turbidity removal efficiency and current density in the electrocoagulation process ( Previously, it was shown that current density can influence the treatment efficiency of the electrocoagulation process It appears that conductivity had some effect on the removal efficiency of kaolinite in suspension in the investigated range (15–300  The effect of current density and conductivity on the theoretical amount of aluminum released from the electrodes and the energy consumption for kaolinite suspensions are shown graphically in In summary, turbidity removal increased with increasing current density and conductivity due to formation of higher amount of Al Turbidity removal efficiencies and kaolinite concentrations as a function of electrocoagulation time at constant electrolysis voltage (40 Kaolinite concentration in suspension decreased rather sharply within first 10 The predicted values of the model parameters The effectiveness of both electrocoagulation and conventional coagulation depends on the initial pH of the suspension. In the electrocoagulation case, the optimum pH for the removal of kaolinite from the suspension was found to be 9. The highest turbidity removal efficiency for electrocoagulation was 87% at pH 9. In the coagulation case, highest turbidity removal efficiencies were 88–93% which occurred within the pH range 5–8. In the electrocoagulation and coagulation experiments, suspension pHs for optimum turbidity removal were around the isoelectric point of the kaolinite particles having adsorbed aluminum species. The coagulation mechanism for the removal of kaolinite from suspension was the charge neutralization of the kaolinite by adsorption of aluminum cations and enmeshment of kaolinite particles in a growing precipitate (for high aluminum concentrations and pH values close to neutral). Electrocoagulation and coagulation removed the turbidity equally well when the same amount of aluminum was introduced into the suspensions, provided that all other operating parameters were optimized specifically for each process. In electrocoagulation, the optimal applied voltage was determined to be 40 Turbidity removal efficiency was initially directly proportional to the current density. However, further increase in current density caused decrease in removal efficiency. Optimum current density for kaolinite was 87 The turbidity removal efficiencies for kaolinite suspensions increased sharply during 10 The authors gratefully acknowledge Dr. Şahinde Demirci and Dr. Ali İhsan Arol for their helpful discussions. The financial support provided by the