Changes that happen with aging have an effect on food texture perception and oral processing behaviour. Mastication and saliva incorporation are two major aspects of oral processing which can be used to evaluate the texture perception of food. This study aimed to investigate inter-oral responses of healthy individuals during chewing in relation to cooked meat texture. Mastication variables were recorded during the chewing process and boluses were collected and analysed for saliva impregnation and particle size distribution. Increasing hardness of meat did not change the number or duration of chewing cycles, but particle breakdown was significantly increased (P < 0.05) with the hardness of meat. As a result more saliva was required to agglomerate harder particles in order to make a safe swallow cohesive bolus. Two different groups were identified in relation to texture responses where one group was able to swallow samples with less saliva incorporated into it and cohesiveness was due to less fragmented muscle fibres and meat juice whereas other group had relatively higher saliva incorporation to obtain cohesiveness of particles.Mastication of food is a series of sensory-motor activities, where food ingested to the mouth is ground into small particles and transformed to a safe swallow cohesive bolus. This process can be challenging due to the poor dentition and swallowing difficulties (dysphagia) associated various conditions, with aging being a leading cause. Population aging is a major demographic trend around the world and it is expected that over the next two decades the number of people above 60 years will exceed one billion globally ( The International Dysphagia Diet Standardisation Initiative (IDDSI) has identified mechanical properties (hardness, cohesiveness and adhesiveness) and the particle size or shape of the food as the two key factors for chocking risk ( Meat is considered as a protein rich food, but cooking brings harder texture to meat by myofibrillar coagulation and collagen constriction ( Furthermore, recent research also focuses on the use of edible nanocoating of cellulose and chitosan nanofibres as along with ZnO nano particles to improve the texture of many perishable products including meat ( The changes that happen to meat during bolus formation in relation to initial texture provide a good platform for understanding texture perception and to provide insights into designing softer texture modified meat products targeted for people with swallowing and chewing difficulties. The interrelationship between chewing activity and texture perception has been established ( The ideal “safe-swallow” bolus should be moist, cohesive and slippery ( Particle breakdown in the oral cavity allows more saliva incorporation by increasing the surface area. This helps to maximize the digestion as well as to produce a safe swallow cohesive bolus which can safely pass through the oesophagus. Particle size distribution has been measured using various methods including sieving, laser diffraction, image analysis, microscopy, sedimentation analysis and light diffusion ( The objective of this study was to evaluate the oral processing behaviour including mastication, saliva incorporation and particle breakdown in relation to initial meat texture. In the past little attention has been paid to these critically important parameters while developing texture modified food for people with dysphagia. Therefore, the knowledge gained in this study will provide insights for the development of texture modified diet intended for therapeutic purposes. Different meat textures were created by varying the temperature and time used for cooking; meat texture was analysed instrumentally using texture profile analysis. A sensory panel used the chew and spit methodology to assess the extent of oral processing different meat textures required, and to create boluses for subsequent bolus characterisation using particle size analysis. The study included 10 (6 female and 4 male) healthy subjects aged between 25 and 55 years recruited using advertisements and via personal communication. The subjects consisted of staff and students of RMIT University. Subjects were pre-screened for the following medical conditions: allergies, no teeth loss (except for third molar), no masticatory disorders, not having removable dentures, not undergone any dental treatment in the two months before trial except teeth cleaning and were not taking medication that can influenced mastication ( The left and right Texture of the cooked meat samples was analysed using the TA.XT plus texture profile analyser (TPA) (Stable Micro System Ltd., Godalming, Surrey, UK) fitted with a 50 kg load cell. For analyses, the cooked surfaces on the meat slices were removed and six 15 mm cubes were cut parallel to the longitudinal orientation of the muscle fibre. Samples (cubes) were individually analysed using TPA with a 25 mm diameter probe by compressing 80% of the height and keeping the fibre axis of all cubes perpendicular to the probe direction ( Each subject attended three masticatory sessions in three consecutive weeks. Sessions were treated as replicates. Subjects were advised not to eat a meal about 1 h before the experiment, to minimize any variations in the desire to swallow. At the beginning of the experiment the authors explained about the project, the purpose of the experiment and what the participation involved, using a participant information sheet and verbal communication. The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of the normal chewing pattern on meat bolus formation ( For actual experiment, the experimenter signalled the panellists to start chewing the meat sample (5.0 ± 0.2 g) that was served at room temperature. Panellists were asked to chew and spit out the boluses of given meat samples into pre-weighed plastic containers, at the moment when swallowing is normally triggered ( The experimental design was: 4 cooking treatments × 10 panellists × 3 replicates. One replicate was completed at each of the three sensory sessions. At each sensory session, three boluses were collected from each panellist for each of the four cooking treatments, thus each panellist provided 12 boluses at each session. The three boluses were assigned to: dry matter analysis, sieve analysis and laser diffraction analysis and image analysis. Overall, a total of 360 boluses were collected. During each masticatory session number of chews and duration were recorded by the experimenter by timing the chewing sequence duration (T) and the number of chewing cycles (N) ( The wet weight of boluses was determined before (WWt To make allowance for these losses, the dry matter of the collected boluses was measured along with the dry matter of meat cubes with a similar weight (5.0 ± 0.2 g) as described by Saliva incorporation was expressed as a percentage of the wet weight of the initial meat sample (WWt The dry matter content of boluses and mashed cooked meat cubes was determined by weight loss on drying. Samples were placed on aluminium dishes, weighed and dried in a conventional oven for 24 h at 102 °C. The samples were allowed to cool in a desiccator for 15 min before re-weighing. Particle size distribution of expectorated meat boluses was examined using the wet sieving method. Due to the fibrous structure of meat it was difficult to separate particles, therefore boluses were prepared for sieving by adding the bolus to a beaker containing 100 mL Milli-Q water and stirred using a magnetic stirrer for 2 min at 200 rpm to separate meat particles. These conditions were selected to separate particles in the bolus, but not to breakup particles any further. After suspending in water, each bolus was sieved through a series of five sieves (4.75, 3.35, 2.80, 1.70 and 0.60 mm; Thomas Scientific, NJ, USA). Each sieve was then held in a conventional oven at 102 °C until a stable weight was reached ( Laser diffraction was used to determine the distribution of particles that passed through the 0.60 mm sieve and were retained on the pan. Size distribution was measured using the Mastersizer 3000 connected to a HydroMV sample handling unit (Malvern Instruments, Worcester, UK). The refractive index for meat and water was considered as 1.336 and 1.333, respectively. Optical microscopic images (Polarizing Microscope ECLIPSE Ci POL, Nikon Instruments, Inc., Melville, NY, USA) were used to analyse the size and shape of the particles collected in the receiving pan. Approximately 2.0 g of representative particles from each bolus (Image-Bolus) were taken and placed on a plastic Petri dish (94 mm diameter, 16 mm high) containing 15 mL of ethanol (70%). The bolus fragments were smoothly dispersed with a spatula to separate particles from the cluster. Petri dishes were then placed on a scanner (Canon Inc., Japan) ( Images were then evaluated using ImageJ software (National Institute of Health and LOCI, University of Wisconsin) by applying a black and white threshold and using the watershed algorithm described by Statistical analysis was performed with the IBM SPSS Statistics 25 software. All results are presented as means and standard deviation. A one-way ANOVA with a 95% confidence level was used to test variance analysis. When the The hardness, springiness and chewiness increased significantly with the increasing cooking temperature and time combinations ( Comparisons among treatments for masticatory variables are shown in Results showed that with increasing cooking temperature and time, saliva incorporation increased significantly ( Wet sieve analysis showed that more than 70% of the content from the original bolus was retained on the first sieve (largest aperture size; 4.75 mm) due to the fibrous microstructure of meat (  Optical microscopic images (x10 magnification) were also used to analyse the size and shape of the particles collected in the pan fraction (   During mastication, meat goes through important structural changes such as breakdown of fibres and saliva incorporation ( Hardness of intact beef increased significantly with increasing temperature and time ( In this study the chewiness followed a similar pattern as the hardness ( The instrumental texture definitions for cohesiveness and adhesiveness are indicative of the strength of internal bonds in the sample and the work required to overcome the sticky forces between the sample and the probe, respectively ( Springiness is defined as the “rate at which a deformed sample returns to its original size and shape.” This was significantly higher at 90 °C compared to 70 °C, suggesting that rubbery hard texture at high temperature helped sample regain the original conformation. Food mastication is the key aspect of oral processing and the ultimate goal of mastication is to minimize the particle size of an ingested food and combine these particles with saliva to produce a safe swallow bolus ( Even though the hardness of meat samples increased significantly with increasing temperature and time, no significant differences were observed for the number of chews and chewing duration among cooking treatments ( The differences in observations between our study and that of A significant inter-individual variability was observed within the panellists for chewing and saliva incorporation ( Meat is an interesting food to understand bolus formation as its unique cohesive structure provides the possibility to study saliva incorporation ( During the biting process saliva is incorporated to the bolus while meat juice is lost due to the bite forces of teeth. Therefore, weight increase before and after chewing the sample does not reflect the exact salivary uptake. Even though panellists were strictly advised not to swallow any sample, involuntary swallows are unavoidable. Also, sometimes panellists are unable to spit the whole bolus as some particles can get stuck in between teeth and tongue. In some studies panellists were asked to rinse their mouth with a known amount of water and add it to the bolus ( After considering all these factors, saliva incorporation was determined using the dry matter content of samples in this study. Also literature suggests that for cohesive food like meat, total losses before swallows were not more than 12% ( Results show saliva incorporation increased significantly (P < 0.05) with the increasing meat hardness ( Saliva can be very diverse in composition and volume among subjects. In this study we observed two different chewing patterns and saliva incorporation among the panellists for different treatments. Eighty precents of panellists had a higher number of chews, greater chewing time and higher saliva incorporation for the more cooked samples (cooked at 90 °C), whereas 20% of the panellists had more chews, chewing duration and lower saliva incorporation for less cooked samples (cooked at 70 °C). Similar observation was reported by Two main thresholds (food particle size and lubrication) are identified to trigger a swallow ( Particle size distribution was analysed in this study using three different methods; wet sieving, image analysis and laser diffraction. Sieving is a well-established technique and is the most commonly used method to evaluate particle size distribution of chewed food ( Sieve analysis results showed more than 70% of the particles retained on the largest sieve (4.75 mm) despite the use of a magnetic stirrer to separate meat particles ( In this study no significant difference in chewing pattern was observed among treatments ( Particles collected in the receiving pan were then observed using laser diffraction method to analyse the particle size difference among the treatments. A similar pattern was also observed here, with the mean particle size (D Particles collected in the receiving pan were characterised using optical microscopy to observe the quantity and size of particles present. Greater amount of particles were collected in the receiving pan in more cooked samples ( The variation in size of muscle fibres might have resulted from intra-oral manipulation of meat, while chewing. This has previously been analysed by video fluorography ( Image analysis for particle size measurements is the most robust method ( In this study, instrumental texture parameters of cooked meat showed good correlation with the oral processing parameters ( Cohesiveness of intact cooked beef showed a positive correlation with particle size of bolus suggesting that stronger internal bonds of cooked meat restricted particle breakdown in the mouth resulting in larger bolus particle size. However, cohesiveness of cooked meat did not show significant correlation with any of the oral processing parameters. In contrast springiness of cooked beef showed significant correlation with oral processing parameters except chewing duration ( Correlation among oral processing parameters is given in In this study oral processing of meat was examined in relation to the texture of the cooked beef Ethics approval was awarded by the This work was supported by  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.