In recent years, experimental research on the mechanisms of food digestion in the gastrointestinal tract has strengthened our knowledge on the effect of food on human health. A number of mathematical models have been proposed to rationalize our understanding on the related mechanisms. One common suggestion is that in silico models could be interconnected and used in the future to predict the effect of food systems (liquid or solid, inner microstructure, state of nutrients…) on various metabolic responses. This paper aims to provide a brief overview of the latest developments in this young but promising field of research.  This review comes from a themed issue on Edited by For a complete overview see the Available online 18th April 2020  2214-7993/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. The increase in diet-related diseases has fuelled the need to improve our knowledge on the fate of foods, or meals, in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Over the past 15 years, research in this field has provided new insights into why and how the structure of the food we eat can affect the kinetics and extent of nutrient absorption [ Predictive models of food’s GI transit, hydrolysis and absorption can be built with classical engineering approaches, in which the digestive system is split into a number of anatomical compartments (e.g. one or several gastric and intestinal sub-compartments, peripheral blood, etc.) and into a series of unit operations to model the physicochemical processes that take place [ The same principles can be applied to relate some nutritional considerations (e.g. extent and kinetics of nutrient absorption) with food or meal digestion. PBK models of the GI transit and absorption of meals, from stomach to colon with consideration of all kinds of macronutrients, were proposed for pigs quite a long time ago [ These examples are interesting in that they can be used to predict the dose and timing of nutrient arrival in the blood stream in response to a given food or a meal, and could be easily connected with nutritional models that aim to predict the metabolic fate and consequences of absorbed amino-acids [ Current developments in the modelling of enzymatic hydrolysis mostly originate from the ongoing efforts to take into account the key properties of the main nutrients (i.e. proteins, lipids and starch). In this field, we may shed light on the results recently obtained from approaches that consider multiple species within each type of macronutrient, rather than trying to model an average behaviour. For instance, a model accounting for the fatty acid composition of an oil-in-water emulsion, and for rate constants that are specific for each fatty acid residue, not only allowed a better fitting of the Gastric emptying is another key determinant of the overall nutrient absorption kinetics. It is well known that this process is, in first approximation, governed by a feedback mechanism controlling the flux of calories delivered to the proximal small intestine. Indeed, it was shown more than 40 years ago that gastric emptying of meals can be fairly predicted from the meal’s initial volume and caloric density [ Food is not simply a soup of nutrients. It has structure that is complex and multiscale, requiring phenomena occurring at a larger scale to be taken into account for solid foods. The comminution of food and mixing with GI fluids are primarily important at the oral and gastric stages, where food pieces are larger and less diluted by the digestive secretions. Food fragment size and structure may not only impact enzymatic hydrolysis but also gastric emptying, which largely controls the overall kinetics of nutrient uptake [ During the oral phase, solid foods are broken down and lubricated with saliva. Food oral processing therefore governs the size distribution of food particles that reach the stomach, which are typically up to several millimetres in size. To enhance our understanding of the relationship between food structure and oral breakdown during mastication, latest results from both finite element [ At the gastric stage, pioneer 3D computational models of the entire stomach date from the early 2010s, by Ferrua and Singh [ Peristatic and segmentation contractions in the small intestine have also been simulated with computational fluid dynamics to predict the flow and mixing at different length scales [ Computational modelling of food breakdown and mixing in the GI tract has already provided important findings. If more work remains to be performed, in particular at the oral and gastric stages, this field of research is still young and ongoing developments in numerical methods rapidly improve the accuracy and speed of complex simulation scenarios. It is therefore expectable that these approaches will become more and more accurate and reliable in the forthcoming years. In relation to the objective of predicting the main metabolic responses to a food or a meal from A number of research groups continue to use and adapt models developed in the fields of engineering and biophysics to predict the behaviour of food in gastric conditions [ Another bottleneck in establishing a comprehensive model of food digestion is the need to rely on relevant experimental data and knowledge. Because Hence, to develop Modelling the digestive processes is challenging and research in this area is currently very active. The scope of existing models spread from molecular mechanisms up to systems view approaches with increasing efforts to relate food properties to key mechanisms of food digestion. Previously proposed PBK models of food digestion and absorption could largely benefit from recent advances in the modelling of food structure effects on digestion, from the enzymatic hydrolysis of macronutrients up to the impact of food macrostructure. All the pieces seem now available to start building Nothing declared. Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have been highlighted as: • of special interest •• of outstanding interest