Many rock engineering works such as road foundations, dams, slopes, bridge abutment and tunnel walls may experience cyclic loading due to a blasting, earthquake, and traffic. In the classical studies of fatigue (versus the view of fracture mechanics and notched samples), two stress-life and strain-life fatigue methods are used. In this research, firstly the concept of cumulative damage was introduced, and applicability of Manson's Bi-linear Damage Rule and miner's Linear Damage Rule were investigated for rock samples under completely reversed loading condition, by a developed fatigue testing machine. Then a new Bi-linear Damage Rule model is proposed to predict the fatigue life of Green onyx samples under two-step loading. Cumulative fatigue damage analysis acting as a key role in life prediction of materials and structures subjected to field load histories. The simplest and most used damage model to predict the fatigue life is the Linear Damage Rule (LDR) which is referred to Miner's rule. In which In general, there are three common methods for fatigue loading in the literature. The first method is the cantilever beam bending or multi-point bending beam. In this case, tension and compression are just induced in particular parts of a cantilever beam. Since micro cracks in a rock sample may be distributed in any direction, it is not clear which side of sample will break. If the loading is of a three- or four-point bending type, in addition to the abovementioned problem, some parts of the sample being loaded are not under simultaneous intermittent tension-compression. The stress at the top of the sample varies from zero to the maximum induced compressive stress, while the lower part of the sample experiences stress from zero to maximum induced tensile stresses. Therefore, all sample locations are not under tension-compression loading. The other type of fatigue loading is the axial tension-compression loading. In this case, all part of a cross section of a sample is under simultaneous tension-compression loading, but clamping the end of the rock sample to withstand direct tensile load for a long time is difficult. The final method is the fatigue test method under rotating beam loading. In this case, due to the rotation of the sample, the entire surface will be under tension-compression loading. And all points on the sample will follow a sinusoidal path. As mentioned, rock structures, in reality, may be subjected to tension-compression loading and sinusoidal stress path may be more representative of stress wave generated in the field. There is no suggested method for determining the fatigue failure in rocks under the completely reversed loading condition. The term completely reversed loading states that stress varies between equal magnitudes of tension and compression level. In order to investigate the fatigue behavior of rock samples under completely reversed loading, the fatigue testing machine was designed and fabricated for the aforementioned purpose. The most common types of fatigue machines are small bending fatigue machine. In general, this simple, inexpensive system allows laboratories to conduct extensive test programs with a reasonable equipment investment. In this research, a new apparatus based on the R.R.Moore test machine, which is commonly used for fatigue test in metal, is used and completely reversed loading was applied to investigate the fatigue behavior of Green onyx samples. The authors previously used completely reversed loading process for studying the fatigue behavior of crystalline rocks by the aforementioned developed apparatus. In the developed machine, loading type is a completely reversed sinusoidal loading due to the combination of pure bending and rotation with adjustable amplitude and frequency. The device is equipped with a sensor that automatically stops the testing operation upon the occurring failures and records the number of cycles. more details about aforementioned apparatus can be found in. By considering a rotating cantilever beam ( Green onyx, a widely used crystalline quarry stone in Iran selected as the specimens. It is consists of only one fine grained mineral (calcite) composition and therefore any mineral compositions and microstructural impacts do not appear in the final results. The elastic modulus, Poisson ratio, uniaxial compressive strength and average grain size is 96 (GPa), 0.25, 100.6 (MPa) and 0.03 (mm) respectively. A number of cylindrical specimens (core samples) with the length of 120 (mm) and the diameter of 11(mm) were prepared by using a rotary drilling machine. Specimens were placed and fixed in two metal frames using epoxy resin. Since most of the fatigue cracks propagated from the surface of specimens, to reduce the effect of surface roughness in the geometric stress concentration, the surfaces of samples were polished carefully. The ultimate tensile strength is considered as the basis for fatigue loading. To find the ultimate tensile strength of samples in bending condition, five specimens were tested by rotating beam fatigue testing machine without whirling. The average value of ultimate tensile strength in bending which is obtained from monotonic bending test is 13.85 MPa. In order to assess the fatigue life of Green onyx samples, constant amplitude fatigue test performed by using a developed apparatus. Six levels of stress based on the ultimate tensile strength were applied. The loading frequency during the test was kept at a constant value of 10 Hz and at each level of stress, three specimens were tested. Fatigue tests with several specimens at each stress level are called tests with replicate data. In which According to this equation, the PR for fatigue testing in this technical note is 67 which is within the range for design stage. According to Eq. Results of constant amplitude fatigue test are presented in Two step high and low sequence loading was performed to study the fatigue life prediction. During the test, the frequency of loading was maintained constant at 10 Hz. In order to study the capability of Manson-Halford's damage rule and Miner's damage rule for Green onyx samples, the predicted fatigue behavior of BLDR and LDR and experimental data for Green onyx samples are compared and shown in As it can be seen in From Point of inflection coordinates can be expressed as follows: Rewriting above equations in logarithmic form give the following equations, By plotting the point of inflection coordinates for six sets of two-step load level experiments versus In ordinary BLDR the summation of For further investigation about effect of variable amplitude loading, consider In order to verify the new proposed BLDR, the two-step high and low loading levels were performed at two different set of loading and the results are illustrated in It has been reported that loading frequency affects the fatigue life. Manson and Halford provided an explicit formula for dividing the total life into its initiation and propagation phases. However, initiation is a relative term, and it could not be determined as to how large the crack must be to be considered as initiated. The number of cycles required to complete the phase I and the damage value at the end of phase I presented in It has been observed that the crack initiation phase is negligible compared to the propagation phase. In the two step high and low loading, if   Rock structures are usually subjected to cyclic loading and there is no conventional suggested standard method for determining the fatigue failure of rocks. Almost all reported research works are related to the evaluation of fatigue behavior of rocks under loading-unloading compression conditions. While rock structures, in reality, may be subjected to tension-compression loading. In order to study the cumulative fatigue damage in rocks under tension-compression condition, a new apparatus based on the rotating beam fatigue testing machine (R.R.Moore) which is commonly used for laboratory fatigue test in metals was used and applicability of bi-linear damage rule and linear damage rule was investigated for rock samples. A new model based on the bi-linear theory was proposed to predict the fatigue life of Green onyx samples under completely reversed loading condition. The following conclusions associated with test results can be denoted, The new apparatus is quite simple and easy to use, and the results confirmed that it can be adopted in evaluating the fatigue behavior of rocks. The variation of remaining cyclic fraction versus initial cyclic fraction is not linear and results showed that due to lack of load-level dependency, the Linear Damage Rule cannot predict fatigue behavior of rocks. The new proposed damage model is in a very good agreement with experimental data and all of the relative forecast error are lower than 20%. The model has a very good capacity to predict the final failure of samples and has ability to consider the effect of loading frequency. Evaluation of the cumulative damage according to the new model is simple, and all the parameter in the new model can be determined easily. The results also indicate the importance of considering the variable amplitude loading in estimating the fatigue life of the rock. It can be concluded that in the high cyclic fatigue regime (i.e.