Proximal humerus fracture treatment has evolved considerably in the recent years. Fewer hemiarthroplasties are being done than in the past. The goal of this chapter is to look for alternatives to reverse total shoulder replacement and to consider what is the best treatment for four-part proximal humerus fractures in active and healthy 65 year-old patients.Proximal humerus fracture treatment has evolved considerably in the recent years. Fewer hemiarthroplasties are being done than in the past. This is certainly due in part to the popularity of the reverse total shoulder replacement but also to the improvement of internal fixation implants and techniques as well as a better understanding of which fractures can be treated non-operatively. The goal of this chapter is to look for alternatives to reverse total shoulder replacement and to consider what is the best treatment for four-part proximal humerus fractures in active and healthy 65 year-old patients. There is good evidence supporting non-operative treatment of proximal humerus fractures. A meta-analysis in 2011 by Iyengar et al. The Cochrane Library did a systematic review in 2015 Proximal humerus plates have also undergone improvements allowing for divergent locking screw constructs and tuberosity repair using sutures through the plate which has dramatically improved outcomes. Some surgeons have even had some anecdotal success treating head-split fractures with these implants. The main reason not to jump immediately to a reverse shoulder replacement is that it is an effective tool as salvage procedure. A few studies have shown similar outcomes between primary reverse replacements and salvage replacements. In a 2016 retrospective review by Sanchez-Sotelo et al., 18 patients with primary RSA and 26 patients with revision RSA for failed proximal humerus ORIF were compared. All patients had three and four-part proximal humerus fractures and had a minimal follow-up of 2 years. Overall, patients had similar ASES scores (64.6 for salvage and 70.6 for primary) and similar ROM (130° forward elevation in salvage vs 133° in primary). This is likely due to the forgiving nature of the reverse which is not as reliant on the rotator cuff and tuberosity position. In some complex fracture patterns including four-part fractures with head splits or varus angulated fractures with metaphyseal comminution, an arthroplasty option may be needed. Although the reverse total shoulder maybe a more predictable alternative on average, in selected patients, hemiarthroplasty can yield superior outcomes. Implants with metaphyseal porous surfaces allow for bony ingrowth and better tuberosity healing which is critical in patients undergoing a hemiarthroplasty. In a study of consecutive patients at Brown and Mount Sinai using a tantalum ingrowth prosthesis, 93% had complete tuberosity healing although this was a carefully selected group of patients. In conclusion, non-operative treatment is still a very reasonable alternative for many patients with proximal humerus fractures. In patients that are younger with good bone quality, either percutaneous fixation for valgus impacted fractures or ORIF with locking plates are good options. When there is a high risk for avascular necrosis because of a head split or a 4-part fracture dislocation, an arthroplasty option should be considered. If the tuberosities have minimal comminution and are amenable to repair, a hemiarthroplasty is a good option and may provide better results than a reverse total shoulder replacement. In truly comminuted cases however, older patients with poor bone quality may benefit from a reverse as a primary procedure. Dr. Evan Flatow receives royalties from Zimmer-Biomet as well as Innomed. He is a patent holder in association with Zimmer-Biomet.