In engineering practice, rock masses are often subjected to cyclic loading. Under cyclic loading, the mechanical properties of rocks are significantly different from those under conventional loading conditions. The mechanical behaviour and fatigue of intact rock has been extensively studied. However, the mechanical fatigue properties of rock masses with surface cracks and related damage evolution models are not well understood. In this study, a series of fatigue damage tests were carried out on yellow sandstone specimens; five different pre-existing surface crack angles (0°, 15°, 30°, 45° and 60°) and three different maximum cyclic stress levels (19.1 MPa, 25.6 MPa and 30.3 MPa) were considered. The results showed that with the increase in the number of cycles, Young's modulus gradually stabilized, while the secant modulus decreased non-linearly. The maximum strain and residual strain continuously accumulated. The influence of macro cracks on the damage of rocks was studied through the increase in strain energy. Based on the macro–micro coupling damage, a constitutive model was proposed for the fatigue test. The theoretical results were fitted with the experimental data, showing that the proposed model can effectively describe the fatigue damage characteristics of fractured rock masses. The research results have certain reference value for the long-term stability evaluation in fractured rock mass engineering.Amplitude Crack area Crack half-length Compression transmitting factor Shearing transmitting factor Damage variable Macro damage variable Micro damage variable Maximum strain damage Residual strain damage Crack depth Young's modulus Frequency Fitting parameter Energy release rate Stress intensity factor Normal stiffness Tangential stiffness Wing crack propagation length Number of cycles Period Energy density Elastic energy density Hysteresis energy density Total energy density Strain energy increment Rock sample volume Crack angle Strain Maximum strain Residual strain Poisson's ratio Stress Normal stress Average cyclic stress Maximum cyclic stress Minimum cyclic stress Equivalent stress Wing crack propagation angle Shear stress Frictional stress Internal friction angle A rock mass is a natural material that usually contains various discontinuities, such as bedding planes In the study of rock fatigue characteristics, many researchers have conducted numerous studies on different influencing factors, mainly the loading frequency These studies on rock fatigue behaviour are mainly concentrated on intact rocks. In actual rock engineering, there are many discontinuities in natural rock. Due to the existence of discontinuities, the mechanical strength of a rock mass is reduced However, these studies did not consider the effect of surface cracks, nor did they investigate the fatigue behaviour of surface cracks under cyclic loading conditions. In addition, a constitutive model of rock with surface cracks under cyclic loading has not been established. Therefore, based on previous studies, in this study, experiments were designed to specifically analyse the effect of crack angle on the results of fatigue loading tests. Then, different methods were applied to analyse the fatigue damage evolution law of yellow sandstones containing pre-existing surface cracks. Finally, based on the statistical theory of damage and the Lemaitre strain equivalence hypothesis, a corresponding fatigue constitutive model was proposed. The rock samples used in this research were collected from yellow sandstone in Sichuan Province, China. To ensure homogeneity and reduce the variability in the test results, the rock samples were cut from the same intact yellow sandstone block. During processing in the laboratory, the yellow sandstone block was cut into cubic specimens with length × width × height dimensions of 80 mm × 40 mm × 120 mm. Then, the two ends of each specimen were smoothed to guarantee that the flatness error of the two end faces of the specimen was less than 0.02 mm. After processing the intact rock specimens, a thin round diamond blade with a diameter of 40 mm was used to make a semi-elliptical surface crack. The experiments were performed using the MTS-322 servo control testing system at Central South University, as illustrated in  In the stress–strain curve of uniaxial loading, the deformation phase can be described by an initial elastic model, tangential elastic model and secant elastic mo. In the fatigue test, the Young's modulus and the secant modulus can be used to analyse the deformation law of the fatigue curve Similarly, the deformation modulus is the slope of the secant at the maximum cyclic stress point of each cycle and can indicate the overall change in the deformation of the rock specimen under fatigue cycles. In a fatigue test, the strain increases continuously as the cycling progresses and can be applied to indicate the fatigue damage law of the specimens. In this research, the corresponding strain at the peak stress of each cycle is regarded as the maximum strain ( According to the theoretical knowledge of cyclic damage According to the analysis results of Liu et al. In summary, with the progress of the cycling, the deformation modulus will decrease non-linearly, and the residual strain will gradually increase. This implies that there is a certain relationship between the deformation modulus and residual strain. The relationship can be calculated using Eq.  The analysis of Momeni et al. As shown in The above analysis shows that the crack angle has a varying effect on the fatigue damage of rocks. When studying the fatigue damage of fractured rock specimens, the influence of cracks must be considered via the crack properties, including the sizes and orientations of the cracks. When multiple cracks exist, the relative positional relationship between cracks must be considered. According to the research results in Liu and Dai Under axial stress If the damage is caused by macro cracks,  The normal stress Considering that the width of the crack is much smaller than the length, it will close when the axial stress reaches approximately 5–10 MPa. Therefore, in the cyclic loading test with a higher maximum cyclic stress level, the macro damage can be analysed according to the crack closure. In closed cracks Under the condition of a planar fracture, according to the superposition effect of the same type of stress intensity factor, the stress intensity factors If a wing crack forms at the crack tip, the stress intensity factors The relationship between the macro damage variable of cracks in this experiment and the crack angle can be obtained through calculation, as shown in According the macro damage variable results above, there is a certain gap between the test results and the theoretical values. That is, the largest damage variable occurs when the crack angle is 45°. However, the uniaxial compressive strength of the fractured rock specimens is not the lowest when the crack angle is 45° in this test. Therefore, in addition to the macro fracture damage on the surface, the effect of micro damage in the fractured rock mass should also be considered. The micro damage is random, assuming that the meso defects of the rock specimens obey the Weibull distribution Then, the micro damage variable The corresponding damage constitutive model based on micro analysis can be calculated as: This paper investigates the damage constitutive model of a fractured rock mass under fatigue loading. Considering the coupling effect of macro and micro damage, according to the Lemaitre strain equivalence hypothesis Substituting each parameter into Eq. Research on the fatigue mechanism of fractured rock with surface cracks under uniaxial cyclic loading is still limited. In this study, the MTS-322 servo control testing system was applied to conduct a uniaxial cyclic loading test on yellow sandstone containing pre-existing surface cracks. The damage evolution law of fractured sandstone with different crack angles was analysed from three aspects: the elastic modulus, strain and energy density. A constitutive model was proposed and verified with the test results. The main conclusions are as follows: The Young's modulus gradually stabilizes and the deformation modulus decreases non-linearly as the cycling progresses. The overall deformation resistance of fractured sandstone increases with increasing axial stress. At the same cyclic stress level, the damage resistance decreases with increasing number of cycles. The changes in the elastic modulus vary with the crack angle. By defining the maximum strain damage and residual strain damage formulas, the fatigue damage evolution curves of fractured sandstones at various crack angles were obtained. After 30 cycles, the damage first sharply increased and then became stable. From the perspective of energy density, it was found that the total energy density and hysteretic energy density of fractured sandstones with different crack angles decrease non-linearly with the increase in the number of cycles, and the accumulation of energy tends to be stable. The macro damage variables of fractured sandstone specimens with pre-existing surface cracks were obtained. Based on the Lemaitre strain equivalence hypothesis, a damage constitutive model with macro–micro coupling suitable for fatigue testing was proposed.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported by the