Agglomeration in fluidized beds begins locally by the sticking of slag–liquid-covered particles. Analysis of the composite fuel is not adequate in predicting agglomeration problems. Separation of the high rank Pittsburgh seam coal into particle classes based on specific gravity (SG1: <1.3g/cm3; SG2: 1.3–1.6g/cm3; SG3: 1.6–2.6g/cm3 and SG4: >2.6g/cm3) and particle size (PS1 through PS7) helped to identify important particle-level slag–liquid formation tendencies. Slag–liquid formation tendencies under fluidized bed operating temperatures were determined both computationally and experimentally. Particles rich in certain iron and calcium phases melt at very low temperatures that are well within fluidized bed operating conditions. The iron rich particle classes (SG3 and SG4) showed the presence of several phases containing iron in different oxidation states. The presence of these iron phases was not detected in the composite bulk fuel. The possibilities of equilibrium liquid phase formation in the presence of different ratios of these iron and calcium oxides to alumino-silicates were determined. Presence of hematite was found to delay slag–liquid formation. Each of the particle classes showed distinct slag–liquid formation tendencies that indicate initiation of agglomeration around SG3 and SG4 particles. The study revealed the importance of particle class-level differences in mineral matter composition for the prediction of agglomeration during fluidized bed gasification.
                  A novel integrated ash agglomeration model that accounts for particle hydrodynamics as well as particle class level ash chemistry has been outlined to predict agglomeration kinetics.Fluidized bed gasification is gaining importance due to the advantages of fuel-flexibility and low temperature sulfur capture Agglomeration problems have been previously experienced in fluidized bed boilers. Similar problems have been witnessed even with fluidized bed gasification systems There are several studies of ash slagging tendencies at high temperatures that are applicable to entrained flow gasifiers This study aims at understanding some of these slag–liquid formation tendencies at fluidized bed temperatures under a reducing atmosphere. Hitherto, techniques such as Initial Deformation Temperature (IDT) that involve visual detection of change in the shape of an ash cone to detect onset of slag formation and indices such as acid to base ratio have been used to predict the slag–liquid formation and agglomeration tendencies. However, several studies have shown that these methods, which depend entirely on the bulk fuel chemical composition, do not allow accurate predictions In order to understand the physics and chemistry at particle level, particle classes of the composite fuel, based on differences in density and size, were used in this study. This facilitates the understanding of slag–liquid formation tendencies at the particle level. The particle fractions were analyzed both computationally and experimentally. FactSage™ thermodynamic simulation software was used and the results were validated with high temperature X-ray diffraction and thermo-mechanical analyses. Pittsburgh no. 8 coal was separated into fractions using different specific gravity liquids and float–sink gravity separation techniques utilized in an earlier study The coal fractions were heated in a proximate analyzer up to 650 Simulations were run using FactSage™ version 5.2 for each of the four gravity-separated fractions (75–106 FactSage™ computes the Gibbs free energy for various possible compounds at a given temperature and pressure using thermodynamic properties from FACT databases while maintaining the elemental balances. The FACT Slag A database was used for the slag phase thermodynamic properties. All the phases available in this Slag A database as well as phases available in the FACT database for pure solids, liquids and gases were used unless the number of phases exceeded the maximum allowed in a single calculation. If the number of possible phases exceeded this limitation, the hydrocarbon phases and the phases containing water of hydration from the solid and liquid phase were not included in the calculation, since they would not exist at the high temperatures studied. The ash compositional analysis as oxides was used as input. Shannon et al. shows that the results are not significantly affected by the forms of sulfur The weight percentage of slag for each of the gravity separated fractions was calculated using the equilibrium amounts of solid and liquid phases. The percentage of slag in the bed depends on the slag formation tendency of each gravity fraction and also the ash content of that fraction and the contribution of that fraction to the whole coal. The weight percent of total slag in the bed is then calculated using the total amount of slag formed from each of the gravity fractions, at a given temperature. This technique of estimation of slag content of the bed is referred to as attribute tracking. In this calculation, the bed is assumed to consist of the ash from the whole coal which is made up of ash obtained from each of the gravity fractions. Ash pellets of 6 An XPERT-PRO diffractometer with a PW3050/60 goniometer with copper as the anode material was used to perform X-ray diffraction measurements. The ash powder was uniformly spread over a platinum strip with the sample length of about 10 The gravity separation of the coal into fractions of different specific gravities utilized the float and sink method, which involves experimental errors in the determination of the location of the layer separating the float and sink fractions. Error is also introduced due to the loss of the sample during filtration. The reproducibility was tested by conducting 5 repeated separations and calculating the yield of the 1.6 float and sink fractions. These repetitions gave an average yield of 4.5 The uncertainty of measurement of the oxide content of the fractions was determined through the analysis of a rock standard over time using the same technique and making observations across several previous measurements. Thus, the relative uncertainty was estimated to be about 2–3 The uncertainty in the thermo-mechanical analyses was determined based on the comparison of results obtained using the SG4 fraction under an oxidizing atmosphere. The uncertainty was assumed to be the same for all the fractions even under reducing atmospheres. It was determined through the calculation of a standard error on the mean of three repeated sets of measurements. Due to the importance of differences in properties at the particle-class level, a model is being developed at Penn State based on two-particle collisions using the Stokes’ criterion. The Stokes’ number is the ratio of kinetic energy to the viscous dissipation forces. The higher the viscous dissipation forces the smaller the Stokes’ number and higher the tendency of particles to remain stuck after collision. If the calculated Stokes’ numbers are less than a computed critical Stokes’ number, the particles are said to stick on collision and otherwise they rebound. This model incorporates effects of both the particle-class chemistry (based on FactSage™ calculations) as well as the particle-class physics. The particle-class physics are obtained in terms of the collision frequency from computational fluid dynamics using the Eulerian formulation with the kinetic theory of granular flow. The amount and viscosity of slag–liquid are obtained using the FactSage™ calculations. The particles may be fully or partially covered by the slag–liquid based on the amount and surface tension. The probability of a wet collision between particles is calculated based on the fraction of surface covered by slag–liquid. Knowing the number of such wet collisions in a given time based on the collision frequency, changes in the number of particles are tracked. These steps, involved in the development of the model, have been illustrated in the algorithm in The changes to an initial particle size distribution with time are tracked. The initial particle size distribution is taken in terms of the number of particles within bins based on particle size. All possible two-particle collisions in the system are subjected to the Stokes’ test to check for particle sticking. If the particles stick as per the Stokes’ test, the diameter of the agglomerate is calculated with a consideration of the mass balance and the particles are relocated into bins of appropriate size. Thus, the change in the average diameter of particles in a given distribution of ash particles with time can be tracked, accounting for both the chemistry of mineral matter and particle physics. The slag–liquid formation tendency was studied under equilibrium conditions. The SG4 fraction shows distinct behavior from the other fractions. Each of the four fractions is also different from the whole coal and shows higher amounts of slag–liquid up to 1000 The fourth gravity fraction begins to sinter at temperatures that are considerably lower than the other fractions and also the bulk coal as seen in Each of the fractions shows a gradual reduction of hematite (H) ( Noteworthy differences are also seen in the detection of muscovite in these fractions ( Similar experiments under oxidizing conditions done in this study, but reported in a companion paper, had shown that muscovite decomposed at low temperatures for SG1 and SG2 fractions. However, the muscovite in the SG3 and SG4 fractions remained stable up to higher temperatures. In addition to these transformations, SG4 fraction also shows the decomposition of calcium carbonate to calcium oxide ( Alumino-silicates along with other oxides lead to slag–liquid formation at different temperatures. In SG3 and SG4 fractions slag–liquid formation is expedited by the iron phases present. Alumino-silicates form slag–liquid at different temperatures in the presence of iron-phases depending on the oxidation state of iron as discussed in the next section. The eutectic composition of 23.25 Thus several equilibrium liquid phases result due to combinations of these calcium and iron-based phases with the alumino-silicates. Some of these are listed in Both SG2 and SG3 fractions have large amount of alumino-silicates as seen from SG3 has a high iron content in the form of hematite, in addition to the high amounts of alumino-silicates as seen from This interaction is less prominent in SG2 fraction due to the lower hematite to alumino-silicate ratio. This is further illustrated by the absence of the muscovite peak at higher temperatures in SG2 and SG1 fractions in HT-XRD. The hematite reduction in SG3 fraction also appears to be slower than the SG4 fraction. The interaction of the iron species with alumino-silicates in SG3 contributes to this delay. There is less hematite in SG3 as compared to SG4 and thus it is entirely involved in this interaction, slowing down its reduction process. Once the hematite has undergone reduction, this effect of muscovite stability is weakened. This also explains the reason for the stability of muscovite in both SG3 and SG4 fractions under oxidizing conditions (shown in a separate paper submitted for publication) but only in the SG3 fraction under reducing conditions. Although the SG4 fraction also contains hematite, it is in large quantities and begins to get reduced immediately. This reduced form (wustite) then leads to slag–liquid formation due to the eutectics and equilibrium liquid phases mentioned previously. Neither the high alumino-silicate content nor the high iron oxide content independently determines the slag–liquid formation tendency and the resultant initiation of agglomeration in fluidized bed conditions. The interactions involving alumino-silicates, which are also affected by the oxidation state of the iron, play an important role. Particles with high contents of reduced iron phases begin slag–liquid formation at low temperatures such as SG4. Significant amount of slag–liquid formation occurs around particles of specific compositions such as alumino-silicate rich particles like SG2. Particles rich in reduced iron phases yield several low melting eutectics under reducing atmospheres. On the other hand, iron present as hematite may slow down alumino-silicate slag formation as well as itself take longer to get reduced. Subsequent lower amounts of wustite are not adequate for slag–liquid formation at low temperatures. This balance becomes critical toward an understanding and prediction of agglomeration under fluidized bed conditions. This is unlike entrained flow gasification wherein most of the iron would exist in the reduced form at high operating temperatures, and thus iron oxide content would directly correlate to higher slagging tendencies. The different stages of iron oxide reduction that exist at low fluidized bed operating conditions add complexity to the prediction of slag–liquid formation and the relevant transformations under different gasifying atmospheres. The differences in the slag formation tendencies of each of the gravity fractions imply that certain fractions initiate agglomeration as discussed below. It should be noted that this analyses does not consider the effect of carbon content in the fuel on agglomeration. Presence of carbon may create highly reducing atmospheres locally. This may lower slag formation temperatures and thereby increase agglomeration. However, the presence of carbon will also decrease the wettability of the particles SG2 particles are rich in alumino-silicates and form slag–liquid at higher temperatures than the SG4 fractions that are iron rich. The SG3 fraction has both a high alumino-silicate content as well as a high content of iron phases. In SG3 the slag–liquid formation is only limited by the co-presence of hematite and alumino-silicates. Until the hematite is reduced, the high slag formation tendency of this fraction is limited to some extent. The SG3 and SG4 fractions of coal are mineral-rich although they make up a smaller portion of the feed than SG1 and SG2. Since the SG4 fraction forms slag–liquid at low temperatures, the percentage of bed ash that forms slag is higher than that predicted by bulk analysis alone. Thus, the average particle size at a given time predicted through attribute tracking of individual fractions was bigger than the average particle size that resulted from bulk coal analyses alone. Bulk analysis would underestimate the potential of the coal to agglomerate as the initiation of agglomeration occurs around SG4 particles at low operating temperatures. Once initiated, increase in bed particle size will promote defluidization and disturb the heat balance. The subsequent rise in bed particle temperatures, granular temperatures and collision frequencies would increase the possibilities of catastrophic agglomeration. This propagation of agglomerate growth is being further investigated. An ash agglomeration model is being developed to facilitate this study and it has been briefly described in this paper. The effects of both ash chemistry as well as particle hydrodynamics are being systematically integrated into this model. This will help to completely understand the mechanism of agglomeration including the initiation and propagation due to presence of particle classes with varying properties. The effect of heterogeneity in ash composition on agglomeration tendencies in fluidized beds was studied using gravity separated coal ash fractions. The FactSage™ and TMA results revealed the presence of ash particles that have distinct slag–liquid formation tendencies. The SG4 particles begin to form slag–liquid at lower temperatures than other fractions. Once agglomeration begins by sticking of these particles, we believe that the subsequent rise in temperature due to heat imbalance will cause the other fractions to begin agglomerating. The method of attribute tracking used in this study also revealed that the amount of slag present in the bed is more than that predicted by whole coal analyses alone. Thus, the study showed that the agglomeration is initiated locally by a few wet particles sticking together. FactSage™ thermodynamic equilibrium modeling along with attribute tracking showed the presence of significant slag–liquid amounts at fluidized bed operating conditions. The XRF compositional analyses of the fractions, the differences in slag formation tendencies and slag phase composition calculated using FactSage™ and the phase transformations observed using HT-XRD along with the theoretical understanding of oxide phase thermodynamics and eutectic formation from the literature Under reducing conditions, iron rich particle classes such as SG3 and SG4 form slag–liquid at temperatures that are lower than typical operating temperatures of fluidized bed gasifiers. Higher alumino-silicate content in SG2 fraction and compounds with iron in a lower oxidation state such as in the SG4 fraction also cause higher slag–liquid amounts as seen from the HT-XRD, XRF and FactSage™ results. Differences in the ratio of ferric oxides to alumino-silicates were clearly distinguishable for the gravity separated coal ash fractions from the XRF analyses with a higher ratio for SG4 than SG3, which was in turn higher than SG2. The study of the slagging tendencies of these different fractions using FactSage™ thermodynamic simulations as well as experiments such as HT-XRD showed that the alumino-silicate to iron oxide ratio and the gaseous atmosphere prevalent are important factors for the prediction of agglomeration under fluidized bed conditions. Partial reduction and the presence of several iron phases with different oxidation states of iron are observed using HT-XRD in the SG3 and SG4 fractions under low temperature fluidized bed gasification conditions. Thus, it is not easily possible to relate the slagging rate directly to the iron content, unlike in high temperature entrained flow gasification. Based on the grind of the fuel and the composition distribution, the number of slag–liquid-covered sticky particles will differ for a given particle size based on the amount of slag–liquid. This leads to particle-level differences in ash agglomeration tendencies. Such differences remain undetected by bulk fuel analyses techniques as seen from the HT-XRD and attribute tracking results. Mathematical models that consider such particle level differences, such as the Penn State ash agglomeration model, will help to improve the accuracy in prediction as well as the fundamental understanding of the agglomeration phenomenon in fluidized beds. These in turn could improve the operational reliabilities of fluidized bed boiler and gasification systems. Financial support for this work was partially provided by