Intensive agricultural management practices have contributed to nitrate concentrations in surface and subsurface drainage water which exceed water quality guidelines. Numerous studies have been conducted to examine the effects of soil and crop management practices on nitrate leaching, however, there are few studies which examine new technologies to reduce nitrate leaching from agricultural land. In this study, technological advances in water table management are used in combination with conservation tillage and intercropping treatments to determine if nitrate leaching can be effectively reduced in a clay loam soil. There were two water table management treatments and four crop management treatments arranged in a 2 by 4 factorial arrangement with two replicates. The water table management treatments consisted of controlled drainage/subirrigation system (CDS) and a free drainage system (FD). The crop management treatments consisted of moldboard plow tillage with and without an annual ryegrass intercrop (MP, MP+IC) and soil saver (modified chisel plow) with and without an annual ryegrass intercrop (SS, SS+IC). The data was modeled using LEACHM and a mean error difference procedure was used to determine how well the model predicted the field data. The model worked well when the difference between the predicted and measured values approached zero. When the CDS system was modeled, the mean error difference values ranged from −1.67 to 0.33mgNl−1 for the 4 crop management treatments whereas the values were considerably greater when the FD system was modeled with values ranging between 7.48 and 12.7mgNl−1. Hence the LEACHM model predicted nitrate leaching better on plots under CDS system than on plots under FD. Both the Leaching Estimation and Chemistry Model (LEACHM) predicted scenarios and field sampled data showed that CDS reduced nitrate leaching substantially. Model calibration by using one full year of field data was found to be acceptable, but for predictions based on shorter calibration periods unsatisfactory results were obtained.Nitrate nitrogen is an essential plant nutrient. Nitrogen can be released from the soil by mineralization processes, however supplemental nitrogen is often required to maximize crop yields. During rainfall events, nitrate nitrogen from soil organic matter, fertilizer, livestock manure, or legume can leach through the soil and contaminate groundwater. High NO Nitrate pollution of lakes, rivers and groundwater has been well documented ( The experimental field plot was located in south-western Ontario, at Eugene F. Whelan Experimental Farm, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Woodslee, Ont. The field plot configuration has been reported previously ( The experiment was initiated in the spring of 1991 on a Brookston clay loam soil. Corn ( Typical herbicide application methods and materials were used in this study. Atrazine (6-chloro- Surface runoff and tile drainage water from the 16 individual plots flowed into sump holes by gravity ( Surface runoff and tile drainage water samples were collected automatically with 32 autosamplers (CALYPSO 2000S, Buhler Gmbh) located in an instrumentation building. The autosampler was activated by the water meter sensor based on a predetermined setting of the flow volume which ranged from 500 to 3000 Soil samples were collected at 0–25, 25–45, 45–80 and 80–120 Surface runoff and tile drainage water samples were collected and stored in glass bottles at 4°C. These water samples were filtered through a 0.45 Leaching Estimation And Chemistry Model (LEACHM) is a process-based model developed by LEACH-W simulates only the water regime, LEACH-N simulates nitrogen transport and transformation, LEACH-P simulates the pesticide displacement and degradation, and LEACH-C simulates the transient movement of inorganic ions. – Soil properties and initial conditions for each soil segment including water content or water potential; hydrological constants for calculating retentivity and hydraulic conductivity; particle size distribution, and the relevant soil chemical properties. – Soil surface boundary conditions including irrigation and rainfall amounts; rates of application; mean temperatures and diurnal amplitudes (weekly means) if a temperature simulation is required; and potential evaporation (weekly totals). – Crop details or control variable if no crops are present. The crop parameters include time of planting; root and crop maturity at harvest; root and cover growth parameters, and soil and plant water potential limits for water extraction by plants. – Other constants were also used in determining lower boundary conditions, time steps, dispersion and diffusion coefficients, chemical reactions and output details. Some of these constants rarely require alteration. These are also listed in the data files and the user has the option of changing these constants. There are limitations in LEACHM model. The model is not applicable to the following conditions: – Profiles with unequal depth increments. – Prediction of surface runoff water quantity and quality. – Simulating plant responses to soil or environmental changes. – Prediction of crop yields. – Transport of immiscible fluids. – Solute distributions and transport in 2 and 3 dimensional flux patterns. – Runoff water effects on management practices and nitrate leaching are not simulated by the model. – The model does not take into account macropore effects. In order to apply LEACHM, the soil profile was divided into three horizontal segments of equal depth: 0–0.2, 0.2–0.4, and 0.4–0.6 The initial NO This procedure assumes that the NO Model calibration and prediction were carried out in two stages. The first stage was that the data for 1992 were used to calibrate the model and to do sensitivity analysis of model's key parameters. Available observed data between January and December 1992 were used in the calibration processes. The second stage was that the datasets of 1993–1994 were used for validation of the calibrated parameters of the model. The field tile nitrate loss data were reported previously ( The calibration process was to obtain the initial values for model parameters that would estimate NO In this study, the parameters of molecular diffusion coefficient, dispersivity, hydraulic conductivity, soil bulk density and urea hydrolysis in LEACHM are considered to be key in influencing model output. Such parameters in LEACHM were selected together with observed data from plots 1 and 13 under MP-IC-CDS and plots 2 and 14 under MP-IC-FD management practices, for sensitivity tests. The initial values contained in plots 1 and 13 and 2 and 14 are presented in Initial tests indicated that the model did not respond to effects of varying calibration parameters in the winter period. The urea hydrolysis constant was varied between 0.1 day The sensitivity of the model to molecular diffusion coefficient was tested using Increasing the soil bulk density between 1.0 and 1.30 Other parameters found to be important in LEACHM performance include precipitation rates, water table depths, and evaporation rates. Precipitation rates in the range of 100 Under free drainage conditions, the model predictions were consistent with no increase in urea hydrolysis after urea application on 29 June, 1992. The model predictions tended to have greater deviations from the observed data in June. These deviations were also observed towards the end of the simulation period in December. Designated parameters for prediction of scenario from the calibration process, are listed in The results of simulation of the nitrate leaching by LEACHM, using the parameters listed in Under CDS conditions, there were no differences in model performance between MP and SS tillage systems with IC, but the model overestimated leaching between February and August 1994 under MP without an annual ryegrass intercrop. Overall the model is not sensitive to immediate leaching following fertilizer applications as shown by model underestimation of leaching after 17 May, 1993 the date when fertilizer was applied. The model output indicated that the SS tillage system, would reduce nitrate leaching. This is expected because MP tillage has a greater water conductivity rate which enhances leaching especially under saturated flow conditions. Under FD conditions, the model predicted highest nitrate leaching in MP without an intercrop, and no notable differences between MP-IC, SS-IC and SS treatments. In all treatments, the model overestimated NO To determine how well a model performs, the model outputs are compared to the measured independent dataset that was not used in the calibration process. It follows that the model input data and rate constants are adjusted within a range of measured values until a minimum difference between measured and predicted values is obtained. Methods for achieving this include tests of means and variances, analysis of variances, mean error difference and goodness of fit testing ( Overall there was no significant difference between the average MED of 1.26 The average mean error difference of 11.24 The LEACHM model performed a better prediction of nitrate leaching on plots under CDS treatments ( The simulated results indicated that free drainage (FD) management systems would result in higher nitrate leaching whereas controlled drainage and subsurface irrigation (CDS) showed reduced nitrate leaching. The LEACHM model performed better predictions for nitrate leaching on plots under CDS than on plots under FD. For all the four management treatments plots with CDS showed smaller values of mean error difference compared with those plots under FD. The calibration process using one year of data appeared to be acceptable. However, application of partial data series for model prediction resulted in significantly higher values of mean error difference. The authors wish to thank the Great Lakes Water Quality Program for the financial support of this project. We also express appreciation for expert technical assistance to M. Soultani, Dr. T. Oloya, D. MacTavish, K. Rinas, J. St. Denis, V. Bernyk, G. Stasko and J. Stowe, and to the farm crew S. Mannel, A. Szabo, and M. Bissonnette at the Eugene F. Whelan Experimental Farm.