Water and wastewater treatment sludges exhibit compressible behaviour due to flocculation and aggregation. At a critical solids concentration called the gel point, which is as low as 1–2 v/v%, a continuous interconnected network of particles is formed that can resist an applied load. The applied load (mechanical filtration pressure or buoyancy in settling for example) must exceed the network strength in order to consolidate the network. The network strength increases with solids concentration such that the equilibrium extent of consolidation is a function of the applied load. Improved understanding of the nature of compressible suspensions can have a significant impact through optimising design and operation of sludge handling and dewatering processes. This work gives an overview of compressional rheology, which has proven to be a useful tool for describing the solid–liquid separation of compressible systems. This is followed by three examples where compressibility effects must be taken into account, namely the extraction of material properties for extremely compressible materials, consolidation and crust formation during constant rate evaporation, and the effect of bed height in thickening.Residual sludges produced during potable water and wastewater treatment must be disposed of, and it is common to separate the solid and liquid phases of sludge using processes such as evaporation, filtration, thickening and centrifugation in order to reduce the cost of sludge disposal. However, the cost of sludge dewatering and handling can account for a major proportion of the overall cost of treatment ( The removal of water from a suspension increases the solids content until, at some critical concentration, the suspended solid phase forms a continuous interconnected network (e.g. a filter cake or a sediment). The critical concentration is termed the gel point solids volume fraction Particulate networks will collapse (i.e. express water and densify) if an applied load exceeds the strength of the network and the water is able to escape (see The compressibility of a particulate network can have dramatic effects on the performance of solid–liquid separation operations and must be accounted for in material property measurement and process modelling in order to accurately predict solid–liquid separation operations. For example, the bed height in continuous thickening ( A phenomenological description of solid–liquid separation that explicitly accounts for compressibility is compressional rheology, which was first described by This paper presents a range of aspects that highlight the importance of considering compressibility effects in the solid–liquid separation of water and wastewater treatment sludges. If compressibility is incorporated into plant design and operating philosophies, plant managers can have confidence that they are minimising their sludge handling costs. After a brief overview of compressional rheology theory, there is discussion of material characterisation techniques with a focus on the importance of using a local rather than an average approach to determining material properties. An example is then given of how to incorporate consolidation and shrinkage effects in vacuum and drying problems. Lastly, predictions of sludge thickening are used to illustrate how consideration of particulate network compressibility can change the design philosophy of equipment, in this case thickeners. Such considerations have led to a revolution in slurry handling in the minerals processing industry and the potential exists for a similar impact in water and wastewater treatment. This section covers the basic derivation of the 1-D Cartesian governing equation used in compressional rheology – readers are directed to several reviews ( Balancing the hydrodynamic, hydrostatic, network pressure and acceleration forces acting in one-dimension The conservation of mass equations for the solid and liquid phases are: Combining Eqs. Despite differences in formalism, compressional rheology is directly related to classical solid–liquid separation theory ( The material parameters of compressibility and permeability can be measured using filtration, sedimentation and centrifugation techniques. As shown above, compressional rheology and classical solid–liquid separation theories can be related. However, unlike the assertion by The temptation can be to assume that a cake or sediment is incompressible such that the concentration is not a function of the applied load. In compressional rheology jargon, the gel point is equal to the jamming or close-packing fraction ( Classical filtration and sedimentation theories have been adapted to account for compressibility by assuming Armed with functional forms for compressibility and permeability, analytical solutions can be found such that average properties can be extracted ( The experimental analysis used in compressional rheology is applicable for all functional forms of The impact of compressibility on wastewater treatment sludge characterisation is highlighted in this section. It is well known that 1-D filtration follows linear For many inorganic compressible suspensions, the time in compression is typically short compared to the overall filtration time. In contrast, many biotic sludges such as wastewater treatment, dairy effluent treatment and algal biomass can show very short formation followed by long compression ( The solution to extracting material properties from such filtration behaviour lies in analysing the compression or consolidation end of the results instead ( Batch sedimentation is used to determine settling velocity as a function of concentration ( In This technique has been used for a range of biotic sludges, with a summary of wastewater treatment sludge characterisation in The peak in This illustrates that the material properties are able to predict the key behaviours of wastewater sludges. By extracting local property information from filtration and sedimentation testing, compressional rheology is able to provide a comprehensive description of biotic sludge behaviour. When used in an appropriate process model, the material properties can be used to inform design and optimise operation. The second example of compressibility effects in the solid–liquid separation of water and wastewater sludges is the illustration of how the compressional rheology approach accounts for consolidation and shrinkage during vacuum and drying problems. When a saturated cake is subjected to an air-driven dewatering process, the cake can either consolidate or desaturate (see  The interception of these two material functions for the wastewater treatment sludge is demonstrated in Thus, for air-driven processes where the solids pressure is less than 9.7 kPa, the sludge never desaturates since the capillary pressure is too large. For pressures greater than 9.7 kPa, the material consolidates until the concentration at the air–liquid interface reaches 0.15 v/v, beyond which the particulate network prefers to desaturate rather than consolidate. As an example of incorporating compressibility effects in air-driven processes, Constant rate 1-D evaporation is analogous to constant rate pressure filtration with an imaginary membrane at the air–liquid interface at the top of the cake ( If the evaporation rate is very slow compared to the material dewaterability (i.e. In general, understanding the time required for consolidation and the onset of desaturation for compressible systems is important for the optimisation of many unit operations. As illustrated, the compressional rheology description combined with the concept of the maximum capillary pressure is able to capture this critical change in behaviour. An important factor that is not covered by compressional rheology is the three-phase drainage and desaturation processes that occur after consolidation has finished. If it is assumed that the particulate network does not deform once desaturation begins (i.e. the solids do not move, just the local saturation value changes) then the solids volume fraction distribution is fixed. Existing theories of desaturation ( The third and final aspect of compressional rheology demonstrated here is the effect that understanding compression is having on continuous thickener design and operation, and subsequent consequences for tailings storage in the minerals processing industry. Thickeners are essentially tanks where the solids settle due to gravity, producing a concentrated underflow and a clear overflow (see Since the 1980s, the introduction of high rate and deep cone thickeners has seen reductions in thickener sizes (with corresponding savings in capital costs), cheaper operating costs through reduced flocculant usage and increases in underflow concentrations. This has been achieved through a combination of four factors, all of which are related to understanding the compressible nature of suspensions. High rate thickeners are taller than conventional thickeners, allowing them to run with increased bed heights and thus increase underflow concentration. Improved understanding of the kinetics of polymer flocculation, including the right combination of high and low shear zones to encourage mixing and then floc formation, has led to optimised feedwell designs. This has delivered optimal dewatering properties and reduced flocculant usage ( For many types of slurry, the maximum in the batch flux function is at lower concentrations than the feed concentration. Therefore, dilution through recirculation of some of the overflow within the feedwell has led to improvements to settling rates and corresponding reductions in required area. Understanding the effect of shear on the densification of flocs ( The impact of improved thickening in the minerals processing industry has been tremendous given that it the world's largest producer of waste – in 2010, the industry produced 51 billion tonnes of waste rock (mine overburden) and 14 billion tonnes of fine particulate tailings ( The financial impact of improved thickener technology is exemplified through the collaborative work between the University of Melbourne, CSIRO (Australia's government research organisation) and the Australian Minerals Industry Research Association (AMIRA). The on-going project has in excess of 20 sponsors and has audited savings to industry of greater than AUD$300 million in the past ten years associated with improved thickening flocculation technologies ( Understanding and accounting for compressibility in the solid–liquid separation of water and wastewater sludges is vital in order to optimise the design and operation of separation equipment. Compressional rheology provides a good description for sludges in processes such as filtration, thickening and centrifugation. It is also able to account for consolidation during vacuum and evaporation processes by incorporating the maximum capillary pressure concept. The application of compressional rheology to wastewater treatment sludges has been very enlightening, leading to a new perspective on extremely compressible suspensions where Improved understanding of the nature of compressible suspensions can have a significant impact, as exemplified by the impact on the minerals processing industry. For the water and wastewater treatment industry, accurate material properties combined with models of process equipment mean that methods for optimising design and operation now exist. This allows intelligent selection of processes and equipment that were not previously possible. A key example is the correlation between volatile solids and dewaterability ( This paper was presented by the author as a keynote address at FILTECH2013, 22–24 October 2013, Wiesbaden, Germany. Colleagues at the University of Melbourne who have contributed to the work on wastewater treatment sludges include Peter Scales, Ross de Kretser, David Dixon and Shane Usher. Various aspects for the wastewater treatment sludge work have been funded by the