Background
                  Unstable intertrochanteric fractures present a challenge to orthopaedic surgeons, with varied geometry of the fractures and a wide choice of implants and techniques. The patients are usually osteoporotic, with multiple co-morbidities and poor tolerance for complications and re-operations. Lateral wall reconstruction and stability of the trochanteric fragments are considered important in providing a better outcome of these difficult injuries. We present a technique of lateral wall and trochanteric reconstruction using Cerclage wires and lag screws in the greater trochanter in addition to intramedullary nailing, and the radiological and functional outcome of this technique of augmentation.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  This prospective study includes 154 patients from 2010 to 2015 presenting to the institute with an unstable intertrochanteric fracture. They were sequentially operated with intramedullary nailing (IMN) and augmentation with cerclage wire and/or Anteroposterior screw in greater trochanter, and 77 patients with IMN only. Operating time and need for blood transfusion post-surgery were documented. Patients were followed up for minimum of 12 months and radiological union time, complications and functional outcome using Harris Hip Score were noted at 1 year. Statistical analysis was performed to compare the results in both groups
               
                  Results
                  The mean union was 3.6 months in group A and 4.1 months in group B, with no statistically significant difference. The operating time needed for augmentation was 10 minutes more than IMN only. Blood transfusion was not required in any case. The incidence of complications like screw cut out, back out and non-union was lower in augmented group, and good functional outcome was greater in the augmented group which was statistically significant. The reoperation rate was lower in augmented group.
               
                  Conclusions
                  This new technique of augmentation of fixation of intramedullary nail in unstable trochanteric fractures using cerclage wires and lag screws for lateral wall reconstruction is useful in reducing complications of the procedure and provides good radiological and functional outcome. It requires little additional operating time with minimal blood loss and soft tissue injury.Fractures of the proximal femur are among the most common injuries in orthopaedic practice. The patients are usually osteoporotic, with multiple co-morbidities and give a history of a trivial fall. These fractures have a wide variety of geometry and present as stable and unstable types. The stability of the fracture depends on many factors, mainly the integrity of the lateral wall Unstable trochanteric fractures pose a challenge to the orthopaedic surgeon. Many options to treat these injuries are available to the surgeon, from the sliding hip screw, intramedullary nails to primary arthroplasty. Intramedullary nails (IMN) have now been accepted as the modality of treatment for very unstable trochanteric fractures, with good stability of fixation, minimal soft tissue injury during surgery and decreased complications The reconstruction of the lateral wall and posteromedial buttress remains an unanswered question in these fractures. Methods of fixation like trochanteric stabilization plates and proximal femoral locking plates have been used with limited success The study includes patients who presented to our institute from January 2010 to December 2015 with an unstable fracture of the proximal femur. Inclusion criteria were the radiological diagnosis of an unstable trochanteric femoral fracture classified as type 31A2.2, 31A2.3, 31A3.1, 31A3.2 and 31A3.3 per the AO/ASIF classification and aged above 18 years. Exclusion criteria were inability to walk before the fracture, other fractures interfering with rehabilitation, compound trauma and pathological fractures. Two patients presented with a pathological fracture secondary to bony metastases, and one patient had a compound trauma due to high energy injury. Nine patients during the course of the study were unable to walk before the trauma due to cerebrovascular stroke and hemiplegia. All these patients were thus excluded from the study. Fractures extending into the intracapsular part of neck femur, so called Kyle’s type, were also excluded. All patients had a low energy trauma. There were 180 patients included in the study. All patients were investigated with X-rays, and CT scans with 3D reconstruction on admission. CT scans were done in these patients for better visualization of the greater trochanteric fragment and the extent of the lateral wall comminution, which were then used for preoperative planning of the augmentation. Patients were admitted in the hospital for surgery and were assigned a number in the study. Using an online randomization tool, the numbers were randomly distributed into two groups namely group A (augmentation done) and group B (no augmentation done), thus minimizing selection bias. Informed consent was taken from the patients, explaining to them the nature of fixation and implants used, as well as risks involved. Ethical approval from the ethics committee of the institute was received. All patients were operated by the same surgeon, who is experienced in treating these fractures, and is well familiar with the technique. Patients were operated with closed reduction of the fracture and internal fixation with IMN and a derotation screw. In 90 cases, additional fixation or augmentation of the fixation of IMN using cerclage wire or a lag screw in the Greater Trochanter (GT) or both were used (Group A). In 90 cases, no augmentation was used in addition to the IMN and Derotation screw, (Group B). Using image intensification a closed reduction is performed to as near an anatomical position as possible. A 4 At the level of the lesser trochanter (LT) a stab incision is made, and a cerclage wire (SS wire) is passed using a AO cerclage instruments. The two ends of the wire now project in the wound. Through the incision of the IMN entry portal, Kocher forceps are introduced and passed sub muscularly distally and the anterior end of the cerclage wire is grasped and delivered proximally. Another stab incision is made at the level of the GT anterolaterally. Kocher forceps is introduced into the wound and into the abductor muscles. The forceps are now brought into the entry point incision and the end of the wire is grasped and brought medial to proximal end of the IMN. The same Kocher forceps, grasping the wire is now passed distally in a sub muscular plane down to the previous stab incision. Now both wires are held and tensioned. The excess wire is cut and the knot bent and tapped inside the wound. A figure-of-eight wire is seen on lateral view of the femur on C-arm, as shown in Fractures with coronal split of the GT were augmented with this technique. Under C-arm guidance, the proper entry point of the screw is determined and a stab incision is made on the anterolateral aspect of the thigh. Using a 3.2mm drill bit with sleeve, a hole is drilled in the greater trochanter. A 6.5 The blood loss and operating time of each surgery was noted. The post-operative protocol was same for both groups. Post-operative antibiotics were given for 24–48 hours as per protocol. Oral and parenteral analgesics were given as required. Active and passive hip and knee flexion was started on day 2 post-operatively as pain permitted. The patient was instructed to walk using walker with bearing weight as tolerated on the operated limb for 1 month. Sutures were removed 15 days after surgery. Patients were followed up at 1.5 months, 3 months, 6 months and 1 year. At follow-up, the patients were asked about pain, functional outcome was assessed by Harris Hip Score (HHS) and X-rays of the proximal femur in AP and lateral projections were obtained. Union time, complications and HHS was recorded at every follow-up. Of the 180 patients, 19 patients were lost to follow-up and thus were not included in the final analysis. Five patients died within 2 months of surgery due to unrelated co-morbidities and 2 patients died within 1 year post-op. Thus 154 patients were available for the final analysis. The mean age of the patients was 74 years. Union was determined clinically by absence of pain and radiologically by complete bridging of the fracture site in both orthogonal projections. The mean union time in group A was 3.61±0.746 months while that of group B was 4.1±0.746 months. The result was not statistically significant at p>0.05, using the Student t test. The post-operative status was determined by Harris hip score calculated at end of 1 year follow-up. The outcome was classified as poor if <70, fair if 70–79, good if 80–89 and excellent when more than 90. The result was analysed using the Chi-square test, the result is statistically significant at p<0.05 (0.0042) as represented in The mean operation time, from first incision to closure was 44±3.17 minutes in group A and 35.2±3.5 minutes in group B. On both groups, no blood transfusions were required post-operatively and superficial hematoma was noted in 3 patients in both groups. In the non-augmented group (group B), there were 6 incidences of the IMN screw cutting through the femoral head (7.8%), which required revision with arthroplasty. In the augmented group (group A), screw penetration was seen in one patient, who required revision surgery by arthroplasty. In group B, screw backing out of the proximal femur was seen on the x-ray of 5 patients, who were clinically asymptomatic and did not require revision surgery at 1 year follow-up. In group A 1 patient had backing out of the IMN screw and had pain in the lateral thigh at 6 months, and was revised by changing the screw. The patient went on to have union and had fair outcome on Harris Hip score at 1 year follow-up. In Group B 1 patient had non-union of the fracture with absence of union on 1 year post-operative radiograph, which required total hip arthroplasty. There was no case of non-union of the fracture in group A. In group B, there was non-union of the greater trochanter fragment in 5 patients at 1 year follow-up. These patients were clinically asymptomatic without limp or pain, and had union of the intertrochanteric fracture site, so revision was not performed. In group A, after fracture union the neck shaft angle was measured and the varus deformity was noted in 5 patients, with no clinical symptoms. In group B, varus was noted in 9 patients with mild pain in the hip joint in one case. In group A, 1 patient had to undergo another surgery, which was changing of the screw of IMN, and none required arthroplasty. In group B, there were 7 patients who required Hip arthroplasty due to screw penetration and non-union. The result was analysed using Chi-square test and was found to be statistically significant at p<0.05 (0.029). The Chi-square test was used to analyse the results and was found to be significant at p<0.05 (0.029), as represented in The management of proximal femoral fractures continues to be of great interest to clinicians Complications of IMN have been well documented The medialization of the shaft and varus collapse are also complications frequently seen in these unstable fractures. The lateral wall integrity is proved to be a key factor by multiple studies in stability of the reduction We have a cut out rate of 7.8% in patients treated with IMN only, and no cut out was observed in patients in whom lateral wall reconstruction using cerclage wire was done. The difference in outcome is statistically significant. This supports our view that lateral wall stability is enhanced by the cerclage wires, thus reducing fracture collapse and cut out rate. Saha et al. have demonstrated faster union time and better stability with fewer complications by anatomical reconstruction of the posteromedial and lateral wall by direct open reduction through the posterior approach The greater trochanter (GT) fracture associated with these fractures also poses a challenge during surgery. Gaining an entry portal becomes difficult and many times, the IMN passes medial to the GT fragment. Using 3D reconstruction CT scans, it has now become easier to diagnose these fractures. In many patients, fractures of the GT are exclusively in the coronal plane, and are sufficiently large to render the fracture highly unstable. The lateral wall of GT thus had to be reconstructed to provide stability. Using Trochanteric stabilization plate (TSP) with the dynamic hip screw for lateral wall reconstruction has been documented Due to the complications, patients in group B required more reoperations and conversion to arthroplasty (7 patients). On the other hand, no patients in group A required conversion to arthroplasty. Re-operation rates have been reported to be as high as 19% The difference in mean union time was not statistically significant in both groups. However, there was one case of non-union in group B, who required a total hip arthroplasty. There was no non-union in group A. Malunion was seen in 9 patients in group B, but were clinically asymptomatic, needing no further revision. Five cases of varus malunion was seen in group A. We can assert thus that better stability of the lateral wall due the cerclage wire and screw leads to lesser incidence of varus collapse and non-union. The functional outcome of all patients was measured by Harris Hip score(HHS) In conclusion, the use of cerclage wire and Lag screw in the greater trochanter in addition to the intramedullary nail provides better stability to the lateral wall and posteromedial wall. This reduces complications like screw cut out and fracture collapse. The functional outcome is better due to increased stability, and union time is not affected. Although technically demanding, this technique is useful in very unstable trochanteric fractures. None declared.