In this study, first-principles calculations were performed to investigate the interactions of hydrogen xanthate (HOCS2
                     −) with pyrite (100) and galena (100) surfaces. The calculation results suggest that strong chemisorption of HOCS2
                     − occurs at Fe sites on the pyrite (100) surface, whereas its interaction at Pb sites on the galena (100) surface is weak. The interaction of xanthate with oxidized pyrite surface is weakened while the interaction of xanthate with oxidized galena surface is enhanced. The hydration of xanthate and mineral surfaces is discussed. Dixanthogen could be formed on the pyrite surface but not on the galena surface.Since the electrochemistry of flotation was proposed to explain the behaviors of sulfide mineral flotation in 1954 by Salamy and Nixon Pyrite and galena are two typical sulfide minerals. With xanthate collector, dixanthogen and Pb–xanthate are respectively used for the flotation of pyrite and galena. The kinetics and thermochemistry studies of xanthate adsorption on minerals showed that the formation of dixanthogen on sulfide mineral surface takes place through a two-step process: the chemisorptions of the xanthate ion (X Experimental and theoretical methods were used to study the mineral flotation In this study, using DFT method, the adsorption of xanthate on pyrite and galena surfaces was simulated and the influence of oxidation of surfaces was studied. Moreover, the interaction of xanthate at the mineral surfaces was explained on the basis of the differences of solid physics properties and electronic structures of pyrite and galena crystals. All the calculations were performed using CASTEP (Cambridge serial total energy package) program module and GGA-PW91 (generalized gradient approximation) density function based on the DFT method The adsorption energy of HOCS The slab models of (2 Different adsorption sites were examined to find the most stable adsorption configuration of xanthate molecule (HOCS In addition, the effects of water molecules (H  The stability constant of chemical interaction of Fe(II)-xanthate and Fe(III)-xanthate were 1.58 The extent of xanthate interacting with the pyrite and galena surfaces depends on their solid surface states and electronic structures. The densities of states (DOS) of S and Fe atoms on pyrite surface and of S and Pb atoms on galena surface are shown in The oxidation of sulfide minerals by O  The different adsorption behaviors of xanthate on the oxidized pyrite and galena surfaces could be explained from the changes of the minerals surface states before and after oxidation by O The final products of the reactions of xanthate on the pyrite and galena surfaces are dixanthogen and Pb-xanthate, respectively. The calculations for dixanthogen formations on the pyrite and galena surfaces were performed using DFT methods to explore the formation of dixanthogen on the mineral surfaces.  The formation of dixanthogen on the sulfide mineral surfaces involves the following two reactions: However, where the formation of the dixanthogen is taking place and what oxidizes xanthate to dixanthogen are still unclear. Haung and Miller showed that xanthate is oxidized by adsorbed oxygen at the pyrite surface Electrochemical measurements suggested that the formation of dixanthogen occurs according to the reaction From Eq. The formation of galena crystal is in accordance with the following equation: It indicates that galena is formed under the reductive atmosphere and possesses reductive properties. This accounts for the low electrode rest potentials and electron exclusion properties of galena. Hence, dixanthate cannot be formed on the galena surface. In addition, the electrochemical flotation process shows that the interaction of xanthate with sulfide mineral surface occurs during the electron transfer between xanthate and mineral surface. The flow direction of electrons depends on the mean chemical potential of each reactant (xanthate or mineral). The mean chemical potential can be well represented by the Fermi energy level ( The final adsorption structure of dixanthogen on the pyrite surface suggests that the adsorption of dixanthogen occurs through the bonding of one S atom of dixanthogen with one Fe atom on the surface. It was speculated that one xanthate ion is initially adsorbed on the surface and then another xanthate ion interacts with the adsorbed xanthate to form dixanthogen. First-principles calculations were performed to study the interaction of hydrogen xanthate (HOCS The authors are grateful for the financial support provided by the