This work investigates the possibility of commercialization of a recently proposed nano calcium carbonate production process as an improved process. The analyzed process uses steel slag instead of limestone as the calcium source to produce nano calcium carbonate and comprises a calcium carbonation process and a NaCl electrolysis process. CO2 reduction impact and techno-economic feasibility of the system are analyzed to investigate its feasibility. The new process is expected to reduce the CO2 emission by about 8 %, compared to the conventional process of making the nano calcium carbonate. In addition, unit cost of production for the new process is 484 USD/ton indicating that it is economically feasible. Sensitivity and scenario analyses are performed with respect to the type of electricity sources and the capital cost of the electrolysis system, which are the key contributors to the overall cost.As climate change caused by the elevated CO A popular target product for CO A new process recently proposed by researchers at the Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) produces calcium carbonate by using steel slag [ The goal of this study is to evaluate the techno-economic feasibility and CO The traditional way of producing calcium carbonate ( A CO Calcium ions in the crushed steel slag leaving the crushing process are extracted with the HCl solution in the extraction process, and then the non-extracted components of the steel slag are removed by filtration. The filtrated solution contains dissolved Ca ions, as well as dissolved impurity metal ions such as Mg, Al, Fe, and K ions. During purification process, the impurity ion precipitation is induced at a solution pH of 11, which is carried out by the addition of NaOH. Theses precipitated impurities are subsequently removed via filtration. Ca(OH) The KIST process comprises six sub-processes. For the purpose of techno-economic analysis and CO As shown in Among the extracted metal ions, calcium and magnesium ions are main products of the extraction process. The dissolution efficiency of Ca and Mg ions are estimated using the equations proposed in H. Jo et al. [ After being filtered by a sedimentation tank (F-101), which uses gravity sedimentation, the filtrate is sent to the purification unit (R-103) to produce Ca ions of high concentration. The pH value of the filtrate solution is 3.80 [ After being filtered by a sedimentation tank (F-102), the Ca ion-rich solution is sent to the carbonation unit (R-104). At low temperature and 1 bar, Ca(OH) In addition, pumps for the liquid transportation and shaft work of the vessels (R-102, R-103, and R-104) are considered in this model. Six pumps (P-101 ∼ P-106) are used for the liquid transportation. The shaft work of the vessel is estimated by Nagata’s equation [ The objective of this study is to determine the commercialization potential of the novel nano calcium carbonate (nCaCO In order to evaluate CO TEA is performed to determine and analyze the economic feasibility of the KIST process replacing the conventional process (either to meet the future demand increase or to replace existing facilities). The system boundary, functional unit and assumptions are same as in the LCA. The detailed of TEA calculation in this study is explained in Appendix B. The mass and energy balance data of the process are used for calculating the net CO Electricity consumption for each sub-process is summarized and is validated with the results from the experimental study ( To estimate the CO Using the recalculated mass and energy balance data, the net CO The CO To judge the techno-economic feasibility of the proposed process, a techno-economic analysis (TEA) is conducted. The key financial parameters for the TEA and prices of the utilities and fuels involved are shown in The estimated cost is given in The CO The results of the sensitivity analysis are plotted in The following approaches are proposed as an optimistic scenario in applying the proposed CO A scenario study reflecting this cost estimation is carried out ( To assess the commercialization potential of an improved nCaCO The sensitivity analysis results showed that nuclear energy is the most competitive among the examined six sources as it led to the lowest unit cost of production as well as the lowest net CO  We don’t have any competing interests to declare. This works was supported by the Lifecycle assessment (LCA) is a method to evaluate and analyze the environmental influences of products and processes taking into consideration their system boundaries and set functional unit. Both direct and indirect CO Techno-economic analysis (TEA) is a method to evaluate and analyze the techno-economic feasibility of a given process. Key metrics used in TEA are annualized capital cost (ACC) and unit production cost, which is proposed by D. R. Woods [