This study evaluates the electrochemical effect of mineral, organic and metallic reducing agents to promote LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 (NMC) dissolution in acidic media. The main aim is to compare the reactivity of metallic current collectors (Cu and Al) to more conventional reducing agents such as organic acids and hydrogen peroxide. In a more applied perspective, this work points out the economic interest to use current collectors as an alternative chemical reagent for an efficient NMC dissolution as they are inherently present in the fraction treated by an hydrometallurgical approach. It demonstrates that galvanic interactions are suitable to leach the transition metal oxides from spent LIBs without heating and emission unlike carboxylic acid solutions, allowing the development of low ecological footprint processes. In a more fundamental framework, the results obtained clear several parts of the dissolution NMC mechanism. A fast first step is controlled by the solution pH with a low influence of redox reactions on the kinetic. A slower second stage is subjected to the electrochemical processes with a surface-controlled dissolution.Spent lithium-ion batteries contain attractive valuable resources such as nickel, cobalt and lithium usually considered as potential environmental contaminants. Recent national and international regulations (in European Union, North America or Channel Islands) define requirements to reduce environmental pollution from spent Li-ion batteries (LIBs). The European 2006/66/CE directive drives manufacturers to improve the recycling efficiency of LIBs. Economic, environmental, health and safety issues need paying attention to batteries recycling as well. Pyrometallurgical, hydrometallurgical or combined pyro-hydrometallurgical processes can be used to recycle spent LIBs. The high temperature pyrometallurgical technique allows treating a large volume of spent LIBs ( Physical pre-treatments (grinding, sieving) aim at separating the lithium metal mixed oxides from the main fraction of other solid elements (collectors, membranes) ( Often unconsidered in the literature, the interaction between cathodic materials and metals coming from collectors is investigated as an alternative chemical reagent for an efficient NMC dissolution. This study compares the leaching of NMC electrode by a well-known conventional approach with usual reducing solution (citric, oxalic, formic acids and hydrogen peroxide). An experimental design is first implemented to define the best conditions for the NMC dissolution under low reducing conditions. Effects of temperature, concentration and time are evaluated by this approach. Further, a comparative study between conventional reducing agents and collector metals (Cu and Al) focused on the leaching showing a promising efficiency of collectors with an “environmental friendly” behavior. NMC MX6 electrode material is supplied by Umicore. The particles mean size of NMC powder measured by laser grading with Malvern Mastersizer 2000 is 7.68 Experiments are conducted to determine the most efficient leaching conditions using two non-reducing acids, hydrochloric and sulfuric acid by a 23 factorial design. Factors tested (levels in parentheses) are: acid concentration C (1 and 3 Y is the percentage of metal dissolved, b is the empirical model coefficients, N is the test number and X The dissolution rate has thermodynamic and kinetic implication. Positive electrodes from LIBs have a high chemical stability. Their chemical and electrochemical reactivities evolve with the solid-state properties (structure and composition). The NMC material presents a layered structure including mixed-metal oxides with lithium intercalation. As first approximation, the NMC can be assimilated to a stack of transition metal oxides. From this point of view, NMC is composed of NiO, MnO The leaching efficiency of NMC is evaluated in sulfuric and hydrochloric acids. Effects of concentration, temperature and time are studied to determine the most efficient leaching conditions. The solid to liquid ratio remains constant at 4% (w/v). In the case of hydrochloric acid, the dissolution of nickel, manganese and cobalt is concomitant except in experiments 2 and 6 where manganese is less dissolved than nickel and cobalt. It occurs only when the leaching temperature is set at 90 The results obtained in sulfuric acid show that Ni, Co and Mn show a comparable leaching efficiency at low temperature (30 Although hydrochloric acid is more efficient, for both acids heating is needed to dissolve NMC material. X-ray diffraction analysis on the solid residue shows that it is composed of at least two crystalline compounds, manganese dioxide and a delithiated NMC phase ( The presence of delithiated forms is consistent with lithium deinsertion. This result is in accordance with the literature ( NMC leaching efficiency is evaluated using different reducing agents, citric, oxalic and formic acids. Based on lithium dissolution, the comparison between citric, formic, oxalic and sulfuric acids and their combinations for the NMC dissolution ( without H with H Oxalic acid is the most efficient acid, although Ni, Co and Mn are not detected in solution due to their precipitation with oxalate anions (pKs (NiC The higher leaching efficiency of manganese in presence of sulfuric acid is probably due to an increase of its solubility limit at lower pH. Similar observations are found in the literature ( Leaching efficiency in formic and citric acids is comparable but lower than in oxalic acid. Standard potentials are similar ( To increase the dissolution rate, hydrogen peroxide is added in over-stoichiometry, between 1 and 10 LIBs usually contain copper and aluminum current collectors which can be used as reducing agents considering the redox potentials of Cu In acidic media, the reactions between protons and the metal (Eqs. The calculation of metal consumption by NMC dissolution indicates an over-consumption of 750% for aluminum and 100% for copper. Aluminum is noticeably over-consumed due to a low stability in acidic media, unlike copper. The slight over-consumption of copper is ascribed to the leaching time. Beyond 1 Aluminum easily forms oxide layer ( All media show a significant NMC dissolution in moderate operative conditions (30 Protons activity and carboxylic acids speciation should impact the leaching efficiency. Results in Complete dissolution requires a temperature increase as reported in literature for many redox processes indicating usually a kinetic limitation. Reagent nature and reducing power are crucial properties for a surface-controlled reaction. That is why operative conditions used are different according to the reducing media. These observations suggest that the dissolution of LIBs positive electrodes shows two dissolution steps with different mechanisms and limitations. The comparison of hydrometallurgical recycling processes of LIBs is complex due to different operative conditions and plurality of systems ( Oxalic acid promotes NMC material dissolution at ambient temperature leading to Ni, Co and Mn oxalate precipitation impeding their selective separation. Hydrogen peroxide represents another alternative. Its major disadvantage comes from an over-consumption due to its natural disproportion and the metals from casing and current collector's oxidation. As showed in this work, copper and aluminum promote the full NMC material dissolution by galvanic interactions. Their oxidation avoids toxic gases emissions, carbon dioxide or to resort to thermal energy. Based on emission and energy considerations, they represent an interesting alternative with a reduced environmental footprint. At a fundamental level, leaching results reveal a specific dissolution mechanism of NMC material. The dissolution seems to operate in two leaching phases. The first dissolution step is controlled by the solution pH with a low impact of the reducing agent. It conducts to dissolve 40% of transition metals at pH From a more applied perspective, this study evaluates and compares the reducing effect of mineral, organic and metallic reducing agents on the NMC leaching in acidic media. It points out the large interest to use metallic current collectors as alternative reducing agents. Copper and aluminum are inherently present in the fraction treated by hydrometallurgy and could be advantageously used. It demonstrates that galvanic interactions are suitable to leach the transition metal oxides from spent LIBs without heating and emission unlike carboxylic acid solutions, allowing the development of low ecological footprint processes. The higher NMC leaching efficiency was obtained with the copper collector. The leaching kinetic requires 1 Nevertheless, the diversity of LIBs active materials currently developed raises the issue of the representativeness of such studies towards future materials, showing different compositions. This research was supported by the Materials Transverse Program of the