Acid mine drainage (AMD) was used for the pre-treatment of indigenous South African grass (Eragrostis curvula), and compared to H2SO4 (1 wt%) pre-treatment. The optimal pre-treatment duration were investigated and found to be 1 day for H2SO4 and 3 days for AMD pre-treatment. The optimal biomass solid loadings were found to be 20 wt% for both pre-treatment methods. Additionally, enzymatic hydrolysis and fermentation to produce ethanol were investigated for both separate hydrolysis and fermentation (SHF) and simultaneous saccharification and fermentation (SSF). In both SHF and SSF, the H2SO4 pre-treatment obtained higher concentrations of glucose/ethanol compared to AMD pre-treatment. The concentration of glucose/ethanol obtained using AMD pre-treatment was 70–80% of that achieved using H2SO4 pre-treatment. Empirical equations modeling the glucose/ethanol concentration in all processes were determined using a least squares method. Concentrations predicted by the models were found to have a high correlation (r2 = 0.87–0.99) to concentrations determined experimentally.The burning of fossil fuels is the cause of recently observed atmospheric and oceanic warming, and associated climate change ( To overcome these drawbacks, the production of bioethanol from lignocellulosic biomass (agricultural waste, forestry residue and energy crops) has been investigated ( Various pre-treatment methods have shown effective, including physical, physico-chemical, chemical and biological ( AMD is highly acidic (pH 1–3) water with high concentrations of sulfate (<20 g/L) and heavy metals (iron, aluminum <5 g/L) that is formed through a series of geo-chemical reactions when sulfite rich rocks are exposed to oxygen and water, often as a result of mining activities ( AMD has been found to have a negative effect on aquatic and riparian ecosystems due to the toxicity effects of increased chemical concentration. As the pH increases naturally dissolved heavy metals deposit on the ecosystem floor ( In addition to the suitability of AMD for pre-treatment of biomass, it has also been shown that this could be combined with a process to remediate the AMD using sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB) ( Enzymatic hydrolysis and fermentation has been investigated in different reactor configurations including separate hydrolysis and fermentation (SHF) in which hydrolysis and fermentation occur in separate reactors, and simultaneous saccharification and fermentation (SSF), in which hydrolysis occur in the same reactor. Although SSF reduces the product inhibition of glucose on the hydrolysis reaction by keeping glucose concentration low, the compromised of reactor temperature of SSF (38 °C) between optimal temperature for hydrolysis (45–50 °C) and fermentation (30–37 °C) ( Previous studies have shown that glucose and ethanol concentrations from hydrolysis and fermentation can be predicted using kinetic models ( This paper presents the optimum conditions for pre-treatment of long stem grass using AMD and H The materials and methods are presented in 5 main sub-sections: Materials (characterization of AMD and grass); Optimization of biomass pre-treatment (determination of optimal pre-treatment for maximized enzymatic hydrolysis sugar recovery); Enzymatic hydrolysis and fermentation (performance of SHF and SSF using optimally pre-treated biomass); Analytical methods; and Empirical model development. AMD was sourced from a coal mine in the eMalahleni district in South Africa. pH was determined using the Ohaus ST2100-F Bench top pH meter. Sulfate concentration was determined using a Merck Sulfate Test Kit #114548 ( An indigenous South African grass classified as Celluclast 1.5 L cellulase enzyme (Novozyme), with an activity of 80 FPU/mL, was used for enzymatic hydrolysis at a dosage of 16.5 FPU/g substrate. This was mixed with 0.05 M sodium citrate buffer (pH 4.8). The effect of pre-treatment time on the yield of enzymatic hydrolysis was evaluated. 20 g of grass in was loaded in 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks with 200 mL of either 100 wt% AMD or 1 wt% H The effect of biomass solid loading during pre-treatment on the yield of enzymatic hydrolysis was evaluated. 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks were loaded with 200 mL of either 1 wt% H Enzymatic hydrolysis of pre-treated biomass was then carried out by loading pre-treated biomass (20 wt%) into 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing buffer/cellulase mixture. These were placed in the shaking incubator at 50 °C and 100RPM. Samples were taken after 24 and 48 h and analyzed for glucose. The optimum pre-treatment time was taken as the time after which there was no longer a rapid increase in glucose produced in enzymatic hydrolysis. This was determined to be 24 h for H All further SHF and SSF experiments were conducted with the optimal pre-treatment conditions determined. Many of the methods used in the evaluation of the performance of SHF and SSF were based the NREL LAP “SSF Experimental Protocols — Lignocellulosic Biomass Hydrolysis and Fermentation” ( Yeast for fermentation in both SHF and SSF was isolated from a commercially available home distillers' yeast that has been identified for its fast rate of fermentation and high ethanol tolerance (Alcotech Turbo-yeast 48). The yeast was isolated by inoculating the yeast from packaging into a glucose solution, which was grown at room temperatures for 24 h. YPD agar slants (screw topped culture tubes with YPD agar set at an angle) were then produced from the fermentation broth. Identification of the yeast strain was done using Multi Locus Sequence Typing (MLST) of the following loci ATF1, RPN2, NUP116, STE50 and YBL081W. Extraction of DNA and sequencing of loci was performed by Inqaba Biotech laboratories ( A loopful (10 μL) of To evaluate the performance of SHF and SSF a standard pre-treated biomass was produced as follows. 500 g of grass underwent pre-treatment at 90 °C with either sulfuric acid or AMD at a solid loading ratio of 20 wt%. Sulfuric acid pre-treatment was carried out at 1 wt% H Pre-treated biomass was loaded into 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks with 200 mL of buffer/cellulase mixture at the following solid loading fractions 5, 10, 15 and 20 wt%. Experiments were carried out in duplicate. Flasks were placed in the shaking incubator operating at 50 °C and 100 RPM. Samples were taken after, 0, 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 72, and 168 h and analyze. At 168 h the slurry was filtered using Whatman 54 filter paper. The biomass was washed and dried. The filtrate from the hydrolysis experiments was added to 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks, and inoculated with 10% v/v Pre-treated biomass was loaded into 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks with 200 mL of buffer/cellulase mixture at solid loading fractions of 5-, 10-, 15- and 20 wt%. Experiments were carried out in duplicate. The flasks were inoculated with 10% v/v All liquid samples were centrifuged at 2348 The results from the SHF/SSF experiments were then used to develop an empirical model of the reactions taking place. Empirical equations were determined using a least squares method for fitting empirical equations. Different forms of equations were used for hydrolysis in SHF, fermentation in SHF and SSF due to the different nature of the data received. The glucose concentration during hydrolysis in SHF was found to follow a logarithmic equation of the form. Values for Substituting the equations for The rate of fermentation was found to have two distinct phases during fermentation The concentration of glucose was thus equal to The ethanol concentration, The concentration of ethanol during SSF was found to follow a logarithmic equation of the form Values for The correlation between the experimentally determined data and the results that the model predicts was determined using excels CORREL function that determines the coefficient of determination (r The composition of the biomass is presented in The composition of weeping love grass determined in this study is similar to that reported by The AMD was found to be highly acidic (pH 2.4) with a high concentration of sulfate (12.5 g/L). There was also a high concentration of dissolved iron (4.29 g/L) and low concentrations of dissolved magnesium (0.474 g/L) and aluminum (0.396 g/L). There were trace concentrations (<0.1 g/L) of various other metal such as manganese, silicone, sodium and zinc. Trace concentration of other elements were found, however elements with a concentration of <10 mg/L were not listed. The quality of the AMD used in this investigation was relatively strong, with previous studies reporting AMD pH of 2–3, and sulfate concentrations of 3,5 g/L ( The results for the experiment to determine the optimum pre-treatment time (T) are presented in The concentration of glucose initially increases rapidly with increasing pre-treatment time, followed by a steady increase ( There is no correlation between the biomass solid loading in H As can be seen in The concentration of glucose during hydrolysis in SHF is presented in Increasing the solid loading results in an increase in final glucose concentration. This was found for both H A previous study that investigated the production of glucose from grass pre-treated with AMD achieved a maximum glucose concentration of 4.8 g/L ( It was found that in hydrolysis the final concentration of glucose produced from biomass pre-treated with AMD was 71.9 ± 2.9%% of that achieved in biomass pre-treated with H As can be seen in The concentration of ethanol and glucose during fermentation is presented in As can be seen in Likewise the correlation between measured and predicted ethanol concentration ranges between 0.95 and 0.99 for H Ethanol produced from hydrolysates with a higher initial glucose concentration produced a higher final ethanol concentration. This was found for both hydrolysates produced from H It was found that in fermentation the final concentration of ethanol produced from biomass pre-treated with AMD was 73.5 ± 5.7% of that achieved in biomass pre-treated with H A review of bioethanol production from grass reported a final ethanol concentrations ranging between 4.72 and 16.0 g/L using SHF ( The concentration of ethanol produced during SSF is presented in As can be seen in Increasing the solid loading results in an increase in final ethanol concentration for both H It was found that in SSF the final ethanol concentration produced from biomass pre-treated with AMD was 78.6 ± 6.9% of that achieved with biomass pre-treated with H A review of bioethanol production from grass reported a final ethanol concentration ranging between 1.8 and 28.1 g/L using SSF (insert reference). The final ethanol concentration achieved at 20 wt% in this study are in the middle of this range for both AMD pre-treatment (14.43 g/L), H Although the final ethanol concentration achieved in this study are comparable to previous studies for SSF and SHF using grasses, the final concentration of ethanol is still significantly lower than what is assumed to be achievable (53 g/L) using the most advanced technology and suitable feedstocks ( A summary of the empirical equations used is presented The concentration of glucose and ethanol achieved from biomass pre-treated with AMD ranged between 67 and 89% of that produced from biomass pre-treated with H Although lower final ethanol concentrations require more energy for product separation (distillation), the possible benefit of partial remediation of AMD or incorporation of the two processes into one, may make pre-treatment with AMD advantageous. The potential for cheap/free AMD may also provide added economic incentive for its use. It is recommended that further research be carried out so as to try achieved higher glucose/ethanol concentrations from biomass pre-treated with AMD that are comparable to that of biomass pre-treated with H The high correlation between the experimentally determined and model predicted concentrations (both glucose and ethanol) indicates that the proposed equations accurately model the glucose and ethanol concentration over time. The proposed equations are well suited to initial process design as determining the equation coefficients is less demanding of time and resources than more complicated models. It was found that the optimum conditions for pre-treatment at low temperature (90 °C) were 20 wt% solid loading for both AMD and H This work is based on research supported in part by the