In this study, effects of the starting material on chemical, physical, and biological properties of biomimetic hydroxyapatite ceramic powders (BHA) were investigated. Characterization and chemical analysis of BHA powders were performed by using XRD, FT-IR, and ICP-AES. Microstructural features such as size and morphology of the resulting BHA powders were characterized by using BET, nano particle sizer, pycnometer, and SEM. Additionally, biological properties of the BHA ceramic powders were also investigated by using water-soluble tetrazolium salts test (WST-1). According to the chemical analysis of BHA ceramic powders, chemical structures of ceramics which are prepared under different conditions and by using different starting materials show differences. Ceramic powders which are produced at 80°C are mainly composed of hydroxyapatite, dental hydroxyapatite (contain Na and Mg elements in addition to Ca), and calcium phosphate sulfide. However, these structures are altered at high temperatures such as 900°C depending on the features of starting materials and form various calcium phosphate ceramics and/or their mixtures such as Na-Mg-hydroxyapatite, hydroxyapatite, Mg-Whitlockit, and chloroapatite. In vitro cytotoxicity studies showed that amorphous ceramics produced at 80°C and ceramics containing chloroapatite structure as main or secondary phases were found to be extremely cytotoxic. Furthermore, cell culture studies showed that highly crystalline pure hydroxyapatite structures were extremely cytotoxic due to their high crystallinity values. Consequently, the current study indicates that the selection of starting materials which can be used in the production of calcium phosphate ceramics is very important. It is possible to produce calcium phosphate ceramics which have sufficient biocompatibility at physiological pH values and by using appropriate starting materials.Carbonated hydroxyapatite (C-HA) is the major mineral phase of the natural bone and teeth Nanosized HA particles can be prepared by using variety of techniques such as mechanochemical synthesis SBF is a semi-stable buffer solution Ca(NO Seeded BHA powder samples (treated at 80 The chemical structure and phase purity of the BHA and BHA-HT powders were examined by using X-ray powder diffractometer (XRD; Shimadzu, XRD-2000) with CuKα radiation. The tube voltage and current were 40 The morphology of the powders was examined with the help of the field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, JEOL-JSM-6335F) operating at 10 Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES; Schimadzu, ICPE 9000) was used to determine the molar ratio of Ca/P in the BHA structure. The density and multipoint surface area of dried and heat treated powders were measured by using ultrapicnometer (Quardrosorb, Ultrapyc 1200e) and the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET; Quardrosorb SI, Malvern) technique, respectively. BHA particles were dispersed in ethanol by ultrasonic homogenizer for 10 The L929 rat cell line was maintained in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and penicillin/streptomycin and it was used as a cell culture. The water-soluble tetrazolium salts (WST-1) assay was used to determine to the mitochondrial function. WST-1 test of HA powders were studied according to the ISO-10993 regulations. Ten thousands (10,000) osteoblast cells/well were incubated together with the following concentrations of BHA and BHA/HT particles: 0.02 The structure of the hydroxyapatite ceramics and phase purities of the samples were investigated by XRD and analyzed by ‘Match 3.0.2’ program. Furthermore, relative proportions of phase composition of the ceramic samples were determined by using FullProf tool with the help of the Rietveld method. Besides, the lattice parameters and crystallinity percentage of ceramics were calculated by using XRD patterns. The crystallinity percentage of samples was determined by using the full width at half maximum (FWHM) value of the main XRD peaks of samples. The FWHM values of the BHA-samples (in The resultant powders, labeled BHA-2, BHA-3, BHA-7, BHA-8, BHA-11, BHA-13, BHA-14, BHA-15 and BHA-16 (  XRD patterns of BHA-5 and BHA-6 samples (  XRD patterns of BHA-3/HT, BHA-11/HT and BHA-12/HT samples which were calcinated at 900 The diffraction patterns of BHA-2/HT, BHA-4/HT, BHA-7/HT, BHA-14/HT, BHA-15/HT and BHA-16/HT samples can be seen in The XRD patterns of the BHA-5/HT, BHA-8/HT, BHA-9/HT and BHA-10/HT ( The crystallinity percentage of the samples was established by using FWHM values of the main XRD peaks and it was given in Since the sintering temperature was increased from 80 Furthermore, it has also been determined that features of calcium phosphate ceramics and degradation behaviors of these ceramics upon heat treatment at 900 FTIR spectra of all biomimetic hydroxyapatite ceramics which were produced at 80 According to the FTIR spectra, it can be concluded that dried BHA samples (at 80 The microstructural characteristics of the synthesized BHA samples were investigated by using scanning electron microscopy. It is well known that several factors (such as the precursors, the synthesis process and the precipitation conditions) influence the particle size and the morphology of powders In this study, Ca/P ratio of biomimetic hydroxyapatite ceramics can be seen in In this study, the Ca/P ratio was calculated 1.67 only for BHA-1 structure. However, all the BHA and BHA/HT samples except BHA-15/HT were in the range of Ca/P ratio of natural hard tissues. However, the deviation of Ca/P ratio (1.67) was expected as a consequence of the washing-drying procedure. With the washing-drying process, some free Ca Specific surface areas, average particle size, and density measurements of BHA powders have been given in Cytotoxic effect of hydroxyapatite powders on the L929 cell culture after 24 Besides, when we consider high biocompatibility features of HA ceramics, it is interesting that BHA-3/HT, BHA-11/HT and BHA-12/HT samples containing pure hydroxyapatite phase have cytotoxic effect. Therefore, it is thought that the low cell viability of these ceramic powders could be related to the high crystallinity values (over 90%) of those ceramics. As it was previously mentioned in literature, hydroxyapatite ceramics are produced at high pH conditions. For instance, Mobasherpour et al. In this study, the chemical, physical, and biological effects of starting materials on hydroxyapatite ceramics under biomimetic conditions (7.4 pH and 37 Conclusively, the use of different starting materials in half-stable SBF solution and low pH values affect the chemical composition of calcium phosphate structures. Thus, this leads to the big difference in the biocompatibility features of the final product. The trace elements (Na and Mg) have been successfully incorporated into the biphasic mixtures of apatites with the help of the biomimetic precipitation method by using different precursors. The phase stability and the concentrations of the incorporated elements have been verified by XRD analysis. Besides, FT-IR spectra also confirmed the presence of apatites at 900 This study was supported, in part, by the