Matrix Gla protein (Mgp) is a secreted vitamin K-dependent extracellular matrix protein and a physiological inhibitor of calcification whose gene structure, amino acid sequence and tissue distribution have been conserved throughout evolution. In the present work, the turbot (Scophthalmus maximus) mgp cDNA was cloned and the sequence of the deduced protein compared to that of other vertebrates. As expected, it was closer to teleosts than to other vertebrate groups but there was a strict conservation of amino-acids thought to be important for protein function. Analysis of mgp gene expression indicated branchial arches as the site with higher levels of expression, followed by heart, vertebra and kidney. These results were confirmed by in situ hybridization with a strong mgp expression in branchial arch chondrocytes.
                  Mgp was found to accumulate in gills where it appeared to be restricted to chondrocytes from branchial filaments, while in vertebrae it was localized in vertebral end plates, in growth zones, in vertebral arches and spines and in notochord cells. In the soft tissues analysed, Mgp was mainly detected in kidney and heart, consistent with previous data and providing further evidence for a role of Mgp as a calcification inhibitor and a modulator of the mineralization process. Our studies provide evidence that turbot, an important new species for aquaculture, is also a useful model to study function and expression of Mgp.Matrix γ-carboxyglutamic acid (Gla) protein (Mgp) is a vitamin K-dependent protein known for its capability of binding mineral ions through its gamma-carboxylated glutamic acid residues. Mgp is normally found associated with the organic matrix of cartilage and bone The skeleton is highly diversified throughout fish species and different aquatic habitats and is responsible for body shape, movement and muscle attachment, as well as protection of internal organs. It also plays an important role in physiological functions such as feeding and reproduction, and is the major calcium and/or phosphate reservoir for many species ( Turbot juveniles (~ Total RNA was purified from turbot tissues (vertebrae, liver, kidney, heart and branchial arches) using the TRIZOL (Gibco) method, according to supplier instructions. Integrity of purified RNA was evaluated by gel electrophoresis. The turbot Poly-A All PCR products obtained were fractionated by agarose gel electrophoresis, purified from the gel and cloned into pCR Turbot 18S ribosomal RNA was cloned using 1 Real-time qPCR assays were performed using iCycler PCR system and software to quantify nucleic acids (Bio-Rad, Richmond, USA). Total RNA (1 Turbot liver, spleen, heart, kidney, gut, vertebrae and branchial arches were included in paraffin blocks, sectioned (5–7 Vertebra from adult The hearts from four Western-blot analysis for both validation of ArMgp antibody (developed against Immunohistochemistry was performed with ArMgp primary antibodies validated for turbot Mgp by western blotting (supplementary Fig. 5), using as secondary antibodies peroxidase-conjugated or FITC-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG, as described for other species ( Immunofluorescent Mgp detection procedure was similar to that described above but incubation with goat anti-rabbit IgG FITC-conjugated (Sigma) was performed in a humidified dark chamber. Sections were washed and mounted with glycerol immediately before observation. Results were visualized with a Leica DMLB fluorescence microscope equipped with a Leica DC 300 FX camera. Specificity of the immunoreactions was confirmed by negative controls where (1) primary antibody was replaced with BSA, (2) secondary antibody was replaced with Coon's buffer or (3) either primary or secondary antibodies were omitted. Sense and anti-sense RNA probes were synthesised from a 575-bp partial sequence of turbot Treatment of slides and hybridization conditions were performed as previously described ( Statistical analysis of expression levels was first performed using ANOVA with a The complete nucleotide sequence of turbot Distribution and levels of turbot From all tissues analysed, liver had the lowest levels of Confirming the qPCR data, The antibodies developed against In turbot, the gills consist of four to five branchial arches on each side of the esophagus that attach 2 sets of branchial filaments composed by the primary and secondary lamellas. Both branchial arches and primary lamella have a central core of cartilage (nomenclature used for cartilage follows that of The turbot vertebra is composed by the vertebral In the centre of two adjacent vertebrae, and filling the intervertebral space, is the notochord ( Each trunk vertebrae comprises one haemal and one neural process. Together, the haemal arches form the haemal canal which carries the primary blood vessels, while the neural arches accommodate the spinal cord, and together form the neural canal. From each neural and haemal arch, a spine extends providing anchorage for muscle attachment. Mgp was immunodetected in vertebral arches and spines, by both techniques used ( From all turbot soft tissues analysed (heart, gut, kidney, liver and spleen), accumulation of Mgp was immunodetected only in the endothelium of urinary tubules of kidney ( Comparison of turbot Mgp with sequences from other organisms indicated a higher degree of identity with homologous sequences from fish species (ranging from 80% to 60% amino acid conservation) than with other groups of vertebrates (ranging from 40% to 30% amino acid conservation). However, the evolutionary conservation of many invariant residues identified from the alignment of all vertebrate Mgp sequences, suggests that they are required for maintenance of a correct protein structure and/or to preserve a critical function. Among the unique characteristics that distinguish Mgp from other vitamin K-dependent proteins is the lack of a pro-peptide, with the gamma-carboxylase recognition sequence encoded inside the mature protein ( Previous findings showed that tissue distribution of After branchial arches, heart was the other tissue where significant levels of Vertebrae and kidney, in contrast with heart and branchial arches, showed very low levels of In the kidney, Immunostaining showed Mgp accumulation in the gills only at sites of proliferating chondrocytes from Zellknorpel cartilage of branchial filaments ( In turbot vertebrae, Mgp accumulation was observed at four different sites ( Furthermore, Mgp accumulation was evident in the matrix of vertebral end plates from turbot, a site near vertebrae growth zone. The positive staining with alcian blue in a contiguous slide seems to indicate that this matrix is still undergoing calcification. This result is in contrast with that found in meagre ( Immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry revealed accumulation of Mgp in the notochord cells, both chordoblasts and chordocytes. Since no reports of Mgp accumulation and/or expression in the notochord structures were found in the literature, this is the first report of Mgp accumulation in this structure. The presence of Mgp in this site could be related to a possible role of Mgp in teleost osteogenesis while also preventing local calcification, in agreement with its proposed function in fish and mammals. Immunodetection of Mgp in soft tissues was positive in heart and kidney ( In kidney, accumulation of Mgp was immunodetected in the renal tubules corroborating the results obtained for the expression of this protein. Our results confirm previous reports of Mgp accumulation in kidney by In this report, in addition to the presence of In conclusion, the results presented in this report strongly suggest that in turbot, Mgp expression and function is associated with regulation of mineralization, and provides further evidence confirming that bony fish are indeed useful models to study function, regulation and expression of Mgp. The identification of Mgp in the notochord cells is a novel finding and opens new perspectives for Mgp function in this tissue. In addition we report the intracellular localization of This work was partially funded by FCT (Portuguese Science and Technology Foundation), grant FISHDEV POCTI/CVT/42098/2001, including funding from POCI 2010 and UE funds from FEDER and by MCYT (Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnología), grant SPARUGENES MCYT/AGL2003-03558. Vânia Roberto was a recipient of PhD fellowships (SFRH/BD/38607/2007).