Methods for improving the treatment efficiency of a refractory gold-bearing sulfidic concentrate are proposed. These methods consist of the oxidation of the concentrate during a two-step process, which includes a high temperature ferric leaching step and a subsequent biooxidation step, and the use of organic nutrients during the biooxidation step. The concentrate contained 34.7% pyrite and 7.9% arsenopyrite. The biooxidation of the concentrate (for a one-step process) was conducted at 45°C in two bioreactors that were connected in series under continuous conditions. The pyrite and arsenopyrite oxidation levels after 240h were 60.2% and 92.0%, and the gold recovery level by carbon-in-pulp cyanidation was 65.7%. The two-step process included the leaching of the concentrate by a biologically generated Fe3+-containing solution and the subsequent biooxidation of the leach residue. In this case, the pyrite and arsenopyrite oxidation levels after 240h of biooxidation were 65.7% and 94.1%, and the gold recovery level was 71.7%.
                  The effect of an organic nutrient (yeast extract) on biooxidation during the two-step process was studied. The pyrite and arsenopyrite oxidation levels after 240h of biooxidation under mixotrophic conditions were 73.5% and 95.1%, and the gold recovery level was 77.9%. The effect of the organic nutrient on the microbial population was determined. Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans and Acidithiobacillus caldus were the predominant microorganisms studied under both autotrophic and mixotrophic conditions. Archaeon Acidiplasma sp. MBA-1 was a minor component of the microbial community under autotrophic conditions but was one of the predominant microorganisms studied under mixotrophic conditions. These results suggest that the organic nutrient changed the composition and increased the activity of the microbial population.
                  Thus, a two-step process with organic nutrients added during biooxidation may be considered as an effective strategy for treating refractory pyrite–arsenopyrite concentrates.Enhanced biooxidation of sulfidic minerals is essential for the development of biohydrometallurgy. To achieve this intensification, a two-step process for treating gold-bearing sulfidic concentrates was proposed by The solubilization of metals by acidophilic, chemolithotrophic microorganisms is widely and successfully used in the industrial process of bioleaching or biomining to extract noble and nonferrous metals. Acidophilic microorganisms that are able to oxidize sulfidic minerals are phylogenetically heterogeneous and include representatives of several bacterial and archaeal phyla, such as mesophilic ( Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) was shown to accumulate at high concentrations (100  The effects of organic nutrients on chalcopyrite bioleaching for different temperatures were investigated by The goals of this work were to study approaches for improving the biooxidation process of a refractory gold-bearing sulfidic concentrate (including preliminary high-temperature ferric leaching and the addition of organic nutrients to the media) and to determine the change in the composition of the microbial population due to organic nutrients during a two-step process. A pyrite–arsenopyrite flotation concentrate was used in this work as the gold-bearing sulfidic concentrate. The chemical and mineralogical compositions of the concentrate are presented in A mesophilic microbial consortium containing Ferric leaching was conducted in a 2.0 The investigation of the biooxidation of the concentrate was conducted using three series of experiments: (a) a one-step process that had no source of additional organic nutrients in the media, (b) a two-step process that had no source of additional organic matter in the media and (c) a two-step process that included the addition of yeast extract (0.02%). Experiments on the biooxidation of the concentrate were conducted in two reactors that were connected in series under continuous conditions with periodic feeding and with effluent removal. Biooxidation was conducted in 2.0 Pure cultures of autotrophic and mixotrophic microorganisms were obtained by inoculating selective media with terminal 10-fold dilutions of the pulp liquid phase at 45 The identification of the isolated strains was conducted by analyzing the sequences of the 16S rRNA genes. The extraction of the genomic DNA, the PCR amplification of the 16S rRNA gene using universal bacterial and archaeal primers, the purification of the resultant PCR, the sequencing, and the phylogenetic affiliation of the isolated products were performed as previously described ( The enumeration of the microorganisms was conducted by directly counting them using an Amplival phase-contrast microscope (Carl Zeiss, Germany). The values of the рН and Eh were measured with a рН-150МA pH meter–millivoltmeter (Belarus). The redox potential was measured using a platinum electrode relative to a silver chloride electrode; the values were recalculated relative to a normal hydrogen electrode. The concentrations of the Fe The iron and arsenic contents in the solid phase were measured using the phase method ( The gold content in the solid phase was measured using a fire assay. The extent of gold recovery was determined by carbon-in-pulp cyanidation, which was conducted under the following conditions: pulp density of 30% (w/v), pH 10.2–10.5 (adjusted using NaOH), cyanide (NaCN) concentration of 1.0 Considering the mineralogical composition data, the following reactions could be expected to occur during the ferric leaching of the sulfidic concentrate: The higher the temperature and the higher the pH of the pulp, the higher the rate of the reaction that includes jarosite formation ( The leach residue was then subjected to biooxidation, in which reactions The flotation concentrate used in the present work is a pyrite–arsenopyrite type that has a sulfidic mineral ratio of FeS Under the parameters specified above, ferric leaching occurs within 7 Thus, the product of the ferric leaching of the concentrate, which was used as a raw material for biooxidation, had a FeS The options for improving the efficiency of the biooxidation of gold-bearing sulfidic concentrate are proposed. These options include the preliminary ferric leaching of the concentrate and the addition of organic nutrients to the media. It should be noted that the initial concentrate could contain both organic matter of natural origin (from the ore) and organic matter that was introduced during its production (e.g., flotation reagents). However, the residue obtained after the ferric leaching of the concentrate should contain less organic matter than the initial concentrate due to the organic matter washing off into the liquid phase. Investigating the effects of introducing additional organic compounds into the pulp for the biooxidation of gold-bearing sulfidic concentrates is therefore an important issue. The physicochemical parameters of the pulp liquid phase during biooxidation are presented in  The calculated oxidation levels of both of the elements present in the sulfidic minerals and of the minerals themselves were used for a thorough assessment of the efficiency of the biooxidation of the concentrate. The results are presented in The data on the parameters of the pulp liquid phase, the content of the elements and minerals in the biooxidized residues, and the oxidation levels and rates of the sulfidic minerals indicate that the treatment of this refractory pyrite–arsenopyrite gold-bearing concentrate is more efficient for the two-step process with organic nutrients (yeast extract) in the media. Under industrial conditions, cheaper organic materials or waste products, such as corn extract, may be used to replace the yeast extract ( These results can be explained by a higher ratio of mixotrophic microorganisms in the microbial community in the presence of the YE and by the enhanced oxidation activity of these microorganisms. The predominant microorganisms were isolated and identified to confirm this assumption. The data on gold recovery from the biooxidized residues by carbon-in-pulp cyanidation ( The content of organic carbon (up 1.69%) and elemental sulfur (up 0.36%) in the concentrate and in the biooxidized residues is insignificant; therefore, their presence could not affect the gold recovery by cyanidation (due to the sorption capacity of carbonaceous matter and the reaction of elemental sulfur with cyanide to form thiocyanate). The dependence of gold recovery from the concentrate on the sulfidic sulfur oxidation level is shown in The total number of microorganisms in the pulp liquid phase was as high as 10 Two strains were isolated from the pulp for both processes without the YE. A pure culture of an Three strains were isolated from the community that was formed during the biooxidation step of the two-step process with the YE. A pure culture of an The autotrophic bacterium All of the obtained ferrous iron-oxidizing microorganisms were mixotrophic ( The addition of the YE to the pulp led to an increase in the species diversity of the ferrous iron-oxidizing mixotrophic microorganisms. While Thus, the results of the microbiological studies explain the intensification of the oxidation of the sulfidic concentrate when YE is present. Options for increasing the treatment efficiency of a refractory gold-bearing sulfidic concentrate were proposed. These options consisted of the oxidation of the concentrate during a two-step process, which included a high temperature ferric leaching step and a subsequent biooxidation step, and the use of organic nutrients during the biooxidation step. The biooxidation of the concentrate (one-step process) was conducted at 45 The concentration of the organic nutrients in the media is therefore one of the most important factors that affect the efficiency of the biooxidation of sulfidic raw materials under moderately thermophilic conditions. The addition of organic nutrients to the media during the biooxidation of the sulfidic concentrate led to an increase in the biodiversity of the microorganisms due to the activation of the mixotrophic microorganisms (bacteria The ferric leaching of the concentrate and the addition of YE during biooxidation increased the gold recovery by 12.2% after 240 Thus, a two-step process with organic nutrients added during biooxidation may be considered as an effective strategy for treating refractory pyrite–arsenopyrite concentrates. The residence time of the concentrate in the bioreactors was 10 This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, Grant No. 10-04-00589.