The effect of molybdenum and nickel on the microstructure and properties of low carbon steels in the carburized and hardened conditions were studied by means of optical microscopy, surface hardness and microhardness measurements, X-ray diffractometry and impact tests. It was found that molybdenum produces fine martensite and nickel has no effect in refining the size of martensite. Molybdenum with nickel is more effective than molybdenum without nickel in refining the size of martensite. Molybdenum and nickel enhance the formation of retained austenite in the case of carburized and hardened low carbon steels but nickel is more effective than molybdenum in enhancing the formation of retained austenite. Molybdenum improves and nickel reduces the maximum case hardness steels. The presence of nickel decreases the effect of molybdenum in the increment of maximum case hardness. Molybdenum and nickel both increase the core hardness but molybdenum is more effective than nickel in increasing the core hardness. Molybdenum with nickel is more effective in increasing the core hardness than molybdenum without nickel. Molybdenum and nickel both reduce the toughness of the core the steels. Nickel is more detrimental to toughness than molybdenum.Many machine parts used for heavy duty applications, such as drive gears, drive shafts, cam shafts, bus and truck gears, crank-shafts, axles, etc. demand increased hardness and wear resistance in the case and better toughness in the core than those of common parts made of low carbon steel in the carburized and hardened conditions. Moreover, advanced aircraft and helicopter require high-duty transmission gear materials which must be able to retain their hardness and strength at elevated temperature up to about 315 Small addition of alloying elements, such as Nb, V, Mo, Ti, etc. can strengthen the steel tremendously and there is an additional strengthening effect due to the precipitation of the carbide or carbonitride of the added elements The carburizing behaviour of plain carbon steel is well established. Some studies have already been done on the carburizing behaviour of low alloy steels containing nickel, chromium, molybdenum, vanadium and niobium Four 0.13% carbon steels with compositions given in Two sets of the polished specimens (about The surface hardness of both the carburized, hardened and tempered (QT) specimens and carburized, hardened, tempered and sub-zero treated (QST) specimens was measured by a Rockwell hardness testing machine. These heat-treated specimens were then sectioned, ground, mounted, polished and lightly etched in 2% nital. Microhardness measurements were then carried out from the surface to the core on the lightly etched specimens. The hardness profiles were then drawn by using microhardness value (VHN) at different points from the sub-surface to the core. The specimens were again polished properly and etched in 2% nital for optical microscopy and photomicroscopy. The retained austenite contents in the case of the specimens were measured by X-ray diffraction technique using Cu To assess the toughness of the core of the carburized and heat treated steels, the standard Charpy V-notch specimens of each of steel were heated at 950 Optical microscopy revealed that the structures in the case of steels 1–4 carburized, hardened and tempered consist of tempered martensite and retained austenite for all the carburizing periods. For all the steels percentage of retained austenite decreases towards the center in the case and at some depth martensite becomes about cent percent. Typical optical micrographs of steels 1–4 carburized for 4 The retained austenite content also increase with the increase in carburizing time in all the steels ( Molybdenum in steels 2 and 3 exists as molybdenum carbide (Mo Low carbon martensite was found in the core of the carburized specimens of steels 1–4 in the hardened and tempered condition. Steel 1 produced the coarsest and steel 3 produced the finest martensite in the core while Steel 4 produced low carbon martensite similar to that of steel 1 and Steel 2 produced low carbon martensite finer than steel 1 and coarser than steel 3. These variations in the finness of low carbon martensite of the steels is clearly due to the difference in their prior austenite grain size The microstructures observed in the core of the QST specimens of all the steels were similar to those found in the core of QT specimens. This is clearly due to the absence of retained austenite which can be transformed to more stable phases at the sub-zero temperature in the core the carburized and hardened specimens. The hardness profiles from the subsurface to the core of the hardened and tempered (QT) specimens and those for the hardened, sub-zero treated and tempered (QST) specimens of steels 1–4 carburized for 1, 2 and 4 The surface hardness of the QT and QST specimens of carburized steels 1–4 as measured by Rockwell hardness testing machine are presented in From the hardness profiles ( Under the identical conditions of carburizing and hardening, molybdenum containing steel 2 produced maximum case hardness and steel 4 containing nickel produced minimum case hardness and steel 3 produced case hardness higher than steel 4 lower than steel 1 ( It is clear from  No appreciable change is observed in the core hardness of all the steels with the increase of carburizing time in both QT and QST conditions ( The impact test results have been presented in It is also evident from  Molybdenum and nickel both enhance the formation of retained austenite in the cases of carburized and hardened steels with or without sub-zero treatment. Nickel is more effective than molybdenum in enhancing the formation of retained austenite. In the presence of molybdenum this enhancing effect of nickel is increased. Molybdenum produces fine martensite but nickel has no effect in refining the size of martensite. Molybdenum with nickel is more effective than molybdenum without nickel in refining the size of martensite. Molybdenum increases and nickel decreases the maximum case hardness of low carbon steel under all the heat treatment conditions. The presence of nickel decreases the effect of molybdenum in the increment of maximum case hardness. Molybdenum and nickel both increase the core hardness but molybdenum is more effective than nickel in the increment of core hardness of low carbon steels. Molybdenum with nickel is more effective in increasing the core hardness than molybdenum without nickel. Sub-zero treatment increases the surface hardness and maximum hardness of the carburized low carbon steels in the hardened and tempered conditions. Under all the heat-treatment conditions the surface hardness of the carburized plain carbon, molybdenum and nickel steels is always lower than the maximum hardness. Molybdenum and nickel both reduce the toughness of the core of low carbon steels in the carburized and hardened condition. Nickel is more detrimental to toughness than molybdenum. The combined effect of molybdenum and nickel is greater than that of either molybdenum or nickel alone in reducing toughness.