The oxidation kinetics of a massive pyrite (FeS2) sample from Zacatecas, Mexico were investigated in sulfuric acid solution under oxygen pressure. The effects of temperature (170–230°C), particle size (49–125 μm diameter), agitation speed (650–950 rpm), oxygen partial pressure (345–1035 kPa) and pulp density (1–20 g/L) were evaluated. The catalytic effect of Cu(II) was also observed.
                  Fe(III) was found to be the initial product of pyrite oxidation, although the proportion of total dissolved iron as Fe(III) did reach a minimum during each test, indicating the generation and subsequent oxidation of reduced sulfur species. Pyrite oxidation kinetics are limited by the rate of reaction at the pyrite surface, with an activation energy of 33.2 kJ/mol (7.9 kcal/mol) with respect to dissolved oxygen concentration, or 41.7 kJ/mol (10.0 kcal/mol) with respect to oxygen partial pressure, over the temperature range 170–230°C. The reaction order with respect to oxygen partial pressure was found to be 0.5 at 210°C, indicating the first charge transfers of both the anodic and cathodic half-cell reactions to be the most likely rate-controlling steps.
                  Conversion data conform to the shrinking sphere model initially, but deviate at higher conversions, indicating passivation of the mineral surface, most likely by elemental sulfur, which may precipitate via the disproportionation of other reduced sulfur species (e.g., thiosulfate) that form as intermediate products of pyrite oxidation. In order to account quantitatively for this passivation phenomenon, a new “passivating shrinking sphere” model is proposed which fits the conversion data precisely over the entire range.Pyrite (FeS Pyrite oxidation has been studied extensively because of its importance in sulfide mineral separations by flotation, in the generation of acid in mine waters and in leaching. Aqueous oxidation of pyrite has been reviewed thoroughly by As temperature increases, Ferric sulfate has been reported as an important oxidizing agent for pyrite At high temperatures, ferric sulfate tends to hydrolyze, resulting in the precipitation of ferric oxide (Fe  1. It is accepted by all researchers that the pressure oxidation of pyrite is controlled by the surface reaction rate. Reaction orders with respect to oxygen partial pressure depend on both temperature and pressure. First-order dependence is exhibited predominantly at lower oxygen partial pressures (<20 atm) and at all temperatures employed, suggesting a mass transfer limitation. One-half order dependence is found at higher oxygen partial pressures and temperatures. 2. 3. Activation energies between 46 and 55 kJ/mol are reported at temperatures below 160°C. Interestingly, Although extensive investigations have been performed by previous researchers, all of the reported work has been conducted at temperatures lower than 180°C. No data is available on the kinetics of pyrite dissolution during acid pressure oxidation over the temperature range from 180 to 230°C, which is the range employed by most commercial plants. From a process optimization standpoint, it is important to know the behavior of pyrite during acidic pressure oxidation at temperatures above 180°C; hence, the necessity of the present study. The main objectives of our investigation were to gather data on the pressure oxidation of pyrite over the typical temperature range employed in the commercial pressure oxidation of refractory gold ores, and to develop a reliable rate equation which may be used to model the pressure leaching of refractory gold ores. High-grade massive pyrite specimens originating from Zacatecas, Mexico were obtained from Ward's Natural Science Establishment, of Ontario, Canada. The samples were crushed, ground and dry-sieved to different narrow size fractions, namely −149+105, −105+74, −74+53 and −53+44 μm. The samples were then washed to remove any fines adhering to particle surfaces which might interfere with the interpretation of the results, and air-dried at ambient temperature. The samples were analyzed by two analytical labs in order to obtain reliable assays. The results indicated that the purity of the pyrite sample was 97±1%, that the mole ratio of sulfur to iron was 1.92, which is very close to the stoichiometric value for pyrite, and that iron and sulfide sulfur composition in each size fraction showed very little variation, with maximum differences of only 0.6% for iron and 1% for sulfide sulfur. The pyrite crystal structure was confirmed by X-ray diffraction. All solutions were prepared with reagent grade chemicals and deionized water. Medical grade oxygen gas was used in all experiments. All pressure oxidation experiments were conducted in a 2-L Parr titanium autoclave. The temperature was monitored using a thermocouple probe to an accuracy of ±1°C and maintained at desired set points by external heating and by passing cooling water through the internal cooling coils. Cooling water flow was regulated by a solenoid valve. Agitation was provided by dual four-pitched-blade impellers. Temperature and agitation speed were maintained using a Parr controller unit. Oxygen was introduced into the autoclave near the bottom through a dip tube, which was also connected to an autoclave sampler. Heat resistant superalloy valves were selected to avoid any corrosion in contact with oxidizing acid solution. The slurry used for most experiments had a standard composition of 1 g/L pyrite and 0.5 M H It is well known that titanium is corroded in high temperature sulfuric acid solutions in the absence of an oxidizing agent (i.e., Cu(II), Fe(III) or O A slurry with several borosilicate glass ampoules containing sulfuric acid, or a solution with one borosilicate glass ampoule containing pyrite, was placed in the autoclave, which was then sealed and heated. Once the desired temperature was reached, an initial sample was taken, then the unit was pressurized with oxygen for 1 min. Finally, the ampoules were broken by engaging the impellers and the test was thus initiated. In the tests at low pulp density, slurry samples were withdrawn periodically from the autoclave through the dip tube. The withdrawn sample was cooled immediately (in less than 5 s) to room temperature and filtered. At the end of the run, the system was cooled quickly (in less than 15 min) to room temperature with the cooling coil. The slurry was removed and filtered, the residue was washed and dried, and both solids and solution were analyzed. In order to avoid contamination from any iron residue precipitated onto the walls of the bomb and internal parts, the bomb was soaked after each experiment with 1.5 L of 15% HCl solution for 30 min at a temperature of 80°C, then cooled to room temperature. The solution was analyzed for total iron to determine the extent of precipitation. Then, after being washed with water, the bomb was soaked overnight in a solution containing 10% HNO Solution samples from the low pulp density tests were analyzed for Fe(II) by redox titration with Ce(SO Pressure oxidation tests were performed under the following conditions: agitation speeds from 650 to 950 rpm, temperatures from 170 to 230°C, mean particle sizes (diameters) from 49 to 125 μm, oxygen partial pressures from 345 to 1035 kPa (50–150 psi) and pyrite pulp densities of 1 and 20 g/L. The mean particle size was taken as the square root of the product of two adjacent sieve sizes (i.e., the geometric mean sieve opening). The standard conditions for the leaching experiments were as follows: agitation speed of 800 rpm, temperature of 210°C, O All of the experimental results are presented in For the tests at low pulp density, pyrite conversion was calculated from the concentration of iron in solution divided by the mass of iron in the head sample divided by the original solution volume. The ratio of Fe(III) to total dissolved iron ([Fe(III)]/[Fe For the tests at high pulp density, a digital oxygen mass flowmeter was used to record the consumption of oxygen during pressure oxidation. Thus, pyrite conversion was calculated from the oxygen consumed according to Agitation speed is often important in liquid–solid reactions, especially those under diffusion control. The initial rate of pyrite extraction was recorded at 650, 800 and 950 rpm under the standard conditions. It was observed that agitation speed had no significant effect on the initial rate of pyrite oxidation when maintained at 800 rpm or higher. Based on these results, a stirring speed of 800 rpm was chosen for all subsequent experiments to minimize iron precipitation by solution splashing. The effect of temperature (Tests 1 through 4) on pyrite conversion is shown in This fit is demonstrated by the linear plots of Plotting the natural logarithm of 1/ Returning to If we define the point on the x-axis of When One can see both situations in This model is similar in concept to a model put forward by  In order to clarify the role of pyrite in the oxidation of Fe(II), a blank test was run under the standard conditions with 0.6 g Fe(II) added to the initial solution. The results of this test are shown in The effect of particle size (Tests 2 and 5 through 7) on pyrite conversion is shown in Plots of − The relationship between the ratio of [Fe(III)]/[Fe The effect of oxygen partial pressure (Tests 2, 8 and 9) on pyrite conversion is shown in Assuming symmetry factors of approximately 0.5, then the first charge transfer step must be the rate-controlling step in both half-cell reactions, or else the reaction order with respect to oxygen partial pressure would report as some value other than 0.5. If, for example, the second charge transfer step of the anodic process was the rate-controlling step, as Now that we have confirmed that the pyrite oxidation rate is 1/2-order with respect to oxygen partial pressure, it is possible to correct the Arrhenius activation energy for the temperature effect on the saturation concentration of dissolved oxygen. According to the recent model of Since Plots of − A partial explanation for the dependence of the onset of passivation on oxygen partial pressure may be found in the plots of the [Fe(III)]/[Fe The effect of pulp density (Tests 2 and 10) on pyrite conversion at 1 and 20 g/L, under the standard conditions, is shown in The effect of copper ions (Tests 2, 11 and 12), added as 5 g/L anhydrous CuSO It is doubtful whether copper is actually involved in any galvanic interactions at the pyrite surface. Instead, its catalytic effect probably stems from the fact that the reaction between Cu(I) and dissolved oxygen under these conditions is virtually instantaneous Several investigators have postulated the mechanism of pyrite oxidation as involving the formation of sulfoxy intermediates, most notably thiosulfate The sulfur, most likely in the form of polysulfides adsorbed onto the pyrite surface, is also oxidized, possibly through one or more thionate intermediates. However, if the rate of this oxidation were to become too slow, owing perhaps to a decrease in potential near the pyrite surface due to the local buildup of Fe(II) as indicated in The oxygen pressure oxidation kinetics of pyrite in sulfuric acid media were studied in the temperature range of 170–230°C. A number of conclusions may be drawn from the results: 1. Pyrite oxidation during acidic oxygen pressure leaching at high temperature exhibits 1/2-order dependency on dissolved oxygen concentration, suggesting an electrochemical leaching mechanism. 2. Fe(III) appears to be produced directly from the oxidation of pyrite by dissolved oxygen, with a portion being subsequently reduced to Fe(II), most likely during the oxidation of reduced sulfur intermediates. 3. At low pulp density, pyrite forms a passivating film which impedes oxidation, and which may cause it to cease altogether, depending on the extent of oxidation at the onset of passivation and the rate of passivation. The former would appear to be a function of electrochemical potential at the pyrite surface (as indicated by the ratio of Fe(III) to total iron in solution), while the latter is mostly a function of temperature. Increasing the pulp density appears to prevent the onset of passivation. 4. At least until the onset of passivation, pyrite oxidation conforms to the shrinking sphere model, denoting surface reaction control, as given in 5. Beyond the onset of passivation, the rate of pyrite oxidation is adequately described by a “passivating shrinking sphere model” as given in particle size, μm initial particle size, μm Arrhenius activation energy, kJ/mol passivation slope oxygen partial pressure, kPa gas constant (8.314 J/gmol K) time, min temperature,°C or K pyrite conversion parameter of the passivating shrinking sphere model dimensionless particle size time required for complete reaction, min parameter of the passivation shrinking sphere model parameter of Tromans' model of oxygen saturation The authors express their sincere gratitude to Barrick Gold Corporation, SNC-Lavalin and the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (Industrially Oriented Research Grant 194122-96) for their financial support.