Introduction
                  Management of complex tibial plateau fractures can be challenging for orthopaedic surgeons. Wide disagreement still remains about the best surgical technique to use in these fractures. The purpose of this study was to compare the results of complex tibial plateau fractures treated by an open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) versus hybrid external fixation (EF) in term of clinical and functional outcomes.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  We retrospectively examined a series of 79 patients affected by tibial plateau fractures admitted at our Department between January 2006 and November 2011. Forty-one patients were treated using a hybrid EF; in 38 cases, ORIF technique was used. Clinical evaluation was performed using the method of Rasmussen; functional assessment was made using the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Arthritis Index (WOMAC) questionnaire. Residual pain was detected using a Numeric Rating Scale (NRS).
               
                  Results
                  The average time to union in the plate group was 17.2 weeks (9.1–45 weeks), while in the EF one 15.9 (7.5–32). The mean overall hospital stay was 14.2 days for the ORIF group and 7.8 for the EF group. At the last follow-up, the mean Rasmussen score was 24.9 (good) in the patients treated with ORIF and 25 (good) in those who received EF. The WOMAC index disclosed a relatively higher score in the EF group (80.5 ORIF–84.2 EF). Pain evaluation revealed no differences between the groups.
                  In terms of complications, deep infection occurred in four (10.5%) patients belonging to the ORIF group and 2 (4.9%) to EF one. Signs of osteoarthritis (OA) were observed in 4 (10.5%) knees that had open reduction and in 11 (26.9%) that had a hybrid external fixator.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Either ORIF or hybrid EF represents a valid treatment option in complex tibial plateau fractures. However, hybrid external fixation has shown relative better functional outcome results, relative lower rate of infection and decreased hospital stays. These aspects make of EF our best choice in case of high-energy complex tibial fractures.The tibial plateau fractures represent 1–2% of all fractures and approximately 8% of the fractures in elderly In the current medical literature there is no consensus about the best approach to treat these fractures. Among the different options available, the two surgical methods most commonly in use are plating internal fixation and hybrid external fixation (EF). Whatever type of technique is used, principal goals of treatment includes an anatomical reconstruction of proximal tibial articular surface, a good restoring of limb axial alignment and a stable fixation of metadiaphyseal comminution to allow early knee mobilization and weight bearing. Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) allows anatomic reduction and stable fixation, but extensive exposure of lateral and medial side is often required; the combination of original injury damage with the extensive surgical approach, led to high rate of complications including wound healing problems and infection The purpose of this retrospective study was to compare the results of complex tibial plateau fractures treated by ORIF versus hybrid EF in term of clinical and functional outcomes. We retrospectively examined a consecutive series of 79 patients affected by tibial plateau fractures admitted at our Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology between January 2006 and November 2011. Patients were identified from our trauma database and data were accumulated from case notes, operative records and radiographs. Inclusion criteria were the presence of a complex tibial plateau fracture (IV, V, VI according to Schatzker classification), subjects aged over 18 years and the ability to walk without assistance before injury. Patients with bilateral fractures, ipsilateral fracture of femur, any other limb fractures, open fractures or severe head injury with permanent neurological deficit were excluded from the study. Our study sample consisted of 46 (58%) man and 33 women (42%) with an average age of 54.1 years (18–81). All patients had antero-posterior and lateral knee view radiographs at our emergency department and a knee computed tomography (CT) scan was always performed in order to obtain a good classification. The final sample included 23 Schatzker type IV (29%), 29 type V (37%) and 27 type VI (34%). Forty-one patients were treated using an hybrid external fixation (EF) (10 – IV; 15 – V; 16 – VI); in 38 cases, ORIF technique with 3.5 In 52 (66%) patients, who sustained high-energy fractures (motor vehicle accident or fall from height greater than 3 The soft tissue condition was the most important item on our preoperative planning in order to understand the better timing of the operation and the choice of the surgical procedure. The group treated with hybrid EF received surgery at average 3.5 days after trauma (1.5–6 days), while the ORIF group at average 5 days (4.2–9 days). All procedures in both groups were performed under general or spinal anaesthesia, with prophylactic antibiotic coverage administered and image-intensifier assistance. In the ORIF group, a combined medial and lateral incision was used for Schatzker type V and VI ( In the hybrid EF group, the patients were managed with a closed, percutaneous reduction of the articular surface followed by insertion of percutaneous lag screws to stabilise the articular fragments. In 3 subjects a small incision over the antero-medial portion of the tibia metaphysis was made in the tibial cortex: a smooth periosteum elevator was utilised, under image intensifier control, to lift and relocate the articular fragments. No bone grafts or plates were used in the EF group. After closed or mini-open reduction of the fractures fragments, a hybrid EF was applied. The frame consisted of a proximal ring with 4 k-wires (2 with olives and 2 without) and 3 distal 5/6 Patients were encouraged to start early knee range of movement exercise and quadriceps strengthening exercise. In both groups, partial weight bearing was allowed after 6–8 weeks and full weight bearing deferred until 12 weeks or at complete fracture healing. Fracture healing was determined by the presence of a bridging callus in at least three of the four cortices in the AP and lateral radiographs and by the clinical impression of pain-free weight bearing. Depending on their general condition, patients were discharged from the hospital between 5th and 10th post-operative day. After discharge, all patients were followed regularly in the trauma clinic for clinical and radiological assessments. Clinical evaluation was performed using the method of Rasmussen We use the Chi-Squared test (with Yates correction for continuity), with 5% confidence level, to check the difference in frequency of complications between the two samples. We used the All 79 patients were available for clinical and radiographic follow-up at an average of 38.4 months (range12–72). The mean follow-up was 39.4 months (13–72) for the EF group and 35.1 months (12–68) for plates one. With respect to follow-up, the difference was not as significant between the groups ( No significant differences existed regarding gender ratio, mean age and injured limbs between the two groups. Regarding the trauma mechanism, we noticed a higher number of patients with low-energy trauma in the ORIF group (18/27, 67%) with respect to those treated with EF (9/27, 33%). Similarly, we notice a lower number of patients with high-energy trauma in the ORIF group (20/52, 38%) with respect to those treated with EF (32/52, 62%). These results confirm that the EF treatment was preferred in cases of high-energy trauma (Chi-square test, The overall mean duration healing was 16.8 weeks. The average time to union in the external fixation group was 15.9 weeks (7.5–32) while in plating group was 17.2 weeks (9.1–45); no statistical difference was demonstrated between the two groups ( Two groups were not significantly different with respect to the mean number of preoperative days (3.5 for EF group and 5 for ORIF; At the last follow-up, the mean Rasmussen score was 24.9 (good) in the patients treated with open reduction and internal fixation and 25 (good) in those who received EF. With respect to Rasmussen score, the difference was not significant between the groups ( A comparison of the functional outcome, using the WOMAC index, highlighted a relatively higher score in the EF group (80.5 ORIF–84.2 EF); however, this difference was not statistically significant ( At the time of final follow-up, radiographic signs of osteoarthritis (OA) were detected in 4 (10.5%) knees that had open reduction (Ahlbäck type 3) and in 11 (26.9%) that had a hybrid external fixator (7-Ahlbäck type 2; 4-Ahlbäck type 3) (Chi-square test, Superficial infection was detected in 5 cases (3 – EF; 2 – ORIF) and successfully controlled with debridement and antibiotic therapy. Four (10.5%) patients treated with ORIF developed deep infection; one of them required TKR after 16 months from the first surgery. Two (4.9%) cases of deep infection were observed in the EF group. Even if the incidence of deep infection was relative higher in the ORIF group, this difference was not significant between two groups (Chi-square test, Three (7.3%) patients treated with EF spanning the knee developed knee stiffness requiring manipulation under anaesthesia; one (2.6%) case of screw pull-out occurred in the ORIF group requiring a second stage procedure ( The optimal treatment of complex tibial plateau fractures has remained challenging and controversial. Over the past few decades, various Authors have advocated different methods of treatment, but at the present there is no consensus about the best approach in these complex injuries. However, according to literature, ORIF with dual plating A correct comparison between different studies is often complex because of the heterogeneity of injuries, kind of treatment and outcome rating; moreover, there are only few papers which directly compare different surgical techniques The main goal of our study was to determine whether hybrid external fixation or internal fixation is the most appropriate technique to treat complex tibial plateau fractures, in terms of clinical and functional outcomes. Among the different scoring systems used to evaluate clinical and functional outcomes, we utilised the WOMAC and Rasmussen scores. According to the WOMAC, external fixation performed better, generating higher average scores at the final follow-up; however, the difference in average scores between the two techniques was not statistically significant, and, similarly, no statistical differences were found using the Rasmussen scale. Moreover, the two techniques were not statistically distinguishable in terms of residual pain, using the NRS scale. Our findings are consistent with those presented by the Canadian Orthopaedic Trauma Association in a multicenter, prospective, randomised clinical trial of 83 V and VI tibial plateau fractures treated with ORIF or EF. The Authors did not find any difference in average pain, stiffness and function scores at one and two year horizons, using the WOMAC and HSS scales In terms of fractures healing time, we noticed an overall mean duration of 16.8 weeks with no significant difference between the two samples. Our findings are supported by Yu et al. In our study we compared also the two groups in terms of complications and in particular of infection. This variable is often used by orthopaedic surgeons to support the choice of EF versus ORIF. In our sample, five cases of superficial infection were detected (3 – EF; 2 – ORIF); all cases were successfully resolved with local therapy and oral antibiotics. We observed four (10.5%) cases of deep infection in the ORIF group, and only two (4.9%) cases in the EF group; these results are particularly important if we consider that the EF treatment was preferred in cases of high-energy trauma. Even if the statistical power of this comparison is limited by the size of the two samples, our findings are broadly in line with the literature. In a study on 33 bicondylar tibial plateau fractures treated with hybrid EF, Babis et al. reported only one case of deep infection (3%) Secondary osteoarthritis remains a problem in the follow-up of knee intrarticular fractures. Different studies demonstrated that articular irregularities and joint instability predispose to early sign of OA Our results are broadly in line with those presented in other studies. At the last follow-up, 4 (10.5%) patients in the ORIF group and 11 (26.9%) in the EF group showed radiographic evidence of osteoarthritis. However, is our opinion that a follow-up longer than 5 years will be necessary to further detect the development of OA and the need for TKR. Based on our findings, both internal and external fixations represent a valid treatment option in complex tibial plateau fractures with the expectation of reasonable results. However, EF has shown relative better functional outcome results and a relative lower rate of infection. In our opinion these advantages could justify the more common use of this technique, especially in those patients with high-energy tibial plateau fractures, as observed in our retrospective analysis. Moreover EF is associated with shorter length of hospital stay and thus it is cost effective, especially in older patients with multiple comorbidities. As limitations of this study, we should consider its retrospective nature and the size of the two samples that limit the statistical power of our comparison. Moreover a follow-up shorter than 5 years could be inadequate to draw correct conclusions about the development of late complications, particularly of post-traumatic osteoarthritis and the need for TKR. No funding was received in support of this study. None of the other authors have any conflicts of interest to declare.