High gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) has witnessed widespread application in many scientific and industrial fields. In this paper, the favorable aspect ratio of matrices in axial HGMS was investigated, providing that matrices’ cross-section area were equal. Particle capture models for different circumstances were derived and selection method of applicable particle capture models for specific conditions when varying matrix aspect ratio γ (1/4 ∼ 5) was put forward. Particle capture cross section of matrices under a variety of conditions were depicted and quantified. The horizontal and vertical dimension of the particle capture cross section increases and decreases with the increase of aspect ratio, respectively. The particle capture cross section area increases rapidly and slowly before and after reaching magnetization saturation. There exists a favorable matrix aspect ratio at which the particle capture cross section area (particle capture efficiency) reaches the maximum. The favorable aspect ratio is induction dependent and decreases with the increase of magnetic induction. In scientific studies and industrial practice employing axial HGMS, matrices with the favorable aspect ratio can be adopted basing on results of this investigation, which is quite beneficial for the recovery of fine weakly magnetic particles.the applied magnetic field, A/m the Magnetic induction, T the saturation magnetic, T half the long axis of the elliptic matrix, m half the short axis of the elliptic matrix, m half the focal length of the elliptic matrix, m aspect ratio of the matrix, – ratio of long axis to short axis, radius of the circular matrix, m radius of the magnetic particle, m volume of the magnetic particle, m magnetic susceptibility of the magnetic particle, 0.0025. angle between the magnetic field and x axis, ° elliptic angle coordinate – elliptic coordinate – imaginary symbol – napierian base - permeability of vacuum, 4π × 10 the velocity of the fluid, 0.05 m/s viscosity of the fluid, 1 mPa·s High gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) is efficient in disposing weakly magnetic materials and has witnessed widespread application in many scientific and industrial fields ( To investigate effect of matrix aspect ratio on the performance in HGMS, two aspects should be focused on: derivation of particle capture models for different cases and selection of applicable particle capture models for specific conditions. For selection of applicable particle capture models, a key problem is the judgment of magnetization state (saturated or unsaturated) of matrix. The magnetization state of matrices will vary with not only the applied magnetic induction, but also matrix aspect ratio. In a constant magnetic induction, magnetization state of matrix will change with increasing aspect ratio and matrix can reach saturation even under a low magnetic induction. Previous researchers paid little attention to the magnetization state of matrix in HGMS ( In this paper, based on our previous work, influence of matrix aspect ratio on matrix’s particle capture performance in axial HGMS was investigated, considering the variation of matrix’s magnetization state. Particle capture models for different cases were derived and particle capture cross section of matrices with different aspect ratio were depicted with the derived models. Particle capture cross section area for different cases were depicted and quantified. Favorable aspect ratio of matrix in axial HGMS were investigated and presented.  The calculation of magnetic field around elliptic matrix can be calculated by means of analogy with the calculation of electric field around elliptic dielectric given by Smythe ( For unsaturated matrices, the boundary conditions are as follow: For unsaturated matrix, permeability of matrix is much great than vacuum permeability, the following approximation can be applied. Then magnetic field outside elliptic matrix can be calculated: For saturated matrix, the boundary conditions can be expressed with saturation magnetization At the boundary Magnetic field outside saturated matrix is the same as Eqs. For the case that the applied magnetic field is perpendicular to long axis of elliptic matrix, For unsaturated matrix, the same boundary condition as Eqs. Similarly, as permeability of unsaturated matrix is much greater than vacuum permeability, the following approximation can be applied: The magnetic field outside matrix: For saturated matrix, the same boundary condition as Eqs. With the magnetic field, magnetic force acting on paramagnetic particles can be calculated with Eq. The particle motion equations then can be derived, as shown by Eqs. Particle motion equations of circular matrix had been derived in our previous paper ( As shown above, particle capture models for several cases had been established. It arises that which model should be adopted for a specific condition with varying aspect ratio The demarcation for judging magnetization state of matrices has been plotted by the red line in On the basis of  For more accurate analyses of particle capture performance of matrices with different   Although favorable aspect ratio does not appear in the Favorable aspect ratio of matrices in axial HGMS was investigated. Particle capture cross section of matrices under a variety of conditions were depicted and quantified. Horizontal and vertical dimension of particle capture cross section increases and decreases with increase of matrix aspect ratio, respectively. Particle capture cross section area increase rapidly and slowly before and after reaching magnetization saturation. There exists a favorable matrix aspect ratio at which particle capture cross section area (particle capture efficiency) reaches the maximum. The favorable aspect ratio is induction dependent and decreases with increase of applied magnetic induction. Particle capture cross section area of matrix with the favorable aspect ratio can be much larger than that of conventional circular matrix. Adopting matrices with favorable aspect ratio is beneficial for recovery of magnetic particles, especially fine weakly magnetic particles. This research work was financially supported by the