Pall rings, a common random packing material, were used in the biotrickling filtration of biogas with high H2S. Assessment of 600d of operation covered the reactor start-up, the operation at neutral pH and the transition from neutral to acid pH. During the start-up period, operational parameters such as the aeration rate and the trickling liquid velocity were optimized. During the steady-state operation at neutral pH, the performance of the random packing material was investigated by reducing the gas contact time at both constant and increasing H2S loads. The random packing material showed similar elimination capacities and removal efficiencies in comparison with previous studies with a structured packing material, indicating that Pall rings are suitable for biogas desulfurization in biotrickling filters. The diversity of Eubacteria and the structure of the community were investigated before and after the pH transition using the bacterial tag-encoded FLX amplicon pyrosequencing. The pH transition to acid pH drastically reduced the microbial diversity and produced a progressive specialization of the sulfur-oxidizing bacteria community without any detrimental effect on the overall desulfurizing capacity of the reactor. During acidic pH operation, a persistent accumulation of elemental sulfur was found.At present, biogas energy recovery is becoming more and more interesting due to increasing environmental and economical constraints associated to fossil fuels. Hydrogen sulfide is one of the reduced sulfur compounds most commonly reported in biogas, where it can range from 0.1% to 2% v/v (1000–20,000 Biological desulfurization processes have proven to be a technically and economically effective alternative to traditional physicochemical processes, especially for low H According to the stoichiometry of Eqs. The use of structured packing materials has been previously proven to be effective in the desulfurization high H Environmental conditions imposed by the operation have a direct impact in microorganisms diversity. Molecular biology techniques have been applied to describe the taxonomic diversity and to study the dynamics of microbial populations, ( Firstly, the aim of this work was to study the performance of Pall rings in a biotrickling filter to desulfurize a highly H The studied biotrickling filter is a conventional up-flow mode, counter–current biotrickling filter. Reactor diameter was 7 The biotrickling filter was operated for almost two years under steady-state conditions treating a reference synthetic biogas (Carburos Metalicos, Spain) containing 2000 Aerobic sludge from a local municipal wastewater treatment plant (Manresa, Barcelona) was used for the inoculation of the reactor with non-acclimated biomass. Fresh sludge was diluted 1:1 with mineral medium, thus having a final volatile suspended solids concentration of 2.4 After the start-up period of 21 During the neutral pH steady-state operation period, two experiments between days 392 and 432 of operation were performed to investigate the effect of the EBRT reduction on the performance of the reactor. First, during experiment E1, the EBRT was stepwise decreased from 131 to 29 The biotrickling filter was equipped with on-line monitoring of pH, oxidation-reduction potential (ORP) (pH28, Crison Instruments, Spain) and dissolved oxygen (DO) (oxi340i, WTW, Germany) for the liquid phase. Also, TDS was on-line monitored during experiments by an integrated flow-based system with an ion selective electrode for sulfide/hydrogen sulfide measurements ( Biomass samples for community diversity assessment were taken on day 245 (at neutral pH) and on day 586 (at acid pH). Biomass attached to the packing material was displaced by mechanical agitation in phosphate buffer 30 Bacterial Tag-encoded FLX Amplicon Pyrosequencing (bTEFAP) was selected as the sequencing approach. DNA was amplified previously to the pyrosequencing procedure using a forward and reverse fusion primer (Section SM-2). Amplifications were performed in 25 Amplification products were visualized with gels (Life Technologies, USA). Products were then pooled equimolarly and each pool was cleaned with Diffinity RapidTip (Diffinity Genomics, USA), and size selected using Agencourt AMPure XP (BeckmanCoulter, USA) following Roche 454 protocols (454 Life Sciences, USA). Size selected pools were then quantified and 150 Based upon the data of sequence identity percentage, sequences were classified at the appropriate taxonomic levels based upon the following criteria: greater than 97% identity were resolved at species level, between 95% and 97% at genus level, between 90% and 95% at family level, between 85% and 90% at order level, between 80% and 85% at class level and between 77% and 80% at phyla level. After resolving based upon these parameters, the percentage of each organism was individually calculated for each sample. Data obtained provided relative abundance information within and among individual samples. Relative abundances of reads were calculated by taxonomic level for each library. Values represent the percentage of reads of sequences obtained at each taxonomic identity (according to the degree that of similarity described above) within the total set of readings from the library. Indices of biological diversity were calculated for both libraries ( After inoculation, the inlet H Despite achieving a RE of H Changes in the air inlet flow rate were performed during the same period, resulting in different ratios of O Up to this point, accumulation of biosulfur as well as massive colonization of the packing material by biomass was deemed as an impairment for the effective liquid distribution and, concomitantly, the proper penetration of oxygen into the deeper layers of the biotrickling filter. Thus, the TLV was incremented to 11.7 Results showed that combined manipulation of both the TLV and air inlet flow allowed consolidating a stable operation with the characteristics pursued of minimum biosulfur production and maximum sulfate production, which sets up the basis for future definition of oxygen control strategies based on oxygen supply regulation. The performance of the reactor was satisfactorily supported during the operation at neutral pH until day 440 of operation, with minimum S  From the The effect of EBRT was studied at constant (E1) and variable (E2) H The effect of the EBRT reduction on the H After 440 However, it is worth noticing that a significant quantity of S The effect of a pH change in the bacterial diversity was studied through the bTEFAP approach. Two amplicon libraries, namely 245 At all levels, a large simplification of the microbial diversity was encountered in the library 586 As shown in In library 586 Changes in the community composition of Packing material deterioration was observed at acidic pH during biomass sampling, particularly in the bottom part of the reactor, close to the biogas inlet, due to the corrosive nature of H Biogas desulfurization in biotrickling filters has been proven effective for both neutral and acidic pH operation using metallic Pall rings. However, significant packing degradation occurred at acidic pH. Oxygen supply and the effect of the gas contact time were parameterized for this packing material. Maximum ECs of 100 The Spanish government (MEC) provided financial support through the project CICYT CTM2009-14338-C03-01 and CTM2009-14338-C03-02. The Department of Chemical Engineering at UAB (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona) is an unit of Biochemical Engineering of the Xarxa de Referència en Biotecnologia de Catalunya (XRB), Generalitat de Catalunya. We also acknowledge Research and Testing Laboratories for their contribution in helping along the sequencing process. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 