The flotation behavior of a refuse pond fine coal slurry sample was studied using mechanical and column flotation techniques. Flotation parameters investigated included type and dosage of frother and collector, agitation speed, scrubbing time, slurry pH, etc. for the mechanical flotation cell, and air flow rate, feed flow rate, and wash water flow rate for the column flotation. Flotation kinetics was also studied in the mechanical flotation cell. The results showed that the coal sample was very difficult to clean by flotation. Low yield (5–15%) and low combustible recovery (6–23%) and high product ash (about 22%) were obtained when methyl-isobutyl-carbinol (MIBC) was used as frother and #2 fuel oil as collector. Adjustment of operating parameters such as agitation intensity showed limited effects. However, flotation yield was significantly improved when MIBC and #2 fuel oil were replaced with frother P948 and collector SPP. Mechanical scrubbing was unable to restore the floatability of the coal sample. ‘Ken-Flote’ column flotation was inferior to mechanical flotation for oxidized coal and possible reasons were given.Froth flotation is a fine particle separation process based on the difference in surface hydrophobicity of different components. It is often very effective for coal cleaning since coal is naturally hydrophobic and minerals are hydrophilic. Coal shows good flotation behavior without oil or with a small amount of oil. There is a huge difference in the floatability of coals depending on coal type or rank, mining method (strip mining or deep mining), oxidation time, coal handling procedure, etc. Freshly deep-mined high rank coals are readily floatable while low rank or oxidized coals are difficult to float. Low volatile coals are easier to float than most high volatile coals. Different petrographic constituents also have different floatability. Vitrain is more readily floatable than durain. Flotation is often used in coal preparation plants to clean fine (−28 mesh) coal which amounts to 5–25% run-of-mine coal. However, this technology was not widely used until about a decade ago and as a result, billions of tons of coal fines had been discarded in refuse ponds. The recovery and utilization of these coal fines in refuse slurry ponds as a significant energy source will have considerable environmental and economical benefits. It is known that oxidized coals show poor natural floatability and their flotation requires the use of high dosages of oil The floatability of oxidized coals may be improved by modifying surface characteristics and/or enhancing particle–reagent interactions. Switching MIBC frother to pine oil was shown to be effective by Gayle et al. The present flotation study was undertaken as part of the efforts to develop an effective fine coal cleaning circuit to recover fine coal from a refuse pond. Flotation parameters examined included type and dosage of frother and collector, agitation speed, scrubbing time, and slurry pH for the mechanical flotation cell, and air flow rate, feed flow rate, and wash water flow rate for the column flotation. The objective was to determine the best conditions for coal cleaning performance. Three 55-gallon drums of fine coal slurry sample used in this study was supplied from a western Kentucky fine coal recovery facility. The refuse pond has been in existence for more than 30 years. A Denver 5-l mechanical flotation cell was used in conventional flotation tests. The impeller rotation speed was kept constant at 1500 rpm, with the air inlet fully open. Flotation time was about 5 min. Feed solids concentration was 5%, unless noted otherwise. The flotation column used in the present study was a ‘Ken-Flote’ column of 5-cm diameter and 6-m height described in detail elsewhere  In order to improve flotation performance of the coal sample, other flotation reagents were used in the study. It should be emphasized that the enhanced flotation performance of the oxidized coal with collector SPP and frother P948 was achieved at much lower reagent dosages. The dosage of collector SPP and frother P948 was only about 10% #2 fuel oil and half MIBC dosage, respectively. The substantially lower dosage of reagents would considerably reduce the flotation cost in industrial practice. It is estimated that the reagent cost can be reduced from $7.95/t to $1.60/t if 3 lb/t MIBC and 30 lb/t fuel oil are replaced with 1 lb/t P948 and 3 lb/t SPP. Enhanced flotation results obtained using frother P948 and collector SPP can be attributed to more stable froth created by P948 than MIBC and improved dispersion of fuel oil in the presence of petroleum sulfonate contained in collector SPP. The petroleum sulfonate is mostly comprised of sulfonates with some mineral oil and a little water. It is oil-soluble and water dispersible. The petroleum sulfonate acts as an emulsifier, producing small droplets of oil upon agitation. The small droplets adsorb more efficiently than fuel oil itself on marginally hydrophobic surfaces such as oxidized coal or fly ash carbon. The importance of collector SPP was clearly shown in last three tests in It is known that if coal is superficially oxidized, mechanical scrubbing of flotation slurry may be able to restore the natural floatability of coal by removing the thin oxidation layer from the coal surface.  Use of cationic amine collectors was suggested by previous investigators to promote coal flotation recovery Kinetics is an important aspect of flotation process. The effect of collector dosage on flotation kinetics was studied by conducting additional flotation tests at 2.0 and 1.0 lb/t collector SPP and results are shown in Column flotation has been widely used in fine coal flotation since it is well established that column flotation is more effective and more selective for recovering fine coal particles due to its plug flow pattern, smaller air bubble size, and addition of wash water. To investigate the applicability of this technology to flotation of the present slurry pond coal sample, ‘Ken-Flote’ flotation column was employed to perform column flotation experiments under various conditions. The results are summarized in It should be emphasized, however, that the aforementioned column flotation results and discussion may only be applied to ‘Ken-Flote’-type flotation columns with quiescent flow condition. With a flotation column like Jameson Cell using the turbulent collection mechanism, the column flotation results may be close to or even better than those of mechanical flotation machines. (1) The refuse pond coal slurry sample tested was heavily oxidized and its floatablity was poor. High dosages of #2 fuel oil (30 lb/t) were needed to obtain a flotation combustible recovery of 23.25% in the presence of 3.0 lb/t MIBC used as frother. (2) Combined use of frother P948 from Ciba Specialty Chemicals and collector SPP from CYTEC substantially reduced reagent dosages and significantly enhanced flotation recovery. Kinetic flotation experiments showed that a combustible recovery of about 50% and 67% was obtained using 2- and 5-min flotation time, respectively, in the presence of 1.0 lb/t P948 and 3.0 lb/t SPP. The product ash was between 21% and 22%. (3) The optimum mechanical flotation condition for this particular coal slurry sample was found to be 1.0 lb/t frother P948, 3.0 lb/t SPP, 1200 rpm, 5-min flotation time, and natural slurry pH. Under these conditions, flotation yield was 46.58%, combustible recovery was 65.25%, and product ash was 21.12%. (4) Mechanical flotation is more effective than column flotation in floating heavily oxidized coal. It produced higher flotation recovery and lower product ash. (5) Mechanical scrubbing of flotation feed slightly improved flotation performance, but was unable to produce 80–90% flotation recovery routinely observed with unoxidized coals.