Many of the bauxites currently being processed to alumina contain titanium minerals, yet little fundamental knowledge is available regarding their dissolution behaviour in Bayer liquors. In this paper the dissolution of various titanium oxide phases (anatase, rutile, sodium titanate and calcium titanate) are presented. It is shown that rutile, calcium titanate and sodium titanate have the expected dissolution behaviour, which increases with free caustic concentration. Anatase, too, generally increases in dissolution with free caustic concentration. However, anatase is shown to have an anomalous behaviour when gibbsite co-precipitates. In this case, the dissolution of anatase does not follow the expected free caustic trend. According to the data presented, the most probable cause is an impervious aluminium/sodium titanate surface layer hindering further dissolution.In the processing of bauxite ore to alumina (Al The literature on titanates in Bayer liquors has focussed almost exclusively on their impact on extraction and reaction with lime during digestion, or the final precipitation products. Studies have found that sodium titanates are formed at lower temperatures and higher caustic concentrations ( The interest in titanates is not limited to the alumina industry however, and titanate compounds are currently under investigation as a route to the formation of Ti-containing inorganic nanotubes ( Missing from our current understanding is any fundamental information regarding the solubility of titanium (in various forms) in Bayer liquors. However, such data is difficult to obtain unambiguously when re-precipitation reactions can also occur. To this end we have begun to systematically measure the dissolution of anatase, rutile, sodium titanate and calcium titanate in synthetic Bayer liquors. Unfortunately, the measurement of dissolution under hydrothermal conditions is not a trivial exercise; the greatest challenge being to remove the excess solids without significant cooling, and subsequent re-precipitation, occurring. In the preliminary experiments we conducted, even at 90 °C we found that the measured [Ti] levels were lower when the filtered solution was left to stand undiluted or not sufficiently diluted. This highlights that re-precipitation can and does occur as the temperature drops towards ambient and the [Ti] level in solution reaches supersaturated levels, limiting experiments to lower temperatures. In what follows we present some preliminary dissolution data for anatase, rutile, sodium titanate and calcium titanate in synthetic Bayer liquors at 90 °C. Although this data can be used to extrapolate what can be expected under the hydrothermal conditions of the Bayer process, it is clearly well below even the low temperature Bayer process. However, collecting dissolution data at higher temperatures presents major practical difficulties under atmospheric pressure which must first be overcome. The solids, TiO Sodium hydroxide (A.R.grade, BDH), MilliQ water, sodium carbonate (A.R.grade, BDH) and aluminium wire (BDH, 99.9% pure) were used for synthetic Bayer liquor preparation. XRD patterns were collected on a Philips Xpert diffractometer using Co K The following conventions used in the alumina industry have been followed: aluminium in solution expressed as g/L Al total caustic, expressed as g/L Na total alkalinity, expressed as g/L Na alumina to total caustic ratio (related to supersaturation of aluminium in solution) Free Caustic The subsequent graphs shown in this manuscript show the data as a function of Concentrated sodium hydroxide (16 M, corrosive) solution was prepared and placed in a refrigerator for 3 days in order to precipitate carbonate before pressure filtering (and produce low carbonate Bayer liquors). The filtered hydroxide solution was then diluted with Milli-Q water to the desired C value in a stainless steel vessel containing a magnetic stirrer. Heat was applied and aluminium wire was dissolved (slowly adding Al wire and avoiding excessive boiling) to achieve the desired ‘ Synthetic Bayer liquor (30 mL) was equilibrated to 90 °C (± As can be seen in The dissolution behaviour of sodium titanate and calcium titanate are presented in Of the 4 solid phases, calcium titanate has the lowest solubility. The concentration of calcium titanate dissolved (at For anatase and rutile, the dissolution increased significantly at the equivalent free caustic level when aluminate was also present. Sodium titanate did not show such behaviour. Calcium titanate showed a decrease in dissolution as the free caustic concentration decreased. However, the value in pure caustic at a free caustic concentration of ~ It should be noted that, depending on the In the case of rutile, when viewed from a free caustic perspective, the dissolved titanium is seen to increase with increasing The results are presented in The dissolution behaviour of calcium titanate, plotted against the final free caustic level, is shown in The situation is quite different for anatase where the dissolution behaviour of the TiO If we take into consideration the final free caustic concentration of these solutions the resulting trend shown in Comparing this graph with that shown in SEM images of this sample ( Surface blocking is the most likely explanation for the dissolution behaviour results at high What is not completely known at this point is whether the dissolution behaviour we have measured are the actual solubilities of each mineral phase or the equilibrium solubilities for a lesser soluble phase. That is, as anatase and rutile are dissolving, is there a re-precipitation reaction based on an equilibrium phase having a lower solubility? As an example, if we compare If the sodium titanate solubility is given by the black line and its metastable zone limit by the dotted line, then as FC decreases, the solubility of anatase (red line) is higher than the metastable zone limit and sodium titanate can precipitate. The solubility of rutile on the other hand,(blue line) does not lie above the metastable zone limit and thus sodium titanate does not precipitate, or at least not to the same extent. It is also feasible that less sodium titanate forms on rutile than on anatase as a result of surface area differences and so rutile is less affected than anatase overall. Sodium titanate has a low dissolution level at low FCs and by inference also at high The results presented here support the results of Rutile, calcium titanate and sodium titanate dissolution behaviour in synthetic Bayer liquors is proportional to the free caustic concentration. Gibbsite precipitation in the liquors did not affect the dissolution behaviour determined for rutile, calcium titanate or sodium titanate, other than to change the free caustic levels and therefore cause the system to re-equilibrate to the new free caustic level. Sodium titanate and calcium titanate showed no change in dissolution behaviour when the aluminate ion was present, while rutile and anatase showed a slight increase in dissolution in aluminate solutions when compared with pure caustic solutions. Anatase dissolution behaviour is generally proportional to free caustic levels but at high Calcium titanate (perovskite) has the lowest solubility of all the phases studied at 90 °C and the equilibrium solubility at a FC of ≤ The authors gratefully acknowledge support under the Australian Government's Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) Program, through the AJ Parker CRC for Integrated Hydrometallurgy Solutions. We also thank John Murphy of UWA Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis for preparing the ultra-microtomed samples.