Zinc metal is mainly produced by a hydrometallurgical process, in which zinc electrolyte is recirculated, and impurities especially halides are accumulated then, which have dreadful impacts on the process and product. Until now numerous efforts have been made to remove halides from the electrolyte, but none of them are fully satisfying, and it is still a big issue for the industry. As a conventional membrane technology, diffusion dialysis (DD) is originally designed to recover free acid from acid-salt mixture by concentration gradient. In this work, we proposed a novel process to selectively remove these halide impurities from the spent zinc electrolyte by DD directly. Significant Cl- and F- permselectivities over HSO4
                     - are observed in this process. The removal efficiencies are as high as 50–70% and 30–42% for chloride and fluoride, respectively, while the zinc loss is less than 1%. The flow intensity in the current work is much higher than that in conventional DD, which reduces the overall cost immensely. The mechanism of this selective mass transfer is also studied intensively to understand influence of flow intensity, charge number and hydrated radii of ions on the permselectivity. The results here are not confined to provide a superior method to remove halide impurities for the zinc industry, but also extend new applications and deepen understandings for the well-established DD process in selective ion separation. This capability is very likely to become a new growth point and future direction for the DD process besides acid/alkali recovery.Approximately 80% of the total world production of metallic zinc comes from the hydrometallurgical roast–leach–electrowin process with zinc blend as typical starting materials Up to now, numerous efforts have been made to remove chlorides and fluorides from the hydrometallurgical circuit. (1) Halides can be removed as precipitations from neutral electrolyte before zinc electrolysis, such as AgCl In recent years, membrane processes have been rising for industrial applications, including the zinc electrolyte purification. Monovalent ions such as Cl The anion exchange membrane (AEM, TWDDA standard) used in this work was obtained from Shandong Tianwei Membrane Technology Co., Ltd., China. The detailed specifications are listed in Various simulated feed solutions (marked in A home-made DD dialyzer was used for halide impurities removal. The dialyzer was also equipped with home-made tortuous path flow spacer (260 Potentiometric titration (ZDJ-4B automatic titrator from INESA Scientific Instrument Co., Ltd, China) was utilized to analyze concentrations of ions in feed and sample solutions. The Cl The overall dialysis coefficient The recovery (favorable mass transfer) or leakage (unfavorable mass transfer) ratio of a species in continuous DD process is calculated by the formula as in our previous work The detailed chemical compositions of real spent zinc electrolyte were obtained by ICP-OES and potentiometric titration which are listed in As shown in In this electrolyte system, sulfate presents in the form of HSO The main flaw of the new strategy is that only part of the halide impurities can be removed, however, it is not a big problem for the practical purposes. As the halide build-up is slow and small amounts of impurities are tolerable in the process, it is not necessary to remove all the impurities. For example, in the plant, which provided us spent electrolyte samples, the total electrolyte circulation is 4000 Since thin spacers (0.7 Real spent electrolyte and pure water were pumped through the DD dialyzer at different flow intensities. After a steady state was achieved, the process parameters such as the inlet/outlet flows, detailed chemical compositions of all streams were analyzed and shown in The recovering ratio of total H The permeations of different anions (or different cations) across the membrane are not equivalent to each other, and it is termed permselectivity In Eq. The permselectivity of halide impurities (Cl The leakage ratios of all metal cations, such as Na The cost of halides removal in this study mainly consists of capital cost, chemical cost and the disposal cost of effluent. The total dechlorination capacity needed in the plant can be estimated by the chlorine mass balance. As previously described, the total electrolyte circulation is 4000 The detailed calculation procedures of the process parameters and costs are all listed in The cost of H The influence of chlorides concentration on the purification performance is investigated in both simulated and real spent electrolyte solutions. As shown in In recent years DD has become one of the best available technologies for the reclamation of free acid from acid-salt mixtures In this work, a novel purification process is proposed to remove halide impurities from the spent zinc electrolyte by a conventional DD process. The findings show that the halide impurities such as Cl The authors are grateful for financial support by the Supplementary tables as Excel worksheets, including detailed process parameters during the continous DD tests (Table S1), dialysis coefficients in continuous DD tests (Table S2), and detailed procedure for the cost estimation (Table S3). Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 