Introduction
                  Experience with treating proximal humeral nonunions with reverse total shoulder arthroplasty is limited. We report our results.
               
                  Patients
                  Eighteen patients with proximal humeral atrophic nonunion were treated with reverse total shoulder prosthesis. There were 12 women and 6 men, with a mean age of 78.8 years (range, 75–84 years). The mean follow up after reverse arthroplasty was 28 months (range, 24–32 months). Extensive proximal humeral bone loss that was found in six cases was treated adding a proximal humeral allograft. A long humeral stem was always used.
               
                  Results
                  The mean Constant score increased from 26% preoperatively to 55% postoperatively (p <0.0001). The average anterior elevation increased from 35° to 90° (p<0.0001), abduction from 35° to 85° (p<0.0001), external rotation from 15° to 30° (p <0.0001) and internal rotation from 25° to 55° (p <0.0001). The average subjective shoulder score increased from 10% preoperatively to 50% postoperatively (p <0.0001). All but 4 patients would undergo the same procedure again if faced with the same problem. Eight patients were very satisfied, 6 satisfied and 4 unhappy with the operation. We had one case of transitory axillary nerve palsy and two cases of infection. Two prosthetic dislocations occurred; they were successfully treated by revision with a larger polyethylene glenosphere of 44mm.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty improves function and motion in patients with proximal humeral fracture sequelae. However, the rate of dislocation is high.The incidence of humeral surgical neck nonunions is not high, but it is a devastating complication resulting in weakness and instability of the upper extremity. Patients are usually unable to perform even basic daily tasks with the affected extremity. Open reduction and internal fixation with a plate is another option, and good results have been reported in the literature. Prosthetic replacement of the humeral head with a hemiarthroplasty, or with a total shoulder replacement, is another option. Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty has been used to treat cuff tear arthritis, The purpose of the present study is to evaluate the results achieved with the use of reverse total shoulder arthroplasty for the treatment of proximal humeral nonunions in elderly patients. Between 2007 and 2009, 18 (6 male) patients with proximal humeral atrophic nonunion were treated operatively by the Lima reverse shoulder prosthesis (Lima Ltd Medical Systems). This is a retrospective study with prospectively documented data. Patients gave their consent to participate in this study. Local ethics committee approval was obtained. The mean age was 78.8 years (range, 75–84). All patients complained of pain, limitation of shoulder movement and difficulty in carrying out daily activities. The mean delay from the initial injury to surgical treatment of the nonunion by reverse arthroplaty was 11 months (range, 8–13). Initial treatment consisted of immobilisation in a sling followed by physical therapy in 6 patients, closed reduction and percutaneous pinning in 3, and internal fixation with the Philos plate in 9. All cases were atrophic surgical neck nonunions. No axillary nerve injury was present. Radiographic preoperative assessment included anteroposterior, scapular lateral and axillary radiographs. A proximal humeral bone loss was found intraoperatively in all cases. This bone loss was moderate in 12 cases and extensive in 6. The mean clinical and radiologic follow up was 28 months (range, 24–32). All patients were operated placed in a beach-chair position. A deltopectoral approach was used. The subscapularis was released from the lesser tuberosity. The axillary nerve was exposed and protected. The plate was removed if present. After removal of scar tissue and the articular portion of the humeral head, the glenoid was exposed. The soft tissues and capsule were released. The axis of the glenoid was determined, and the insertion point for the guide pin was chosen approximately 2 mm inferior to the middle of the glenoid and approximately centred anteroposteriorly. The glenoid was reamed until a flat uniform surface was achieved. The glenoid was replaced with a small uncemented glenoid component fixed with two 6.5 mm screws. Moderate proximal bone loss was treated by adding bone graft obtained from the resected humeral head around the proximal area of the reverse humeral body. In the cases where there was extensive proximal humeral bone loss, a proximal humeral allograft was prepared and secured with cerclage wire fixation around the proximal body of the prosthesis and the remaining humerus ( Range of motion, Constant score and subjective shoulder value (the estimated value as a percentage of an entirely normal shoulder) were recorded preoperatively and postoperatively at last follow up. In addition patients were asked about their subjective satisfaction and willingness to undergo the operation again. Anteroposterior, axillary lateral and scapular lateral radiographs with a minimum 24-months follow up were available in all patients. The radiographs were examined to assess implant position, radiolucent lines, osteolysis, heterotopic ossification and infrascapular notching. Inferior scapular notching was classified according to Nerot's system. Statistical analysis of the results was performed with the Wilcoxon signed rank test for comparison of specific preoperative and postoperative values. The mean Constant score increased from 26% preoperatively to 55% postoperatively (p <0.0001) and the average subjective shoulder score increased from 10% preoperatively to 50% postoperatively (p <0.0001). All patients, except the 4 patients who had a dislocation or an infection of the prosthesis, would undergo the same procedure again if faced with the same problem. Eight patients were very satisfied, 6 were satisfied, and 4 patients were unhappy with the operation (the 4 patients with a dislocation or an infection of the prosthesis). The average anterior elevation increased from 35° preoperatively to 90° postoperatively (p <0.0001). The average abduction increased from 35° preoperatively to 85° postoperatively (p <0.0001). The average external rotation increased from 15° preoperatively to 30° postoperatively (p <0.0001). The average internal rotation increased from 25° preoperatively to 55° postoperatively (p <0.0001). There were no cases of glenoid or humeral loosening but we found four cases of glenoid notching. Evaluation of the six allografts demonstrated that three were integrated, one had been removed during débridement for the treatment of infection, and two had been nearly completely resorbed. Five patients (27%) developed complications: one case of transient axillary nerve palsy, two cases of postoperative infection and two cases of dislocation. The two cases with infection had an initial extensive proximal humeral bone loss that had been managed with an allograft–reverse shoulder prosthesis combination and were treated with debridement, polyethylene exchange and antibiotic treatment. In one of them this treatment was successful but in the other the infection recurred and he needed a second debridement with allograft and prosthesis removal. He rejected a new procedure when the infection was eradicated. The two patients with postoperative dislocation of the prosthesis underwent reduction, but dislocation reoccured shortly after. These patients had a 36 mm metallic glenosphere. They were treated by revision with a larger polyethylene glenosphere of 44 mm that improved prosthesis stability, and the dislocation did not re-occur. Many approaches to the treatment of proximal humeral nonunions have been described. Plate fixation is suitable for patients with sufficient bone stock in the humeral head, but it has the disadvantage of extensive soft-tissue dissection, that may lead to avascular necrosis of the humeral head, and mechanical impingement underneath the acromion. Intramedullary rods can also lead to mechanical impingement. Hemiarthroplasty is effective for pain relief, but functional recovery is not satisfactory. In the elderly population, these fractures are associated with osteoporosis. Hemiarthroplasty has several problems. The tuberosities must heal to the shaft and the humeral length must be maintained. When a nonunion occurs, there is a certain amount of bone loss at the site of the nonunion. The humerus must be restored to its original length to maintain the deltoid muscle tension. It is difficult to restore length and get the tuberosities healed to the humeral saft in this situation. Failure of tuberosity healing may lead to a poor functional result. Moreover, we believe that the rotator cuff of the proximal humeral nonunions of long evolution in old people is functionally useless because of muscle atrophy and adherences between the rotator cuff and the surrounding soft tissues. Patients with nonunions usually have deltoid atrophy due to disuse. If operative treatment is being considered, a thorough neurologic examination should be performed and an electromyography study should be warranted if there are doubts about nerve function. An axillary nerve palsy is a contraindication to use a reverse shoulder arthroplasty. The reported short-term functional results of reverse total shoulder artroplasty in the treatment of glenohumeral osteoarthritis with massive rupture of the cuff have been good, but the reported survival rate at ten years has been around 58%. The reported results of reverse total shoulder arthroplasty for the treatment of posttraumatic arthritis have been worse than for the cuff tear arthropathy, Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty has been used in the revision of failed shoulder hemiarthroplasty. The prosthesis provided improvement in pain and function, but high rates of complications were associated with glenoid and proximal humeral bone loss. We used reverse total shoulder arthroplasty for the treatment of proximal humeral nonunions because we thought that in these cases of long evolution in elderly patients, the rotator cuff is functionally useless and the bone stock is not suitable for achieving a good fixation. In cases of extensive proximal bone loss, the allograft restores the deltoid contour, the humeral length and lateral offset of the shoulder joint. This improves the moment arm of the deltoid and increases the total resultant force through a pulley mechanism. Our rate of dislocation was high. There are several factors that increase the risk of postoperative dislocation. The amount of soft tissue release needed to implant the prosthesis is very important. In some cases there are deficiencies of tendons, such as subscapularis or infraspinatus, and bone loss of the glenoid or proximal humerus. This makes the procedure more complicated because in these cases, an allograft is needed and the correct position and appropriate height of the prosthesis is difficult to calculate. This can result in a poor muscular control and instability of the prosthesis. The two dislocations were in patients with a 36 mm glenosphere. We did not have dislocations in the patients with a larger glenosphere (44 mm). Instability was solved by changing the 36 mm glenosphere to a 44 mm glenosphere, which improved prosthesis stability. A large glenosphere should be considered therefore in these cases of proximal humeral nonunion.