It has been 10years since the JK size-dependent breakage model was developed (Shi and Kojovic, 2007). This paper reviews 20 applications of the model for the mineral and coal industries in the past 10years to encourage its use in future applications. The review is divided into three parts: Part 1 for ore and coal breakage characterisation, Part 2 for assessment of material strength and energy requirement for size reduction, and Part 3 for modelling comminution equipment.
                  Part 1 of the review covers the model structure, its applications in high energy single impact data reduction, low energy incremental breakage modelling, reduced breakage testing method, a new impact breakage testing method using mixed particles in a wide size range, fine particle breakage characterisation (JKFBC), and a multi-component breakage model for coal grinding. It has been proved through these applications that the JK size-dependent breakage model is a useful tool for ore and coal breakage characterisation.It is well known that the crack density of larger particles is much greater than that for smaller particles ( To describe the degree of breakage in relation to particle size effect and specific energy input, a size-dependent breakage model was developed in 2006, and published in 2007 ( As the publications related to the application of the JK size-dependent breakage model are scattered in various journals, conferences, students' theses and technical reports, the objective of this review paper is to gather the major applications, mainly from the present author's work, in one place to demonstrate how this model can be applied for the mineral and coal industries and to inspire potential applications in the future. This is particularly important in the current energy-sensitive world, since the JK size-dependent breakage model has the potential to improve breakage characterisation and equipment modelling by taking into account the effect of particle size on the energy and size reduction relationship. The review is divided into three parts: Part 1 for ore and coal breakage characterisation, Part 2 for assessment of particle strength and energy requirement for size reduction, and Part 3 for modelling comminution devices. This is Part 1 of the review. Combining the two approaches from Rumpf's similarity consideration ( In modelling a breakage event, knowing whether or not a particle will break at all (breakage probability) is necessary, but it is only part of the process. It is more important to know the particle progeny size distribution following breakage. However it is also more difficult to model the breakage distribution function than the breakage probability, since the breakage probability in the Vogel and Peukert work can be simply represented with a single number, while the breakage distribution function is a matrix. At the JKMRC (Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre), there is a long history in modelling breakage distribution using a single parameter, As long as the Since particle size ( In validating the revised breakage model (Eq. Numerous DWT and JKRBT test data have confirmed this trend. An equation to describe the parameter Note that the unit of particle size Parameter  A method that is based on the JK size-dependent breakage model to predict breakage properties of a particulate material when subjected to impact was patented by the JKMRC in 2006. Part of the work was published in One of the most common applications of the JK size-dependent breakage model is for breakage testing data reduction. In a standard DWT, five narrowly sized particles are tested, each with three different specific energy levels, resulting in 15 product samples. Each product is sieved to determine the breakage index The JK size-dependent breakage model usually fits the breakage testing well, as shown in  After the breakage model for   DEM simulations of the impact energy distribution pattern in an AG mill operation have revealed that small energy impacts take place at a much higher frequency than high energy impacts ( Two sets of published incremental breakage testing data ( It was observed in Whyte's thesis (2005) that the plot of Whyte's data were re-organised in four groups, in which some Hit-classes were combined to increase the number of particles in the groups: 1 Hit, 2 Hits, 3–4 Hits and 5–10 Hits. Note that the measured The term The JK size-dependent breakage model was employed to fit the Whyte's regrouped data with one set of  The tests were conducted in a different way to Whyte's. Particles from each size fraction were separated into approximately 10 different samples, each subjected to a given impact energy. The number of particles and the total mass of each sample were recorded. Particles in each sample were subjected to the same impact energy. After each impact, the particle was checked against the lower limit of the screen aperture. Any product that was still too large was subjected to a further impact at the same energy level until it broke to a size smaller than the screen aperture. The total number of impacts per sample was recorded and all the products in a given sample were combined for sizing. This procedure provides sufficient particles in the product for size analysis, and hence the size distribution data are deemed to be reliable. However, the information on how the progeny properties vary with each impact is not available since the products from different number of impacts were not collected separately. Values of     The same trend was observed in a coke incremental breakage result ( The cumulative percentage passing 6.7 As shown in Extensive effort was made to test various combinations of size and energy settings for the DWT by the present author 10 In the reduced breakage testing method, the effect of particle size on breakage results is measured and mechanistically modelled. This approach is advantageous to other reduced breakage characterisation methods, in which one feed size is tested and the size effect is estimated from a database or calibrated with an additional full DWT. Similar to the application in developing the reduced breakage test, the JK size-dependent breakage mode has found another application to process the incomplete DWT data. In a standard DWT test, the top particle size tested is 53–63 In the standard impact breakage characterisation tests, particles in narrowly sized fractions are tested at various specific energy levels. For example, the standard JKMRC DWT uses five size fractions: 13.2–16 In the new testing procedure, the received feed sample is sieved to determine the size distribution. Particles in the typical JKRBT testing size range (13.2–45 The general approach taken in the data reduction procedure is summarised below ( Divide the wide–size feed into several virtual narrow size fractions by simulation; Use the size–dependent breakage model with initially guessed values of Use the calculated Sum up the product size distribution matrices using the feed proportion to form a combined product size distribution; Estimate the weighted error between the calculated and the measured product size distributions; Repeat the procedures for the three or four products at various impact specific energy levels and calculate the total error (sum of squares, Adjust the model parameters Five sets of JKRBT data were used to validate the Wide-size breakage characterisation method. Since the Wide–size JKRBT breakage characterisation method uses mixed particles in a wide size range, one of the potential applications is for online ore competence measurement. Despite the fact that the JKRBT can do rapid ore breakage characterisation, the preparation of narrowly sized particles for the standard JKRBT test is one of the major barriers preventing its implementation for online breakage characterisation. Now the Wide-size JKRBT test can resolve this issue, which provides a renewed opportunity for online ore competence characterisation. The standard DWT and JKRBT tests use particles coarser than 13.2 A device developed at the JKMRC for coal breakage characterisation ( For each JKFBC test, three to five narrowly sized particles in the 0.6–4.75 The JK size-dependent breakage model was employed for the JKFBC data reduction. The energy threshold parameter, A number of JKFBC tests on various ore samples have now been conducted. The JK size-dependent breakage model was applied to characterise their breakage parameters. In all cases, the model fits the data well. The JKFBC and the JK size-dependent breakage model have been employed as a new breakage characterisation method to supply the fine ore characteristic parameters for a specific energy-based ball mill model, which will be presented in Part 3 of this review. In order to study the influence of particle size and density on size reduction, an experiment was conducted using the JKFBC mill to grind two coal samples collected from an Australian power station and a Chinese power station. The Australian coal has an HGI of 52, and the Chinese coal has HGI of 80, which is softer than the Australian coal sample. The coal samples were sized and then fractionated by float-sink testing. The Australian coal sample was collected by the JKMRC, and the Chinese coal sample was collected and processed by JKMRC's research partner, China University of Mining and Technology, before transported to JKMRC for the JKFBC tests. The JKFBC tests were performed based on particle density and size. About 60 tests (nominally 4 RDs (relative density)  The JK size-dependent breakage model was revised for the multi-component breakage data. The model takes the following form ( The model incorporates four parameters, In analysing the correlation between the fitted JK size-dependent breakage model parameters and the HGI values of the two coal samples, The JK size-dependent breakage model ( The author appreciates the financial support provided by the following organisations for the JKMRC projects presented in this review article: