Over the years technology in the cement industry has been further developed with a growing focus on sustainable, cost- and energy-efficient production. While significant steps may not seem visible on a year to year basis, the medium-term view shows notable progress. The trend of increasing the capacity of cement kilns has slowed down in recent years — maximum clinker output still lies between 12,000 and 13,000tpd. Burning and cooling technologies have progressed, especially with respect to burners specifically designed for the co-incineration of high levels of alternative fuels. Taking into account all process-integrated measures, thermal process efficiency reaches values above 80% of the theoretical maximum. The grinding of raw materials and cement has been in the focus of better energy utilisation, but product quality is also of the highest importance. In terms of sustainable production, NOx abatement and CO2 capture and its reuse remain in the focus of extensive research.Costs lower than SCR Abatement efficiency limited Risk of higher NH Optimum temperature after preheater, no preheating required Less complexity than low dust scheme Dust load high, potential impact on clogging and catalyst's activity Dust load very low, little risk of clogging higher, less risk to loose catalyst's activity Gas to be reheated As compared to high dust SCR: less catalyst volume required Good cost/benefit ratio Requires high temperature ESP As compared to high dust SCR less clogging potential Less experience as compared to other schemes Over the years technology in the cement industry has developed with a growing focus on sustainable and also cost and energy efficient production. While significant steps may not seem visible on a year to year basis, the medium-term view shows notable progress. The drivers for progress are certainly cost-based, but at the same time the cement industry, together with its equipment suppliers, has always strived to improve the overall efficiency and sustainability of the cement production process. Substantial energy savings have been achieved in recent years, and product-related emissions of CO The trend of increasing the capacity of cement kilns has slowed down in recent years — maximum clinker output now lies between 12,000 and 13,000 No breakthrough technologies are currently in sight with respect to clinker burning. Fourth generation clinker coolers are available from several suppliers and can be seen as state of the art. Cooler efficiencies of about 75% of the theoretical maximum can usually be achieved. Some developments have been made in burner technology, especially with respect to burners specifically designed for the co-incineration of high levels of alternative fuels. Taking into account the process-integrated drying of raw materials, other main constituents and fuels, the efficiency of the thermal process reaches values above 80% of the theoretical maximum Energy utilisation in the cement industry has always been optimised for economic reasons; therefore, the potential for further optimisation is comparatively low. In 2010, the “Cement Technology Roadmap” of the International Energy Agency (IEA) The reason for the very limited additional potential savings of thermal energy is the necessary heat for the clinker production process.  Electrical energy only comprises between 10 and 15% of the overall energy demand for cement production but is a notable cost driver In recent years, the worldwide use of alternative fuels has increased significantly in many markets because their use may reduce the demand for fossil fuels and can – depending on the type of alternative fuel – increase the overall cost efficiency of the respective plant. Moderate substitution rates may be reached by the use of widely available bulky materials (e.g. entire tyres) combusted in the kiln inlet. Further substitution requires high-quality or even tailor-made alternative fuels with guaranteed constant moisture contents, particle sizes and heating values to avoid possible issues regarding process conditions and clinker quality. The fluctuation in the moisture content of a given alternative fuel derived from selected industrial wastes is shown as an example in To increase energy efficiency by ensuring a complete combustion of alternative fuels, fuels can be gasified in fluidised or fixed bed chambers or suspension flow processes. Different concepts for combustion chambers for calciner systems have been developed and installed in the past years Separate combustion chambers using a burner design similar to rotary kiln burners provide longer retention times than conventional calciner combustion systems without the need of further combustion points Moreover, a moderate oxygen enrichment in the combustion air can support the complete fuel particle burnout, which allows an increased substitution rate or the utilisation of slow-burning alternative fuels Alternative fuels may exhibit differing chemical compositions compared to fossil fuels, for which reason the raw mix has to be adapted to produce comparable clinker compositions on site, but the kiln's operation is also influenced. Depending on the overall raw material composition and the composition of the alternative fuels, a gas bypass may be required which allows to extract a certain amount of gas at the kiln inlet in order to reduce inner cycles ( Regarding the sustainability of the cement production process, waste heat recovery (WHR) provides a potential to recover the energy from the clinker burning process. The technology was spearheaded by Japanese companies before being introduced to the Chinese market in 1998. China since then has become market leader in terms of installed WHR systems, driven by incentives as well as national energy efficiency regulations The choice of the technology applied in a specific case depends strongly on the available heat flow rate but mostly of all on the available temperature level. The most common conventional water steam cycle can operate at heat source temperatures of as low as 300 State-of-the-art process-integrated measures as well as dedicated secondary abatement technologies ensure low emissions while keeping the influence on the kiln operation at a minimum. Recently, special focus has been placed on mercury, NO The Minamata Convention on Mercury as a global and legally binding treaty is targeted at the worldwide reduction of mercury emissions, regulating their anthropogenic causes. It was initiated by the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) Governing Council in 2009 and opened for signature in October 2013, and will come into force after being ratified by 50 countries. UNEP addresses the anthropogenic mercury sources in its global mercury assessment including a breakdown of the relative contributions of the estimated mercury emissions to air from anthropogenic sources in 2010 in The cement industry's share in these emissions may have been overestimated since it does not correspond to the industry's experiences and it has therefore been challenged by the European CEMBUREAU and the CSI (Cement Sustainability Initiative). The behaviour of mercury in the clinker burning process is well understood. Like other trace elements, mercury is introduced into the production process through all raw materials and fuels. The respective concentrations are low and depend on the type and origin of the various fuels and raw materials, e.g. within a quarry trace element concentrations reflect the variation of the specific geological distribution. Owing to their high volatility, mercury and its compounds are adsorbed on cement kiln dust at comparatively low temperatures with respect to other trace elements in the burning process In cases where higher mercury emissions may occur, abatement strategies are required. Monitoring the mercury input from alternative materials and fuels as well as dust shuttling to avoid the build-up of mercury cycles in the kiln/preheater system are proven measures for mercury control. Long-term balance tests have shown that shuttling precipitated dust in combination with a sophisticated temperature control provides a high removal efficiency when conducted in the mill-off mode Continuous measurement of mercury emissions remains a challenge due to the fact that mercury can occur as elemental mercury (Hg(0)) and oxidised mercury (Hg(I) and Hg(II)). Mercury compounds contained in the gas stream need to be completely reduced for a reliable measurement. For this procedure different technologies are available. These are a wet chemical procedure, thermocatalytic reduction or thermal reduction under temperatures of about 1000 In recent years the cement industry's NO The SCR (selective catalytic reduction) technology is based on the same principle as the SNCR technology but uses a catalyst to bring the required reaction temperature into a range of 250–400 The cement industry has reduced its greenhouse gas emissions per tonne of cement over the last two decades through a combination of different means in order to address the environmental imperative of climate change. The reduction methods are in line with those indicated in several roadmaps, which underline the requirement of cutting industrial CO The biggest lever to reduce anthropogenic CO A lower clinker-to-cement-ratio also results in less energy demand per unit of cement because the energy and CO However, the International Energy Agency expects that these conventional measures will only partly fulfil the reduction target for CO Oxyfuel technology is still at a basic research status, because the integration of the technology requires substantial adaptation of the process. It requires in particular the use of oxygen for combustion and the recirculation of flue gas – mainly CO However, to what degree carbon capture could become a technically and economically feasible technology in the cement industry remains an open question. Besides legal or technological reasons it is first of all the overall cost which is extremely high and would not allow the respective plant to operate competitively ( Against the background of the missing legal overall framework for CO Comminution and especially cement grinding still account for the majority of the electrical energy demand of cement production. As While vertical roller mills (VRMs) are predominantly used for raw material grinding, different types of grinding systems are used for the finish grinding of cement. VRMs are well established, however, roller presses in conjunction with ball mills are also widely used. In any case, finish grinding operations containing ball mills are still frequently found on a global level. In terms of new installations globally, excluding China, the VRM is way ahead with 113 mills ordered in 2012 followed by the ball mill with 51 and high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) with 27 new orders Huge challenges to cope with increasing energy costs have also initiated the substitution of existing grinding equipment by new mills. However, in most cases such substitution goes along with an increase in production or an installation of new capacities Theory indicates that industrial comminution in general is more than one order of magnitude worse in energy efficiency than laboratory single particle comminution Besides sufficient theoretical models, data on the individual material properties is required in order to actually optimise cement grinding equipment. Cement clinker itself can already exhibit huge differences in grindability as These effects can be avoided by the separate grinding and blending of cements. Single components can be ground on suitable mill systems at higher efficiencies while particle size distributions can be better controlled compared to intergrinding. In addition, blending allows not only for more flexible production but also for additional degrees of freedom with regard to the overall particle size distribution. Taking into account the hardening and strength development of different materials as well as their grindabilities it is possible to design production- and resource-efficient cements Today many different approaches are being examined with regard to new cement types which exhibit a lower energy demand and/or lower CO Process-wise the technology for these new cement types is in principle available; various kiln systems including their coolers exist. They differ from conventional clinker production due to the fact that the stabilisation of the major mineralogical phase requires e.g. very specific temperature profiles in the kiln or cooling conditions Belite types of clinker have been well known for many years. These can be burned like OPC clinker but at lower temperatures of around 1250–1300 The main phase of sulphoaluminate clinker is ye'elimite (C The belite-calciumsulfoaluminate-ternesite (BCT) technology combines the different performance and durability characteristics of calcium-sulfoaluminate (CSA) cements and belite cements. CO CELITEMENT is produced in an autoclave process with subsequent reaction grinding. The first field of application is assumed to be in special construction materials such as tile adhesives, fillers, plasters or mortars. Although the production technology is not based on conventional rotary kilns, the use of autoclaves for the mass production of building materials such as lime silica bricks is well established. The CELITEMENT process is in its pilot research status, comprehensive data about the material and the process, e.g. energy demand, are not yet available Due to their lower CO The technology of cement production will without doubt be developed further in future years, as it has in the past. The challenges which remain for the cement industry are: to reduce production costs, and to keep a strong focus on quality, performance and cement's impact on concrete durability. Overall, CO