Steel fibre reinforced concrete (SFRC) has been increasingly used in the engineering structures subjected to intense dynamic loads. In structural design and analysis, a dynamic increase factor (DIF) has been usually used to characterize strain-rate effect on the dynamic mechanical behaviour of SFRC. At present, several analytical equations that contain one or two variables have been utilised to predict the DIF values for material strengths of SFRC. However, this may lead to unsatisfactory results as the rate sensitivity of SFRC is influenced by multiple variables. In this study, a hybrid model, integrating random forest (RF) technique and firefly algorithm (FA), is proposed for predicting DIF values for SFRC. RF is utilized to discover the non-linear relationship between the influencing variables and DIF, while FA optimizes the hyper-parameters of RF. A total of 193 and 314 DIF data samples for compressive and tensile strengths of SFRC are retrieved from the reported studies to train and verify the proposed model. The input variables for the predictive model include strain rate, matrix strength, fibre dosage, and fibre properties (i.e. fibre shape, fibre aspect ratio and fibre tensile strength). The predicted results denote that the developed model is an efficient and accurate method to predict the DIF values for SFRC. Additionally, the relative importance of each input variable is investigated. It is found that the DIF values of SFRC are most sensitive to the matrix strength.Steel fibre reinforced concrete (SFRC) has gained worldwide interest in the application of protective structures and strategically important infrastructures, due to its higher strength, remarkable energy absorption ability, good fatigue resistance and improved durability compared to normal concrete In structural design and analysis, a dynamic increase factor (DIF), identified by the ratio of dynamic to static strengths of the material, has been commonly used to imitate the strength enhancement resulted from strain-rate effect. Experimental tests on the dynamic mechanical properties of SFRC in tension Although previous research has made progress in estimating the strength gain of SFRC under higher loading rates, the accuracies of the existing predictions can be further improved. For example, in addition to the fibre shape, fibre dosage and matrix strength, the DIF of SFRC is also influenced by the fibre aspect ratio and fibre tensile strength Artificial intelligence (AI) technique can be a potential solution for predicting the DIF values of SFRC, which has shown an appreciateable advancement in interdisciplinary science and engineering areas This study aims to propose a novel hybrid (RF-FA) model to accurately and efficiently predict the strain-rate sensitivity of SFRC. A novel regression technique known as random forest (RF) algorithm is employed to predict the DIF values of SFRC, which is a more accurate and computationally efficient approach compared to other commonly used prediction tools, e.g., ANN, gradient boosting machine and decision tree The remaining article is structured into four sections. As a regression technique, the RF developed by Breiman RF model uses bagging technique to generate training data via resampling the original dataset with replacement. Note that some random data may be used more than once in the training process, while some data may never be used. Such characteristic of bagging contributes to the greater stability and higher prediction accuracy of RF algorithm Before commencing the training process of RF, several key hyper-parameters must be pre-determined, i.e. the number of decision trees in the forest and the maximum depth of each decision tree. In order to achieve a desirable predictive performance, a proper hyper-parameter setting is necessary. The optimal hyper-parameters can be simply determined utilizing trial and error method; however, it is inconvenient and time-consuming, and it relies heavily on the computation ability of the computer. To overcome these limitations, metaheuristic optimisation algorithms are applied to obtain the optimal hyper-parameters in RF. Metaheuristic algorithms are nature-inspired global optimization methods, which try to mimic the social behaviour or natural phenomenon such as biological evolution, music improvisation and animal behaviour FA was firstly proposed by Yang This section presents the proposed DIF prediction model that integrates RF algorithms and FA. RF is used to perform the supervised regression tasks, while FA is utilized to identify the optimal hyper-parameters of RF. In this study, the collected dataset is divided into two sub-datasets, namely Dataset1 and Dataset2, for predicting CDIF and TDIF respectively. The dataset includes two output variables (CDIF and TDIF) and six input variables (steel fibre shape, fibre dosage, fibre aspect ratio, fibre tensile strength, matrix strength and strain rate). Each input parameter would affect the DIF value of SFRC at a given strain rate. It should be noted that other parameters, which may also influence the rate sensitivity of SFRC (e.g. specimen size, chemical components and loading apparatus), are neglected in this study due to the limited data on these influencing factors and the main target of this study is to assess the performance of the proposed RF-FA model. To carry out the supervised regression, training and testing datasets need to be properly selected for pre-processing. The training set is utilised to train the regression model and identify the optimal hyper-parameters, while the testing set is prepared to verify the generalization capability of the regression model Dataset 1 includes a total of 193 CDIF values for the compressive strength of SFRC, which are from the database collected by Yang et al. Dataset 2 consists of 314 TDIF values for SFRC from various experimental results collected by the authors and reported in A validation method is required when tunning hyper-parameters. In this study, a In this work, the efficiency and accuracy of the proposed RF-FA model in predicting DIF values of SFRC are evaluated using four statistical metrics, including correlation coefficient (R), root mean square error (RMSE), mean bias error (MBE) and mean absolute percentage error (MAPE). R is an association indicator to measure how strong the relationship is between the two variables. As an efficiency indicator RMSE measures the deviation of the predictive results from the experimental values during the prediction process. MBE is an indicator of average deviation. Positive MBE means the estimated result is overestimated and vice versa. The accuracy of a predictive model is measured by MAPE. The performance of RF model is highly relied on the combination of hyper-parameters, including the maximum depth (Max_depth), the number of decision trees (n The 10-fold cross-validation is carried out, and an average correlation coefficient is obtained for each tuning value in FA. The optimal tuning value is determined by comparing the average correlation coefficients. The greater the average correlation coefficient, the stronger the association between experimental data and predictive results will be. Based on the optimal tuning value for FA, 100 fireflies are randomly generated in the first generation, and then the movement characteristic of fireflies corresponded to their light intensity and objective function is used to create the next generation. The three parameters required for FA, i.e. light absorption coefficient (γ), step size and maximum generation number (  As aforementioned, FA is used in this study to optimize the hyper-parameters of RF regression model. The greatest and average R values are recorded simultaneously during the tuning process to assess the performance of FA, i.e. if the greatest R value from each generation is progressively increased, then the optimisation algorithm is regarded as efficient. The variation of the greatest R in the first nine generations for CDIF and TDIF are shown in It can be seen from The hyper-parameters determined by the optimum R value are considered as the optimum hyper-parameters. The optimum hyper-parameters for both CDIF and TDIF datasets are listed in In this section, the performance of the RF model with the optimum hyper-parameters listed in  After training, the RF-FA model is evaluated using the CDIF testing set, and the results are shown in The histogram plots of the ratio of the tested to predicted CDIF for training and testing datasets are illustrated in The comparison between the predicted TDIF values acquired from the RF-FA model and the test data in the training set is shown in The evaluation of the proposed RF-FA model using the TDIF testing set is illustrated in  As mentioned above, the strain rate sensitivity of SFRC is affected by various parameters, such as matrix strength, fibre dosage, fibre shape, fibre aspect ratio and fibre tensile strength. However, the accurate cause of the rate sensitivity is still arguable and needs further investigation. The time-dependent micro-crack development and the viscoelastic character of the hardened matrix may partially contribute to the strain-rate sensitivity of SFRC  The importance scores of the influencing variables for TDIF of SFRC are illustrated in Based on the relative importance analysis, the degrees of effects of influencing variables, such as matrix strength, fibre dosage and fibre properties, on the strain-rate sensitivity of SFRC are clearly evaluated. It is of great and practical significance in facilitating the design and analysis of SFRC components. In addition, it is worth noting that the importance score could be more accurate when a larger data pool is available. This study has, for the first time, examined the dynamic increase factors of SFRC using an efficient hybrid RF-FA model. The datasets for CDIF and TDIF of SFRC from various experimental tests are retrieved for training and evaluating the proposed hybrid model. The inputs for the proposed model include strain rate, matrix strength, fibre dosage, fibre shape, fibre aspect ratio and fibre tensile strength. In this study, FA is implemented to determine the optimum hyper-parameters of the RF model. A 10-fold cross validation method is employed to eliminate the overfitting or underfitting problem during the process of hyper-parameters tunning. Additionally, four statistical performance indicators, namely, R, RMSE, MBE and MAPE, are utilized to evaluate the performance of the developed hybrid model. Finally, the relative importance of the input variables is compared based on the importance score calculated using the Gini importance. The following conclusions are drawn from this study. The proposed RF-FA model has shown great potential in predicting the CDIF and TDIF values of SFRC. FA is an efficient tool to tune the hyper-parameters of RF model. The optimum R value can be obtained within several generations, e.g. three generations and five generations respectively for CDIF and TDIF training sets. The obtained performance indicators (R, RMSE, MBE and MAPE) for CDIF and TDIF testing sets demonstrate the efficiency and accuracy of the proposed RF-FA model. All input variables contribute to the strain-rate sensitivity of SFRC but with different levels of influence. It is found that cementitious matrix strength is the most critical variable for both CDIF and TDIF, as its importance scores is significantly higher than the other inputs. Fibre properties (e.g. fibre tensile strength, fibre aspect ratio and fibre shape) also have a remarkable effect on the DIF of SFRC, among which fibre shape and fibre tensile strength are the most sensitive variables for TDIF and CDIF respectively. The effect of fibre dosage on CDIF is more significant compared with that on TDIF. Among the three adopted fibre shapes, TDIF is most sensitive to twisted steel fibre, while CDIF is most sensitive to straight steel fibre. It is worth mentioning that the influence score obtained for the hooked fibre in the case of CDIF may not be highly reliable due to the limited data in literature. Also, incorporating more input variables, such as specimen size, fibre combination and addition of nano-particles, into the RF-FA model could further improve the numerical predictions. A more extensive DIF database is essential to achieve the best performance of the proposed model and further understand the mechanism of strain-rate sensitivity of SFRC. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.