The dry sand rubber wheel abrasion test (ASTM G 65) is probably the most widely used abrasion test. It has been used for decades with favorable results. However, this test was developed when tool steels and fusion hardfacings were the materials usually ranked with this low-stress sand abrasion test. Two major problems have emerged in the use of this test: 1. The abradant (silica sand) is not aggressive enough for many modern materials. 2. There are many issues with the variability and availability of the rubbers used to force the abrasive against the test surface.
                  This project was initiated to investigate the viability of using the ASTM G 174 loop abrasion test to replace or supplant the ASTM G 65 test. Friction tests were conducted on various substrates with rubbers wheels used in the three-body testing to understand the interface between the rubber and the abrasive. Limited tests were also conducted on replacing the rubber wheel in the three-body test with a steel wheel. Finally tests were conducted to develop a correlation between ASTM G 65 test results and ASTM G 174 test results. The friction tests confirm that various rubbers interact very differently with abrasives and substrates. A steel wheel cannot be used with the current ASTM G 65 force. The sand crushes to powder. However, a correlation curve was developed to allow conversion of historical ASTM G 65 data to results obtained with the ASTM G 174 two-body abrasion test. Overall this study suggests that two -body abrasion testing with aluminum oxide eliminates rubber issues and the aluminum oxide is abrasive enough to rank modern composites and cermets that are too wear-resistant for a sand abrasion test.Abrasion is usually considered to be the costliest form of wear The ASTM Committee on Wear and Erosion (ASTM G 40) identifies four types of abrasion Some manufacturers of tool materials especially those who manufacture tillage equipment believe that 3-body abrasion best simulates their tribosystem and they tend to prefer 3-body tests like ASTM G 65 to rank candidate tool materials for abrasion resistance. On the other hand, mining and mineral beneficiation equipment manufactures believe that rock crushing tests like ASTM G 81 Polishing abrasion occurs on almost any surface that is rubbed by something. However, from the commercial standpoint polishing abrasion is extremely important in optics, and electronics. The precision surfaces needed for optical devices are generated by polishing abrasion and the electronic devices that control all things usually rely on computer chip substrates that are made flat and smooth by polishing abrasion. There are laboratory tests/techniques to evaluate polishing abradants and processes Cemented carbide “hardmetal”, in some countries) manufacturers learned decades ago that low-stress abrasion testing with sand is insufficient to discriminate between different grades. An aluminum oxide slurry test similar in concept with the dry sand rubber wheel test, but using a steel wheel was developed as their abrasion-testing standard. ASTM B 611 ASTM G 105 All of these three-body abrasion tests are included in an ISO testing standard because some hardmetal manufacturers elect to perform low-stress (like ASTM G 65 and G 105) as well as high-stress (ASTM B 611) abrasion in ranking their materials. Unfortunately the former tests produce mass changes that are so low that it is difficult to get accurate mass losses measurements The mass changes are usually a few milligrams from a test specimen that may weigh 300 The ASTM G2 Wear and Erosion Committee has developed a two-body abrasion test, ASTM G 174 Some of the issues with the ASTM G 65 test, like rubber and sand variability/availability and their cost are significant and will not go away. For example, the sand and rubber used in ASTM G 65 and G105 tests come from a single supplier in the USA This significantly limits international use of these tests. Each test requires about 15  This project was initiated to predominately address the rubber wheel problem: to test the acceptability of using neoprene or other rubbers to replace the single-source CBR wheel. However, it evolved into a study to explore the feasibility of replacing the three-body rubber wheel tests with a two-body abrasion test such as ASTM G 174. The objective of the work is to encourage two-body abrasion testing and to develop a correlation between the ASTM G 65 3-body test and the ASTM G 174 two-body abrasion tests. The study commences with laboratory tests to investigate the role of friction in two and three body abrasion (including friction with various rubber wheels). The study progressed into scratch tests to compare 2-body and three-body scratching. Next a limited study was conducted to investigate the feasibility of using a steel wheel in the ASTM G 65 test; finally data is presented on the correlation of the ASTM G 65 abrasion test to the ASTM G 174 abrasion test. The correlation coefficient was reasonable and could possibly be made better with additional testing. However, the establishment of the correlation between the 2-body and 3-body tests will allow conversion to ASTM G 174 without loss of historical data on the ASTM G 65 abrasion test. The kinetic coefficient of friction was measured for rubber wheels from the ASTM G 65 abrasion test rig sliding on various substrates. The rig was essentially a friction sled test like ASTM D 1894 Cold finished low carbon steel sheet (AISI 1020) 60-grit silica sandpaper 60-grit aluminum oxide sandpaper Cold-finished low carbon steel sheet covered with a monolayer of 50/70 AFS test sand The chlorobutyl wheels were purchased from the sole supplier listed in the ASTM G 65 standard; the other test rubbers were purchased as rubber sheets with a thickness the same as the wheel hub. Rings of each rubber were trepanned from the rubber sheet and then bonded to the steel hubs with a rubber contact cement. The other rubbers were: SBR - styrene butadiene rubber, Neo – neoprene with two different hardnesses (60 and 70 Shore A), and a neoprene/ EPDM (ethylene propylene diene mer) blend. The kinetic coefficient of friction was also measured for a steel wheel (that fits the ASTM G 65 rig) sliding on low carbon steel sheet and low carbon steel sheet with a monolayer of 50/70 AFS test sand on the surface. The normal force was the same normal force used in the ASTM G 65 test rig (130 Scratch tests were performed to determine the relative “scratching “by the action of the different rubber and steel wheels. A monolayer of sand was applied to various substrates and the test wheels rubbed sand onto test surfaces under controlled sliding (130 Low carbon steel sheet (AISI 1020 steel) (95 HRB) D2 tool Steel at 60 HRC (1.5C, 1Mn, 12Cr, Rem Fe) Cemented carbide (WC/6%Co) The last tests were conducted to assess the ability of the AFS 50/70 sand that is used in the ASTM G 65 test to scratch cemented carbide Three ASTM G174 loop abrasion tests (Option C−1N, 30 The chlorobutyl rubber (CBR) had the highest friction coefficient and the neoprene (Neo) and neoprene (Neo/EPDM) blend had the lowest. The chlorobutyl rubber displayed stick-slip behavior in all tests against fixed counterface surfaces ( Chlorobutyl rubber definitely behaved differently (higher friction) than all of the other test rubbers, but when tested against a counterface covered with sand particles the friction characteristics were like that of the other rubbers. The friction coefficients were not significantly higher for CBR sliding on the fixed silica and alumina abrasives. Overall the most useful learning from the rubber friction tests was that If the friction coefficient of a new rubber wheel sliding on AISI 1020 carbon steel with an as-rolled surface texture (about 0.1 The scratching test results are shown in However, the nature of wear scars produced by the two-body ASTM G 174 test and the three body ASTM G 65 test indicated that both tests removed material by a mechanism of scratching abrasion. As shown in The correlation test results are shown in The friction tests on 3-body rubber wheel candidate wheel indicate that different rubbers will have different friction responses when the wheels rub on metal test specimens. Of course higher friction between the wheel and specimen can result in more specimen heating which in turn can increase wear rate with some test materials Tests with these same rubbers in a previous study Additional tests have been run using neoprene wheels by an ASTM task group that is exploring the use of other rubbers for the ASTM G65 tests. They identified a neoprene that calibrated in a number of collaborating labs and a procedure has been added to the ASTM G65 standard that allows the use of a neoprene rubber wheel. Thus neoprene can be used in the ASTM G 65 rubber wheel abrasion test but this study suggests that a neoprene wheels will only calibrate if their frictional characteristics are similar to the chlorobutyl rubber that has been used for many years. Rubber friction is important in abrasion testing with rubber wheels. When the ASTM G 65 test was under development in the 1980s, polyurethane (Shore 90A) was tested for the rubber wheel and it did not work at all. The abrasive particles never momentarily fixed to the wheel to act as “tools” against the test surface. Particles simply rolled through the contact without performing significant “work” on the counterface. The scratching tests performed in these studies, confirmed the at the ASTM G 65 test sand does not produce scratching abrasion on cemented carbide or carbide phases in an alloy microstructure. This is probably why cemented carbide manufacturers developed the more aggressive ASTM B 611 test. The scratch tests on soft steel also indicated that CBR wheels under the controlled conditions of the friction test rig produced scratching that was similar to that produced by the other test rubbers. These results suggest that other rubbers like neoprene can be used in place of the chlorobutyl rubber. It is well known that the ASTM G 65 does remove some material when it is used on cemented carbides, even though it is very small. How is material removed, it is proposed that it is removed by adhesive transfer to abrasive particles. This is in agreement with previous work on the mechanism of adhesive wear The correlation results should allow ASTM G 65 users to convert over to the G 174 test and the correlation data can be used to determine where historical ASTM G 65 test data fit into newly generated ASTM G 174 test data. The calculated correlation coefficient may change when more correlation results are added to the correlation plot but the data used to date are as reliable as the ASTM G 65 interlaboratory data. The correlation results agree with early work of Finnie and others Summary – Overall, this study has shown that the nature of the rubber wheel used in three-body abrasion testing has a significant influence on the use of the test to rank materials. If a rubber does not calibrate by producing certain results on a type D2 tool steel reference, it will not reliably rank materials with historic results. Rubber wheels can be damaged by testing material with heterogeneous microstructures. When wheels need replacement, the new wheel must be tested to see if it calibrates. Some do; some do not. This is a continual problem with three-body abrasion testing using rubber wheels. This study did limited correlation testing, but the results to date suggest that two-body abrasion testing with ASTM G 174 will solve the rubber wheel damage problem and the rubber wheel friction concerns. It will produce material abrasion rankings that correlate with historic ranking done with ASTM G 65. This test can be used for all of the types of materials that have been tested with ASTM G 65 and it can also be used on thin coatings and related coatings that presently cannot be tested in the ASTM G 65 test because of its severity. In additional to all of these factors, abrasion testing with alumina finishing tape eliminates the health precautions that are necessary when testing with silica sand. With regard to the relevance of both tests, the earth's crust is composed mostly of silica and alumina, and these two abrasive substances will be contacted in every operation that involves contact with soil or rock. The abrasion resistance of tillage tools and tools used in energy production has great economic significance. Sand abrasion testing like ASTM G 65 worked well with the tool materials it was designed for: alloy and tool steels. It often does not discriminate cemented carbides, cermets and composite hardfacings that contain phases that are harder than silica. Aluminum oxide is significantly harder than most silica sands and this is why it offers improved abrasion ranking of modern abrasion-resistant materials. The ASTM G 174 test has been used for ranking the abrasion resistance of advanced bulk materials and coatings for at least two decades and the rankings using this two body test have correlated with field experience in many proprietary industrial applications. Another option for making the ASTM G 65 more relevant with modern material is to replace the sand with aluminum oxide. The ASTM G 2 Committee on Wear and Erosion in 2016 initiated testing to explore the feasibility of an ASTM G 65 test procedure using alumina as the abradant, but the effort is a long way from a standard test procedure. Two-body abrasion testing with alumina is a standardized abrasion testing option that has been used to rank the abrasion resistance of modern materials for decades in the chemical process industry. It eliminates many of the three-body testing issues and the results correlated with field experience. It should be considered for use in other industries.  Test results using three-body abrasion tests with a rubber wheel depend significantly on the frictional characteristics of the rubber ( Steel wheel abrasion testing with silica may disintegrate the particles and produce safety/heath issues ( A correlation curve can be used to convert historic ASTM G 65 test data to two-body ASTM G 174 test data ( Two-body abrasion test ranking correlates with three-body abrasion test ranking ( Two body abrasion testing with ASTM G 174 and three-body abrasion testing with ASTM G 65 both produce material removal on type D2 tool steel by scratching abrasion ( The material removal mechanism on cemented carbide in both two and three-body abrasion tests used in this study may be different from “scratching abrasion”. (