The Paleoproterozoic terranes (Birimian) of West Africa are well known to host numerous economic gold mineralizations. The Angovia gold mineralization is located in a brecciated and mylonitic zone within the Birimian greenstones. The sulfide–gold mineralization is mainly represented by gold associated with pyrite and chalcopyrite. A fluid inclusion study undertaken on mineralized quartz veins revealed the presence of aqueous-carbonic (CO2–H2O) fluids, the association of carbonic (CO2) and early aqueous fluids, followed by later aqueous (H2O-salt) and finally nitrogen-rich fluids. Entrapment of the initial homogeneous aqueous-carbonic fluids prior to fluid immiscibility depicts the evolution of the P–T conditions during the exhumation of the terranes after the peak of green-schist metamorphism. The CO2 rich-fluid occurs especially in gold-bearing quartz, and are considered as the main evidence of the ore-forming process in the gold-bearing quartz veins. It is considered as a product of immiscibility of the CO2–H2O parent. The volatile fraction of carbonic and aqueous-carbonic fluid inclusions is dominated by CO2, containing minor amounts of N2, even smaller amounts of CH4 and sporadically, H2S. The aqueous-carbonic fluids have moderate salinity (3–10wt.% eq. NaCl). Late aqueous and N2 – (CH4–CO2) fluids are considered as later, unrelated to the main ore stage, and were trapped during the cooling of the hydrothermal system from 300 to 200°C.
                  The immiscibility has been favored by a strong pressure drop, the main trapping P–T conditions being 320–370°C and 105–135MPa. The mineralizing process is likely related to the immiscibility event, which was probably favored by the release of the fluid pressure after fracturing along the main shear zones. The ore process is likely to have occurred along the main shear zones or related secondary structures affected by cycling of the fluid pressure and quartz sealing–fracturing processes. The superimposed process can also explain the relative complexity of the quartz textures and fluid inclusion microfractures, and the rather wide range in the density of both parent fluid and CO2-dominated fluid.The Paleoproterozoic terranes (Birimian) of West Africa are well known to host numerous occurrences of economic gold mineralization ( Up to now, no data are available on the ore-forming fluids and processes for Ivorian Birimian deposits. In other West Africa Birimian gold deposits (quartz vein and quartz pebble type), especially in Ghana and Burkina Faso, ore-forming fluids are characterized by CO Thus, the objective of this work is to decipher the succession of fluid circulation events by studying the relationships between microfracturing and fluid migration at Angovia. Special attention has been paid to the identification of the fluid flow evolution and the determination of the fluid chemistry using microthermometry and Raman spectroscopy. Finally, the P–T–t path of the history of the deposit has been reconstructed. The results are discussed and compared with those of previous studies from Birimian terranes of neighbouring countries in order to set up a genetic model. The Angovia mine is located in Yaouré province (central part of Ivory Coast), which is well known for its gold potential. In the West African geology, Yaouré belongs to the Baoulé-Mossi domain of the Man shield ( The lithostratigraphic sequence of the Birimian of West Africa is still a subject of debate. Since The Birimian formations in the Yaouré area of central Ivory Coast ( In the Yaouré mountains, the underlying sedimentary unit (B The Angovia gold mineralization is located in a brecciated and mylonitic band within the Birimian greenstones. These mylonitic rocks are about 2–70 The Birimian formations of the Yaouré succession have been metamorphosed up to greenschist facies during the Eburnean orogeny ( The Yaouré–Angovia gold mineralization is located in the B In the present study, eight representative gold-bearing quartz samples ( Host rocks of the Yaouré–Angovia mineralization are mainly composed of metadolerites, locally cross-cut by acidic dykes trending N120°E. These metadolerites are massive, fine-grained and are composed of plagioclase (oligoclase), amphiboles, pyroxene, biotite, sphene and xenotime. Locally, they are particularly rich in ferromagnesian minerals (pyroxenes), contain fine-grained pyrite, and still have recognizable ophitic texture. In these rocks, pyrite is often surrounded by quartz and chlorite, the latter replacing amphiboles ( The host rocks show pervasive hydrothermal alteration ( A quartz–carbonate–sulfide Three generations of quartz fracture-filling have been recognized in the Angovia area ( Quartz II, which constitutes the main hydrothermal infilling in fractures of the mine, may reach up to 2 Near the surface, in the mylonitic and brecciated zone, the greenstones are generally completely transformed into clay-rich rocks of white or ochre color. XRD of six samples indicates that the clay fraction is dominated by smectite and kaolinite with small amounts of residual chlorite (ripidolite and brunsvigite types, electron microprobe analysis), illite and traces of illite/smectite mixed-layer clay. Crystals of psilomelane, Fe oxides, REE-rich phosphate and barite, are observed at the sample surface and are attributed to the supergene alteration. Optical and scanning electron microscopy aided by electronic microprobe analysis show that the sulfide ore is a pyrite–chalcopyrite assemblage, strongly corroded in the studied zone ( Microfractures (especially fluid inclusion planes (FIP)) in quartz from fractures were studied in five horizontally oriented double polished thin sections, to describe the relationships between the nature of fluid inclusions and the geometry of microfissuring in quartz quantitatively. The quantitative statistical measurements of the FIP directions were carried out using an interactive videographic analyser adapted on a transmitted light microscope. This system uses the Anima data- processing software at UMR G2R, Nancy ( The gold-bearing quartz (quartz II) shows a relatively low amount of microfracturing, less intense than that observed in the barren quartz ( Barren quartz (ANG13) is characterized by a high amount of healed microfractures showing four principal directions (N030°–050°E, N070°E, N110°–120°E and N140°–150°E, Fluid inclusion microthermometry was carried out at CREGU-UMR G2R, Nancy. Microthermometric characterization of the fluids was performed on wafers using a Chaix-meca heating–freezing stage ( Notation of the fluid inclusion types follows nomenclature previously used ( Doubly polished sections of about 100 Considering the petrographic characteristics of fluid inclusions and their microthermometric behavior, fluid inclusions in the Angovia mineralised quartz and barren quartz can be divided into five types ( Aqueous-carbonic inclusions (Lc-w) belonging to the H Carbonic inclusions (Lc) belonging to the CO Aqueous (H Aqueous fluid inclusions (Lw2) were observed in the gold-bearing quartz only, where they constitute the most abundant fluid inclusions trapped in healed microfractures. However, they were not observed in some mineralized samples (ANG 7 of the N–S vein and ANG 12 of the N040°E vein), and they are thus considered as later than the main ore fluid stage. Ln inclusions (N (i) Primary, two or three phase aqueous-carbonic fluid inclusions (Lc-w or Vc-w) were observed in the quartz sample ANG7-8-9-12 from the central and southern part of the open pit. Although they were in the vicinity of carbonic fluid inclusions, they are clearly less abundant than the carbonic ones, since they represent only 6% of the studied inclusions. Volatile proportions, estimated at room temperature, commonly vary between 30 and 50%. Tm CO Raman analysis of eight inclusions showed that the volatile fraction of these fluid inclusions is dominated by CO (ii) A few secondary aqueous-carbonic fluid inclusions (Lc-w) were observed only in the ANG8 quartz. Tm CO Raman analyses show that gaseous compositions of these fluid inclusions are dominated by CO The aqueous-carbonic fluid inclusions represent over 85% of the observed fluid inclusions in the barren quartz. They can be found as primary and secondary inclusions. (i) Primary, two or three phase aqueous-carbonic fluid inclusions (Lc-w or Vc-w) are dominant. Volatile proportions vary between 30 and 60 vol.%. Tm CO Raman analysis of five inclusions showed that the volatile phase of the Lc-w or Vc-w inclusions is dominated by CO (ii) Secondary (Lc-w) aqueous-carbonic fluids occur in planes and are more abundant in the barren quartz, distinguishing it clearly from the gold-bearing quartz. Tm CO Raman analysis of five inclusions showed that the volatile fraction of these fluid inclusions is dominated by CO (i) Primary fluid inclusions (Lc) are monophase liquid, generally dark and do not show any visible aqueous phase at room temperature ( Raman analysis of 16 fluid inclusions shows that CO (ii) Secondary (Lc) monophase liquid inclusions have been observed locally both in the central and the southern open pit samples (ANG 1–6; ANG 12). Melting temperatures of the CO Raman analysis of seven inclusions ( A few primary (Lc) monophase liquid fluid inclusions were observed in the barren quartz. They represent less than 10% of the fluid inclusions in that quartz. They are often located in the vicinity of aqueous carbonic fluid inclusions. TmCO Raman analysis showed that the inclusions contained mainly CO (i) Primary aqueous inclusions (Lw1) were sporadically observed in samples ANG 2, ANG 5 and ANG 9. In this last sample ANG 9, they are found in the vicinity of carbonic and aqueous carbonic fluid inclusions. The melting temperature of ice (Tm ice) was between −3.5 and −2.4 (ii) Secondary aqueous inclusions (Lw2) were observed in ANG 1, 6, 8 and ANG 9 quartz. Tm ice was observed between −5.4 and −0.7  Secondary N Raman analysis of six fluid inclusions ( In the barren quartz, secondary monophase Ln fluid inclusions are similar to those observed in the mineralized quartz. They showed melting temperatures at around −104.8 Fluid immiscibility is a process frequently invoked as the cause for gold deposition in a variety of mesothermal and epithermal lode gold deposits, ranging from Archean to Tertiary in age ( Both primary aqueous (Lw1) and carbonic (Lc) inclusions co-exist in close proximity in sample ANG 9. Lw1 and Lc inclusions co-exist in a few clusters with aqueous-carbonic inclusions which can be considered as a parent fluid. The primary aqueous fluid inclusions Lw1 are, however rare, and in most cases, are not found together with the carbonic and aqueous-carbonic inclusions in an inclusion cluster. This phenomenon may be attributed to the lower wetting angle of water compared to that of carbon dioxide, with respect to quartz. Consequently, the carbonic fluid inclusions appear to be the most abundant inclusions in the mineralized quartz ( Aqueous phase in the aqueous-carbonic inclusions and the primary aqueous inclusions (Lw1) shows a similar range of salinity and this suggests that they are genetically related. The primary aqueous-carbonic inclusions generally display higher homogenization temperatures than the Lw1 aqueous inclusions, which is also consistent with fluid immiscibility ( At room temperature, the carbonic fluid inclusions (Lc) do not show a visible H Considering all these observations, we propose that fluid immiscibility has occurred in the Angovia quartz vein. Considering that the carbonic fluids and the aqueous fluids (salinity, Th) are the result of an immiscibility process affecting a parent fluid, the aqueous-carbonic fluids Lc-w, and are synchronous, they must have been trapped under the same P–T conditions around the immiscibility curve of a fluid having the features of the Lc-w fluid: approximately 10–20% CO The P–T conditions of the immiscibility can be deduced from consideration of the representative isochores calculated for each type of fluid by considering results from microthermometry and Raman analysis. The P-T diagram in The available data cannot definitely constrain the P–T path, which, however necessarily ends with the conditions above described for the coexisting Lc-Lw1 inclusions. The latter conditions can be considered as the lowest pressure conditions of the ore process, the temperature being in both cases within the 300–370 It is commonly a difficult problem to determine the fluid responsible for mineralization when unequivocal petrographic evidence, such as gold particles in or around the fluid inclusions are not found. The characteristics of the mineralizing fluids is deduced from the consideration of the two main features differentiating the gold-bearing and the barren quartz: The carbonic inclusions (Lc) are the most abundant fluid inclusions in all the mineralized quartz (up to 65%) but are rare in the barren quartz. The presence of abundant carbonic inclusions in mineralized quartz, in contrast to their quasi-absence in barren veins could suggest that fluid immiscibility has occurred in the mineralized veins, whereas in the barren veins such a process is not observed, thus explaining the absence of gold deposition. The temperature estimates for the ore fluid event are thus the conditions defined for the immiscibility, e.g. around 320–370 The crystallisation temperature of chlorite in the mineralized zone, deduced from the chlorite geothermometer ( The alteration mineral assemblage (quartz–muscovite–carbonate–chlorite–tourmaline) within the host rocks suggests that the alteration took place between 225 and 400 The exsolution of cubanite laminae in chalcopyrite ( The conditions may also be compared to those defined for the main gold stage in Birimian terranes from surrounding countries (200–450 In the Angovia deposit, further fluid events are recorded. The isochores of later secondary aqueous fluid (Lw2) indicate that they were probably trapped at temperatures close to a successive stage at around 200–240 Fluid inclusion characteristics of several Birimian gold deposits are summarised in The trapping temperatures and pressures conditions for the Angovia deposit are similar to those estimated for the granitoid-hosted gold deposits in the Birimian terranes of Ghana (200–350 The trapping temperatures and pressures of the Ashanti gold deposits in Ghana were estimated to be 220–440 It has been suggested that the Ashanti-type mineralization was associated with the regional peak metamorphism ( The Angovia gold mineralization, which is developed in and around quartz veins, is located in a brecciated and mylonitic band within a Birimian metadolerite. The sulfide–gold mineralization is mainly represented by gold associated with pyrite and chalcopyrite. Five major types of fluids have been recognized: (i) a CO At Angovia, an immisciblity process occurred in mineralized veins and was probably responsible for the gold deposition. Thus, the mineralizing fluid is probably the parent H Considering that the carbonic fluids and the aqueous fluids with traces of CO The immiscibility has thus been favored by a strong drop in the fluid pressure probably linked to the activity of the main shear zone. It is difficult from the studied material, to depict cycles in the fluid pressure, although they are highly probable as in other Archean provinces ( The nature of the fluids observed in the Angovia deposit is in part similar to those described in the Ashanti (Ghana) and Diabatou (Burkina Faso) gold-bearing quartz veins. The pressure–temperature conditions are comparable to those affecting the granitoid hosted gold deposits in the Birimian terrane of Ghana. We wish to express our sincere gratitude to Christian Girard and Pierre N’Guessan (“Compagnie Minière d’Afrique”) for their help in accessing the Angovia open pit during sampling and also for discussions about the Angovia geology. Thérèse Lhomme is thanked for her help during the Raman analysis. Régine Mosser-Ruck is acknowledged for her help in XRD analysis. This study was financially supported by EGIDE (French cooperation agency) and CREGU. The authors thank W. Heilen, F. Noronha and T. Aïfa, the editor of the special issue, for suggestions and helpful comments on the manuscript.