The zeta potential of microbubbles, generated by injecting pressurised air into water and then releasing the pressure, was determined in the absence and presence of different polyacrylamides. Air was dissolved in either water or solutions of cationic, anionic, amphoteric or nonionic polymers at a constant pressure of four atmospheres. The charge of the bubbles at the shear-zeta plane was measured using a modified microelectrophoresis glass cell, held at a stationary level, at varying pH (2.0–12.0). Known practical problems with this technique were solved, and these solutions are described in detail. The anionic, amphoteric and nonionic polymers increased the negative charge of the bubbles, but the isoelectric point (iep) remained constant at about pH 2.0. Conversely, in the presence of the cationic polymer, the bubbles exhibited positive surface charges between pH 2.0 and 8.0 and an iep of pH 8.0. The results revealed the existence of an important interaction mechanism between air bubbles and polymeric macromolecules; neither this mechanism nor its practical implications have been reported in the literature to date, especially in the treatment of wastewater by flocculation followed by dissolved air flotation (DAF).The knowledge of bubble charge in aqueous solutions is important in many areas, namely, food processing, mineral processing and water and wastewater treatment. The charge of bubbles determines their interactions with solid particles, oil droplets and with other bubbles. In general, gas bubbles suspended in aqueous solutions acquire a surface charge, where the charge density and sign depend on the solution chemistry. The most likely charging mechanism involves the asymmetric dipoles of water molecules residing at the gas–liquid interface ( The interactions among ions, molecules and organic components and air bubbles have been studied by several authors, focusing on their applications in many processes ( Measurements of bubble zeta potential in the presence of polymers are relevant to the flotation of ores and to pollutant removal in water and wastewater treatment. The adsorption of polyacrylamides onto air bubbles may influence the kinetics and efficiency of these flotation processes as well as particle flocculation. The study by This work studied the surface charge of single air bubbles in water and in the presence of polyacrylamide solutions, commonly used as flocculants in flocculation–flotation processes ( Thus, knowledge of these interactions may enhance the potential for applications of the flocculation–flotation processes in the environmental field (effluent control and water reuse), increasing its treatment capacity and lowering dosages and costs for polymers and other reactants. Furthermore, knowledge of the interfacial behaviour of macromolecules adsorbed at bubble surfaces may aid in the selection of polymers, for example, in the processes of pollutant/contaminant removal in the production of drinking water and/or effluent treatment and in the selective flocculation of mineral particles. The zeta potential of gas bubbles has been determined experimentally and many studies have been published reporting bubble charge in different electrolytes and/or frother solutions. The results of several of these important contributions are summarised in  Although the electrophoresis technique has been widely utilised and may be the most suitable technique to determine bubble zeta potential, the procedure poses many practical problems. The main drawbacks are related to the introduction of gas bubbles into an electrophoresis cell, the rapid rise of large bubbles and the migration of microbubbles toward the electrodes. These problems have not been fully described in the literature and can often lead to erratic measurements, particularly when a smooth, horizontal bubble flow across the cell is required or when bubbles with a wide size distribution are examined. Still, many studies have not mentioned these difficulties, probably because the authors used video cameras, vertical bubble flow inside the cell and surfactant solutions that stabilize the bubble suspensions and also prevent bubble coalescence ( In this context, the present work presents several adaptations of the electrophoresis technique for more accurate measurements of the electrophoretic mobility of microbubbles (as generated, for example, in a DAF technique) using a horizontal microbubble flow inside a microelectrophoresis cell without either a digital camera coupled to the micrometer or surfactants in the solutions. Accordingly, the aim of this work was to fully evaluate the effect of polyacrylamide macromolecules on the zeta potential of air bubbles in water while improving the technique and the quality of results. The improved measurements of bubble charge will provide a better understanding of the interactions between bubbles and polymers in flocculation–flotation processes. The commercial polymers employed and their main properties are summarized in A Rank Brothers microelectrophoresis apparatus, Mark II, was used to determine the electrophoretic mobilities of air microbubbles generated by a dissolved air flotation (DAF) technique. The system was composed of microelectrophoresis equipment with a modified electrophoresis cell, a pair of platinum electrodes, a DAF unit for producing the microbubbles and a glass cylinder to allow the rising and sampling of bubbles in the cell. The flat section of the cell had a rectangular cross-section with internal dimensions of approximately 1 In addition, the transverse cross-sectional area of this cell was determined by accurate calibrations performed with an optical microscope (Zeiss Stemi SV 11) coupled to a digital camera (Sony Mavica MVC-DC500) by capturing images of the cell dimensions under both dry and wet (filled with water) conditions. Two platinum electrodes were inserted into the two wings extending from each side of the cell ( Before the mobility measurements, the stationary level location was determined using spherical glass particles (Sigma-Aldrich®) with a mean size of 10 The mobilities of the bubbles when coated with polyacrylamides were measured in the presence of 10 This low saturation time is very important because it permitted us to work with a small amount of microbubbles instead of a cloud of rising bubbles, improving both the observations at the microscope and the capture of the smaller microbubbles from the glass cylinder at the sampling stage (see below). Moreover, this small number of microbubbles avoids the undesirable migration of the bubbles toward the electrodes. Thus, this procedure enabled suitable measurements of small microbubbles (with very low rising rates) in the range of roughly 10–20 The air-saturated solutions were withdrawn from the vessel through the orifice plate and transferred into the glass cylinder (50 With respect to the cleaning of the experimental apparatus, the electrophoretic cell, glass container and cylinder were cleaned as follows: First, they were submerged in an ultrasonic bath filled with a glassware detergent for 15 The bubble zeta potential, ζ, was calculated using Smoluchowski's equation (Eq. Electrophoretic velocities ( In general, the adapted microelectrophoresis technique showed good performance enabling measurements of mobilities of air bubbles in different solutions. The conventional chemical parameters, such as, ionic strength, reagents chemistry, among others, have been already reported in the literature (    The results obtained by  Thus, in the presence of an anionic polyacrylamide, bubbles become covered by the macromolecules in the same manner as in adsorption at the air/water interface, yielding a net (and high) negative charge with a pH-dependant magnitude.  Similarly, Thus, negative sites were activated with an increase of pH and this increased the negative charge of the air bubbles even at pH values where the zeta potential of the macromolecules decreased (as, for example, at pH 12.0). In contrast to the previously studied polymers, the cationic polyacrylamide caused a reversal of bubble charge, from negative to positive (with a maximum value of + The zeta potential of single air bubbles in water and in the presence of polyacrylamide polymers were measured using a modified and well-calibrated microelectrophoresis system. In water, the zeta potential of the bubbles was negative between pH 2.0 and 12.0, with maximum values of −66 The authors would like to thank the Floerger®, Kemira®, Cytec® and Nalco® corporations for their technical information and for providing the polymers. The authors would also like to thank all of our colleagues at the LTM (31