This study investigates the feasibility of a precipitation process for the removal of arsenic from highly alkaline enargite leaching solutions in the Cu3AsS4–NaHS–NaOH system and regeneration of the leaching reagents. The main objective was to reduce elemental sulfur and subsequently oxidize arsenite (As (III)) to arsenate (As (V)) for the formation and precipitation of Na3AsS4. First, solutions with over 35g/L As were prepared with either arsenic trisulfide (As2S3) or enargite (Cu3AsS4) in the NaHS–NaOH system. These solutions were conditioned at 90°C followed by addition of elemental sulfur and fast cooling to 30°C for precipitate formation. The effect of elemental sulfur addition (sulfur/arsenic ratio), NaHS and NaOH concentrations and times for conditioning and precipitation were evaluated, as well as the recirculation of the mother liquor containing arsenic with leach reagents.
                  The results showed that conditioning solution with high arsenic concentration at 90°C in NaHS (100–250g/L) and NaOH (50–100g/L), and sulfur addition at 1/2wt of arsenic in solution for 1–2h followed by fast cooling to 30°C and conditioning for 3–5h reduced arsenic concentration in solution by over 60%. Characterization by XRD showed Na3AsS4 as the dominant phase. Starting solutions prepared from As2S3 and Cu3AsS4 produced similar results. The recirculation of process filtrates for re-use in enargite leaching continued to give reproducible leaching results.The most important minerals of arsenic are: arsenopyrite (FeAsS), orpiment (As Many promising studies on the leaching of enargite, tennantite and tetrahedriate are discussed in the literature, using Na The removal of arsenic, dissolved in alkaline solution (Na Arsenic trisulfide (As Two enargite (Cu Sodium hydrosulfide (NaHS, 70% purity) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH, 90% purity) were used to prepare the NaHS–NaOH alkaline solution for dissolution of Cu Schematic illustration of the arsenic precipitation process from alkaline solution performed in this work is shown in For the precipitation process, a solution with arsenic concentration ranging between 35 and 60 With Cu A 200 After conditioning the arsenic solution at 90 X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed, using Rigaku, RINT–2200/PC system with a Cu Kα irradiation source (λ Batch solutions with arsenic concentration ranging from 38 to 59 No precipitation occurred without S or Sb addition (Test 1) when the temperature was quickly reduced to 30 Tests 5–10 were performed without antimony but with sulfur addition ranging from 1:8 to 1:1 (S/As wt. ratio). A summary of arsenic precipitation at increasing S addition is shown in Precipitation experiments from Tests 12–14 were performed using filtrates from previous tests with fresh As  The dissociation of NaHS provides S The results in Enargite (Cu Test 1 solution was obtained by adding As XRD patterns taken for Tests 1–4 precipitates were very similar to those shown in Dissolution of arsenic from Cu The morphology of the precipitates was also investigated by taking scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and all precipitates analyzed exhibited similar properties. SEM images of the precipitate obtained for Test 4 ( Analysis and evaluation of the arsenic content in the Na For the precipitate from Test 2, the arsenic content was evaluated to be 24.07% which is close to the 27.5% As content for pure Na According to findings in the current study, a process to precipitate and remove arsenic dissolved in alkaline sulfide solutions resulting from copper ores and concentrates containing arsenic such as enargite (Cu NaHS concentrations ranging from 180 to 250 Arsenic concentrations above 35 Cooling of the solutions from 90 to 30 Precipitation of arsenic from the Cu Characterization and analysis of precipitates showed Na Further work is currently in progress to determine a complete process for the treatment of copper concentrates containing arsenic, including physical separation by flotation, leaching in alkaline sulfide media for removal of arsenic, and further handling of the Na The authors sincerely acknowledge Mr. M. Abumiya and Mr. M. Matsumoto of DOWA Metals & Mining Co., Ltd., Japan for their kind assistance and valuable discussions throughout this work.