We investigate the behaviour of polydisperse particle clouds settling in a viscous fluid by means of numerical simulations. The sedimentation process is described on examples of bidisperse systems as well as fully polydisperse particle systems, pointing out parallels and differences to the monodisperse case. Based on our results we propose a simple formula which gives the maximum velocity of a polydisperse particle cloud settling in a viscous fluid. The proposed formula agrees with our numerical results even in case of systems with high polydispersity.Sedimentation is part of many industrial processes in the fields of chemical, biological and environmental engineering. Waste water treatment and mineral processing are only two examples where the treatment of highly polydisperse suspensions plays a major role. As opposed to the assumption of many models, particles are normally not spatially uniformly distributed in such suspensions. Due to hydrodynamic interactions and the polydisperse nature of the particulate system, clusters of different sizes and lifetimes are formed. Such clusters, or particle clouds, can undergo a remarkable motion. In the absence of turbulence, spherical clouds behave like drops of fluid settling in another fluid with lower mass density In this section we describe our simulation method and we derive a formula which gives the settling velocity of a polydisperse spherical particle cloud. We confine ourselves to a brief discussion of the exact form of the numerical scheme we use, since the method and extensions to it are well known. For readers not familiar with the Stokesian Dynamics method, we refer to We consider particles settling in a viscous fluid, thus the Stokes equations suffice to describe the fluid motion. When interparticle forces are negligible, the equations of motion for suspended non-Brownian particles solely under the influence of gravity are Nitsche and Batchelor We have validated our code on several examples, obtaining good agreement. In this section we give some examples which are significant for this work. For all numerical experiments we assume that the particle density is the same for all particles. The driving force in all simulations is gravity, which scales as the third power of the particle radius. To determine the accuracy of our simulation, we chose the example of two equal spheres settling in a given configuration in a quiescent fluid ( In the previous example where we examined the error made in one time step, particles do not move relative to each other. To investigate the deviation of the solution of the mobility problem without lubrication correction from the solution of the resistance problem with lubrication correction after a longer time span, we have run numerical experiments as described in A qualitative comparison of our results from a simulation of the settling process of a monodisperse particle cloud of 3000 particles with the results of Metzger et al. In order to investigate the nature of the cloud evolution for a bidisperse particle system we have investigated two different kinds of initial conditions—unmixed bidisperse clouds, where the fraction of large particles is only distributed in the upper hemisphere of the cloud, and well-mixed clouds, where no restriction to the location of the particles inside the cloud has been imposed.  We have conducted numerical experiments on the probability of a break-up of a bidisperse particle cloud. This process is shown for the monodisperse case in In order to further investigate the behaviour of polydisperse particle clouds, we have conducted numerical experiments on fully polydisperse systems with a particle radius distribution according to a given log-normal distribution. The considered clouds consisted of 1000, 2500 and 5000 particles, respectively, with particle and fluid properties such that the resulting Reynolds number and Stokes number were sufficiently small, i.e. the assumptions For a validation of formula To cover a wide spectrum of possible particle systems, we have run extensive numerical tests on the already described well-mixed bi- and polydisperse particle systems. While we varied the percentage of small particles in bidisperse particle systems with fixed volume fraction, we varied In addition to the comparisons of analytical prediction and numerical results presented in The use of e.g. the mean particle radius together with a formula proposed for monodisperse clouds leads to an error, which can be significant when polydisperse clouds are considered. This work gives more insight into the sedimentation process of polydisperse particle clouds in viscous fluids. Until now research has been concentrated on the investigation and description of monodisperse particle clouds, drops or blobs, as they are sometimes called. Due to the fact that we have parallelized our algorithm, we are able to simulate particle systems of several thousand particles with any radius distribution in a short time. This enables us to investigate large polydisperse particle clouds, for which the evolution differs from that of relatively small particle clouds comprised of several hundred up to one thousand particles. One result is that, given that the considered particle cloud consists of a large number of particles, a polydisperse particle cloud undergoes the same remarkable motion as a sufficiently large monodisperse cloud does. An initially spherical cloud evolves into a torus that starts to oscillate until it breaks up into smaller clouds, which then undergo the same motion. For a smaller number of particles, namely about 1000 particles and less, polydisperse clouds are not as stable as their monodisperse counterpart. In an extreme case of polydispersity, a bidisperse system, the evolution is dominated by the fraction with the highest number of particles in the system. Due to a loss of particles during sedimentation, initially spherical particle clouds attain their maximum settling velocity while they still have their initial shape. Starting from the Hadamard–Rybczynski equation we have derived a formula which yields the settling velocity of such a particle cloud. By a comparison with numerical experiments we have shown that the proposed formula gives a very good estimate for the settling velocity of a polydisperse spherical particle cloud. F. Bülow acknowledges partial support by the We start from the Hadamard–Rybczynski equation (H–R equation),