Electrowinning is most often used to recover gold and silver from eluates produced by the elution of activated carbon. This chapter discusses the operation of the electrowinning process that differs depending on the elution procedure that is used. Increases in electrowinning cell performance and efficiency was achieved by replacing the single cylindrical packed-bed cathodes, used in the original US Bureau of Mines (USBM) designs, with multiple rectangular parallel-plate cells. The packed-bed feature was still retained and steel wool was packed into the cathode enclosure, with electrical contact achieved via a stainless steel spike entering vertically from the surface.Electrowinning is most often used to recover gold and silver from eluates produced by the elution of activated carbon. Operation of the electrowinning process differs depending on the elution procedure that is used. In the case of Zadra elution, where the electrowinning cell is in series with the elution column, the column and cell must be designed to elute and recover the gold by re-circulation of the eluant until the gold content of the eluted carbon is low enough (<100 In the case of Anglo American Research Laboratories (AARL) elution, electrowinning is carried out on the complete batch of eluate produced by a single pass through the elution column. The pregnant eluate is re-circulated through the cell until the concentration of the gold in the barren solution is low enough to be discarded or returned to the adsorption circuit. The cell is operated independently of the elution process. The reactions occurring at the electrodes of a cell recovering gold from eluates containing cyanide and/or alkali are:  The maximum rate of deposition of gold ( Integrating, this becomes Deposition of a metal onto a packed-bed electrode at a rate controlled by mass transport is given by  The decay of gold concentration with time for electrowinning a batch of eluate by recirculation at a volumetric flowrate By determining The single-pass extraction efficiency ( The actual operating current required (typically ∼400 The evolution of oxygen at the anode by the reaction depicted in Eq. One of the earliest references to gold electrowinning was contained in British Patent 9582 (1842), in which William Henry Fox Talbot described a method for plating gold using metal electrodes in an electrolyte and powered by a galvanic cell. This summary will try to record some of the practical aspects learned over the last 160 years of experience available in this field. The advent of the use of coconut-shell-based activated carbon to recover gold from cyanide solutions (see Chapter 23), and the need to recover the gold from pregnant eluate solutions resulting from elution of the loaded carbon led to the adoption of electrowinning as the primary means of gold metal recovery. The basic design features of the electrowinning step were published by the United States Bureau of Mines (USBM; This type of cells were to some extent limited by stationary diffusion layers developing adjacent to the plating site, which inhibited the transfer of the plating ion across the barrier, and to the thickness of the packed bed.  The USBM design was based on a cylindrical packed bed of steel wool as cathode. The electrolyte was introduced to the centre of the cell and flowed through the packed bed and out of the top of the cell. The anode was a cylinder of punched-plate or mesh stainless steel located around the cell's outer circumference. Either a single cell or multiple cells in a series cascade arrangement could be used. The total system operated at atmospheric boiling point for the particular elevation and electrolyte composition at the site and was usually operated in the range 95–99°C. The elution rate of the gold from the carbon in to the eluate was limited by the relatively low temperature and due to the cell inefficiency, gold which was not plated was recycled to the carbon, further inhibiting the elution rate. These two effects resulted in elution cycle times in the range 24–96 In some instances, custom elution contractors would toll charge for elution on a time basis, resulting in the return of poorly eluted carbon to the adsorption circuit. Attempts were made to increase the mass transfer and plating rates in cylindrical cells by instituting pumped internal recirculation; however, this technique failed to generate the required increase in efficiency. In 1998, a cooperative effort between a consultant engineer and the West Australian Chemistry Centre and Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) led to the design and construction of a tangentially agitated annular electrowinning cell. Trials with the cell revealed two serious problems. The first was there was no practical way to provide the plating surface area that the steel-wool-based cathodes provided, and the cells became too long, or required too many units in series. The second was that if the annular gap was reduced to obtain high surface turbulence and high mass-transfer rates, the gold plated was either too fine or too colloidal, and travelled out of the cell with the electrolyte. The idea was abandoned and further improvements were directed to parallel-plate cell designs featuring multiple cathodes. It is interesting to note that this type of cell design was progressed, and is now in commercial operation in the copper industry, and has been piloted for commercial operation in the silver heap-leach industry. The author has no knowledge of these cell designs finding application in gold elution and electrowinning circuits. The need to electrowin in 10–16 In addition to the increased operating temperature, there were several other variations that impacted on the design of the required electrowinning system. These were The The The As a further possible variation in the AARL systems, the designer may elect to use recirculation of the electrolyte for the required time to reach a design barren-electrolyte grade, or he may elect to design for a system that will generate an acceptable barren-electrolyte grade in a single pass. It may also be found that a combination of these with either partial recirculation followed by open-circuit pass out, or multiple open-circuit passes without mixing and recirculation achieves the lowest barren in the available time with the least number of cells. Increases in electrowinning cell performance and efficiency was achieved by replacing the single cylindrical packed-bed cathodes, used in the original US Bureau of Mines (USBM) designs, with multiple rectangular parallel-plate cells. The packed-bed feature was still retained, and steel wool was packed into the cathode enclosure, with electrical contact achieved via a stainless-steel spike entering vertically from the surface. These cells suffered from the effect that as the electrolyte flowed through the bed, it entered the area that was below the deposition potential of gold, owing to the resistance drop through the electrolyte and the loosely packed steel wool. Individual cathode-pass efficiencies per unit weight of cathode were low. A further disadvantage was the need to process large masses of residual steel wool, usually by dissolution in hydrochloric acid. This process was relatively difficult, being labour intensive and unhygienic; it was not unusual at the smaller operations to see a plastic rubbish bin of gold/steel-wool sludge sitting outside the gold room in the sunshine and fresh air, being given the occasional stir with a broom handle. There was a developing tendency to change to rolls of steel wool and wind these on to a high-density polyethylene (HDPE) cathode former. The winding method was to overlap each strand by 30–50% and to cross wrap a second layer at right angles, with winding densities on the order of 2,000 The required number of such cathodes in series that was required to achieve a target single-cathode pass efficiency, and hence a target cell pass efficiency, was calculated after examination of site operating data. The practice of sub-contracting cathode construction to disabled people was also initiated. The operator was saved the time of winding his cathodes and the supplier performed a very useful service to the gold industry. Cathode-enclosure designs were changed to accommodate these pre-formed cathodes and clamp them to a transverse copper conductor bar using a plastic pressure-plate as part of the cathode enclosure. This cell design using nine cathodes and ten anodes became the workhorse of the Australian gold industry. A typical cell operating at good efficiency would plate 70% of the gold in a single pass, with poor operations as low as 40% and the best operators achieving 90% pass efficiencies. In South Africa, the Mintek cell, featuring six cathodes in series, and fabricated from stainless steel was chosen as the standard cell. The advent of corrosion at the solution interface, and breaking off of the cathodes at the surface was a serious problem. When the cell is in service the relatively fragile steel-wool wires are cathodically protected by the applied current and cannot corrode. Between cycles the reverse occurs, and the moist area at the solution interface anodically corrodes. Anode wires also corrode and thin out at the base, causing excess current density at the surface. The steel wool is also inflammable, and can contribute to cell fires. Some designers countered this problem by dropping the transverse bus bar to the surface, and eliminating the non-wetted wire. Others developed a saw-tooth cathode former and wound the wool horizontally so that it was always immersed.  There were several features of the system that were beneficial. It was observed that as the replacement cell was started the gold dissolution rate was anode current-controlled as a result of the high surface area of the original woven stainless-steel cathodes. Gold in solution tenors therefore increased rapidly. The replate plating reaction started slowly, owing to low grades in solution, but then increased as the bulk solution tenor increased. The net effect was that plating would plateau at approximately 3,000 If copper had been electrowon on to the original cathodes, it would also anodically dissolve; however, by manipulation of the free cyanide level in the cell, the copper could be maintained in solution, and replating of copper did not occur. The cells therefore had some electrorefining ability and became known as electrorefining cells. There were other disadvantages of the system that arose; for example, sometimes it was very difficult to remove the plate. In circuits using closed-circuit elution, where the carbon was contaminated with silicate minerals, the silica dissolved in the hot caustic eluant at the high-temperature section of the circuit, and reprecipitated in the cell at the coolest part of the circuit. The stainless-steel cathode wires became coated and the cell resistance became so high that it could not meet its design duty. There was therefore a need to develop a system to delete the replate step and to pressure jet the bullion off the woven stainless-steel cathodes directly.  Several operators of replate circuits converted to the pressure-cleaning system, usually with success. In 1995, the decision was taken to expand the Fimiston complex in Kalgoorlie, Western Australia and to convert from the conventional steel-wool cathodes to woven stainless-steel with an all-sludge bullion-handling system. Fimiston was unusual in that it produced carbon loadings of greater than 15,000 Micrographs were also used to show the type of plate occurring and the degree of attachment still remaining as carryover after a chosen cleaning procedure. The data clearly showed that for high-grade solutions, competent gold metal was so strongly attached that only the most robust industrial cleaners could achieve removal, and nozzle pressures of 20,000 Access between anode and cathodes for the high-pressure cleaning nozzle was a further problem, which at that time was not resolved, and a separate wash station was provided. The system was carried forward to the production stage and all of the Big Pit gold production is now produced through four 24-cathode 1 In 1999, the new concept of arranging the anodes and cathodes in a rigid array was introduced at the Pajingo mine in Queensland. This idea had several advantages. All connections were rigidly bolted and there was little possibility of poor connections and uneven current and voltage distribution. The removal of the anode array prior to pressure cleaning the cathodes provided space for insertion of the cleaning head, and the cathode array could be slowly lifted to gain access to the lower sections of the individual cathodes. The system has found wide acceptance and is routinely selected for large installations. In the early 2000s, Delkor Limited of South Africa announced their intention to develop an electrowinning cell, in which the gold was conventionally electrowon onto woven stainless steel in one compartment, and then ultrasonic bullion removal was completed in another, with the cells operating in a continuous carousel mode. The development project did not succeed and was discontinued. In the mid-1980s, the concept of operating closed-circuit elution circuits without intermediate heat-exchange to cool the eluate to less than atmospheric boiling point was introduced. The electrowinning cell was enclosed in a pressure vessel and for the first time electrowinning at temperatures of 130–140°C was practiced. The design was known as the The units were developed as containerized, transportable pre-commissioned units and were adopted in many countries with remote sites, and many in Australia. They are responsible for significant gold production and have found continuous application. The units suffered from the disadvantages of all stainless-steel construction described above, and owing to the fact that they operated under pressure, the operator had no access to on-line current and voltage measurement or troubleshooting. As elution column sizes increased, the practice of operating at high linear velocities was also used to achieve the flow necessary in the same cross-section cell, with entry to the centre of the cell and split exits from each end. This caused some operations to experience severe sludging problems, with bullion sludge deposition in the outlet end of the cell, and anode–cathode pair short-circuiting occurring. In the early 2000s, Kemix Pty Ltd in South Africa introduced the concept of an electrowinning cell enclosed in a cylinder (the Kemix Sludge Reactor). The unit features a rotating cathode where gold sludges form and built-in high-pressure cathode wash jets that wash off all the gold in ∼10 On completion of the electrowinning cycle the cell changes to the cleaning cycle, and the bullion is flushed out of the bottom of the enclosure to a holding tank for final processing. There are three plants using this system in South Africa. Kloof gold mine produces three tonnes of gold per month, all of the gold being sludged in a system with seven sludge reactors. It is considered more suitable for plants that produce large amounts of gold. In 1996, Gekko Systems of Ballarat in Australia piloted the concept of direct electrowinning of gold from intensively cyanided gravity concentrates. The idea was successful and has found routine use in the gold industry. The electrowinning is completed at ambient temperature, as opposed to AARL eluates, which typically operate at 50–60°C, Zadra eluates (95–99°C) and pressurized cells (130–140°C). The operational data allowed some evaluation of the effect of temperature. Even very low temperatures were piloted, when electrowinning in areas where the outside ambient was −40°C was contemplated. Design data based on actual operating data are therefore available covering the range 25–140°C, and pilot data are available down to 5°C. Intensive cyanidation of concentrates may result in the dissolution of other species that can affect the electrowinning process, and in some cases could prevent electrowinning from occurring. Some designers of bio-oxidation plants choose to complete a solid/liquid separation on the oxidized, cyanided concentrate, and to use zinc precipitation as the final method of bullion recovery. The grades and solution flowrates are directly applicable to common sizes of electrowinning cells. In one case, a production electrowinning cell was fitted to such a circuit to test the concept of replacing the entire Merrill–Crowe circuit by a direct electrowinning system. The data indicated that other species in the electrolyte solution were severely affecting cell performance, and the cell could therefore not meet the duty. While not exhaustive, the following aspects are considered key to the design and operation of electrowinning circuits in gold plants. Experience has shown that a cathode wound to a density of approximately 1,000 If the linear velocity is too low, the transport rate of gold to the plating surface will be too slow, and hence, the plating rate too slow. If gold is not presented at a fast enough rate to the cathode surface a second reaction will start and poorly attached powdery gold or colloidal gold will result. If the linear velocity is too high, the hydraulic turbulence has two effects – the gold may be physically abraded off the steel wool, or the cathode may start to oscillate hydraulically and break off at the surface connection to the transverse bus bar. The elution method chosen will fix the required cell flowrate and number of cells. The limiting linear velocity will fix the cell cross-sectional area. Physical handling characteristics constrain the upper size limit to approximately 1 The total current required can be calculated from Coulomb's law, as can the known mass of metal, or metals, to be plated and the design available plating time. The current efficiency to be used in this calculation will vary greatly with metal concentration. Both pilot-scale laboratory experiments and plant data have been used to generate a relationship between metal grade and plating current efficiencies, and this relationship is used to decide the current efficiency applicable to a particular design and duty. Other reactions occurring in the cell, such as the reversible hydroxide to oxygen reaction Eq. In addition to the manner of wrapping cathodes and the wrapping density, the operator typically has a choice from the suppliers of three types of steel wool and one type of woven stainless-steel mesh. The steel-wool grades are classified as grade zero, grade one, or grade three. Electron microscopy has been used to measure the wire diameters of these grades and hence, to calculate the surface area to mass relationship and actual plating current density. Double-woven stainless steel has been found to have a significantly lower surface area to mass ratio. Current densities that are too low will possibly be below the deposition potential for gold, and no plating will occur. Current densities that are too high will result in poorly plated gold and co-deposition of other species, including the production of hydrogen gas. As discussed above, the choice of elution system will impact on the concentration and volume of the eluate. Zadra systems will generate a pulse of metal of variable feed concentration. Open-circuit AARL systems will generate 7–8 bed volumes of eluate, which will mix by recirculation to a relatively steady head grade. Split AARL systems will concentrate the gold at higher concentrations into a smaller volume of approximately 5 bed volumes, and will therefore electrowin more efficiently. The number of cathodes required to achieve a particular cell-pass efficiency could be predicted theoretically, but as more and more operating data became available it was better to use this data as a practical model. In some designs, cells were built as single units containing 18 cathodes in a single enclosure, and other designs feature cascade arrangements of three standard 9-cathode cells in series, to effectively have a 27-cathode cell. For the major gold producers, for example Fimiston in Western Australia, very large cells were designed and built using 24 cathodes in series, and equipped with 5,000 It would seem to be a basic requirement that a cell design should require the eluate to flow through steel wool for plating to occur. Several designs either provide clearance under the cathodes, or around the cathodes, or run at a higher flowrate than the flow-through characteristics of the cathode can accept. There is a trade-off between maintaining pass efficiency and faster throughput, and hence more passes; however, a good design should attempt to satisfy both requirements. When an operator lifts a freshly wound cathode after the first 30 If silver is present, a non-metallic electrum enriched in silver will deposit. Plate attachment is poor and if a hose-off system is in use, a simple garden-hose nozzle will detach the plate. Our old favorite, lead nitrate can be used to modify the attachment of the primary plate, making the whole assembly easier to remove. Conversely, if copper enters the process (often undetected, as it will not be routinely monitored), the copper–gold alloys may be so massive and well attached that plate removal becomes almost impossible. Initially, in Australia at least, cells were fabricated from HDPE. The material had adequate mechanical strength at high temperatures, was a non-conductor, and did not corrode. Unfortunately it had one very serious fault, it was combustible. For convenience, designers selected quick-fit compression clips to carry the current from a hard-wired copper side-bus bar to the copper transverse bus bar. These were required to be kept clean to ensure that no high-resistance joints developed. Unfortunately, for a variety of reasons this did not occur. The copper used is subjected to a continuous atmosphere of steam, cyanide mist and ammonia, so corrosion and film build-up is inevitable. Major gold producers in Australia and Africa experienced cell fires, and in the worst instance total destruction of the entire gold room occurred and gold production stopped. The alternative was to use hard-wired connections, and this was initiated especially for anodes, which did not require removal of every cycle. A second alternative that was adopted by some designers was to change from copper to stainless steel. The very significant difference in electrical conductivity was neither appreciated nor allowed for. In one application, surveys carried out on cells using stainless steel indicated that the voltage drop down the main bus bar was so significant that the last electrode pair in the series was supplied with 56% less current than the electrode pair at the inlet end of the cell and there was a linear reduction in the cathode current from the inlet to the outlet end. In another cell with copper main bus bars, and stainless-steel cross bus bars and droppers, individual dropper current measurement demonstrated that 47% of the current was flowing down the closest dropper, 32% down the central dropper, and 21% down the dropper on the anode bus side of the cell. When the voltage drop-down of the cathode wires themselves was added in to the calculation, the remote quartile of the cathodes were initially inactive. Gold is, however, a very good conductor, and after initial plate build-up, the effect of the resistance of the cathode wires is minimized. Woven stainless steel has different directional resistance properties and this feature needs to be allowed for in design. There is an additional effect that occurs when defective connections occur. The cell operator only knows that he needs a target current to plate his gold in the time allowed. Unless he is monitoring individual electrode currents (despite the ease of this operation using a hand-held tong tester, very few operators do), he will be unaware that he has lost connection and several electrodes will be inactive. The applied cell-voltage is increased to achieve the target total current. The already heated high-resistance joints are further heated, and the well-connected cathodes are forced over their design limit and also begin to heat. Destructive cell fires are the result; in Africa during one after-hours incident, the operators present on site had no authority to enter the gold room and were forced to watch the cell burn on the security closed-circuit television (CCTV). An electrowinning cell is effectively a direct-current resistance unit. One of the current carriers is the gold-deposition reaction. At the beginning of the plating cycle when the gold solution tenors are high, maximum current is needed to plate the gold. As the gold plates, with removal from the solution phase, the cell resistance will rise and the current will fall. This is in keeping with the need to plate gold at a slower rate in the latter part of the plating cycle. Some designers have supplied automatic current control and forced the current to increase under conditions of depleted gold tenors. This should be a retrograde step and will force other side reactions to occur, resulting in increased anode corrosion. It is recommended that once the input current and voltage are decided and set, the current be allowed to fall and naturally follow the solution resistivity. It may be that the use of stainless-steel side bus bars could have a beneficial effect. With a correctly chosen cross-sectional area, those cathodes doing most of the plating, at the inlet end of the cell, would receive more current than those at the outlet end, where plating is essentially completed. As a result of the security requirements in gold rooms the building enclosures tend to be airtight and relatively compact. The cells operate at high temperatures and the open cell designs discharge a fume of steam, cyanide mist and ammonia from the surface. It is critical to provide adequate ventilation and it is recommended that all emissions be captured in a scrubber. A well-designed installation will allow for safe access to the cell under operational conditions to allow the operator to monitor the electrical characteristics of the cell while it is on-line, and carry out the necessary remedial actions if required. Mercury is a constituent of some ores, and a residual from processing in some tailings. The mercury cyanide complex loads on to carbon and is electrowon. Mercury vapour will become a major health hazard in these circumstances, and special design features are required to capture the mercury. The author and editor wish to thank Prof. Mike Nicol for contributing material used in the Background Section.