The metacarpal fractures are common fractures which are treated by orthopaedic surgeons, plastic surgeons and hand surgeons equally. These are seen in young adults who have active life style. These have a major impact in life style of the patients if these are not treated adequately. The management of the fractures vary among surgeons to surgeons; two surgeons in the same centre can have a different treatment plan for a fracture. There are no standard guidelines for the treatment and it ranges from conservative management, Kirschner’s wire (K-wires), plates and screws. This review article is about the management of metacarpal fractures where the commonly done procedures are reviewed.Metacarpal fractures are second most common fractures in the hand. The incidence of metacarpal fractures is 8.4 per 10,000 person-years. The metacarpals are placed together in a fan shape manner. These are attached to carpals at their base. The second and third metacarpophalangeal joints (MCPJ) are relatively stiff and immobile in nature. The fourth and fifth MCPJ are relatively mobile in nature. Hence, The malunion of fractures of neck and shaft of second and third metacarpal is less tolerated than the fracture of fourth or fifth metacarpal. The metacarpals fan out in divergent manner from their base. These are stabilized distally by the intermetacarpal ligaments. The proximal migration of the fractured fragments is prevented because of this ligament. The middle finger is the longest metacarpal and it forms the pillar on which other metacarpals are stabilized distally. The distal dome shaped structure makes them more stable. The palmar surface of hand is concave and the dorsal surface of hand is convex. This spade shaped structure is important for prehensile grip. The alteration in this shape may give rise to saddle syndrome. The palmar and dorsal interossei muscles arise from the shaft of the metacarpals. The contraction of these muscles gives rise to dorsal angulation deformity of the fractured metacarpal. The metacarpal shaft fractures should be immobilised with MCPJ in flexion so the contraction force of interossei muscles is neutralised and the deformity is prevented. The other reason to immobilise the MCPJ in flexion is related to length of the collateral ligaments which are most tight in flexion. The collateral ligaments are relaxed with MCPJ in extension leading to slight mobility (up to 20°) in coronal plane. The volar plate is the capsular thickening and prevents hyperextension of the MCPJ. The flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU) is attached to base of fifth metacarpal. The fracture of base of fifth metacarpal leads to displacement similar to Bennett’s fracture. The extensor carpi radialis longus and brevis are attached to base of second and third metacarpal respectively. The fracture of the base of the second or third metacarpal can also lead to dorsal displacement because of the contraction of these muscles. The metacarpal fractures present with swelling and tenderness over the dorsum of hand. The deformity of the fingers is obvious sometimes. Among all the deformities of the hand, rotation is most poorly tolerated. The rotational deformity should be identified in patients of suspected of metacarpal fracture. The overriding of the finger, one over the other, at the time of presentation is a tell tale sign for presence of the rotational deformity. Subtle presence of rotational deformity can be identified by asking the patient to flex the fingers. All the fingers should point towards the scaphoid tuberosity. In presence of the rotational deformity, the scissoring of the fingers becomes obvious. The tenodesis effect can be used to unmark the rotational deformity. When the wrist is extended, all the fingers get flexed due to tenodesis effect and these point towards the scaphoid tuberosity. Proximal compression of the forearm also produces the same effect and this manoeuvre can also be used ( There are three issues that are very important for metacarpal fractures. These include (1) shortening (2) rotation and (3) angulation in different planes. There is no absolute value of shortening which is tolerated by the patient. Different surgeons have mentioned different amount of shortening that gives rise decreased functional status of the finger ( The minimally displaced, stable fractures can be managed with conservative treatment. An unstable fracture cannot be reduced with a closed method, or, if reduced then it cannot be held in the reduced position without supplemental fixation. It is difficult to assess the shortening on a single radiograph. Ideally, radiograph of opposite hand should be taken and exact amount of shortening can be measured. Practically; it is not always possible. The shortening of the fifth metacarpal and index metacarpal can be assessed on a single radiograph by drawing tangential lines connecting the most distal part of the heads of third and fourth metacarpal. The fracture of neck of the fifth metacarpal has drawn special attention of the surgeons. This has been called as ‘Boxer’s fracture’. Infact, it is less common among the professional boxers and it is seen in the occasional boxers who are not trained and hit with the knuckles of the fifth metacarpal. The relatively higher mobility at fifth CMC joint makes the malreduction acceptable. Jahss described reduction manoeuvre for this fracture. Muller et al. did a prospective randomized trial comparing immediate mobilization with cast immobilization for treatment of Boxer’s fractures with volar angulation up to 70°. The cosmetic loss of fifth knuckle is the only problem and it should be discussed with all the patients. There has been no functional loss with malreduced fracture of the fifth metacarpal. Special attention must be given in manual labourers as the head of the metacarpal becomes prominent volarly and this may hamper the grip while lifting heavy objects. The metacarpal fractures can be stabilized by absorbable suture hemicercilage, K wires, multiple inter-fragmentary screws, intra-medullary screws, metallic plates (compression plating, locking screw construct etc.), absorbable plates and external fixators. The choice of implants depends upon many factors that include nature of the fracture (open/close), location of the fracture, fracture morphology, functional demand of the patient, compliance of the patient. The patient’s choice also plays a role as the patient can decide as per his need. In countries where healthcare is not provided by the insurance, the socioeconomic status of the patient also plays a role. The costly implants cannot be afforded by every patient and hence, the K wires in different innovative configurations become the choice of implant in these countries. The balance between maintaining the biology and fracture stability is crucial. The closed reduction preserves the biology but fracture stability, maintained by the K wires is poor to fracture stability maintained by the plates. Intramedullary K wire fixation was first described by Vom Saal in 1953. He used K wire by inserting it from the head of the metacarpal. In French literature, Foucher G described bouquet wiring technique for distal third of the fifth metacarpal fractures in 1976. Orbay JL used flexible intra-medullary nail (1.1 or 1.6 mm) for unstable fractures of the metacarpal. Open retrograde pinning of transverse fractures of the metacarpal and phalanges was described in 1982. Lamb did transverse metacarpal wiring in 66 patients. In authors experience, it is very good technique in open fractures where the metacarpals can be fixed with the intact metacarpal. In the presence of multiple metacarpal fractures, the central metacarpal can be plated and rest of the metacarpals are transfixed to this metacarpal. It is difficult to control the rotational deformity with this technique. The plating depends upon the principle of autogenous welding. When the fracture is reduced anatomically and absolute stability is provided with compression at the fracture site then consolidation happens without external callus because of direct osteonal remodelling. This principle was initially followed by Robert Danis in Belgium. In 1950, Dr. Maurice E. Muller who visited Danis, further developed this concept and established a laboratory for experimental surgery. In 1958; foundation of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen or AO was established by Muller, Allgower, Willenegger and Schneider. The results were carefully documented for further improvement. The precision engineering was used to develop the necessary instruments. In hand surgery, the principles of compression plating, bridge plating, lag screws and buttress plating are used commonly. Dorsal plates have shown the highest stability. Black et al. performed biomechanical testing in a metacarpal model with dorsal plating with and without lag screws, crossed K-wires, intraosseous wires, and K-wires with intraosseous wires. The dorsal plating along with the lagged screws has shown the highest stability in metacarpal model. The dorsal plate placement may lead to extensor tendon adherence to plate, tendon rupture, hard ware prominence and wound healing problems. The lateral locking plates are more commonly used now days and hence these minimize the extensor tendons problem and hardware prominence problems. These plates can be covered with interossei muscles after application. The authors of this article use the plates frequently whenever the fracture geometry demands more stability ( The mini external fixator has been traditionally used for compound fractures in hand. The inter-fragmentary screw fixation van be used in long oblique fractures and short oblique fractures. We use lag screws in various places ( Del Pinal et al. described the minimally invasive technique for intramedullary fixation of the phanalegal and metacarpal fractures. Metacarpal head fractures are different from shaft fractures. These are rare and more commonly missed during the initial presentation. Usually three radiographic views as posteroanterior, oblique, and lateral views are recommended for hand trauma. If the metacarpal head fracture is suspected then the Brewerton view is done; it is done with MCPJ is flexed at 65° and fingers resting on the plate. The radiographic beam is tilted 15° ulnar to radial. This gives a clear picture of the metacarpal head. The metacarpal head fractures can be classified into epiphyseal fracture, avulsion fractures of the collateral ligaments, head split fractures as a two-part fracture (oblique, vertical, and horizontal), comminuted fracture, Boxers fracture with extension into the joint, loss of substance, and occult compression with avascular necrosis. Fracture of the base of the metacarpal (second to fifth) is an uncommon injury. The fracture-dislocation of all the CMC joints (second to fifth) is high-velocity injury. In case of comminution of the fractures, the central column (third metacarpal and capitate) is plated and the rest of the metacarpals are transversely fixed to this central column ( The discussion of all the complications in detail is beyond the mandate of this review article. In brief, malunion is the most common complication which can present as dorsal angulation or rotatory malunion. The dorsal angulation is mainly a cosmetic problem and rarely may present as chronic pain due to tenosynovitis or sometimes as a manifestation of the saddle syndrome. It can easily be corrected by doing open or close wedge osteotomy. The rotatory malunions are more troublesome and present as scissoring of the fingers and it becomes difficult to hold the objects. These are usually treated by doing osteotomy at the base of the metacarpal. Other complications may be nonunion, infection, hardware problems, and stiffness of the MCP joints. Lalonde et al. popularised use of WALANT in hand surgery. They have shown the use of Epinephrine in hand surgery is very safe and most of the procedures canbe performed. In authors practice, WALANT is commonly used after a discussion with the patients. The choice of anaesthesia is decided by the patient. The patients usually make different choices. Most of the metacarpal fractures can be managed conservatively and only few require operative intervention. K-wires are still most commonly used for the fixation of metacarpal fractures. Lag screws only and plating carry special value in unstable fractures. The intra-medullary screws have also opened a new window. The utility of different methods is summarized in The authors received no financial support for research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. Nil.