Blasting is the most cost effective methodology to break rock for mining or civil engineering applications. A good production blast will break only the rock that is needed to be removed, leaving the host rock with minimal damage. The control of rock damage due to blasting is very important when it comes to mine or construction design, safety, and cost. Damage to the host rock due to a production blast could result in failures, overbreak and unstable ground. Knowing how far the fractures generated by a production blast will go into the host rock is a valuable tool for engineers to design a safe highwall while keeping the actual excavation close to the design. Currently, there are several methods available to predict damage due to blasting. The accuracy of many of these methods is questionable, and in most cases, the methodologies over predict the results. This often leads to inefficient mines and poor construction works. When the current methodologies are reviewed, each one presents sound approaches, but in many cases they also lack consideration of other variables that, according to the authors, need to be included when predicting blast damage. This paper presents a practical methodology to assess the rock damage from blasting by combining other methodologies. The proposed method allows consideration of more variables when compared to available methods, resulting in a more accurate rock damage assessment. The method uses the estimation of the generated levels of peak particle velocity with the distance from a production blast presented by Persson and Holmberg, the peak particle velocity damage ranges proposed by Forsyth and the relationship between the static compressive strength and dynamic compressive strength of rocks from Liu. The new methodology was validated using the data published in a large-scale study performed in granite by Siskind.Rock damage due to blasting is a very important topic when it comes to ground control in surface mines, construction works, underground mines, and tunnels. Blast induced rock damage can induce ground failures that cause serious safety hazards, production losses and lawsuits. Knowing the limit of rock damage due to blasting will make safer and more productive mines and construction operations. Currently, there are several methods available to predict damage due to blasting including Holmberg-Persson, Ash, Johnson, CSM, NIOSH modified, and Powder Factor approach, among others According to Sun, there are no less than 18 methods that have been proposed to predict damage due to rock blasting As seen in The calculation of the PPV can be done using modifications to the scaled distance equation or using soft computing methodologies such as in Khandelwal and Singh or Verma and Singh The selection of particle velocity as a parameter is driven by the simplicity in measuring using conventional geophones. When PPV is used as a parameter, the damage zone is calculated as the distance between the borehole and the location in the rock mass where the PPV value doesn’t cause any fracturing or damage in the intact rock/rock mass.  There are various definitions of the blast damage zone (BDZ). According to Singh, the BDZ is the extent of the zone where the blast hole changes the rock mass properties, downgrading its performance and behavior The crushing zone is the zone of material adjacent to the blasthole. Usually this zone is in direct contact with the explosive. The diameter of this zone is a function of many variables such as coupling ratio, explosive type, rock and rock mass properties among others. Its determination is not easy and in most of the cases the boundary between the crushing zone and the fracture zone is not evident. In the fracture zone, the presence of fractures is considerable (high fracture density zone) and as mentioned before, in most of the cases its boundary is combined with the crushing zone boundary. Beyond the fracture zone, there is the fragment formation zone. In this zone there are fractures but the density is lower compared to the fracture zone. Usually, the fragment formation zone cracks are evident in the remained rock mass of walls of a tunnel or in the face of a slope. The depth of this zone will influence the ground control required to guarantee the stability of excavations, highwalls and slopes.  A damage zone prediction model will assess the extent of the crack/fracture and the fragment formation zone accurately. The studies from Holmberg and Persson, Liu et al., Fleetwood, and Forsyth were used to propose the practical methodology to assess rock blast damage included in this paper In the late 1970s, Holmberg and Persson (H-P) introduced the Swedish approach to contour blasting  The validity of the two fundamental assumptions of the H-P method are as follows: the entire charge detonates instantaneously; and the amplitudes are simply summed without considering arrival direction. The shape of the explosive charge between spherical and cylindrical has been discussed by others, including Blair and Minchinton, and Iverson et al. One disadvantage of Eq. The solution proposed by Iverson et al. involves determining As the H-P method continues to be reviewed, there are different modifications available that attempt to improve the accuracy of predictions, such as Arora and Dey; Inverson et al., and Smith Some materials possess properties which are strain rate sensitive. Strain rate sensitivity is observed when the stress-strain properties of a material change according to the strain-rate regime affecting the way the material responds under loading conditions. Despite the lack of a formal consensus on the manner in which material parameters are affected by strain-rate loading conditions, those changes can be characterized according to the behavior of the initial Young’s modulus and the ratio of the dynamic strain A study presented by Liu et al., using a split Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB) determined the dynamic strength properties of three different types of rocks The expression of the strength increase factor for the different types of rock and the strain rate reported by Liu are included in the set of Eq. For example if a strain rate is 100 s Forsyth, assuming a plane wave condition, discusses a relationship between the Fleetwood et al. discusses the improvements in the accuracy of the estimation of the While there are several methods to predict damage due to rock blasting, none of the methods encompass all the parameters that should be included in the analysis The five steps proposed to assess blast rock damage are as follows: Determine the static material properties for the rock under study including UCS, Young’s Modulus and P-Wave velocity Determine the dynamic material properties based on the strain rate levels expected from blasting Determine a PPV damage limit using Forsyth, Eq. Using the H-P blast damage model, determine the iso-vibration contours around a single hole. To use the H-P model, it is required to know the parameters in Eq. Compare the PPV damage limit value calculated in step 3 against the iso-vibration contours calculated in step 4 to assess the area where damage limit To validate the accuracy of the results using the previous steps the study presented by Siskind was used Siskind conducted a study on a full scale blast in Lithonia Granite, Lithonia, GA According to the measurements, the acoustic pulse velocity is the most sensitive parameter to measure the extent of the damaged rock due to blasting. For the test setup by Siskind, it was found that there was heavy damage (severely fractured zone) between the center of the blast hole and a distance of 64 cm (8 blast hole radii), and slight damage between 64 and 114 cm (8–14 blasthole radii) The steps of the proposed methodology in this paper are explained in detail using the data from Siskind and included in  Step 1: static material properties According to Step 2: dynamic material properties The dynamic properties can be estimated based on the static values through the strength increase factor Step 3: PPV damage limit using dynamic material properties Using this dynamic UCS in the Forsyth equation (Eq. Step 4: PPV values generated around a single hole using H-P model The basic equation (Eq. Step 5: PPV values generated vs maximum limits  The extent of rock damage predicted using the static value of the UCS is 3.47 m. The extent of rock damage predicted using dynamic compressive strength (3.0) is 1.67 m. And the extent of rock damage predicted using 1000 mm/s as the limit of damage as suggested by Holmberg-Persson is 2.34 m. If the measured value reported in the RI 7901 (1.14 m) is assumed as the accurate value, the error in the estimation of the damage fracture distance is included in One potential source of error in the calculation of damage extent is the lack of empirical data for the site constants to be utilized in the H-P model. By utilizing actual site constants and data from the Lithonia site, it may be possible to assess the validity of this method further. That data was unavailable for this research. The extent of rock damage due to blasting is an important parameter to understand the development of mines, civil infrastructure, and development projects. A number of theories have been presented to estimate the range of damage for typical blasting scenarios. These theories have historically overestimated the extent of damage to the rock material, and have not been very effective at assessing the damage to the rock mass which is more complex with limited understanding of structural and regional geology. During the blasting process, multiple phases of loading occur that can cause damage to the rock mass. Most practitioners agree that the initial shock and pressure loading serves to extend preexisting micro cracks in the rock material surrounding the borehole. These cracks are further extended by gas pressure that results from the completed detonation process within the hole. In massive rock, the extent of these cracks is the sum of the rock damage observed. In cases where geologic cracking, discontinuities, and joint/bedding planes are present, the gas pressure is often directed into these naturally occurring cracks and will tend to extend and/or expand these preexisting cracks preferentially to causing damage to the intact rock material at distance. For this reason, estimation and prediction of rock mass damage is related more to the existing geologic conditions than it is to the intact strength of the rock material. Conversely, in massive rock material, predictive models considering the rock strength are more reasonably applied to predict the extent of damage. For this reason, the comparison data utilized for the damage prediction methodology presented in this paper was taken from a rock deposit that is more massive in nature. For a definitive model that considers both damage to intact rock and damage to the rock mass, other parameters will need to be considered. The methodology in this paper advances understanding and provides a tool for assessing the damage to intact rock surrounding a borehole in typical blasting scenarios. There are only a handful of large scale tests out there that do a good job at proving when blast damage ceases to exist. Doing large scale testing in different geology types would help validate the model. The topic of damage due to blasting is important. For such an important topic, the gap in the literature is inexplicable. The evaluation is time consuming and expensive, probably driving the lack of reported data. The method used above uses constants from Persson and Holmbergs book. Further research into how these constants change is necessary to make a more accurate model. These constants could be used to calibrate models with different parameters or geology types. Also, the equation in step 4 from the Persson and Holmberg book is scrutinized for using an equation of a spherical charge circle instead of a cylindrical weighting each explosive increment charge same. Future research comparing an equation using a cylindrical charge and weighting the contribution to the The new method used an adjustment factor to predict the value of dynamic strength. Future research is needed with tested values for dynamic compressive strength. Also, using tests that take into account confinement and dynamic situations to predict damage range could be useful. Triaxial testing which takes confinement into account will give compressive results that are higher than UCS tests. Increased strength with increased load rate is also seen giving evidence that dynamic strength is a more realistic property to use for damage prediction. One dynamic testing method that could use future research for damage prediction would be the Split Hopkinson pressure bar. There are many parameters that are not present in this model. At the moment, this prediction method incorporates the most practical variables for predicting rock damage due to blasting. There is still much to do to incorporate the different variables that go into rock damage. Other variables that could possibly contribute to rock damage due to blasting are timing of shot, hole diameter, blast design parameters, confinement, energy of explosives, geological conditions, and preexisting fractures or discontinuities. Currently there are methods in the literature that predict damage due to blasting. Most of them are very conservative methods that only use a couple of parameters for the prediction. Each one of these methods has a very sound approach that just lacks further research to introduce more variables into the model. This new method takes the sound parts of other methods and combines them to create a prediction method that uses more variables that influence rock damage due to blasting. Combining these methods into one method better predicts rock damage due to blasting when compared to the large-scale damage study performed by Siskind. Being able to more accurately predict rock damage due to blasting will help design more efficient mines and help avoid legal cases involving blast damage.