Flotation performance of a de-slimed (−150 + 53 μm) Jordanian siliceous phosphate was evaluated in a batch laboratory flotation column 100 cm high and 5 cm inside diameter. The collector used during anionic flotation was sodium oleate while an amine acetate (AEROMINE 3100C) was used for cationic flotation. Flotation comparison at different collector dosage, superficial gas velocity, and frother concentration showed that the maximum difference in performance between cationic and anionic flotation was obtained with these flotation parameters: 30 × 10−6 (mg/L) frother concentration, 250 g/t collector concentration, and 3.4 cm/s superficial gas velocity. At these operating conditions amine (cationic) flotation gave 7% higher flotation recovery, a 6% cleaner concentrate grade, and was 6% more efficient at removing silica.Phosphate rock is a non-renewable source of phosphorous, a major constituent of the fertilizer industry. Jordan is one of the key players in phosphate rock production with more than 700 million tons of proven reserves. Most of these reserves are of sedimentary origin and silica is one of the main impurities. Separation of phosphate from gangue is a necessity for fertilizer production. Phosphate needs to be upgraded to at least 65% Tertiary Calcium Phosphate (TCP) with a CaO/P These requirements are met by upgrading phosphate rock using different methods such as froth flotation, leaching, and classification. Flotation is the most popular method and more than half of the World’s phosphate production is currently beneficiated by this process The double float “Crago Process” is the standard flotation method used for processing siliceous phosphate. In this process phosphate is first floated by an anionic collector (a fatty acid) in an alkaline media (pH 8.5–9). At this stage about 30%–40% of the silica floats with the phosphate. The concentrate is then de-oiled with sulfuric acid to remove collector from phosphate particles, and then re-floated with an amine at neutral pH to remove the silica Jordanian phosphate is floated in a single stage at alkaline pH (8.5–9) using tall oil as the phosphate collector and sodium silicate as the silica depressant. No amine (cationic) flotation of Jordanian phosphate is reported in the literature Phosphate anionic flotation is not selective. This may be due to silica activation by calcium ions (Ca On the other hand, phosphate amine flotation (reverse flotation) where silica is floated first is more selective. This may be due to the strong electrostatic interactions between a positively charged amine colloid and the negatively charged silica particles. However, amine costs, and consumption, reduce the attractiveness of this process Combinations of anionic–cationic flotation methods were developed to replace the conventional Crago process. For example, Zhang et al. suggest an amine-fatty acid double flotation process for Florida phosphate According to Zhang et al. amine sensitivity to slime feed can be reduced by adopting the following strategies: 1) Adding polymers (dispersants) to the flotation feed and water; 2) Adding the amine stage-wise; or, 3) Adding the amine continuously Extensive work comparing anionic and cationic flotation using a mechanical flotation cell has been done. It appears that few researchers have carried out a comparison between anionic and cationic flotation in column flotation cells. Hence, the scope of this work was to conduct a comparison between anionic and cationic flotation. The comparison was conducted using a lab-scale batch column flotation cell at various levels of gas flow rate, frother concentration, and collector dosage. Jordanian siliceous phosphate with The flotation results shown in Oleate and amine flotation were compared according to the following scenarios. First, a comparison was made at three levels of frother concentration (10 × 10  Concentrate grade (%TCP) linearly increased with frother concentration for both cationic and anionic flotation. Anionic flotation recovery was increased with higher rate than cationic flotation (  The collector concentration (250 g/t, or 63 mg/L) used in the above comparison was six times higher than the maximum collector concentration required to form a sodium oleate monolayer on the apatite surface At the previous operating conditions a 30 × 10 As shown in  On the other hand, The superficial gas velocity of 4.3 cm/s, a collector concentration of 250 g/t, and a frother concentration of 20 ppm gave 8% higher recovery for amine flotation. Also, the amine concentrate was 6% cleaner and silica removal was 9% more efficient. Increasing collector concentration caused a linear increase in flotation recovery during both amine and oleate flotation (  A collector concentration of 800 g/t (200 mg/L) with a frother concentration of 20 × 10  The optimum operating parameters for anionic rougher flotation was 750 g/t collector concentration, 20 × 10 A comparison between anionic and cationic flotation showed that the maximum performance difference between cationic and anionic flotation was obtained with the following flotation parameters: 30 × 10 Superficial gas velocity and frother concentration have the same effect on both anionic and cationic flotation, which indicates that flotation operating parameters have the same effect on both types of flotation. This work was done during the first author’s Fulbright fellowship at the Center for Advanced Separation (CAST)/Virginia Technical Institute and State University-USA. Salah would like to thank all the people who work at CAST for their friendship and support during his stay in Blacksburg, VA.