Polymeric matrices composed of glycidyl methacrylate/divinylbenzene and glycidyl methacrylate/N,N′-methylenebis(acrylamide) were prepared concurrently in the presence of dispersed fine magnetite particles. The obtained products were allowed to react with tetraethylenepentamine to produce two amino-magnetic resins named RI and RII. The adsorption of Th(IV) ions on RI and RII from nitric acid solutions was studied using batch and column experiments. At pH3.7, maximum adsorption capacity values of 0.86 and 0.97mmolg−1 of Th(IV) ions were obtained for RI and RII, respectively. At S/L ratio=1, removal efficiency values of 86 and 99% from an initial concentration of 0.54mmolL−1 were achieved for Th(IV) ions using RI and RII, respectively. At all S/L ratios, the more hydrophilic resin RII showed better removal efficiency compared to RI. Adsorption experiments were carried out on three granite ore samples to recover Th(IV) ions using the two new resins obtained. The results indicated good recovery percentage and selectivity of the resins towards Th(IV) ions compared to other associated elements. The resins loaded with Th(IV) ions were effectively regenerated using 0.1M HNO3.Thorium is a naturally radioactive metal existing at minor levels in soil, rocks, water, plants and animals ( The removal of Th(IV) ions from its sources is an economic and environmental task. Various physical and chemical techniques like, precipitation, coagulation, flotation, solvent extraction, and adsorption have been adopted by some researchers to perform the removal of thorium ions from water and wastewater ( Moreover, chelating resins with magnetic properties are important due to the ease of solid/liquid separation using an external magnetic field improving the recovery and separation process ( The objective of this work was to studies recovery of Th(IV) ions from granite leach liquors using amino-magnetic glycidyl methacrylate resins. The adsorbents were synthesized from glycidyl methacrylate, magnetite particles, and divinylbenzene or Glycidyl methacrylate (GMA), divinylbenzene (DVB), benzoyl peroxide (Bz Chemical synthesis of colloidal magnetite has been reported since a long time ago by many authors ( Two resins composed of magnetite-GMA/DVB and magnetite-GMA/MBA were prepared through the suspension copolymerization of GMA with DVB or MBA as a cross-linker and Bz The resins obtained in the previous step were allowed to react with tetraethylenepentamine (TEP) to give the corresponding amine containing resins RI and RII with hydrophobic and hydrophilic properties, respectively. The products obtained were filtered and washed with distilled water, ethanol and dried in air. The synthetic routes of RI and RII are shown in The effect of pH on the adsorption of Th(IV) ions was proved by placing portions of 0.02 The kinetics of the adsorption of Th(IV) ions on RI and RII were studied by placing portions of 0.02 Experiments on real samples were conducted using three granite ore samples named G-1, G-2, and G-3. Each sample was digested with 2 The experiments of adsorption of Th(IV) ions on RI and RII under flow conditions were carried out in a plastic column (length 3 To study the effect of the resin bed height on the uptake of Th(IV) ions, the column was packed with RI or RII resins to give bed heights of 1, 1.5 and 2 Effect of pH is one of the most significant factors affecting the adsorption process because it controls the surface charge of the adsorbent and adsorbate. It should be noted that at pH The uptake in the range of pH The monomeric hydrolyzed species may include (Th(OH)) Adsorption isotherms of Th(IV) ions on RI and RII were tested in the range 25–60 The adsorption data of Th(IV) ions on RI and RII presented in Thermodynamic parameters for the adsorption of Th(IV) ions onto RI and RII were calculated by substituting K The values of ∆ The degree of suitability of the resins towards Th(IV) ions was estimated from the values of separation factor constant (R The adsorption data were analysis according to D-R model ( The mean adsorption energy, E (kJ For E Freundlich adsorption model is valuable in describing the adsorption on heterogeneous surfaces ( The study of the kinetics of adsorption is essential to determine the optimum operating conditions for the full-scale batch reactor. The adsorption of Th(IV) ions by RI and RII as a function of time was studied ( The adsorption data in Adsorption reaction generally proceeds through multi-steps including mass transfer, external film diffusion, intraparticle diffusion and adsorption reaction between the adsorbate and adsorbent surface active sites. In order to investigate the role of intraparticle diffusion on the adsorption of thorium ions on RI and RII, the adsorption/time data were applied to the model (  The breakthrough curves of Th(IV) ions by RI and RII at flow rates of 1, 2 and 3 The effect of bed height on the adsorption of Th(IV) ions by RI and RII was studied at different bed height (1, 1.5 and 2 The critical bed height (Z The applicability of the resins obtained for the extraction of Th(IV) ions from its ores was carried out on three granite samples (G-1, G-2, and G-3) using the batch method. The data of analysis of the three Granite samples are displayed in Regeneration of the resins was carried out using 0.5 Two new chelating magnetic-resins were prepared and used in recovering Th(IV) ions from nitric acid solutions. The adsorption properties including maximum adsorption capacity, kinetics, and thermodynamics controlling the adsorption process were well-examined using batch and column methods. The resin with higher hydrophilic properties showed enhanced adsorption behavior compared to the hydrophobic resin. The obtained resins showed better uptake capacity towards Th(IV) ions from nitric acid solutions compared to data published by others using different sorbents. Th(IV) ions were recovered effectively and selectively from real samples of Granite ores using the prepared resins. The embedded magnetic properties of the resins enabled their easy collection and lower cost phase separation of the resins from the operating media. Special dedication to the memory of Prof. Ahmed M. Donia.