The present study reports chemical treatment of pigment titanium dioxide (TiO2) with silicone to give surface functionalized TiO2. The surface functionalization was confirmed by Fourier Transform Infra Red Spectroscopy, Scanning Electron Microscopy, Transition Electron Microscopy and Dynamic Light Scattering analysis. Coatings were formulated by incorporation of these functionalized TiO2 into the epoxy polymer matrix and compared for coating properties with untreated TiO2. The effect of the functionalized TiO2 on various coating properties with respect to physico-mechanical properties, anticorrosion efficiencies, UV resistance and chemical resistance was studied in detail. The results revealed remarkable enhancement of coating properties with functionalized TiO2 when compared with the coatings formulated with untreated TiO2.Pigments and extenders in paint and coating formulations significantly contribute to their mechanical, chemical and performance properties Silicones are recommended as surface treating agent in several literatures for surface functionalization of pigments to achieve proper dispersion of inorganic materials in polymer matrix and to yield better compatibility between the particles and host polymeric materials Bauer et al. In this work, we have selected rutile grade titanium dioxide (TiO The epoxy resin (GY250) supplied by Huntsman was used as matrix resin and cycloaliphatic amine (EPIKURE F-205) from KIANRESIN was used as hardener. Ti-pure R902, rutile TiO Surface functionalization of TiO A similar procedure was followed for untreated TiO The epoxy paint was prepared using a high speed disperser. TiO For curing, epoxy paint and cycloaliphatic amine were mixed in a weight ratio 100:27 of epoxy to amine. Solvents mixture of xylene and butanol was used for dilution as per the convenience of spray coating application. Coatings films were prepared on carbon steel panels as substrates having dimensions 120 mm × 50 mm × 0.5 mm for testing the paint properties. The substrates were polished with Emery paper 800 and then degreased with cleaner solution for 5 min. The coating films were applied by spray coating and were allowed to cure at room temperature for 7 days. The average thickness of the dried coated films was about 80–90 μm. The free-standing films with average dry film thickness of 150 μm were prepared by application of epoxy based paint on the silicone sheets. The films were left for about 2 weeks at room temperature for complete curing. Physicochemical properties such as oil absorption value and bulk density of TiO The transition electron microscopy (TEM) was examined using a one-step replica method in TEM 1200 EX II electron microscope. Elemental analyses were performed using Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDXS) JEOL JED-2300T EDS system with high energy resolution and high sensitivity. Studies of the morphology and microstructure of the untreated TiO The size distribution of the untreated TiO Water vapor transmission of free films containing untreated TiO All polarization studies were carried out at room temperature in 3.5% NaCl solution. Test system consisted of a three-electrode cell, in which a saturated calomel electrode (SCE), a carbon steel electrode and a coated coupon were used as reference, counter, and working electrodes, respectively. The exposed area of the coupons to the NaCl solution was 12.56 cm Accelerated weathering test was conducted in the QUV chamber (Model QUV/Spray, Q-Panel Co.) as per ASTM G 154. Coated panels were then placed in the QUV chamber for 120 h. According to test procedure, the specimens were alternately exposed to UVB radiation (313 nm, 0.71 W m F-TiO The success of surface treatment was further confirmed by TEM analysis.  Dynamic light scattering (DLS) results for particle size distributions and the tendency to form aggregates and agglomerates of untreated TiO Whereas the silicone treatment resulted in the TiO Further silicone treatments are known to make the surfaces hydrophobic and contact angle measurement is the most important parameter for quantitative characterization of hydrophobicity The physicochemical parameters were evaluated for F-TiO As mentioned earlier, dispersion of inorganic material in organic polymer matrix plays a crucial role not only to make a defect free paint but also its long term performance. The F-TiO The epoxy coatings were then subjected to water vapor transmission test and the results are compared in The role of F-TiO As epoxy coatings are well known for their chemical resistance, the study would be incomplete without investigating their anti-corrosive properties using F-TiO The aspects of epoxy coatings containing untreated and F-TiO The weatherability of epoxy paint based on F-TiO Pigment TiO Restricted pigment particle agglomeration. Improved pigment dispersibility. Enhanced hydrophobicity. Improved mechanical properties. Improved corrosion resistance and weatherability. The authors thank Dr. Akhil Sen from Dept of Polymer science, BIT-Mesra and Mr. Dhriti Ranjan Saha from IACS, Jadavpur University, Kolkata for their kind support in carrying out various analyses.