The effect of industrial and home processing, in vitro gastrointestinal digestion, individual phenolic content, and antioxidant capacity of tomato into tomato sauce were investigated. Industrial processing of tomato fruit into sauce had an overall positive effect on the total antioxidant capacity (∼1.2-fold higher) compared to tomato fruit whereas home processing of tomato fruit into sauce led to a decrease in these values. Untargeted LC–QTOF-MS analysis revealed 31 compounds in tomato that changed upon processing, of which 18 could be putatively identified. Naringenin chalcone is only detectable in the fruit, while naringenin is strongly increased in the sauces. Rutin content increased by 36% in the industrial processed sauce whereas decreased by 26% in the home processed sauce when compared to fruit. According to the results of an in vitro gastrointestinal digestion model, industrial processing may lead to enhanced bioaccessibility of antioxidants.In the Western diet, tomatoes are a major source of nourishment for the world’s population due to their large consumption and versatility. They can be used for direct consumption (fresh/raw) or as an ingredient in many food recipes ( Bioaccessibility, which is defined as the fraction of the nutrient that can be released from the food matrix ( The effects of industrial processing on the antioxidants of tomatoes have been extensively studied. However, little is known about the impact of different processing methods on tomato and tomato sauce. Therefore, in this study the aim was to compare the effect of industrial-scale preparation and home cooking on tomato antioxidants during sauce production. Using an untargeted LC–MS analysis, a number of phenolic compounds were monitored and identified in tomato and different processed tomato sauces. Moreover, an A commercial tomato variety (   The moisture contents of samples were determined according to the guidelines of the official Turkish Standard 1129-ISO 1026 method at 70 Tomato samples (2.0 Individual black mulberry phenolics were identified and quantified by using targeted HPLC and untargeted LC–QTOF-MS measurements. For these, the samples were prepared by the extraction of 400 Total antioxidant capacity (TAC) assays were performed using a spectrophotometer. TAC was estimated using four different assays, and in all assays, the results were expressed in mg of Trolox equivalent (TE) per 100 An LC-PDA-FTMS system was used to investigate the untargeted analysis of tomato samples. Chromatographic and mass spectrometric conditions were as described by Compounds naringenin, naringenin chalcone, quercetin, dihydrokaempferol, α-tomatine, coumaroyl quinic acid and isoquercetin were obtained from Extrasynthese (Genay, France), and analyzed as reference compounds. Acquisition and visualization of the LC-FTMS data were performed using Xcalibur software. The MetAlign software package ( Samples from the tomato fruit and the two different processing methods for producing tomato sauce were prepared each from three independent processing events. All samples were freeze-dried and equal amounts of dry-weight were extracted using 75% methanol, in order to extract semipolar compounds. Major phenolic compounds were determined following the method of  The results were expressed as means In tomato fruit samples, the moisture content was found to be 93.3 To correct for any differences in moisture content, all spectrophotometric data were compared on a dry-weight (DW) basis. The antioxidant capacity of samples was determined using four different assays including ABTS, DPPH, FRAP, and CUPRAC as represented in Methanol extracts of fruit, industrial and home processed sauces were analyzed using LC–MS. A multivariate analysis was carried out on the LC–MS data to visualize the changes in metabolic composition as a result of the two tomato processing methods. The results of the multivariate analyses were visualized using Principle Component Analysis (PCA) plots ( For identification of compounds that are significantly differing in content between the fruit and processed samples, LC–MS data were further processed. In A targeted HPLC method was used to quantify a set of four compounds, including rutin, chlorogenic acid, naringenin and naringenin chalcone ( Results obtained for TAC analysis are given in Domestic and commercial food processing typically have major effects on the structural integrity of fruits and vegetables ( It is known that industrial processing can be much better controlled and optimized through the application of kinetic principles when compared household cooking ( The phenolic compounds identified in tomato fruit and processed sauces are shown in The bioaccessibility of tomato antioxidants using an The current study has shown that industrial processing may contribute to obtaining tomato sauces with higher antioxidant content compared to tomato and home processed tomato sauces. Moreover, industrial processing may lead to enhanced bioaccessibility of antioxidants. In further studies, we are planning to focus on bioavailability of tomato polyphenols using cellular models such as Caco-2 and We thank TUBITAK, the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 