Supracondylar femoral fractures account for a noticeable percentage of the femoral shaft fractures, affecting two etiological groups: high energy trauma in young men, with good bone quality, and older women with osteoporotic femur. Surgical treatment of those kind of fractures remains controversial, with different surgical options such as plate and sliding barrel locking condylar plate, less invasive stabilization system (LISS) or intramedullary nailing, which has emerged as a new fixation choice in the treatment of that type of fractures.
                  The present work performs a comparative study about the biomechanical behavior of anterograde and retrograde nailing in supracondylar femoral fractures type A, in order to determine the best choice of nailing and locking configuration. A three-dimensional finite element model of the femur was developed, modeling femoral supracondylar fracture and different nailing configurations, both for anterograde and retrograde nails. The study was focused on the immediately post-operative stage, verifying the appropriate stability of the osteosynthesis.
                  The obtained results show a better biomechanical behavior for anterograde nails, providing a better stability from the point of view of global movements, lower stresses in screws, and less stress concentration in cortical bone. So, for the analyzed fractures and osteosyntheses types, anterograde nailing has demonstrated to be a better surgical option, being an excellent indication in supracondylar fractures of femur, with clear benefits compared to retrograde nailing, providing a better stabilization which enables for a more satisfactory fracture healing.Orthopaedic Trauma Association Open Reduction Internal Fixation Intramedullary nailing Finite Elements Three-Dimensional Computed Tomography Computer Aided Design Post-operative Supracondylar femoral fractures account 3 to 6% of the femoral shaft fractures [ Surgical treatment of supracondylar femoral fractures is controversial. Since the introduction of fixed-angle blade plates in the 60′s, new treatment methods have appeared such as plate and sliding barrel locking condylar plate, which may be used with a large approach to the fracture, or by using the less invasive stabilization system (LISS) technique; when joint involvement is present, a combination of open surgery, for articular reconstruction, and LISS technique may be suitable Intramedullary nailing (IM) has emerged as a new technical choice in the treatment of that type of fractures. The evolution in the design and materials of the nails has expanded the indications of that technique. In 1953, Modny and Bambara described interlocking nails The primary goals of the surgical treatment include adequate stability of the fracture site, preserving the length and axis of the leg, a surgery as less aggressive as possible and a good consolidation and functional result Retrograde nails can be used in all three types of fractures A, B and C. In addition to ORIF techniques, extra-articular fractures (type A) may be managed with anterograde as well as with retrograde intramedullary nailing. Retrograde nailing has specific indications, either related to approach difficulties in the anterograde nailing (obesity Therefore, in supracondylar type A fractures located in zone 5 of Wiss The development of simulation models using the Finite Element Method (FE) appears as a reliable alternative to in vivo animal experimentation and in vitro studies, because the differences between in vivo humans and in vivo animals or in vitro behavior make difficult the application to humans of such kind of studies. Analysis of osteosynthesis by means of FE models enables the assessment of all critical parameters related to the biomechanical behavior of intramedullary nailing (global stability, local movements at the fracture site and stresses in bone, nail and locking screws), both for anterograde and retrograde nailing. For anterograde nailing, Shih In the case of retrograde nailing, Chen Despite the published works, they obtained very mixed results, because of analyzing different situations and configurations. The published results are difficult to compare and lead to controversial conclusions. In view of the existing dispute between the use of anterograde or retrograde nailing for the treatment of supracondylar femoral fractures, the aim of the present work is to carry out a comparative study about the biomechanical behavior of anterograde and retorgrade nailing in that type of fractures, in order to determine the best choice of nailing and locking configuration. A three dimensional (3D) finite element model from a femur corresponding to a 55-year-old male donor was developed (the present work is included in the project “Estudio biomecánico y clinico del enclavamiento centromedular en el tratamiento de las fracturas diafisarias de fémur”, which was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Institute of Health Sciences of Aragón, Spain; protocol number C.P.-C.I. PI 15/0214). The outer geometry of the femur was obtained by means of 3D Roland3D Roland® PICZA (Irvine, California) scanner, whereas a set of computed tomography (CT) of the femur were treated using Mimics® Software (Materialise, Leuven). The CT scans were obtained by means of a TOSHIBA Aquilion 64 scanner (Toshiba Medical Systems, Zoetermeer, Netherlands) (512 × 512 acquisition matrix, field of view (FOV)=240 mm, slice thickness=0.5 mm, in plane resolution). Once the inner interface between cortical and trabecular bone was delimited, material properties were assigned to the FE model in I-Deas® 11 NX Series PLM software (Siemens, Plano, Texas) Nail surgery was virtually reproduced in I-Deas, inserting the nails into the femur with the corresponding screws, being performed the computer aided design (CAD) model under surgeon supervision. In order to cover a broad range of surgical options, the osteosyntheses included in Concerning materials behavior, bone, nail and screws were considered as linear elastic isotropic. For cortical and trabecular bone, the elastic properties were E To guarantee the accuracy of the FE results, a sensitivity analysis was performed to determine the minimal size mesh required for an accurate simulation. For this purpose, a mesh refinement was executed in order to achieve a convergence towards a minimum of the potential energy, both for the whole model and for each of its components, with a tolerance of 1% between consecutive meshes. The final models had an average mesh size about 1.5 mm, with about of 240.000 nodes and 1.100.000 elements on average. Concerning the loads conditions, a load case associated with an accidental support of the leg at early postoperative (PO) stage has been considered. This load was quantified to be about 25% the maximum gait load. According to Orthoload's database, the hip reaction force and abductor force, referred to 45% of the gait, correspond to the maximum and most representative load The FE simulations allowed verifying the biomechanical behavior of the different cases, obtaining the mobility and stress results for the different osteosyntheses analyzed. The different behaviors and resulting trends are detailed hereafter. Global movements of the femoral head for the different osteosyntheses simulated are shown in Relative movements at fracture site are processed considering working groups of corresponding nodes located in opposite positions at the fracture focus ( The graphs of relative displacements at fracture site for the different osteosynthesis considered in the study are collected in The micromovements practically reached the same range of values, independently of the type of nail. Concerning gap size, for anterograde nails the micromovements increase as the gap grows for the different osteosyntheses analyzed, obtaining the lower values for the osteosynthesis number 4, except for gap size of 20.0 mm. For retrograde nails, the gap influence is almost non-existent for smaller gaps, significantly increasing for the gap of 20.0 mm.    Results corresponding to stresses in cortical bone, for the different osteosyntheses and fracture gap size are presented in  Stresses in cortical bone are lower for anterograde nails, being very similar in this case independently of fracture gap size and osteosynthesis type. For retrograde nails, stresses are almost independent of fracture gap size, but they are significantly lower for longer nails (320 mm). Those stresses appear located at the contact zone around nail tip. The obtained values are sufficiently low to avoid additional fractures. From our knowledge, none of the published papers using the FE method has comparatively studied the complete biomechanical behavior of anterograde vs. retrograde IM nailing in supracondylar fractures of the femur, simulating different types of comminution at the fracture site. Bougherara Most of the published works use synthetic bones to compare the retrograde nail with different types of plates [ The main aim of surgical treatment is to use a device which provides adequate stability, preserves the length and alignment of the limb and ensures a good functional result, and all this with a surgical procedure as less aggressive as possible. In the study carried out in the present work, a 13 mm diameter nail in both anterograde and retrograde approaches was used, simulating the reaming of the medullary cavity, because a good contact between endosteum and nail surface is a key point to achieve the stability of the nail [ Among the options of surgical devices for the treatment of fractures of the distal extremity of the femur, the ORIF may be indicated in fractures which involve the joint, but in those located in the supracondylar area, intramedullary nailing is a better option. Blocked plates can prevent callus formation, because of their high stiffness, The obtained results show the influence of nail type in the biomechanical behavior of the different osteosyntheses analyzed. So, concerning mobility, despite both types of nails provide approximately the same range of micromovements at fracture site, with retrograde nails the global mobility is significantly higher, reaching displacement values as much as 49% greater. Then, anterograde nails provide a better stability from the point of view of global movements. On the other hand, stresses in nail are very similar independently of nail type for different fracture gap sizes and osteosynthesis type, being slightly higher for anterograde nailing; however, stresses in screws are significantly higher for retrograde nailing, reaching values approximately twice in longer nails than for anterograde nailing. Finally, stresses in cortical bone are significantly higher for retrograde nails, especially for shorter nails, appearing at the contact zone corresponding to nail tip. Those concentrated stresses can lead to secondary fractures in the affected zone if load accidentally increases. Definitively, for the analyzed fractures and osteosyntheses types, anterograde nailing has demonstrated to be a better surgical option. It is clear that anterograde nailing provides greater fracture stability, from the biomechanical point of view. But it should also be noted that a large proportion of these fractures occur in women with osteoporosis, whose bone structure in the distal femoral metaphysis is weak, causing greater instability in the retrograde nail, despite using screws with condyle washers in the locking holes proximal to the knee to avoid "Bell-Clapper Effect" On the other hand, bone healing is faster with the anterograde nails As main limitations of the present study, the consideration of only one type of fracture (i.e., transverse) could limit the generalization of the conclusions. On the other hand, the comparison with other surgical techniques (i.e., locking plates) could provide additional valuable information. In view of the obtained results, anterograde nailing is an excellent indication in supracondylar fractures of femur type A, according to the AO/OTA classification, with clear benefits compared to retrograde nailing, providing a better stabilization which enables for a more satisfactory fracture healing. The authors have no professional or financial conflicts of interest to discloser. This research has been partially financed by The Fundación Mutua Madrileña (Research Project: AP162632016) and by the Government of Spain, Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (Research Project: DPI2016-77745-R).