Steady state dissolution rates of Manangotry monazite ((Ca0.04La0.21Ce0.43Pr0.05Nd0.15Sm0.02Gd0.01Th0.13)P0.90Si0.09O4) were determined in open system titanium mixed flow reactors at pH=2 at temperatures from 50 to 229 °C, and at pH 1.6, 2.6, and 10 at 70 °C. Dissolution rates at 70 °C and pH 2, 6, and 10 were determined from closed system experiments. All dissolution rates are calculated from release rates of Ce into solution as measured by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS).
                  Measured pH=2 monazite dissolution rates increase from 4.3×10−17 to 1.2×10−14 mol/cm2/s with increasing temperature from 50 to 229 °C. This is consistent with an apparent activation energy of 10.3 kcal/mol. Measured and estimated 70 °C monazite dissolution rates reach a minimum at near neutral pH; dissolution rates were found to be 1×10−16, 4×10−18, and 4×10−17 mol/cm2/s at pH=2, 6, and 10, respectively.
                  The light rare earth elements (REE) (La, Ce, Pr, and Nd) and uranium were found to be released in approximately stoichiometric quantities in all experiments. Sm/Ce and Gd/Ce ratios in the outlet solutions were found to be slightly higher than those of the dissolving monazite at all pH and temperatures. In contrast, thorium release stoichiometry depended on pH and temperature. Th was released at close to stoichiometric proportions at basic conditions, but was released to solution in far lower proportions at pH 2, likely due to the precipitation of a Th-rich secondary phase.Monazite is a naturally occurring monoclinic phosphate mineral of the rare earth elements (REE) and thorium. Yttrium, calcium, iron, and silica are frequently present in this mineral structure. Monazite is the dominant REE-bearing mineral in numerous natural systems and it is a primary ore of several REE, most notably cerium and lanthanum, and of thorium. The behavior of monazite, (REE, Th,)PO The standard state adopted in this study is that of unit activity for pure minerals and H The overall rate of a chemical reaction ( It should be noted that the forward or far from equilibrium dissolution rate is not necessarily independent of the aqueous concentration of elements released from the dissolving mineral. There are a significant number of examples of mineral dissolution reactions that exhibit non-zero order rate dependencies on the aqueous concentrations of their constituent metals including the alkali feldspars, muscovite and enstatite (see All experiments reported in this study were performed on ground powder of a single ∼7 cm in diameter natural Manangotry monazite crystal. Details of the geologic origin and age of Manangotry monazite are detailed by Open system dissolution experiments were performed at the temperature and pH conditions listed in Closed system experiments were performed by adding a 0.2-g sub-sample of the original cleaned ground monazite powder to 50 ml of aqueous solution. Aqueous solutions having pH of 2, 6, and 10 were generated by adding sufficient reagent grade HCl, NH pH of all solutions were measured at 25 °C using a Schott-Gerate H62 electrode and a Philips PW9422 digital pH meter. The electrode was calibrated using NBS/DIN calibration buffer solutions. Aqueous metal concentrations of all solutions were measured by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) using a Perkin-Elmer Elan 5000. Prior to analysis, all solutions (1) were acidified such that they contained ∼0.3 mol/kg HNO The evolution of outlet fluid compositions during open system dissolution experiment Mon3-16 is illustrated in To assess the origin of the low Th/Ce outlet solution concentration ratios in these low pH experiments, ∼2 mm sized monazite diameter fragments, one of which is shown in The evolution of outlet fluid composition during experiment Mon4-14 is illustrated in The temporal evolution of aqueous metal concentrations during the closed system experiments performed at 70 °C are illustrated in The relative stoichiometry of metals released during the closed system experiments matches closely those of the open system experiments. Light rare earth metals are released in proportions consistent with that of the dissolving monazite at all pH; Sm and Gd are released at slightly faster rates. Thorium is released at proportions consistent with stoichiometric dissolution at pH 6 and 10, but its release rate is far lower at pH 2. The only major difference in the metal release rates between closed and open system experiments appears to be that of uranium, which is released at a faster rate in the closed system experiments. The origin of this difference is unclear but may be due to a preferential initial release of this element; this initial preferential uranium release appears to be indicated by the open system results (see Steady state monazite dissolution rates ( Dissolution rates are obtained from closed system experiments indirectly, from the temporal evolution of reactive fluid metal concentration. Dissolution rates were generated from the slopes of the lines drawn in Because measured reactive fluid Ce concentrations of the closed system, pH=6 experiment are low and exhibit a scattered pattern with elapsed time, it is not possible to generate an unambiguous monazite dissolution rate from these data. A provisional estimate of the maximum possible monazite dissolution rate of this experiment can be generated by observing that the aqueous Ce concentration is not more than 1.2×10 The variation of mineral dissolution rates with temperature is commonly described using the empirical Arrhenius equation given by The variation of measured monazite dissolution rates with pH at 70 °C is depicted in Uncertainties associated with the rate constants generated above arise from a variety of sources, including the measurement of aqueous solution concentrations, fluid flow rates, monazite surface area, and natural compositional variation. The uncertainties in measured values of the total aqueous metal concentration are on the order of ±2% or less for concentrations in excess of ∼1×10 It should also be emphasized in this regard that monazite dissolution rates in the present study were generated from steady state Ce release rates. Other light rare earth elements and uranium were released in proportions that are consistent with the stoichiometry of the dissolving monazite. Aqueous Th/Ce ratios were far lower than that of the dissolving monazite in outlet experiments obtained from experiments performed at acid conditions, but consistent with stoichiometric dissolution at basic conditions. Aqueous phosphate concentrations were not measured, and therefore it is not possible to determine if phosphate was released in proportions consistent with the stoichiometric dissolution of the original monazite. It is possible, therefore, that measured outlet Ce concentrations reflect some combination of the dissolution of the original monazite and the precipitation of a secondary phosphate phase. The observation that the uranium and light rare earth element concentration of the outlet fluids are consistent with that of the original dissolving monazite, however, supports strongly the assumption made in this study that steady state Ce release rates can be used to quantify monazite dissolution rates. Steady state dissolution rates generated in the present study at 70 °C and pH from 1.6 to 10 vary over the range 4×10 We are indebted to Mark Hodson, Paul Hoskin, and Henry Teng for providing constructive and insightful reviews, and to John M. Hanchar for editing this manuscript and co-organizing this special issue. We would like to thank Jacques Schott, Jean-Louis Dandurand, Robert Gout, Stephan Köhler, Oleg Pokrovsky, Patrica Fournier, Carlos Jové, Jean-Marie Gautier, and Stacey Callahan for helpful discussions during the course of this study. Eric Martellet and Eric Pili generously provided the Monazite sample dissolved in this study; Philippe de Parseval aided us with the Scanning Electron Microscope. Support from Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique is gratefully acknowledged.