The effect of sodium lauryl sulphate (SLS) on the cathodic current efficiency (CE), surface morphology, crystallographic orientations and polarization behaviour of the stainless steel cathode during nickel electrowinning from acidic sulphate solutions was investigated. The results indicated that SLS did not have a significant effect on the cathodic current efficiency. However, noticeable changes in the surface morphology and deposit quality were observed. Cyclic and linear sweep voltammetric studies revealed that an increase in SLS concentration from 2 to 40mgdm−3 increased the cathodic potential and shifted the nucleation overpotential (NOP) towards more negative values which was also reflected in the decrease in the rate of electron transfer i.e. i
                     0 values obtained on both the stainless steel and nickel substrates. The presence of SLS did not change the fcc structure of the electrodeposited nickel but affected the peak intensities of the various crystal planes.Organic additives used in nickel-plating baths serve a variety of purposes. They act as brighteners, levelers, wetting agents and stress reducers etc. The nickel brighteners fall into two distinct classes i.e. Class I and Class II brighteners. Aromatic sulphonic acids, sulphonimide and sulphonamides are known as Class I nickel brighteners. Class II brighteners are principally unsaturated organic compounds which provide the leveling and increased luster of the deposit when used in conjunction with Class I brighteners ( Organic additives have been found to affect the electrowinning of nickel from sulphate, chloride and Watts bath. High purity nickel was produced by electrowinning from sulphate and chloride solutions in the presence of high concentration of boric acid as a buffer ( Selenious oxide and certain dyes have been used in conjunction with naphthalene sulphonic acids in nickel baths for improving the brightness and leveling of the nickel deposits. Whilst saccharin, p-toluene sulphonamide, sodium m-benzene disulphonate, o-sulpho benzaldehyde have been used as stress reducers in Watts or sulphamate bath to obtain the desired hardness without tensile stress ( Certain anionic wetting agents are used in nickel baths to prevent bubbles of hydrogen from adhering to the cathode and causing pits in the deposit. Sulphates of normal primary alcohols containing 8–18 carbon atoms at concentrations of 0.1–0.5 SLS has thus been used has an anti-pitting agent, misting agent as well as a wetting agent in the electroplating of nickel. However, there is no literature available on the role of SLS on the surface quality, crystallographic orientation of the nickel deposits, polarization behaviour of the cathode during electrowinning of nickel from acidic sulphate solutions which this paper addresses. Nickel electro-deposition was carried out in a rectangular flow cell of dimension 13.2 Ultrapure water (Millipore Milli Q system) was used for preparing the solutions. The nickel electrolyte was prepared from analytical grade nickel sulphate; (NiSO For electro-deposition and polarization studies the surface of the electrode prior to nickel electro-deposition was polished with 400 and then 1200 grade silicon carbide paper and then rinsed with 1 After electrolysis, the cathode was removed from the cell and thoroughly washed with water and dried. The cathodic current efficiency was calculated from the weight gained by the cathode following electrolysis. A Philips PW 1030 X-ray diffractometer was used to determine the preferred crystal orientations of nickel deposits relative to the ASTM standard of nickel. The surface morphology of the deposits was examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Philips XL 20 SE microscope. Potendio-dynamic polarization measurements were carried out by using a PAR model 273 From the cathodic polarization curves for nickel deposition Tafel slopes were determined and transfer coefficients were calculated by using the following equations: where The CE data for nickel electro-deposition from the acidic nickel sulphate baths in the presence and absence of SLS are given in The nickel deposits obtained from the SLS free bath were smooth, bright and uniform. Addition of SLS to the nickel bath in the concentration range of 2–20 The typical SE micrographs for the nickel electrodeposits in the presence and absence of SLS are shown in  It can be clearly seen from the figure that the current density increases sharply up to point D with increase in potential beyond C. At point D, a peak is formed at − The reversal of the current occurs at point D and finally at point E, the current becomes almost zero. This potential is referred as the crossover potential ( A clearer picture of the polarization behaviour of nickel in presence of additive SLS was obtained from the linear sweep voltammetric studies. The cathodic polarization curves for nickel deposition on stainless steel and nickel substrates in the absence and presence of SLS were obtained by using the above techniques. From the curves displayed in The cathodic polarization data for nickel electro-deposition on stainless steel and nickel substrates were used to calculate the electron transfer kinetic parameters i.e. Tafel slope ( In the absence of SLS during nickel deposition on stainless steel substrate the The effect of SLS on the nickel electro-deposition process is more clearly reflected in its influence on the  The addition of SLS does not have a significant effect on the current efficiency, however, marked changes in surface morphology and deposit quality are observed. Increase in SLS concentration from 10 to 40 SLS acts as a good cathode polarizer and improves the quality of the nickel deposit at higher concentration. Addition of varying concentrations of SLS to the nickel bath does not change the fcc structure of the electrodeposited nickel. Nevertheless it affects the preferred crystal orientation and peak intensities of various crystal planes giving smooth and compact deposit at higher concentrations of SLS. The authors thank Peter Fallon for assistance in SEM, Ken Seymour for assistance in XRD and T.B. Issa for general assistance throughout the work. Financial support was partly received from the