We described the results obtained in the third phase of a broader project whose aim is to perform a detailed forensic evaluation of damages occurring over time to buildings in an industrial estate located on the outskirts of the town of La Unión (Murcia, Spain). The damages respond to subsidence that commenced in 1998, most probably as a result of cave-ins in mine workings.
                  The first phase of the research project involved mapping cracks in affected buildings and classifying them according to their most representative features. A set of points in the affected zone was also levelled at regular time intervals in order to monitor changes in the subsidence bowl.
                  The second phase involved the quantification—using biaxial extensometers and inclinometers—of the most significant parameters for the cracks detected in the buildings inventoried in the previous phase. A comparative analysis was also made of the data obtained in different stages of the study.
                  This final phase of the study is a detailed description of a subsidence simulated on the basis of a hypothetical cave-in of abandoned underground mine workings that aims to predict subsidence progression over time more accurately. The strain values obtained in the simulation were used to estimate potential damage to buildings in the affected zone according to damage severity classification criteria.
                  The simulation of soil subsidence developments over time in response to mine cave-ins is corroborated by data collected and analysed in the first two phases of the study and so confirms the conclusions of the earlier phases of the study.Since the middle of the 19th century, subsidence has been a matter of concern to the mining sector, given the considerable damage caused to a terrain. Subsidence refers to vertical and horizontal movements—often the result of extraction activities performed in the subsoil—that affect the topographic surface. Such land movements and the resulting strains cause—sometimes very considerable—damage. Intensive mining activity took place in the municipality of La Unión, located near the cities of Cartagena and Murcia in southeastern Spain ( Mine licence-holders tended to operate the mines in an irrational manner, under the pressure of making the lease pay and ensuring sufficient profits. In the stage prior to abandoning a mine, over-exploitation was typically combined with a retreat mining strategy, whereby pillars were reduced in number or removed in the retreat back towards the mine entrance. By reducing the security factor Some mines in La Unión remained active until the early 1980s. Lo Tacón industrial estate, located on the outskirts of La Unión, was built over an area of abandoned mine galleries. It is sometimes said that the mines are alive and that they constantly change, even after their productive phase have ended, and this explains the subsidence problems At the end of the 1970s some of the land located over old mine workings on the outskirts of La Unión was rezoned for construction in a project that also included Lo Tacón industrial estate. The large number of mine concessions awarded for this area gives an idea of the density of galleries and the level of over-exploitation ( We do not have reliable data on the characteristics of all the mines, as there are very few mining operation plans in existence from which to obtain information such as shaft depths and the number of levels. The first evidence of subsidence and the first cracks in buildings located in and around Lo Tacón were detected on 3 May 2002. The differential settlement produced in the buildings as a consequence of the sinking subsoil caused angular and linear distortions in their structure that became evident in cracks in weaker areas (partitions and closures). The distortions occur within the limits corresponding to structural damage in general buildings In the first phase of our research we performed a geological inspection that involved a monitoring of soil movements and progression over time. Two maps were also created: a detailed map of cracks in the ground and a map of all buildings with cracks The geological inspection revealed the affected zone to be located in a sunken block of the Sierra Minera Cartagena-La Unión, related to the main Cartagena-La Unión fault (N-60°–70°-E); this fault runs parallel to the railroad ( Data obtained from existing boreholes and borehole A1 made in the initial part of the study ( Soil movement progression was monitored using several levelling networks. The measurements made were used to draw a contoured map ( The map of the cracks that appeared in the ground shows that these occur mainly in zone Z2, occur more densely in the northwestern and southeastern sections and are arranged in the form of concentric arcs around the centre of the subsidence bowl (the blue In the second phase of the forensic analysis (conducted between December 2002 and July 2005), uniaxial and biaxial extensometers were installed ( In November 2008, data capture from the manual equipment was concluded. Downloaded in the same month were values recorded by capture modules in stations where equipment was modified for automated data readings.  An analysis of data collected from all the crack monitoring stations revealed a NE–SW alignment of the buildings whose extensometers showed the greatest movements ( In the third phase of our study we implemented a computer simulation of the subsidence taking place in Lo Tacón industrial estate using influence functions. The goal was to establish the current situation of the subsidence process so as to be able to predict progression as accurately as possible. The influence function is used to determine the influence, on whatever point of the topographic surface, of the extraction of an elementary volume from the subsoil. The following principles are assumed:    The overlap principle is represented for the two elements The overlap principle makes it possible to calculate subsidence, for any point of the topographic surface, by decomposing the cavity in terms of elementary extraction units, irrespective of geometry, and summing the effects on this point. Among the more widely used functions, noteworthy is that developed by Ramírez Oyanguren The influence function was modified by the Land Engineering Group of the University of Oviedo On the basis of these considerations, volume Division between the two volumes will not in general be equal, because, as mentioned previously, the roof and wall gravitational parameters ( Bearing in mind these effects, the following formulas are proposed to determine values for The generalized influence function proposed by the Land Engineering Group of the University of Oviedo is expressed as: Using the generalized influence function, Subsidencia-3D was used to build subsidence models that took into consideration potential subsidence of different mine workings in the zone. For the results to be reliable as possible it was necessary to calibrate the parameters affecting the calculation. The back-analysis method was used, since it obtains results from the fit to the initial data that are similar to those observed in reality. Subsidence forecasts were made on the basis of data collected in the two levelling campaigns implemented in the affected zone. Detected subsidence measured a maximum of 507 To calculate real subsidence in the area since 1998, pairs of benchmarks located close to each other and corresponding to the two monitoring periods were identified. Subsidence for each benchmark for the 44 Benchmark subsidence between 1999 and 2003 was calculated and taken as the initial set of values for the second series of data corresponding to the period 2003–2005. A graph was calculated for each benchmark pair, similar to that shown in The data in As can be appreciated in This prediction can be considered to be valid if subsidence data for the benchmarks for which data are available are assumed to be correct and if no new gallery collapses occur underground. Considering 1350  Maximum subsidence in the centre of the subsidence bowl was 1520  For the hypothetical subsidence situation studied, the strain values obtained were used to estimate building damage in Lo Tacón industrial estate using two building damage classifications: the five categories of damage established by the National Coal Board (NCB) according to building length changes and strains Change in building length was calculated by multiplying length by maximum strain; multiplication by the greatest and least dimensions resulted in a range of values indicative of the change in building length and, therefore, of the damage to the building. The worst-case scenarios were calculated for buildings located within the studied zone. The building labelled Z2-ED1 (premises belonging to Sondeos Hermanos Cabezo) is theoretically the most affected, with changes in length ranging between 0.23 Inclusion in the influence function of roof and wall gravitational parameters and rock mass quality parameters enables the influence function to be generalized to any seam geometry. The results obtained for the simulation largely coincide with values recorded in the field. Despite the larger number of parameters, furthermore, the calibration task was easier, as each parameter reflected a physical behaviour that was easily forecasted. Values for subsidence as simulated on the basis of the generalized influence function proposed by the Land Engineering Group of the University of Oviedo largely coincided with the values measured in levelling campaigns performed in the affected zone. Simulated maximum subsidence values for the centre of the subsidence bowl were similar to the values measured in the initial research phases. Damage predictions made according to the building damage criteria applied in our research confirm the observations of the first two phases of our research. It can be observed that the buildings most affected are located in the northeastern, western and southwestern sections of the subsidence bowl.