Sn-β zeolites were facilely synthesized by a post-synthesis method consisting of two steps, i.e., heteroatom removal and isomorphous substitution by reaction with SnCl4. This significantly shortened the Sn-β zeolite preparation time from the previously reported 40 d to less than 1 d. It was shown that Sn-β samples prepared using the post-synthesis method had higher Sn contents than that prepared using a hydrothermal method. The as-synthesized Sn-β zeolites were tested in the isomerization of glucose to fructose in aqueous media. The effects of reaction temperature, reaction time, catalyst amount, solvent, and halide additive on the isomerization reaction over Sn-Al-β zeolites were studied in detail. Under the optimized conditions, the yield of fructose reached a maximum of ∼43%. The catalysts can be reused without loss of activity after regeneration by calcination.The use of alternative energy sources is attracting increasing attention, because of the current high consumption of fossil resources and concomitant serious environmental problems [ Typical approaches for isomerizing glucose include base- catalyzed and enzymatic techniques. For base-catalyzed isomerization, excess homogeneous inorganic bases in aqueous solution are generally used, but fructose has very poor stability in strongly basic systems [ Sn-β zeolites, which are Lewis acids and potential heterogeneous catalysts, are used in a number of reactions such as Baeyer-Villiger oxidation of cyclic ketones [ In this paper, we report the facile preparation of Sn-β zeolites through isomorphous substitution of dealuminated/ deboronated zeolites with SnCl Anhydrous SnCl The Sn-Al-β catalysts (prepared using Al-β zeolite as the precursor) were prepared using a previously reported post- synthesis method [ Sn-B-β catalysts (synthesized using B-β zeolite as the precursor) were prepared using a post-synthesis method reported in the literature [ For comparison experiments, an Sn-β zeolite was synthesized by hydrothermal methods [ The structures of the β zeolite samples were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD; Rigaku D/Max 2400), using Cu Kα radiation at a scanning rate of 8°/min between 5° and 50°. The amount of Sn was determined using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES; Perkin OPTIMA- 2000DV). Ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectra were obtained using a Shimadzu UV-550 spectrophotometer, with BaSO Glucose isomerization was carried out in 1 mL thick-walled glass reactors heated in a Reacti-Therm I Heating/Stirring Module (Thermo Scientific). In a typical run, 0.4 mL of an aqueous solution consisting of 10 wt% glucose and 30 mg of catalyst were placed in the reactor. The reactor was sealed and put in the module at a defined temperature, under stirring, for a defined reaction time, ranging from 15 min to 2 h. The reaction was quenched by rapid cooling in an ice bath. The reaction solution was diluted and filtered, and then a small amount of clear filtrate was removed for analysis. The samples were analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography, using an Agilent 1200 system. Glucose and fructose were monitored using a refractive index detector with a Biorad Aminex HPX-87H column. The mobile phase was freshly prepared 0.005 mol/L H As can be seen in The Sn contents of Sn-β zeolites synthesized via different methods were determined using ICP-AES ( UV-Vis spectroscopy was used to verify the coordination states of Sn in the samples ( The FT-IR spectra of the β zeolites before and after deboronation or dealumination, and those after post-synthesis with SnCl Sn-β zeolites have been shown to be effective heterogeneous catalysts for the isomerization of glucose to fructose in aqueous solutions, and could therefore be used in biorefining of carbohydrates [ The effects of catalyst dosage on the isomerization of glucose over the Sn-Al-β zeolite were investigated; the results are shown in The XRD and UV-Vis results suggest that more extra- framework small SnO The effects of the solvent on the isomerization of glucose to fructose were investigated, and the results are shown in Ionic liquids such as [bmim]Cl essentially suppressed glucose isomerization, so it was speculated that the anion could be an influential factor. Experiments were performed to examine the effects of anions. Various sodium halides, i.e., NaF, NaCl, NaBr, and NaI, were used as additives under the same reaction conditions. The glucose conversions and fructose yields are listed in The Sn-Al-β zeolite was used to study the reusabilities of the synthesized zeolites in the isomerization of glucose. It was found that carbonaceous deposits formed during the reaction, resulting in a decrease in the fructose yield from 43.2% in the first run to 39.8% in the second run (without regeneration; the catalyst was filtered and dried at 393 K before reuse). To eliminate the effects of carbonaceous deposits, the Sn-Al-β catalyst was regenerated by calcination at 813 K for 4 h after each run, and reused four times. The results are listed in In this work, a facile preparation of Sn-β zeolites by post-synthesis is presented. The post-synthesis method consisted of two procedures, i.e., heteroatom removal and isomorphous substitution by reaction with SnCl