Rock and soil are natural assemblies of mineral grains. Dissolution of mineral compositions in a granular assembly can dramatically disturb and change the microstructure. Once the soil fabric and inter-particle contacts change, large deformations can develop and the shear strength can decrease. Currently there is a lack of understanding and experimental evidence of geomaterial behaviour subjected to mineral dissolution under realistic complex stress conditions. In this experimental study, extensive laboratory tests were conducted to investigate changes in the stress-strain relation, shear strength and critical state of a granular assembly after experiencing a substantial loss of particles by salt dissolution. During the salt dissolution process, a larger shear stress or confining pressure leads to a smaller increase of void ratio, a smaller positive state parameter, and a weaker strain-hardening behaviour. After the salt dissolution, the material grading becomes narrower, the grading state index decreases and the specific void ratio increases, leading to an upward shift of the critical state line. However, the increase of void ratio is more than the upward shift of the critical state line, thus the stress state changes from the dense side to the loose side, accompanied by a change of shearing behaviour from strain-softening to strain-hardening. Nevertheless, as the critical friction angle is dominated by the inter-particle contacts among coarse particles, with almost no change in the coarse content of the post-dissolution materials, only a slight decrease of 2.3° in the critical friction angle is found.Rock and soil matrixes naturally contain soluble minerals, such as salt, limestone, marble, gypsum, dolomite, anhydrite, and halite. The engineering properties of soils containing soluble materials have been investigated in laboratories. McDougall et al. The aforementioned experimental studies were all conducted under one dimensional or isotropic stress states. Limited understanding has been obtained on the effects of stress state during the mineral dissolution process. The stress state in reality is essential to the mechanical behaviour of granular materials. The main objective of the present study is to investigate the effects of mineral dissolution on the soil mechanical behaviour under various stress states. Extensive laboratory tests have been conducted on sand-salt mixtures using a modified triaxial testing apparatus. Three typical stress states are applied: isotropic stress condition, triaxial compression stress condition, and extension stress condition. The characteristics of soil deformation, stress-strain behaviour, critical state, and peak and critical state shear strengths after salt dissolution are assessed, which provide factual data to support theoretical studies and numerical analysis. The test equipment ( A high-resolution digital camera was installed in front of the triaxial chamber to capture the soil deformation induced by salt dissolution ( The soluble material in this study was a sand-salt mixture. Salt is a natural component in soils, which forms by natural processes such as mineral weathering, gradual withdrawal of seawater, or through artificial processes such as irrigation. It has been widely used in experimental studies to investigate the mechanical behaviour of soluble materials. After sample preparation, the consolidation process was performed on each soil specimen. As shown in Stress state significantly affects soil mechanical behaviour. Even a very dense soil will exhibit strain-hardening behaviour as a loose sand does when it is under a sufficiently high confining pressure. To study the role the stress condition plays on soil mechanical properties after experiencing mineral dissolution, three typical stress states were taken into account: isotropic stress state, triaxial compression stress state, and triaxial extension stress state. The stress state is indicated by   After as much as 15% of salt dissolved, all the soil specimens experienced significant axial and radial deformations. The test soil was constituted by a large portion of coarse sand (i.e. 80% by weight) and a small portion of fine sand (i.e. 20% by weight), representing a granular structure controlled by both the coarse and fine fractions. Nevertheless, the degree of soil deformation differs for different applied stress states or different degrees of stress-induced anisotropy. The deformation characteristics of a material will be significantly affected by the anisotropy in its microstructure. As shown in Under the same stress ratio of The soil volumetric strain was obtained by The void ratio reflects the state of soil microstructure, which is a ratio of the void-space volume ( When a soil sample was consolidated to a particular stress state, the sample experienced a small consolidation-induced deformation without any particle loss. The sample volume after consolidation ( At the end of the salt dissolution, the final volume of the soil sample can be obtained by the photographic method ( After the salt dissolution, the void ratio increases dramatically ( After the end of the salt dissolution process, a conventional triaxial shear test under a constant All the soil samples were subjected to the same amount of salt dissolution, and the compression shearing resistance increased with increasing confining stress as shown in The stress-strain behaviour is closely related to its stress state after the salt dissolution. The soil exhibited a weaker strain-hardening behaviour during shearing when it was subject to a larger shear stress or confining pressure during the salt dissolution process. As shown in  Soil grading may change by weathering, degradation, dissolution, seepage, crushing, breakage etc., leading to changes in its basic constitutive properties such as critical states and stress-strain relations. Removal of fines (e.g. by seepage or dissolution) and addition of fines (e.g. by particle crushing or breakage) are two complementary effects which make the current grading narrower or broader. For a given soil, there is a tendency for the soil grading to become increasingly “self-similar” as crushing continues, which provides the broadest grading boundary. Through DEM analyses ( Moreover, The state parameter of each soil specimen in this study after the salt dissolution is shown in The friction angle is the most important parameter for analysing soil response subjected to loading. The critical stress ratio of the soils after salt dissolution under the triaxial compression condition is 1.28, corresponding to a critical friction angle of 31.8°. For the benchmark soil without experiencing salt dissolution, the critical stress ratio and the critical friction angle are 1.38 and 34.1°, respectively. A slight reduction of the critical friction angle (2.3°) can be found after salt dissolution. For the test soils under the triaxial extension shearing, the critical stress ratio is 0.88, corresponding to a critical friction angle of 31.0°. For the benchmark soil without experiencing particles loss, the critical stress ratio and the critical friction angle are 0.91 and 32.4°, respectively. The critical friction angle strongly depends on soil compositions. In this study, the soil before salt dissolution was composed of 80% of coarse particles ranging from 1.18 to 5 mm and 20% of fine particles in the range of 0.09–0.15 mm. The critical friction angle is mainly controlled by the inter-particle sliding friction and geometrical interference between the coarse particles. Although the soil experienced salt dissolution, the critical friction angle did not change significantly, as the salt grains only replaced the fine grains. Extensive laboratory tests were performed to investigate the mechanical behaviour of a granular assembly after its salt content dissolves under complex stress conditions. Several conclusions can be drawn: The stress state significantly affects soil deformation characteristics subjected to the same amount of particle loss. The soil under a larger shear stress ratio or a higher confining stress developed greater axial and radial deformations upon loss of fine particles. However, the soil volume changes are quite similar, which are more closely related to the amount of loss of solid particles. Salt dissolution caused the soil mass and volume to decrease, but the soil void ratio to increase. A soil specimen under a lower mean effective stress or with a smaller stress ratio experienced a larger increment of void ratio and formed a looser soil structure. After a significant amount of salts dissolved, the shearing behaviour of the changed from the original strain-softening behaviour to a clear strain-hardening behaviour. During the salt dissolution process, a larger shear stress and confining pressure resulted in a smaller increase of void ratio, a smaller positive state parameter and weaker strain-hardening behaviour. The soil grading becomes narrower, the grading state index decreases and the void ratio increases after the salt dissolution, leading to an upward shift of the critical state line. The increase of void ratio is larger than the rise of the critical state line, hence the soil stress state shafts from the dense side of the initial critical state line to the loose side of the new critical state line. After the salt dissolution, the critical friction angle decreased slightly from 34.1° to 31.8° under compression shearing. The 2.3° reduction of the critical friction angle of the post-dissolution soil is relatively small, as the critical friction angle is dominated by the inter-particle contacts among the coarse particles that do not dissolve. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was substantially supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at