The overall process for producing pure magnesium compounds from serpentinite usually starts with acid leaching. However, if serpentinite is calcined prior to leaching, not only faster magnesium dissolution is achieved, but use of thermally activated serpentine also significantly reduces the problems relating to corrosion of the leaching equipment, because less aggressive leaching agents can be used and/or lower leaching temperatures and pressures can be applied. This paper compares how calcination influences the dissolution behaviour of magnesium in solutions of hydrochloric acid, acetic acid and ammonium chloride. Fine-grained serpentinite, characterized by the extent of serpentine decomposition between 85 and 95%, displayed the highest reactivity. The initial magnesium dissolution rate of calcined serpentinite was up to 30-, 125- and 165-times higher as compared to that of uncalcined serpentinite in solutions of hydrochloric acid, acetic acid and ammonium chloride, respectively, under identical reaction conditions.If serpentinite is used to produce pure magnesium compounds, acid leaching is usually the first stage of the overall process. Leaching generates a soluble magnesium salt, which builds up in solution and is then separated from the insoluble residue, and later refined. Commonly used lixiviants are hydrochloric acid ( For practical purposes, it is favourable to improve serpentinite leaching. To enhance the leaching rate, Faster magnesium dissolution due to calcination would reduce leaching time and, consequently, the size of a potential leaching reactor. Moreover, use of calcined serpentinite could reduce the problems relating to corrosion of the leaching reactor, because solutions of weak acids or hydrolyzing salts could be used and/or lower leaching temperatures and pressures could be applied. In two-stage leaching processes where also amorphous silica is produced ( Herein, we explore how calcination of serpentinite can enhance the dissolution rate of magnesium in solutions of three different leaching agents: hydrochloric acid (strong acid), acetic acid (weak acid) and ammonium chloride (hydrolyzing salt). The literature reports on the effects of lixiviant concentration, leaching temperature and serpentinite particle size on the dissolution of magnesium ( Bulk material obtained from the mining and processing of serpentinite in Dobšiná, Slovakia was used in our laboratory tests. The test sample with particle sizes up to 315 Calcined samples were prepared as follows: ten grams of serpentinite was placed in a crucible with a lid and inserted in a muffle furnace where the sample was heated at a predefined temperature (between 600 and 800 The values of the specific surface ranging from 9 to 10 The reactivity of original (uncalcined) or calcined serpentinite was determined as follows: one gram of sample was dissolved at 20 In the present study, the reactivity of calcined serpentinite was expressed in terms of the For original (uncalcined) serpentine (i.e. for The initial magnesium dissolution rate, To find the calcination temperature, thermal decomposition of serpentine was studied by differential thermal analysis (DTA) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) as well as by high-temperature in-situ X-ray powder diffraction analysis between 100 and 1000 The influence of the calcination temperature and time on the initial rate of magnesium dissolution, The results shown in While the curves for hydrochloric and acetic acid ( The initial rate of magnesium dissolution during leaching of uncalcined serpentinite, When calcined serpentinite was leached, the maximum initial rate of magnesium dissolution was observed at the calcination temperature 600 The efficiency of thermal activation due to calcination strongly depends on the nature of the leaching agent used. Due to calcination, the Increasing the calcination time increases reactivity when the calcination temperature is less than 700 However, when the effect of calcination is characterized by the fraction of serpentine thermally decomposed, In general, each As The accelerating effect of calcination on Similar to the It is worth noting that while Common effect of the calcination temperature and time on the dissolution of magnesium from calcined serpentinite in solutions of hydrochloric acid (strong acid), acetic acid (weak acid) and ammonium chloride (hydrolyzing salt) was examined. The initial magnesium dissolution rate ( Since there is an interaction between calcination time and temperature, one cannot postulate the effect of increasing the temperature on the leaching behaviour without considering the calcination time. However, when the effect of calcination is characterized by the fraction of serpentine thermally decomposed ( Calcination seems to have much stronger effect on leaching of calcined serpentinite in solutions of weak acids and hydrolyzing salts as compared to solutions of strong acids. Rate-enhancement for the magnesium dissolution rate stemming from thermal activation during calcination decreases in the following order: NH The results show that calcination reduces dramatically the leaching time. This finding is favourable considering a potential reactor size and necessary investment/operating costs associated with the leaching process. When hydrochloric acid is used as a leaching agent, calcination need not be necessarily more economic than intensification of the leaching conditions (hydrochloric acid concentration and/or leaching temperature). However, calcination can “open the door” to application of more selective leaching techniques using solutions of weak acids or hydrolyzing salts, which could result in reduced corrosion, cheaper leachate refining and leaching agent recovery, as well. This study was financially supported by the Grant Agency of the