Approximately two thirds of the world’s copper comes from porphyry deposits. These deposits have many distinct attributes, including multiple events in their formation, which affect the reaction series between the hydrothermal fluid and its host rock. This, in turn, defines the alteration and main causes of ore formation. Many porphyry copper deposits are hosted in quartz feldspar porphyries, where the alteration–mineralisation is zoned from barren early sodic–calcic, through potentially ore-grade potassic, chlorite–sericite, and phyllic, to advanced argillic. Chalcopyrite±bornite mineralisation in many porphyry copper deposits is largely confined to potassic zones (Sillitoe, 2010). This paper discusses the initial development of a Process Alteration Index (PAI) that focuses on understanding the formation of copper porphyry mineralisation, and supports predictive comminution and metallurgical modelling studies. The PAI can be determined using analytical techniques and focuses on the role of plagioclase and quartz during porphyry deposit formation. Samples from the Highland Valley Copper Mine in British Columbia were selected from a single lithology which displayed a range of degrees of alteration advancing from weak to intense. The samples were analysed using X-ray Diffraction Analysis (XRD) with Rietveld refinement, and the ore hardness determined using the Julius Kruttschnitt Rotary Breakage Tester (JKRBT). A relationship between key alteration parameters which underpin copper ore formation and the ore hardness was observed in the limited dataset available for this research and further work is recommended to determine whether this relationship could be used in predictive mill throughput modelling studies.Porphyry copper deposits are well known as the world’s primary source of copper and many also contain important sources of molybdenum and gold. Some of these deposits are gigantic, with several deposits of over 1 The general mineralogical composition of quartz feldspar porphyry (hereafter referred to as the “original form”) consists of quartz, plagioclase, potassium-feldspar, hornblende, and biotite. In ore forming systems the mineralisation is complimented by chalcopyrite, bornite, and other secondary copper minerals, with accessory pyrite, magnetite, apatite, and other minerals. In porphyry deposits these mineral assemblages are replaced by alteration minerals such as quartz, potassium-feldspar, illite, kaolinite, sericite, chlorite, dickite, biotite, calcite, zunyite and other minerals, in accordance with a chemical reaction series (hereafter referred to as the “alteration form”). Put simply the copper minerals are introduced during the changes from the “original” to the “alteration” forms.  Alteration indices using oxide and molecular ratios were first introduced by The Alteration index proposed by The potassium oxide and magnesium oxide quantities increase, whereas sodium oxide and calcium oxide content decrease based on the alteration intensity and the index reaches 100 when alteration intensity is at its maximum. The approach proposed by Silica saturation is increased. Divergent and reversed Bowen series are used for calculations. Mineral assemblages are calculated according to Greenschist facies. Calculations done according to VMS – type hydrothermal alteration. Virtual CO Previous indices have been developed for the use of exploration and their focus was developing a systematic approach to find new mineral resources based on the alteration zonation. This paper proposes an index based on understanding the link between the original form and altered form of porphyry copper deposits, through which key parameters can be defined which may lead to predictions of breakage and metallurgical response. The approach will be extended to other alteration types which are economic ore contributors. This paper discusses the potential for an effective and practical Process Alteration Index (PAI) that focuses on understanding the formation of copper porphyry ores. The basis for this index has been investigated here and the concept will be developed further in future work to support predictive breakage and metallurgical modelling studies. Recent developments in integrated studies between ore variability and mineral processing have driven the need to better understand the ore variability as a means to maximise the value from the ore. As a result, existing methodologies are now being adapted to incorporate geological and metallurgical databases, with the aim of linking ore mineralogy to comminution and beneficiation performance. However, the current developments are driven by statistical correlations rather than a fundamental and mechanistic understanding. This paper aims to show that there is a fundamental mechanistic relationship between mineralogy, ore hardness and breakage by focussing on mineral proportion and texture changes caused during ore formation in a copper porphyry deposit. The PAI focuses on what has been lost in the system, rather than which new minerals were formed subsequent to the deposition of the minerals of economic interest. The advantage of this approach is that it avoids the need to define the complex alteration minerals. The PAI calculation takes into account the role of plagioclase and quartz during the formation of the porphyry copper system. The three key conditions are: Sodium-feldspar (plagioclase) is always replaced by alteration minerals. Quartz is always added to the system either as quartz veins and/or through the replacement of other minerals. The original quartz in the rock is never replaced by the other minerals. This approach effectively incorporates the variability of lithology, subsequent alteration and copper mineralisation processes. Thus plagioclase replacement is given by: The conceptual replacement processes that occur during the formation of a porphyry copper system are illustrated in In order to test Eqs. To characterise the mineralogy of the samples X-ray diffractometer (XRD) analyses were performed with the Rietveld refinement used to estimate the mineral proportions. A laboratory-scale test was required to measure the ore hardness and in this study, the JKRBT device, developed by the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC), was selected to define the rock breakage characteristics in terms of The mineral contents of the nine samples obtained from the XRD study are given in Eqs.  To generate a breakage prediction model which is applicable to copper (±gold) porphyry systems, the model must identify the methods needed for evaluating and characterising alteration, ore textures, mineralogy, rock type and hardness using simple, cost effective and objective tests. Ultimately these characteristics will be correlated, with mill throughput and metallurgical response, in a manner that can be incorporated into the resource block model and eventually into the mine plan. Mill throughput depends on a range of parameters such as the diameter and length of mill, speed, ball load, feed size distribution, specific gravity, specific power required for size reduction, and ore characteristics. These parameters can be measured accurately, the exception being ore characteristics such as the amount of alteration minerals, and the meso- and micro-scale ore textures, which may have a subjective component and/or higher error compared to the other parameters. This difficulty in ore characterisation results from the poor structural order of many clay species, the presence of lamellar intergrowths and often poorly characterised mixed layers, and the lack of suitable standards ( The test samples were taken from weak to intensely altered ore and represented a wide range of hardness values. As shown in The replacement of plagioclase and the addition of quartz as alteration processes were previously proposed as key parameters needed to develop a practical PAI for porphyry copper deposits. The relationship between feldspar replacement and relative quartz addition and JKRBT According to a study by The results obtained from this limited data set indicate the importance of measuring mineralogy and hardness as accurately as possible and defining the key parameters of ore formation. They support the importance of a fundamental understanding of ore formation for improved predictive hardness modelling. In the transformation of the original form of the QFP rock to copper ore, there is the development of complex mineral structure, texture and grain size relationships that increase the difficulties for predictive geometallurgical modelling studies. This limited study demonstrates the potential use of PAI, and further studies are recommended to validate the index. This paper discussed the development of the Process Alteration Index (PAI) incorporating an understanding of the formation of copper porphyry mineralisation that supports predictive comminution and metallurgical modelling studies. This approach specifically focuses the key role of plagioclase and quartz in the alteration and replacement process. The understanding comes from two primary observations, firstly the measurement of what has been lost in the system rather than the new minerals formed, since these are hard to quantify, and secondly the percentage of other minerals that have been replaced by quartz. The plagioclase replacement in phyllic and argillic alteration has an essential role in linking geological variabilities to mineral processing and the limited testing indicates that the overall correlation between plagioclase replacement and the JKRBT result is higher (0.94) than the correlation between of relative quartz addition and JKRBT result (0.79). The decomposition and transformation of the rock to the ore develops a complex mineral structure, texture, grain size relationship which needs to be considered, especially when working on highly altered ore for predictive geometallurgical modelling studies. The approach proposed in this paper may provide the following advantages over conventional approaches: The methodology can be widely used for porphyry copper (±gold) deposits. It avoids the difficulties in quantifying complex alteration minerals using available mineral quantification techniques (XRD Rietveld, MLA, and XRF). Both lithology and alteration variability are considered in the definition. It supports the development of predictive processing models which consider a fundamental geological approach. Introducing the key ore forming parameters to mineral processing and relating the processing performance to degree of alteration is a novel idea. This study was completed with a limited number of tests in order to explore the idea and further work is needed to validate and develop predictive processing models for detailed mill throughput and flotation performance. The authors would like to thank staff at Teck Resources Ltd., particularly Nichola McKay, Section Leader of the Mineralogy Department of Applied Research & Technology (ART), Martin Lapointe, Advanced Projects Manager of Exploration, Chris Dechert General Manager of Highland Valley Copper mine, and the mine and mill staff at the Highland Valley Copper Mine, British Columbia, Canada, for their support and the opportunity to write this article. Thanks are also extended to Dr. Toni Kojovic, JKMRC for his technical support and to Dr. Peter Holtham and Karen Holtham for internal reviews.