In this study, analysis of the second law of thermodynamics is applied to the ladle furnace in an important alloyed and special steel production company in Turkey. Taking liquid steel and stack gas temperatures and production time of liquid steel in the ladle furnace into consideration, actual work, irreversibility and exergy efficiency have been calculated. In general, exergy efficiency is found to be 50%. Irreversibilities which cause the significant production costs are investigated in detail.area (m constant pressure specific heat (kcal/kg energy (kcal) Gibbss function (kcal) Grashof number heat transfer coefficient (kcal/m specific enthalpy (kcal/kg) enthalpy of formation (kcal/kg) irreversibility (kcal) overall thermal conductivity (kcal/m length (m) ladle furnace mass (kg) number of moles Prandtl number heat (kcal). rate of heat (kcal/h) specific entropy (kcal/kg absolute entropy at standard condition (kcal/kg inner surface temperature of furnace (K) outer surface temperature of furnace (K) temperature of surroundings (K) work (kcal) density (kg/m emission coefficient second law efficiency Stefan–Boltzmann constant (1.35×10 bar over symbol denotes property on a molar basis absorption actual alloy materials argon gas conduction convection control volume deoxidization materials dust electrodes fluxes inlet liquid steel going in LF exit liquid steel going out LF oxygen radiation reversible slug stack gas Energy demand has been rising with the increased degree of industrialization and population increase. After 1970s, numerous papers have been published on the efficient use of energy and improving the energy efficiency of industrial processes. The first law of thermodynamics which is generally used to assess the energy efficiency is related to the quantity of energy, but not the quality of energy. First law is also insufficient in determining change of state occurrences and directions of change of states. Second law of thermodynamics may overcome these difficulties and it takes into account the quality of energy as well as quantity of energy The iron and steel sector uses approximately 11% of total world energy production There are many studies in the literature about the application of the second law in thermal plants. Although, insufficient in quantity, there are some studies regarding the iron and steel sector, like work In this study, the second law analysis is applied to the ladle furnace (LF). The actual work, reversible work, irreversibility and exergy efficiency are investigated. As known, the production of steel with a desired composition can be accomplished by many chemical reactions between materials charged into the furnace and elements and compounds forming the liquid steel in the LF After determining the mass amounts, the chemical analyses of these materials are made by using the measurements taken in the plant and studying the production cards and the relevant literature When we apply the first law of thermodynamics to the LF, regarded a steady-state, steady-flow process, by neglecting the changes in the potential and kinetic energies, we can calculate the amount of the actual work given to the system, as shown below: The second law of thermodynamics is applied to the furnace to obtain minimum reversible work. For this purpose, the following assumptions are made: chemical reactions are reversible, furnace is a steady-state process, enthalpy is only temperature dependent. Using From the Carnot engine, it is known that The reversible work given to the system can be expressed as the following d d Then based on mole numbers, The coefficients In order to evaluate the electrical energy given to the LF, it should be compared to the amount of reversible work to be given to the furnace. This comparison can be made by the second law efficiency defined in The lost work can be calculated by A computer program in Q-Basic language was developed for the second law analysis in the LF. This program performs the mass analysis, the first law analysis and the second law analysis. The results per ton of steel production are depicted in the In this study, the following conclusions were reached about the LF in the plant: (1) The actual work, the reversible work and the irreversibility increase as the temperature of the liquid steel outgoing from the LF increases ( (2) The actual work, the reversible work and the irreversibility have small changes with the temperature of the stack gas of the LF ( (3) Moreover, the reversible work and the irreversibility also change with the production times in the LF ( (4) In general, the exergy efficiency is about 50%, and exergy losses cause significant rises in production costs. (5) Irreversibilities occurring in LF are stemming from chemical reactions and heat transfer to surroundings. The irreversibilities by chemical reactions are unavoidable irreversibilities. However, it is possible to reduce the irreversibilities by improving the isolation of the LF, using quality refractors.