In this paper, ZrB2–SiC composites doped with 0–5wt.% AlN were prepared by a low pressure hot pressing as well as a pressureless sintering methods at 1900°C for 2h. The influence of aluminum nitride addition on the sinterability and microstructure development of such ceramic composites was studied by a fractographical approach. The results revealed that only 1wt.% AlN can aid the densification process of the hot pressed ceramic composite via the liquid phase sintering mechanism due to the formation of nano-scale metakaolinite spinel layers. In the pressureless sintering method, adding more AlN can increase the formation of gaseous products which raised the amount of porosities in the final microstructure. The formation of nano-graphite phase in the hot pressing process, the formation of Al2OC in the pressureless sintering process, and the formation of BN in the both processes were disclosed by X-ray diffraction, SEM and TEM analyses.Due to its high melting point and novel combination of properties such as high hardness, chemical inertness, electrical conductivity and low thermal expansion coefficient, zirconium diboride which is known as an ultra-high temperature ceramic (UHTC), has recently attracted the scientists' attention. Mentioned properties along with relatively low density, make ZrB Aside from carbides and borides, refractory nitrides such as HfN Another research showed that the addition of BN significantly improves the densification of ZrB It is also reported that aluminum nitride as a sintering aid in hot pressing of ZrB Although valuable research works have been carried out about the effects of AlN on the processing parameters and the mechanical properties of ZrB Commercially available ZrB A set of the powder mixtures was fabricated by hot pressing in graphite dies which were lined with a thin graphite foil and boron nitride to protect the dies from reacting with the powders. The samples were heated up to a predetermined temperature of 900 The as-sieved powders were biaxially compacted using a cold pressing machine (Uniaxial Cold Press, Tajhiz Ceram Co., Iran) under an applied pressure of 400 The phase composition of the starting materials and the powder mixtures were characterized using CuKα radiation on the X–ray diffractometer (XRD: Philips PW1800, Netherlands), operated at 40 Measured relative densities of HP and PS samples are presented in A local decrease is seen in the relative density of HP samples at 3 The relationships between AlN content and Vickers hardness of both hot pressed and pressureless sintered ZrB SEM micrographs of the fracture surfaces of additive-free samples fabricated via hot pressing (HP0) and pressureless sintering (PS0) are presented in  In hot pressed samples, applied pressure keeps the particles together and makes steady contact areas between them. Plastic deformation on the surfaces of tempered particles which is caused by applied pressure may also increase the contact areas SEM micrographs and related EDS patterns of fracture surfaces of PS1 and HP1 samples are presented in SEM micrograph of the fracture surface of the PS1 sample also includes some regions in which particles are joined via a glassy phase. Although the mentioned phase provides a good joining and keeps particles together and is expected to result in wide diffusion paths, it appears that the amount of sintering aid is not enough to cover all the particles of the composite. In a way that, in most regions, formed necks are similar to those existing in additive-free sample (PS0). However, the relative density of PS1 is approximately 8% less than that of PS0, and it may be due to the formation of some gaseous products as a result of AlN addition which cannot escape from the microstructure in absence of the applied external pressure. Also, EDS spectrum of formed glassy phase (Point B) in PS1 sample, which is presented in  The fracture surface of PS3 sample ( SEM micrographs of the fracture surfaces of 5 Intragranular fracture mode of the HP5 sample which is clearly visible at BN peak at the XRD pattern of HP5 sample ( In which, B Alumina as another product of Eq. Such a liquid phase, which promotes the liquid phase sintering phenomenon, forms the base of the glassy phase during its solidification. As it can be seen at According to the The phase Al As a result of external pressure at hot pressing process, formed gaseous phases in Eq. Also, it has been reported that at elevated temperatures and high external pressures, the residual carbon tends to change to graphite In the other side, fracture surface of the PS5 sample which is presented in In addition, the presence of some agglomerated particles which are kept together with a binder-like phase, similar to those seen at PS1 and PS3 samples is clearly visible and can be considered as a sign of liquid phase formation. EDS spectrum presented at The mentioned phase which has a hexagonal crystalline structure and melting point of about 2400 Chemical reaction presented in Eq. As it can be paraphrased from the aforementioned chemical reactions at Eqs. Simultaneous development in sintering process and gas formation during pressureless sintering, results in more porosity with smaller size in PS samples. Such a phenomenon can clearly be paraphrased, comparing the type and size of porosities presented at Generally, the introduction of AlN in ZrB ZrB Aside from the reactive sintering mechanism which leads to the formation of BN at the interfaces of the grains, the formation of glassy phase is introduced as the dominant mechanism of densification in hot pressed samples. Possible chemical reactions which can lead to the formation of third phases (glassy or crystalline interfacial phases) were discussed and presented; most of them can lead to the formation of considerable amounts of gaseous phases. Although these gaseous phases are easily pushed out by the applied pressure of hot pressing process, but can result in more porosities at pressureless sintered composites. Therefore, contrary to hot pressed samples, increasing the amount of AlN additive which promotes the formation of gaseous phases, leads to significant decrease in the relative density of pressureless sintered samples, although it can also boost the sintering process between particles via the formation of a liquid/amorphous phase. XRD and TEM analyses also indicated that in hot pressed samples, the residual carbon from the binder pyrolysis reaction, which plays a key role in gas-forming chemical reactions, may also change to nano-graphite. Whereas in pressureless sintered samples, in addition to the gas-forming reactions, carbon can participate in a chemical reaction which leads to the formation of Al This work was supported by the Advanced Ceramic Research Group (ACRG) of the