The extraction and separation of uranium (U(VI)) and thorium (Th(IV)) from rare earth elements (REEs) in acidic waste solutions is very important and still challenging. In this paper, a high-efficient sorbent was successfully prepared by functionalization of graphene oxide with phenanthroline diamide (GO-PDA), which exhibited excellent selectivity towards actinides over lanthanides. The sorption behaviors of GO-PDA towards U(VI) and Th(IV) under various conditions were evaluated by batch experiment. Fast sorption kinetics and high sorption capacities were realized for both U(VI) and Th(IV), which reached equilibrium in 60min. The sorption isotherms of both U(VI) and Th(IV) coincided with Langmuir model, while the maximum sorption capacities of U(VI) (pH=5.5) and Th(IV) (pH=4.0) at 298K were calculated to be 718 and 703mg/g respectively, which were much higher than most of the previously reported graphene oxide (GO) based sorbents. GO-PDA also possessed significantly enhanced selectivity for U(VI) and Th(IV) over Eu(III), Nd(III) and Sm(III) compared to pristine GO at ultralow low pH (0−2), with separation factors larger than 23 at pH 0. Most importantly, GO-PDA was made into membrane with porous structure, which achieved fast and efficient separation of U(VI) and Th(IV) from Eu(III), Nd(III) and Sm(III) in aqueous solution. This work demonstrates that GO-PDA is a promising sorbent for efficient selective separation of U(VI) and Th(IV) from REEs in strong acidic waste solutions, which is of great value for nuclear waste management and nuclear fuel recycling.Rare earth elements (REEs) refer to the 15 lanthanide elements including yttrium (Y) and scandium (Sc) Furthermore, the recovery of U and Th is of great importance for the sustainable development of nuclear industry. U is the most important fuel element used in nuclear reactors, while Th is regarded as potential nuclear fuel elements, as Solvent extraction have been most widely used to remove U(VI) or/and Th(IV) from REEs over the years In this work, phenanthroline diamide (PDA) functionalized GO sorbent (GO-PDA) was successfully synthesized, which combined the fast sorption rate and high sorption capacity of GO as well as the excellent selectivity of PDA towards actinides over lanthanides. Most importantly, GO-PDA can be made into membrane with porous structure, which is beneficial to practical application. U(VI) and Th(IV) in aqueous solution can be easily and efficiently separated from Eu(III), Nd(III) and Sm(III) by GO-PDA membrane compared to membrane made of pristine GO which is relatively dense. This work highlights the potential practical application of GO-PDA as efficient sorbents for fast and selective separation and recovery of U(VI) and Th(IV) from REEs in strong acidic waste solutions. Graphite was bought from Beijing Jixingsheng'an Industry & Trade Co., Ltd.  GO. GO was synthesized according to the modified Hummers method GO-NH GO-PDA. 10.0 The sorption experiments of U(VI) and Th(IV) by GO-PDA were studied by a batch method in air in polyethylene test tubes. The initial U(VI) and Th(IV) concentrations varied from 30 to 350 For desorption of U(VI) and Th(IV) from GO-PDA, the suspension after sorption for 6 The morphologies of GO, GO-NH  Almost no signal of N 1s was observed in the XPS spectra of GO ( The expected decrease of the C/N atomic ratio from 10.05 (GO-NH Elemental analysis (EA) was used to estimate the grafting density of PDA modification. There was no N element in GO. The weight ratios of N element in GO-NH The TEM image of GO shown in The preparation of GO-PDA sorbent is depicted in The sorption kinetics of GO-PDA for U(VI) and Th(IV) were studied at pH = 5.5 and pH = 4 to avoid precipitation of U(VI) and Th(IV) The sorption kinetics were fitted by the pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order models, which can be expressed by Eqs. To study the effect of solution pH on the sorption behavior of GO-PDA, HClO Additionally, pH-dependent surface charge of the sorbent may also be responsible for the pH-dependent U(VI) sorption. The surface of GO kept negatively charged at pH 0–5.5 ( Eu(III) was selected to represent the lanthanides. The sorption of Eu(III) was negligibly low at pH The effect of ionic strength on sorption behavior is complicated. Different relationships between the sorption behavior and ionic strength have been reported To understand the sorption mechanism, equilibrium isotherm studies were carried out at a constant pH by varying the initial concentration of U(VI) and Th(IV). The sorption capacities of GO-PDA versus the equilibrium concentration of U(VI) (pH Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models were used to fit the data. The Langmuir model describes the monolayer sorption process on a homogeneous surface well. The Freundlich model is proper for sorption process occurred on a heterogeneous surface. They can be expressed by Eqs. The thermodynamic parameters for U(VI) and Th(IV) sorption on GO-PDA were calculated from the temperature dependent sorption isotherms, as shown in All the calculated thermodynamic parameters were listed in The reusability of sorbent is very important for practical application. As shown in The selective sorption of U(VI) and Th(IV) from the mixed solution containing Eu(III), Nd(III) and Sm(III) by GO-PDA was investigated at pH 0–4. Eu(III), Nd(III) and Sm(III) were chosen to represent the REEs. The sorption capacities of U(VI), Th(IV), Eu(III), Nd(III) and Sm(III) on GO-PDA and GO at different pH were shown in The selectivity coefficient, calculated by Eq. Noting that GO had a good selectivity for Th(IV) at pH 3 and 4 on account of the high capacities of Th(IV) on GO. The negative charge on GO surface in the whole test pH range increased with increasing pH ( GO-PDA was also made into membrane by deposition of GO-PDA on cellulose filter membrane (220 For comparison, GO membrane was prepared through the same method as GO-PDA membrane. However, the mixed solution could not pass through GO membrane at all. This was because the porous channel of filter membrane was blocked by the dense deposition of thin and smooth unmodified GO sheets in the preparation of GO membrane, as In this work, a new efficient sorbent (GO-PDA) was successfully prepared by functionalizing phenanthroline diamide (PDA) onto GO surface, which was confirmed by TEM, AFM, We are very grateful to Prof. Xuewu Ge and Prof. Mozhen Wang at Department of Polymer Science and Engineering in the University of Science and Technology of China for their helpful discussion about this work. This work was supported by the  