The ability of self-functionalized biogenic GNPs towards highly selective colorimetric detection of rare earth element cerium is being reported for the first time. GNPs underwent rapid aggregation on addition of cerium indicated by red shift of SPR peak followed by complete precipitation. Hereby, this concept of co-ordination of cerium ions onto the GNP surface has been utilized for detection of cerium. The remarkable capacity of GNPs to sensitively detect Ce without proves beneficial compared to previous reports of colorimetric sensing. MDL was 15 and 35ppm by DLS and UV–vis spectroscopy respectively, suggesting DLS to be highly sensitive and a practical alternative in ultrasensitive detection studies. The sensing system showed a good linear fit favouring feasible detection of cerium in range of 2–50ppm. Similar studies further showed the superior selectivity of biogenic GNPs compared to chemically synthesized counterparts. The sensing system favours on-site analysis as it overcomes need of complex instrumentation, lengthy protocols and surface modification of GNP.Rare earth elements (REEs) grouped into the lanthanide series has attracted considerable interest in recent technological fields. Cerium (Ce) the most plentiful element of the series is found in earth crust in an average of 50 Widespread application of Ce and corresponding ecological concerns, arouses the need of a simple and sensitive detection method. Though several analytical and colorimetric methods for determination of Ce exist, however they suffer from drawbacks like high cost, selectivity, complex instrumentation and lengthy protocols ( The present study focuses on the efficiency of biogenic GNPs for facile and selective detection of Ce. Moreover, the work overcomes the shortcoming of additional functionalization making the process rapid and simpler. In addition, we present an ultrasensitive dynamic light scattering (DLS)/photon correlation spectroscopic method to further improve the detection limit. The method holds the advantages of being sensitive, economic and green approach making on-site analysis feasible. Hydrogen tetrachloroaurate (HAuCl Absorption spectra were recorded on an UV–vis spectrophotometer (CECIL). TEM measurements were made on a FEI, TECNAI-G2, 20-TWIN microscope. DLS analysis was carried out on a Dawn Heleos II (Wyatt) system operating at 658 wavelength, at a scattering angle of 90°. The obtained values of hydrodynamic radius (Rh), reported in the paper are the mean of six independent measurements. GNPs were synthesized using the extracellular culture filtrate (ECF) of the fungus The selective ability of the GNPs towards detection of different metals like Na As the biosynthesized GNP selectively detected Ce To explore whether agglomeration of GNP induced by addition of Ce In 2 Within 10 To demonstrate the superior selectivity of biosynthesized GNPs, similar study was carried out using chemically synthesized GNP. The chemically synthesized GNP (using trisodium citrate) had an evident SPR peak at 522 Experiments were carried to determine, the correlation between Ce Addition of Ce We observed that the Ce Moreover, GNP biosynthesized in present study showed a faster and specific reactivity towards Ce It would be noteworthy to mention that various studies have reported the use of functionalized GNPs as effective sensors to detect heavy metals; however our study reports the use of unmodified biogenic GNPs as sensors to detect Ce Biogenic GNPs was demonstrated as a reagent for one step, facile and selective detection of Ce E. Priyadarshini is thankful to the