Here, we report a helium atom diffraction study of 11-hydroxyundecyl octadecyl disulfide (CH3
                     (CH2)17
                     SS(CH2)11
                     OH, HOD) self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) produced by supersonic molecular beam deposition (SMBD). Two different lying down monolayer phases were observed depending on the substrate temperature. At low temperatures a poorly ordered phase was observed, while the diffraction patterns of the film grown at high temperatures were similar to that of mercaptoundecanol (MUD) SAMs reported previously in the literature. The transition from the low temperature phase to the high temperature phase is due to SS bond cleavage at the surface. Desorption from several different chemisorbed and physisorbed states were observed with energies in the same range as observed for MUD and octadecanelthiol (ODT) SAMs.Thiol self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on Au(1 Alkanethiol SAMs on Au(1 Here we present a helium atom diffraction study of the HOD SAMs grown in vacuum by means of supersonic molecular beam deposition (SMBD) which allows a very precise control of film coverage. Using helium diffraction enabled us to monitor film growth in real time and follow the evolution of film structure as a function coverage and substrate temperature. We identified two different lying down monolayer phases one of which was observed only when the film was grown at low substrate temperatures ( The experimental setup was extensively described before The diffraction experiments on the deposited films were carried out by using the primary supersonic beam of helium (purity 99.9999%). The source temperature was set to about 70 Desorption energies were investigated by recording helium specular reflection (SR) intensity as a function of surface temperature. In fact, the SR intensity decreases with temperature due to Debye–Waller effect and, above 400 HOD was synthesized as follows by following the procedure proposed by Flores et al. In Diffraction scans from MLs grown at 200 When the 400 Thermal and structural properties of HOD SAMs deduced from the results shown in In The desorption behavior of the HOD seems to be a combination of MUD and ODT and a single but broad SR intensity rise can be seen ( HOD SAMs grown in vacuum by means of supersonic molecular beam deposition (SMBD) were studied by helium diffraction. Two different lying down monolayer phases were identified. The low temperature (LT) was observed to form only when the film was grown at low substrate temperatures ( This work was supported by the