The high temperature on the austenitization showed the varied results in the fast spheroidization in high carbon leaf spring steel SUP9/55CrMnA. The heating temperature was held for 15 minutes in the austenitization temperature at 800, 850, and 900 °C respectively, which was intended to break cementite lamellar and then proceed to spheroidization at 720 °C for 2 hours. The purpose of this treatment was to enhance machinability, the experiment results showed a significant enhancing in machinability at 800 °C with 180 VHN hardness value and machining performance increased to 78.5% with 54 seconds machining time. The drilling process used an HSS twist drilling 2.5 mm in diameter and a workpiece height of 15 mm under equal spindle speed and load. The machining process is recommended to know the quality of the cementite, which was revealed on the drilling process of the initial specimen, the drill bit was unable to drill the specimen caused by chisel edge blunted. The acceleration spheroidization process under high temperature showed the significant enhancing in machinability of SUP9 leaf spring.The spheroidization is a process that aims to increase the machinability of the material. The main problem of the spheroidization process is time-consuming in holding time in order to break lamellar cementite into a spheroidal. So many researches have been carried out to shorten the process of the holding time. The holding time of the spheroidization process is normally maintained at below the The spheroidization process can be defined as two stages i.e. breaking cementite lamellar and coarsening cementite particles The complexity of the fast spheroidization process is to determine the value of high temperature and suitable holding time. The result of this condition will generate steel with fine cementite lamellar (decrease hardness) or generate carbide precipitation intermetallic compound (increase hardness) The machinability aims to increase performance on the material removal from influence by workpiece properties. The annealing process is used for enhancing machinability in medium carbon alloys, but spheroidization is used to obtain lower hardness structure and increase machinability in high carbon alloys The advantages of brittle properties are achieved low built-up edge (BUE), which is good for surface quality and otherwise, the hardest properties of cementite decrease the machining performance caused by increased cutting force, tool wear, and temperature. The heat treatment is conducted to achieve the material according to our demand, where the fast spheroidization process is conducted to enhancing machinability. The investigation was performed to the high carbon steel from leaf spring steel 55CrMnA or usually called as SUP9, with material composition, 0.762%Cr - 0.884%Mn - equivalent 0.655%C (wt.%) that obtained from metal analysis testing Niton XL2, for the mechanical and thermal properties of SUP9 material able to be shown in The three heat-treatment condition (HTC) was used in this process, i.e. the condition in austenitization temperature at 800 (HTC1), 850 (HTC2), and 900 °C (HTC3) respectively, which aims to determine the quality of austenitization temperature in breaking cementite lamellar. The austenitization temperature was held for 15 minutes, furthermore continued by the spheroidization process at 720 °C with 2 hours holding time and cooling at room temperature. The heating speed in the furnace at 340 °C/h and the furnace temperature decrease in speed at 275 °C/h, as the process able to be shown in After the heat treatment process, it will be continued into microstructure observations were carried out using optical microscope under etching in 4% of Nital. The cold working the machining process was used as the procedure in determine the machinability, where the specimens will be drilled on the upright drilling conventional machine without lubrication (dry machining) with equal spindle speed and load, where its performance value will be reported to the drill ratio value when drilling the specimen (cutting ability). The drill bit with a diameter of 2.5 mm was drilled on the specimen with height of 15 mm, approx. 500 rpm of spindle speed, and the load with weight approx. 3 kg was placed on the handle that regulate feeding value automatically as shown in ( The cementite quality will affect in tool edge, where it is able to be wear, decrease tool life, and poor surface quality if the cutting process in the long cementite lamellar condition, as shown in The temperature variations at austenitization showed significant results; it was shown from the value of hardness and machining performance. From hardness test showed that HTC1 (800 °C) reached a significant value of 180 VHN, while for HTC2 (850 °C) and HTC3 (900 °C) showed hardness number 228 and 286 VHN respectively as shown in The microstructure of the steel SUP9 or 55CrMnA is shown in ( The treatment result showed that the heat treatment condition at 800 °C has good results. The assumption that this is not an effect of austenitization temperature comparison, but resulting from how long time of heating. The cementite lamellar break above the temperature of A The resultant of time ( The calculation inspired by the Taguchi method to robust parameter design (RPD) [ The temperature of austenitization As the result of prediction, the distribution temperature of austenitization able shown in In fact, on the drilling process, the initial workpiece was not able to drill the workpiece, where it blunted caused by wear on the chisel edges. Several investigation declare that is due to an unbalanced axial force with drill diameter Machinability able to define as condition tool lower from wear, generated better surface or less power is needed in machining process. As describe in Based on the results of the investigation, the high-temperature quality in spheroidization SUP9 spring steel process showed the significant effect on machinability that was occurred in HTC1(800 °C). The distinction in drilling time on the HTC1 (800 °C) with the initial condition, which was revealed by an increase in machinability of 78.4% (54 seconds) against HTC3 drilling time (250 seconds). The microstructural phase transformation of HTC1 (800 °C) from the abrasive carbide turns into a fine lamellar cementite, which indicated a change in the hardness value of 412 VHN decreasing to 180 VHN. This condition also affects the machinability, where the machining process of the initial specimen, the drill bit was not able to drill caused chisel edge blunted. Instead, the drill bit was able to drill the HTC1 (800 °C) specimen well. Hendri Chandra and Diah Kusuma Pratiwi: Analyzed and interpreted the data; Wrote the paper. Muhammad Zahir: Performed the experiments; Wrote the paper. This work was supported by the The authors declare no conflict of interest. No additional information is available for this paper. The author would like thank to staff of metallurgy laboratory in Department of Mechanical Engineering, Sriwijaya University.