Specularite concentrate assays high iron grade and little impurities, but has been blended in sinter mixtures only with lower ratio because of its poor granulating performance. Nearly all of existing methods for improving granulation of sinter mixtures comprising specularite concentrate all need finely grinding of it, which means higher energy consumption and production cost. In this paper, granulating characteristics of specularite concentrate were investigated and the pre-briquetting process was employed to improve granulation of sintering mixture containing specularite concentrate. The experimental results show that granulating efficiency was debased obviously when the ratio of specularite fines in sinter blends exceeded 24%. Most specularite particles distributed in the fine granules of −1 mm and adversely affected the permeability of sinter bed. In granulation with specularite concentrate pre-briquetted, the average granule size and permeability of sinter bed increased by 11.17% and 12.69% respectively when the sinter blend contained 36% of specularite concentrate, compared with that in traditional granulation. The pre-briquetting process made the specularite concentrate into independent quasi particles preliminarily, thus changed granulation model and distribution of specularite particles in sinter bed and improved the granulation of sinter mixture containing high ratio of specularite concentrate.Over the last decade, the dependency on imported iron ores increased greatly for the steel industry in China. However, the gradual declining of iron grade and increasing of impurities, such as SiO Granulation is the first stage in the agglomeration of iron ores for sinter production. Its primary objective is to prepare green granules that have large average size and narrow size distributions and then achieve ideal sinter bed permeability [ This study aimed at clarifying the granulating characteristics of specularite concentrate in sintering granulation, then proposing feasible countermeasures to overcome specularite's granulating flaws and obtain ideal sinter bed permeability. Firstly, the granulating performance of sintering mix containing different ratios of specularite were identified, and the granulating behaviors of specularite were investigated at above conditions. Then the pre-briquetting process was introduced, which exhibits positive effect on granulation and sinter bed permeability. Finally, the granulation models for mixture containing specularite concentrate in traditional granulation and specularite pre-briquetted granulation were compared and analyzed. In the granulation tests, specularite concentrate (S) imported from Canada and iron ore fines (M) which was a mixture of some kinds of iron ore fines were used. Other raw materials such as burnt lime, limestone, dolomite and anthracite were all provided by a sintering plant. The chemical compositions and size distributions of raw materials are shown in According to the experiment project, iron ore blends were designed for granulating tests in which 12%, 24%, 36% and 48% of specularite concentrate would be proportioned. The proportioned raw materials including iron ore blends, fluxes, anthracite, sinter return fine (30% in the sinter mixture) and water were weighted and mixed uniformly. Then the sinter mixture was charged into a Φ600 mm × 30 mm drum granulator and granulated at 30 r.p.m. for 5 min. After granulation, the granules were sampled and dried for 2 min at 85 °C in a constant temperature oven. Then the granules were sieved manually by 8, 5, 3, 1 and 0.5 mm square aperture screen and weighted respectively. The granulating efficiency was evaluated in two indexes as follows: Average granules size, which was calculated from Eq. Permeability index of sinter bed, which is worked out by Voice formula of Eq. Different with traditional sintering, in specularite concentrate pre-briquetted granulation all the specularite concentrate was pre-briquetted preliminarily by high-pressure briquetting machine before mixing with other sinter feed and granulation [ Then the green briquettes was added into the drum granulator and granulated with other sinter feed under the conditions as described in The distributions of specularite concentrate in granules of −1 mm and +3 mm after granulation were explored respectively. For the former, according to the difference in density between specularite particles and other fine iron ore, the granules of −1 mm were processed by a XZY-73 shaking table in order to separate the specularite particles from the others. Then these specularite particles were screened for particle sizes analysis. As for the latter, the granules above 3 mm after granulation were consolidated in resin, followed by sectioning and polishing to observe the microstructure of quasi-particles used a Leika DMI4500P optical microscope. Owing to lager particle size, dense microstructure and higher reflective rate than the other materials, specularite is easy to be distinguished from other iron ore particles under the microscope. Based on above researches, the mechanism for improving granulation performance of sinter mixtures comprising high ratio of specularite concentrate by pre-briquetting process would be demonstrated. At optimal moisture level, the effect of the specularite fines' ratio on granulating performance of sintering mixture in traditional granulation is shown in Normally the fine particles will distribute in two parts, either adhere on the surface of quasi particles or scatter in fine granules after granulation.  After the pre-briquetting of specularite concentrate was taken, the granulating performance of sinter mixture containing specularite concentrate is shown in  In addition, the two kinds of granules appearing in the granules of +3 mm in the specularite concentrate pre-briquetted granulation have entirely different microstructure, as For size distribution of sinter layer, two important issues need to be controlled to reduce the permeability resistance of sinter bed. The first is increasing the whole average size of granules, and the second is reducing the content of fine granules in sinter bed. Generally, fine particles would adhere onto the nuclei particles and form quasi particles in traditional drum granulation. However, because of the smooth and hydrophobic surface, regular shape and undesirable size distribution, most fine specularite particles dispersed in the fine granules instead of adhering to the quasi-particles as shown in After the granulation with specularite concentrate pre-briquetted was taken, most of specularite concentrate was molded into briquettes alone preliminarily under the force of double reversal rollers before mixing with other sinter feed as shown in The granulation tests of sinter mixture containing different ratios of specularite concentrate were conducted in traditional drum granulation and granulation with specularite concentrate pre-briquetted respectively. The primary conclusions were the following: Adding more than 24% of specularite concentrate into the blends resulted in obvious decrease of the average particle size of granules and the permeability of sinter bed. Most of specularite particles dispersed in granules of −1 mm. In the outer zone of adhesion layers on the quasi particles, specularite particles were not surrounded entirely by other fine ore particles and could chip off easily. Pre-briquetting process had a positive effect on granulation of sinter mixture containing specularite concentrate, and the effect got more significant as the ratio of specularite concentrate increased in iron ore blends. Most of specularite particles were turned into independent large granules of +3 mm, and less specularite particles are found in granules of −1 mm. The granulation with specularite concentrate pre-briquetted changed the granulating model of sinter mixture and the distribution of specularite particles in sinter bed compared with traditional granulation. Most of specularite particles were formed into independent large granules which could act as skeleton in sinter bed, the amount of specularite particles that dispersed in granules of −1 mm was significantly reduced. By this way the specularite concentrate pre-briquetted process improved the granulation of sinter mixtures containing high ratio of specularite concentrate. The authors want to express their thanks to the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of