The degradation of resource quality, coupled with an increase in resource consumption, impose significant challenges on the capability of phosphate mineral processing operations to supply acceptable products at a rapid rate to fertilizer plants. A serious ongoing concern for phosphate mining operations is to produce a product containing sufficiently low dolomite content (<1% MgO) for the efficient and economic production of fertilizers. This has motivated the detailed characterization and inspection of phosphate resources to identify the textural/morphological features that may limit recovery in mineral processing operations. For example, high speed X-ray computed tomography (HSXCT), and high resolution X-ray computed tomography (HRXCT) have been used for 3D analysis of pebble phosphate. We now apply these results to evaluate attrition scrubbing, a promising method for dolomite rejection from central Florida pebble phosphate, the major source of phosphate in the US.
                  Attrition scrubbing of pebble phosphate samples (top size of 1 mm and 2.97% MgO grade) has been performed under different conditions of scrubbing time, pH, temperature and rpm. The samples subjected to scrubbing were wet screened at 53 µm and the chemical analyses (ICP analyses) of the coarse and fine products indicate that scrubbing can help in the rejection of fines, which contain a significant amount of MgO. The best scrubbing results were obtained for a scrubbing time of 20 min, and an MgO content in the coarse product (concentrate) of approximately 1.72%, with a phosphate P2O5 recovery of 63.47%. It is evident from these results that the phosphate concentrate (+53 µm) from scrubbing does not meet the required MgO level as desired for further processing by acidulation.
                  Further, for a particular scrubbing test, the minus 53 µm was subjected to further size separation at 20 µm and 7 μm. Particle size and chemical analyses are reported for the scrubbed fractions, including 53 × 20 µm, 20 × 7 µm, and −7 µm size classes. Results suggest that considerable liberation of dolomite from the pebble phosphate may be expected at a particle size of 20 µm.Phosphate rock is an important non–substitutable and non-renewable mineral commodity for the fertilizer industry. Phosphate rock is beneficiated through several stages, the first of which is conducted in a washer, where size separation is made at 1 mm. The +1 mm product is called pebble phosphate. Florida phosphate rock is of sedimentary origin and is composed of the phosphate mineral, francolite, along with gangue minerals, including quartz, dolomite and clays. Francolite is a complex fluorapatite (Ca(PO For dolomite rejection from phosphate, several beneficiation methods such as flotation, calcination, leaching, and high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) have been previously evaluated and the results reported. Most of the processes failed to produce a phosphate concentrate with acceptable MgO content. The major issues inhibiting the separation efficiency of these techniques is related to the very similar mineralogical properties between dolomite and francolite. However, it seems that HPGR treatment can result in selective breakage and liberation of dolomite such that the size separation of the HPGR product at 100 µm yielded a coarse phosphate product having less than 1% MgO ( Several concentration methods such as gravity separation, jigging, and dense media separation have been considered for processing of phosphate rock from Florida. It was found that the processing of these sedimentary calcareous phosphate ores is a major problem. There is a dire need for research to focus on the technical and economical utilization of the abundant calcareous phosphate deposits in Florida and around the world ( Characterization of phosphate resources is crucial in order to define the textural features of dolomite, which may limit separation strategies for the rejection of dolomite. In this regard, high speed X-ray computed tomography (HSXCT) was previously employed for rapid characterization of pebble phosphate. The study revealed that HSXCT can be a powerful tool for plant site characterization of pebble phosphate, with a scan rate as high as 0.4–0.6 kg/min ( The HSXCT analysis was extended further to evaluate the suitability of gravity concentration for dolomite rejection from pebble phosphate. The HSXCT results indicated that gravity concentration will not be successful for the pebble phosphate samples in the particle size class 10.39 mm × 4.75 mm. These results are in agreement with the results reported in the literature by other researchers ( In this regard, the current research was undertaken. Due to the lower cost possibility, crushing was considered rather than grinding, and size reduction of pebble phosphate to a top size of 1 mm was performed using a roll crusher. Following size reduction, attrition scrubbing and desliming were evaluated for dolomite rejection. Attrition scrubbing is a technique that can help in the release of fine dolomite and clay particles. It is expected that attrition in water liberates and disperses fine dolomite and clay particles, which can be separated by desliming. Attrition scrubbing is used in various industries, especially when the associated gangue mineral is coarse silica. Attrition scrubbers are considered to be effective for eliminating fine clays from the surface of fine Florida phosphate ores ( With these speculations, attrition scrubbing was evaluated for dolomite rejection from pebble phosphate. This paper discusses the findings obtained from studies performed on the effect of attrition scrubbing followed by desliming for the processing of crushed pebble phosphate (top size 1 mm). The pebble phosphate from mining operations (top size 10 mm) was roll crushed to minus 1 mm and subjected to attrition scrubbing under different conditions of scrubbing time, pH, temperature and rpm. The scrubbed products were deslimed at 53 µm. The coarse and fine fractions were analyzed to determine the content of MgO. Also, sizing and chemical analyses were performed for the scrubbed fractions in the 53 × 20 µm, 20 × 7 µm, and −7 µm size classes. High MgO pebble phosphate samples (10 mm × 1 mm) weighing about 10 kg were obtained from Mosaic’s South Pasture operation in Florida. The high MgO feed was crushed to a top size of 1 mm using a roll crusher. A sampling riffler was used to obtain representative charges weighing approximately 1 kg. Fines were removed from one particular kilogram charge by wet screening at 53 µm. The coarse (plus 53 µm) product was dry screened with rotap and partitioned into the following size classes: 1000 × 500, 500 × 250, 250 × 100, 100 × 53, and minus 53 µm. The weight retained in each size class was recorded. Samples from each size class were analyzed by ICP. In all scrubbing experiments, the ICP elemental analysis provided the content (weight%) of Mg and P in the scrubbed products. The elemental weight% (Mg and P) was converted to weight percent (MgO and P In addition to chemical analyses, three dimensional (3D) characterization of crushed South Pasture High MgO feed was performed using HRXCT to obtain detailed information of samples prior to scrubbing. The HRXCT details are presented in In order to obtain the liberation spectra of dolomite and francolite for characterization purposes, HRXCT scans were performed on phosphate samples in each of the size classes prior to attrition scrubbing. The HRXCT scans were performed using the Zeiss XCT 400 machine at the University of Utah. The energy and power input for the scans were 120 kV and 10 W, respectively. The minimum amount of sample required to establish statistical reliability was calculated from Gy’s equation for all size classes. The sample considered for the HRXCT scans in all the size classes exceeded this lower limit. Further, for the 1000 × 500 size class, the voxel resolution of the scan was 40.16 µm and the weight of material scanned was about 29 g, while for the other size classes, the voxel resolution was about 5 µm with a sample weight of 0.09 g. Using multisize watershed software ( The watershed software reveals the voxel information of individual particles in the sample bed. The volume of each particle was computed from the voxel information, and the corresponding equivalent spherical diameters (ESDs) were calculated. Particles were then sorted based on ESD into size classes along with their corresponding volume percent, and the cumulative HRXCT particle size distribution curves (volume percent vs particle size) were obtained for all the size classes. From Because the objective is to achieve dolomite rejection with acceptable phosphate recovery, it is important to understand the liberation trend of these minerals before designing and implementing a process strategy. Good recovery from a process may be expected only if there is considerable degree of liberation. In this regard, mineral liberation analysis was performed, and the results are presented in From the mineral liberation graphs presented in From the HRXCT dolomite liberation results, it can be understood that separation and recovery from flotation will not be successful to meet the desired product specifications of <1% MgO, due to the lack of liberation. Thus, attrition scrubbing followed by size separation at 53 µm was first considered, rather than grinding for liberation. Several scrubbing experiments were designed to observe the influence of different conditions such as pH, temperature, revolutions per minute (rpm), and scrubbing time on dolomite release and rejection to the fines product (−53 µm). Information about the scrubbing procedures and results are presented in South Pasture High MgO pebble phosphate was roll crushed and the samples of the crushed product (top size 1 mm) were scrubbed using a Wemco attrition scrubber, model number 52254, at FLSmidth laboratories. The equipment used for the procedure is shown in All the attrition scrubbing experiments were performed on feed weighing 1 kg at 70% solids. As previously mentioned, experiments were performed under different conditions of scrubbing time, pH, rpm and temperature. After each scrubbing experiment, pulp weighing about 100 g was removed and wet screened at 53 µm. The coarse and the fine scrubbed products were filtered, dried, weighed, and then pulverized for chemical analysis. The weight percent of coarse and fine products, along with the chemical analysis results obtained for all the scrubbing experiments, are presented in Scrubbing of crushed South Pasture High MgO phosphate was performed for different times of 5, 10, 15, 20, and 30 min at an ambient temperature of 22 °C and 2000 rpm. After each time interval, pulp weighing about 100 g was removed and wet screened at 53 µm. The coarse and the fine products were weighed and sent for ICP analysis. The weight percent distribution and corresponding chemical analysis results for the coarse and fine products are shown in It can be gleaned from For better illustration, the variation of weight percent fines (minus 53 μm) and temperature of the material with attrition scrubbing time are shown in It can be seen that the percent of fines increases with an increase in scrubbing time, as would be expected, and the temperature increases from an initial temperature of 22 °C to a final temperature of 67 °C in 30 min (at the end of the experiment). The percentage of fines that are rejected and the temperature stabilize after 20 min, indicating that the best rejection occurs at 20 min. Finally, the recovery of francolite in the coarse product (plus 53 µm) and rejection of dolomite in the fine product (minus 53 µm) have been computed from results reported in   Scrubbing experiments were performed on crushed pebble phosphate feed at 1200, 1800 and 2000 rpm for a time interval of 30 min. After scrubbing, wet screening was performed at 53 µm, as indicated previously, and products analyzed. Results for the coarse and fine products are shown in  From It is evident from The influence of pH on scrubbing was studied by adding a few drops of commercial hydrochloric acid (HCl) at the beginning of the experiment. The drops were added such that the pulp had an initial pH of 4.1, unlike the other scrubbing tests, in which the pH was about 7.5. No significant change in the results were observed from this experiment. This may be due to the rapid dissolution of carbonates by the acid immediately upon addition. It was considered that rather than preliminary introduction of the acid, it may be better to ensure that the pH remained constant at 4 throughout the course of the experiment. In this regard, the scrubbing experiment was set up to provide for the gradual addition of acid, when required, to maintain the desired pH throughout the course of the experiment. The strength of the HCl acid used was 37% and 15.4 ml of acid were consumed after ten minutes. The final temperature recorded was 34 °C. The comparison between the results for coarse and fine baseline tests without acid and the tests with acid addition, performed for ten minutes, are shown in To investigate the effect of temperature on scrubbing efficiency, two experiments under similar conditions were performed at 50 °C and 1200 rpm and a baseline scrubbing test performed at an ambient temperature of 22 °C. For the temperature experiments, about 1 kg charge was placed in the scrubbing vessel along with 400 ml of water and placed in an oven. The vessel was removed after the material reached a temperature of 53 °C. The temperature at the end of ten minutes was 59 °C. After completion of scrubbing, wet screening was performed at 53 µm and the coarse product was sent for chemical analysis. The weight of the coarse product was 757.7 g and the fine product was 225.4 g. The results for the coarse scrubbed products for the baseline and elevated temperature tests are shown in From Because chemical analysis of the fine minus 53 µm product has not been evaluated in the past, it was of interest to perform a size and chemical analysis of the finer size classes. The minus 53 μm product obtained for the AS-IX test was wet screened using a 635 mesh (20 μm) screen. The weight retained in the 53 × 20 μm size class was 25.2 g, and 200.2 g was collected in the minus 20 μm fraction. The 53 × 20 μm particles were sent for chemical analysis. The minus 20 μm fraction was split, and 35.60 g were taken and blended with alcohol for deglomeration of the aggregate particles. The material was then screened using a porous nylon cloth, to make a size separation at 7 μm. The separation was performed in multiple iterations to reject fines efficiently. After the size separation was complete, the 20 × 7 µm particles retained by the cloth were analyzed using a Cilas particle size analyzer to confirm if size separation was efficient. The results obtained for the 20 × 7 μm fraction are shown in The weights of the 20 × 7 and minus 7 μm size classes were found to be 4.40 g and 27.90 g, respectively. The deviation from the initial weight of 35.60 g was due to some material loss during handling. The ICP chemical analysis results for the 53 × 20, 20 × 7 and minus 7 μm size classes are presented in From In summary, the studies revealed that crushing to a size below 1 mm does not improve liberation of francolite from the pebble phosphate. Although attrition scrubbing of crushed pebble phosphate feed improves the separation efficiencies to some extent, acceptable phosphate product that meets specifications cannot be achieved. Consequently, it has been considered that future research should investigate if grinding may facilitate liberation, and if so, could an acceptable product be made by flotation. However, prior to grinding, it is useful to determine the particle size at which improved liberation may be expected. Thus, grain size distribution analysis of the crushed South Pasture High MgO feed was carried out using HRXCT analysis and the results are presented in Grain size distribution analysis was established from the HRXCT scan data using ImageJ software. The analysis for the sample in the sieve size class 1000 × 500 is shown in Similar dolomite grain size distribution analyses have been performed for other size classes and the results are presented in Thus, it can be estimated that in order to obtain a 75% liberation for both dolomite and francolite, the particles need to be reduced in size to a top size of about 50 µm, as indicated in Pebble phosphate (top size of 10 mm) was crushed to a top size of 1 mm. Prior to attrition scrubbing, the feed was partitioned into individual size classes which were analyzed using HRXCT. The analyses from HRXCT did not indicate improvement in liberation of minerals with respect to size class, indicating that recovery from flotation may not be satisfactory. Scrubbing experiments have been performed on crushed pebble phosphate under different parameters of time, rpm, pH, and temperature. The results of the final rejection of dolomite, recovery of francolite, and grade of MgO in the coarse and fine scrubbed products have been presented for all test cases. The best results were obtained when pebble phosphate feed containing 2.97% MgO was processed through scrubbing at 2000 rpm for 20 min to achieve a concentrate having 1.72% MgO with 63.47% francolite recovery. The rpm has considerable effect on the results, as might be expected, because a higher rpm can transmit energy more effectively to the particles, due to higher shear forces and facilitate better disintegration. Significant improvement in results was observed by increasing the rpm from 1200 to 1800, after which the change was less significant. However, the best grade of MgO percent in the concentrate was achieved at 2000 rpm. It was established that temperature and pH do not have much impact on dolomite rejection by scrubbing. The desired concentrate having an MgO content of less than 1% was not achieved through scrubbing. Further grinding or flotation may be necessary to realize the desired percentage of MgO in the phosphate product. It was determined that some further release of dolomite may be achieved at 20 μm. Hence, attempts are currently being made to characterize the fine material fractions to establish the degree of liberation quantitatively in order to determine if an acceptable phosphate product might be achieved by an appropriate particle separation strategy such as flotation. Thanks to the metallurgical laboratory technicians, Vince Heights and Larry Amiker, at FLSmidth, for assistance with the scrubbing experiments. The support from the analytical laboratory at FLSmidth for chemical analysis is highly appreciated. The authors thank Dorrie Spurlock for her assistance in the preparation of the manuscript. 