Introduction
                  Despite recent treatment advances, management of distal humerus fractures in the elderly remains one of the most challenging aspects of trauma surgery. Although these fractures are relatively rare, they fall under the umbrella of osteoporotic fractures, which themselves are increasing in frequency.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Two studies were performed: one retrospective study of 410 patients over a 10-year period and one prospective study of 87 patients over a 1.5-year period. This allowed us to analyse the epidemiology of distal humerus fractures in subjects above 64years of age in 19 different French hospitals. All of the included patients were reviewed, except for one subject in the retrospective study who had died, but whose data was still used.
               
                  Results
                  Most of the fractures were AO type C, occurred in women in more than 80%, and occurred in nearly one of two persons above 80 years of age. Most of the patients had a high level of autonomy and lived at home. Unlike other upper limb fracture sites, nearly 90% of patients required surgical treatment. The presence of osteoporosis was found to have a tremendous impact on fracture care, complications and results.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Functional status is more important than chronological age in this patient population; the former must be taken into account when determining treatment indications.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV.Distal humerus fractures fall under the umbrella of osteoporotic fractures, as do proximal femur, proximal humerus and distal radius fractures. These are defined as fractures occurring as a result of low-energy trauma in patients above 60 years of age. Around 30% of people 65 years or older living at home and more than 50% of those living in nursing homes or retirement homes fall every year, and about half of those who fall do so repeatedly Patients were included if they were 64 years of age or more and had an isolated, non-pathological, complex articular fracture of the distal humerus. The prospective study was conducted from June 15, 2010 to October 15, 2011, while the retrospective study was conducted from 2000 to 2010. Every patient had at least five months of follow-up. Slightly more patients (224, 55%) were included in the second half of the retrospective period (after 2005). The study design comprised two multicentre observational studies grouping 19 French hospitals. The software STATA The retrospective study included 537 patients, of which 1 subject had died but was retained because of the 82-month follow-up available before his death, and 127 were excluded (52 lost to follow-up, 31 had died with no or insufficient follow-up, 44 had key data missing). As a consequence, the 410 patients retained for the study had an average follow-up of 34 months (range 5–142.4). The prospective study initially included 112 patients, but 25 of those were subsequently excluded (4 had died, 6 were lost to follow-up, 15 had key data missing). The 87 patients retained for the study had an average follow-up of 10 months (range 5.2 to 21.2). Fractures were classified using the AO classification system In the retrospective study, 71% of patients were treated with internal fixation (IF) and 21% with total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) ( The average patient age was 78.4 years (range 64–100), with 41% of patients being above 80 years of age. The cohort consisted mostly of women (236 patients, 82%). Women were significantly older then men (79 vs. 75 years, Epidemiological data for the prospective series were relatively comparable to those of the retrospective series. Again, females were more likely to fracture (84%) and the average age was 79 years. But 48% of the cohort was above 80 years of age, indicating a general ageing in the population. The ASA score was 3 or higher in 39% of cases. However, autonomy appeared identical with similar percentages found for the living situation (86% at home) and Katz score (above 4 in 89% of cases). Although only 32% patients stated having a history of osteoporotic fractures, 54% of patients ( The following variables were significant at the 0.1% level. Patients receiving CT ( None of the factors evaluated (age, living situation, ASA, Katz score, fracture type, etc.) had a statistically significant effect on the occurrence of postoperative complications when using the 0.1% threshold. The only factor having an effect at the 5% threshold level was the radiological finding of osteoporosis. When osteoporosis was present, the clinical and radiological results were worse. For type B fractures, persons living at home and younger persons had better clinical and radiological results. For type C fractures, open fractures had better results. This could be explained by the fact that most of these open type C fractures were Gustilo Grade 1 and 2 (95%), thus were treated more quickly. The ASA classification did not have a significant effect at the 5% threshold level ( The following variables were significant at the 0.1% level. Type A fractures were treated conservatively more often than type C fractures (44% vs. 18%). Patients treated conservatively were older than patients treated surgically by internal fixation (85 years vs. 77 years). None of the factors evaluated had a statistically significant effect on the occurrence of postoperative complications when using the 0.1% threshold. The only factor having an effect at the 5% threshold level was the radiological finding of osteoporosis. Distal humerus fractures account for 1–2% of all fractures in adults Although we do not want to bring up treatment indications, total elbow arthroplasty often provides the best early results among the currently available treatment options. However because of the magnitude of the loads placed on the elbow and the low bone quality in these patients, TEA requires limitations be placed on activities to avoid mechanical failure This would allow us to define different groups of patients: patients with good functional status who are independent, in good general health, with significant physical activity; fragile patients with minor ageing-related deficits (problems walking, hearing, seeing, sometimes living alone) that could lead to loss of autonomy; patients who depend on a caregiver, with major comorbidities and low functional demands. This status appears to be an essential element when choosing a treatment indication, and must be considered alongside with the presence of fracture comminution. Despite recent treatment advances, management of distal humerus fractures in the elderly remains one of the most challenging aspects of trauma surgery. Although these fractures are relatively rare, they fall under the umbrella of osteoporotic fractures, which themselves are increasing in frequency. Most of the fractures were AO type C, occurred in women in more than 80%, and occurred in nearly one of two persons above 80 years of age. Most of the patients had a high level of autonomy and lived at home. Unlike other upper limb fracture sites, nearly 90% of patients required surgical treatment. Osteoporosis seems to be the determining prognostic factor. However, a patient's functional status, more than his/her chronological age, must be taken into account when deciding on treatment. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article. The authors wish to thank all the symposium participants who contributed to this study: L. Hubert, F. Mallard and N. Bigorre (Angers), A. Gabrion (Amiens), L. Obert and M. Ferrier (Besançon), T. Fabre and H. Demezon (Bordeaux), C. Hulet, B. Lebel and F. Dordain (Caen), D. Saragaglia and M. Milaire (Grenoble), J. Tonetti, A. Djahangiri and A. Cikes (Lausanne), L. Pidhorz, P. Alligand and E. De Keating (Le Mans), J.-L. Charissoux and M. Benassayag (Limoges), G. Herzberg (Lyon), B. Coulet (Montpellier), F. Sirveaux and A. Jacquot (Nancy), A. Galey and B. Augereau (HEGP-Paris), S. Levante, N. Mebtouche and T. Begué (Paris), F. Duparc (Rouen), P. Clavert and G. Ducrot (Strasbourg), P. Mansat and H. Nouaille Degorce (Toulouse), L. Favard and J. Brunet (Tours).