The paper presents a simple dynamic model of coal product discharge in a jig. The model is based on the principle of mass conservation of coal density layers transported in the jig’s bed. It can be used to investigate dynamic properties of a discharge zone in a jig and to design control systems of products discharge in a jig. The model has been developed with the use of Matlab/Simulink software. The transfer function of the discharge system in a jig can be approximated by a nonlinear integrating element with saturation determined by the height of the coal layer placed above the upper product overflow gate. Dynamic parameters of the system depend on the dimensions of the jig compartment, parameters of the bottom product discharge gate and tonnage of the yield of density fractions in the feed. The model can be used to design and optimise control systems of refuse discharge in jigs. The simulation model generates the separation density signal similar to the signal produced in the jig and measured by the density meter. The root mean squared error between the measured and simulated changes is ca. s=0.027g/cm3.Most models of the coal washing process in jigs have been developed to simulate how coal particles travelling along the coal bed stratify due to the particles density and shape in a pulsating coal/water media. The coal particles should separate according to increasing density up from the surface of the bed down to the screen deck. Separation is not ideal as the settling and rising velocity of particles also depends on their shape and size. First models simulating the partition curve of a gravitational process (also in jigs) applied a normal or logarithmic distribution or a table of discrete values of partition coefficients. These models were developed by The beneficiation process of fine coal in jigs consists of two phases: stratification of coal particles in the bed according to the particles density and then splitting the stratified material into the product and the discharged refuse. At first, during subsequent water pulsations induced by opening and closing of air valves, coal particles stratify according to various velocities of upward and downward movement. Particles of low density migrate to upper material layers while particles of high density migrate to lower layers. The material is transported on the screen along the jig compartment with the additional horizontal flow of water. The stratification of particles due to density is not perfect because the particles velocity depends in part on their diameter and shape, and variations in the degree of material loosening during a pulsation cycle. The distribution of coal density fractions in the bed, characterized by the imperfection factor To stabilize the desired position of the float, the system should control the amount of the lower product discharged through the bottom gate. Floats are not accurate in indicating the position of the selected layer, especially when the amount of the feed and its density composition changes. In new experimental systems, floats are being replaced with more accurate radiometric density meters which can monitor the process of material loosening/compressing during each coal/water pulsation cycle ( During subsequent media pulsations particles stratify into distinct layers of material. They travel horizontally with velocities It is assumed that the layers do not mix and there is no interaction between the stratification zone and the product discharge zone. At this stage of considerations, we shall also disregard the stratification of layers below the first layer entering the discharge gate at the cross section A–A. The dynamic simulation model is based on the principle of the conservation of volumetric flows through the discharge zone in time      The balance of volumes for the first layer in time      cm  Eq. Eq.       For the second material layer we have:  with the following conditions:  An example of positions of interfaces For the   Eqs. And finally for For the “ The block scheme of the dynamic simulation model of the product discharge zone, developed with the use of the Matlab/Simulink software is presented in The first module (A) of the model is designed to calculate positions Examples of the simulation analysis were performed for the jig type OM24 in the Rydultowy Mine ( Values of yields of eight density layers  The response of the model is fast and can be approximated by the first order inertia element with the time constant of ca. 12 In this case the response of the model can be approximated by the first order inertia with a time constant of ca. 180 The simulation model was tested in experiments performed in the Rydultowy and Murcki Mines where the system of refuse discharge control to stabilize the separation density was investigated ( The separation density was measured by a radiometric density meter (RDM). The signal from the density meter is compared with the desired density of separation The measuring head consists of a    The ratio The parameters used in the simulation model, obtained from process knowledge, were the same as those in the tested control system in the Rydultowy mine ( Parameters of the PI controller and the actuator of the refuse discharge gate: were: (a) proportional coefficient The separation density measured by the radiometric density meter as a function of time in the control system for step changes in the desired density is presented in The simulation model generates the separation density signal similar to the signal produced in the jig and measured by the density meter. The root mean squared error between the measured and simulated changes is ca. The dynamic simulation model has been developed for the cross section A–A of the product discharge zone. To simulate the position of layers along this zone in the cross section B–B (in the middle of the discharge gate opening), where the float is usually situated, we can assume a simple model of linear decrease  The following assumptions have been accepted in the model: (1) coal layers do not mix and (2) density distribution of coal layers, entering the discharge zone, can be approximately determined from the washability characteristics of the feed, imperfection of the machine The model can be used to design and optimise control systems of refuse discharge in jigs. Acknowledgement goes to the Rydultowy and Murcki Mines for providing plant data.