In this paper, a phase mixture model was employed to simulate the strain hardening properties of metallic materials covering a wide grain size range from micrometer down to nanometer scale. In this model a polycrystalline nanomaterial is treated as a mixture of two phases: grain interior, whose plastic deformation is governed by a combination of the dislocation and diffusion mechanisms, and grain boundary ‘phase’, whose plastic flow is controlled by a boundary diffusion mechanism alone. The main focus of the paper is the effect of grain size on the flow stress and strain hardening. The model predictions of the grain size dependence of strain hardening are presented.Nanocrystalline materials (NCMs) defined as polycrystalline materials with average grain size less than 100 A simple argument based on Hart's criterion for the onset of necking can be used for assessing the variation of ductility with decreasing grain size. The growing role of the diffusion-controlled mechanisms of plasticity is expected to lead to the following effects: (i) reduction in the strain hardening and (ii) increase of the strain rate sensitivity of the flow stress. The first effect acts to destabilize uniform deformation against necking, while the second one is a stabilizing factor. The first effect turns out to be predominant, causing the strain to failure to drop off with decreasing grain size in the nanometer range In this paper, a phase mixture model Modeling approaches which combine dislocation glide and the diffusion-controlled plasticity are essential for understanding mechanical behavior of NCMs. In this regard the phase mixture model The constitutive description of the deformation behavior provided by the phase mixture model is represented schematically in The GB phase was described Plastic flow of the crystalline GI is considered to be carried by the dislocation glide mechanism and the diffusion-controlled mechanism operating in parallel. The diffusion mechanism is a combination of the grain boundary diffusion (Coble creep) and the lattice diffusion (Nabarro-Herring creep). Accordingly, the plastic strain rate for the GI phase can be written as The set of Eqs. Numerical simulations based on the aforementioned model were carried out for the case of copper. It is seen that the flow stress levels are generally lower for coarse grain sizes than for fine ones (Hall–Petch behavior), except at very low strain rates (e.g. <10  Very low levels of yield stress for small grain sizes (20  The grain size dependence of the strain rate sensitivity and the strain hardening rate provides a useful resource in optimizing ductility, as the conditions for the onset Strain hardening behavior of nanocrystalline materials was simulated using the phase mixture model. The effect of the strain rate and the grain size on the strain hardening behavior was investigated. A transition from the usual Hall–Petch behavior of the grain size dependent stress to an inverse dependence was obtained by numerical simulations. The contribution of the diffusion-controlled mechanisms to the total deformation that increases with grain refinement and decreasing strain rate was evaluated quantitatively. The numerical assessment of the grain size dependence of strain hardening and strain rate sensitivity of stress provides a useful tool in determining a strategy for ductility improvement. This work was supported by the Korea Research Foundation Grant (KRF-2005-202-D00205). This work was supported by the Brain Korea 21 Project in 2006. The calculations were performed using the supercomputing resources of the Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information (KISTI).