Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a rare inherited disorder primarily affecting bone and dental mineralization. Although there is a continuum in the severity of the disease, clinical forms may be arbitrarily distinguished on the basis of age at onset and the presence or absence of bone symptoms: perinatal, infantile, juvenile, adult, prenatal benign, and odontological. Severe forms (perinatal and infantile) are autosomally recessively inherited while less severe forms may be autosomally recessively or dominantly inherited. Genetic counseling is complicated by the coexistence of the two modes of inheritance, the incomplete penetrance of the dominant forms, the markedly variable expression of the disease, including intra-familial expression, and the existence of a benign prenatal form that may sometimes be difficult to distinguish from the severe prenatal form. The disease is due to loss-of-function mutations in the Alkaline Phosphatase-Liver (ALPL) gene encoding the tissue nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP). The great variety of missence mutations and the dominant negative effect of some mutations largely explain the clinical heterogeneity. Directed mutagenesis studies allowed further elucidation of the cellular pathophysiology of HPP, classification of the alleles in terms of their severity and dominant negative effect, and molecular explanations of the dominant inheritance mode. Genetics significantly contributed to show that there are in fact two HPPs, rare, severe and recessive HPP, and mild recessive or mild dominant HPP, which is markedly more frequent and probably under-diagnosed. The prevalence of the severe forms of HPP has been estimated to be 1/300,000 in France and Northern Europe while the prevalence of the moderate forms of HPP may reach 1/6,370.Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a hereditary disease that mainly affects bone and dental mineralization HPP is also a multiple system disease with, in particular, neurological, muscular and renal manifestations. HPP is due to loss of function of the HPP is a single genetic disease that may be inherited in autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive mode with deviations from the mendelian inheritance inducing variable expressivity, including intra-familial variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance. Molecular biology analysis of HPP patients enabled us to further elucidate the genetic bases of the disease. The severe perinatal and the majority of infantile forms are inherited in autosomal recessive mode. In mild forms (benign prenatal, juvenile, adult and odontohypophosphatasia) both the autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive modes of transmission are identified. Over half of the cases of moderate HPP present with heterozygous mutations of Frequently, the clinical signs observed in HPP patients carrying heterozygous In the recessive inheritance mode, penetrance is complete and genetic testing evidences two mutant alleles, each inherited from one parent. In a small number of cases (about 5%), a mutation may not be detected despite sequencing the entire coding sequence of Genetic counseling in the context of HPP is complicated by the existence of the recessive and dominant inheritance modes, the incomplete penetrance of the dominant forms, the variable expressivity and the existence of a benign prenatal form that is sometimes difficult to distinguish from the severe prenatal form. The risk for a couple that has already had a child with severe HPP of having a second child with the same disease is 25%. In the majority of cases the clinical form will be the same or closely related to that of the index case. However, there may be a degree of familial heterogeneity in the clinical presentation of the disease In that context, the molecular diagnosis enables a prenatal diagnosis to couples who already had a child with severe HPP. Diagnosis is based on a chorionic villi specimen at about 11 weeks of pregnancy. Given the frequency of the disease, the risk that a heterozygous parent’s partner is heterozygous is very low (< 1/250) except in the event of consanguinity. Nonetheless, molecular diagnosis is frequently conducted with a view to reassuring the couple. If one of the segregating mutations in the family has a negative dominant effect, a familial study may be done to test symptomatic relatives. The unborn child may bear one heterozygous ALPL mutation leading to a mild HPP while the index case is affected by a severe form due to an heterozygous compound In moderate forms, the risk of recurrence depends on the mode of inheritance: 25% if it is recessive, 50% or less, due to the incomplete penetrance, if it is dominant. As stated above, intra-familial clinical heterogeneity is more frequent with dominant transmission than with recessive transmission. Testing for Benign prenatal HPP was first described in 1999 by Pauli et al. and Moore et al. The heredity of the benign prenatal form was dominant in two thirds of the cases in our cohort ( Currently, more than 315 different mutations of  The inverse correlation between a patient’s serum alkaline phosphatase level and phenotype severity has long been known A large number of mutations have thus been tested by several teams. Residual activity varies widely between mutations, which likely explains the marked clinical heterogeneity among HPP patients ( The effect of those mutations at the cell level has been widely studied, using, in particular, immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy. Often, the mutant protein is unable to dimerize. It may then not be addressed to the cell membrane (its normal destination) and remains trapped in the cytoplasm, where it accumulates before being degraded Functional tests measure the level of the negative dominant effect of Since HPP was described by Rathbun in 1948, it has been classified as a very rare hereditary disease Fraser estimated the prevalence of severe forms in Canada to be 1/100,000 using pediatric registries. The prevalence in France and in Northern Europe was estimated to be 1/300,000 on the basis of molecular diagnostics The prevalence of moderate forms of HPP is probably much higher than that of severe forms since heterozygotes may be affected if they carry a dominant mutation. Heterozygotes are much more numerous in the general population (1/270 in France) than homozygotes or compound heterozygotes (1/300,000), the only genotypes inducing disease in the recessive form. Taking into account the proportion of dominant mutations and the mean penetrance, the prevalence of moderate forms may reach 1/6,370 in France and Northern Europe, suggesting that those forms are markedly under diagnosed Our understanding of HPP has progressed considerably over the last 15 years. Genetic advances have greatly contributed to the progress by proposing a genetic model of the disease, estimates of the prevalence of severe and moderate forms, a basis for genotype-phenotype correlation, and a molecular explanation for the dominant transmission mode. Progress have resulted in the emergence of questions that have yet to be elucidated, particularly with respect to the role of genetic and environmental factors in phenotype expression and their respective importance. The author reports honoraria for expertise from Alexion.