Vascular calcification is a pathology characterized by the deposition of calcium-phosphate in cardiovascular structures, mainly in the form of hydroxyapatite crystals, resulting in ectopic calcification. It is correlated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease and myocardial infarction in diabetic patients and in those with chronic kidney disease (CKD). Vascular smooth muscle cells are sensitive to changes in inorganic phosphate (Pi) levels. They are able to adapt and modify some of their functions and promote changes which trigger calcification. Pi is regulated by parathyroid hormone and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. Changes in the transport of Pi are the primary factor responsible for the regulation of Pi homeostasis and the calcification process.
                  Synthesis of calcification inhibitors is the main mechanism by which cells are able to prevent vascular calcification. Extracellular pyrophosphate (PPi) is a potent endogenous inhibitor of calcium-phosphate deposition both in vivo and in vitro. Patients with CKD show lower levels of PPi and increased activity of the enzyme alkaline phosphatase. Numerous enzymes implicated in the metabolism of PPi have been associated with vascular calcifications. PPi is synthesized from extracellular ATP by nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase from extracellular ATP hydrolysis. PPi is hydrolyzed into Pi by tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase. ATP can be hydrolyzed to Pi via the ectonucleoside triphosphate diphosphohydrolase family. All these enzymes must be in balance, thereby preventing calcifications. However, diseases like CKD or diabetes induce alterations in their levels. Administration of PPi could open up new treatment options for these patients.Vascular calcification (VC) Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) are sensitive to Pi levels, being able to adapt and modify some of their functions. These changes in response to variation in Pi lead to processes that promote calcification. Some of these actions include extracellular matrix calcification, induction of apoptosis, vesicle release, and the expression of osteogenic and chondrogenic genes. In addition to the main role of Pi, the importance of calcium-phosphate deposition (CPD) in the vessels in the calcification process has been widely described. High concentration of calcium (Ca Phosphate not only plays a role in the calcification process, but it is also involved in physiopathological conditions such as muscle weakness, impaired leukocyte function, and bone mineralization, among others. Given its critical role in cellular biology and its wide distribution, phosphate needs to be strongly regulated. Under normal conditions, Pi levels are kept stable by the actions of two main hormones: the parathyroid hormone (PTH) and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (VitD), Changes in the efficiency of Pi transport are the primary factor responsible for the regulation of Pi homeostasis. All of these hormones that are able to regulate and control Pi levels are called phosphatonins, The main phosphate transporter family is the sodium-dependent phosphate cotransporter, also known as NaPi. These transporters are glycosylated proteins with 10–12 transmembrane regions, whose function is the input of phosphate into the cell. To date, three families of these transporters have been described. Type I and II are widely expressed between species and are distributed mainly in the kidney and intestinal epithelium, while type III transporters are found in many tissues such as kidney, brain, or liver. NaPi-II or SLC34 cotransporters are formed by 3 isoforms: NaPi-IIa, NaPi-IIb, and NaPi-IIc. The most recently discovered phosphate transporter, the NaPi type III or SLC20 family, is predominantly expressed in VSMC, kidney, brain, heart, liver, lung, and osteoblasts. They were discovered as retroviral receptors In the renal epithelium both NaPi-II (NaPi-IIa and NaPi-IIc) and NaPi-III (Pit1 and Pit2) with different expression are found. Previous work from the group of Giachelli Besides these data, PFA has been demonstrated to play an important role in preventing vascular calcification, though it is unclear whether it is mediated by Pi transporters. Thanks to the homology between PFA and pyrophosphate (PPi), PFA and different agents with similar structure like bisphosphonates are able to mimic the actions of PPi, inhibiting calcium-phosphate deposition. PPi is synthesized by nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase (NPP) from extracellular ATP, turning this enzyme into the main source of PPi. Tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP), which hydrolyzes PPi into Pi, Another mechanism that increases the levels of extracellular PPi is the release of the intracellular component through the putative transporter “progressive ankylosis” (ANK). Studies in experimental models of Hutchinson–Gilford progeria syndrome, a disorder characterized by premature aging and vascular calcification, Several enzymes implicated in ATP hydrolysis have been kinetically characterized, confirming NPP1 as the main source of PPi and TNAP as the enzymes responsible for PPi hydrolysis. A number of genetic studies have been performed to understand the processes underlying arterial calcification. Several candidate genes have been proposed to have a role in the calcification process based on animal models or mutations in human diseases. Vascular calcification is a common pathology in patients with CKD receiving hemodialysis treatment. Prof. O’Neill Another study in hemodialysis patients Pi concentration levels show an important increase in patients with CKD. This increment is associated, mainly, with increments in PTH and FGF-23 levels and reduction in plasmatic levels of VitD and Klotho. Moreover, during dialysis session the levels of plasmatic extracellular PPi are reduced in association with increments in the alkaline phosphatase activity, the main enzyme responsible for degradation of extracellular PPi. Although alteration in the phosphate homeostasis plays a key role in the process of calcium-phosphate crystal formation, loss of inhibition enhanced the calcification process. Therefore, the homeostasis of phosphate and pyrophosphate should be studied together.  In chronic renal disease, hyperphosphataemia plays an important role in the development of vascular calcification. The decrease of extracellular pyrophosphate in chronic renal disease, potentiates vascular calcification. Alterations in the balance between phosphate and pyrophosphate may play an important role in the development of vascular calcification. No conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, are declared by the authors(s). We thank Oliver Shaw for English-language revision. This study was supported by grants given from the