Bubble coalescence in liquid metals was studied by considering the case of a bubble chain rising in the eutectic alloy GaInSn. The experiments were performed in a flat vessel with a rectangular cross section. High frame-rate X-ray radiography was used for visualizing the interaction between the bubbles. Essential process parameters such as bubble sizes, bubble shapes, velocities and distance of their closest approach are obtained from image processing. Different coalescence schemes occurring inside the bubble chain are discussed and demonstrated. The results are compared to collision cases where the bubbles bounce off each other. The material properties of the liquid metal differ significantly from those of water or other transparent fluids. In particular, the low viscosity, the high density and the high surface tension result in low values of the Mo number, Mo ≈ 2 × 10−13 and high Reynolds numbers of Re ∼ 104. Nevertheless, the process of bubble approach, collision and coalescence was found to proceed in a qualitatively similar way as reported by previous studies for the case of water or highly viscous fluids. From the analyzed data, it was difficult to define a quantitative criterion that would allow predicting whether a pair of colliding bubbles would coalesce or bounce off. The observations indicate that the turbulent flow in the immediate vicinity of the bubbles has an important influence on whether coalescence occurs or not.Liquid metal two-phase flows are of particular importance for technological processes in metallurgy and metal casting. For example, the secondary-metallurgical treatment of liquid steel relies on the injection of purge gas for improving the steel cleanliness. Objectives are the enhancement of mixing and homogenization and the separation of undesired inclusions by flotation. The efficiency of the flotation process is determined not only by the properties of the inclusions in the melt, but also by the size and the specific surface area of the dispersed gas phase. Fundamental analysis indicated that using smaller bubbles in flotation is the most effective approach because it increases the probability of collision between bubbles and particles and reduces the probability of particle detachment at the liquid-gas interface ( Bubble interactions are influenced by both the material properties of the fluid, in particular the liquid viscosity and the surface tension, and the flow structure around the bubbles that controls the probability for collision and the contact time. It is well-known that coalescence of two bubbles takes place in three main steps: 1) bubbles come into a close contact to each other (i.e. collision) meanwhile being separated by a thin liquid film; 2) this liquid film then drains; 3) when the liquid film reaches a critical thickness a film rupture occurs resulting in coalescence. The primary force promoting film thinning is the capillary pressure, which is induced by variations in the curvature of the gas-liquid interface. When the film becomes very thin the intermolecular forces (i.e. the Van der Waals forces) become significant and the bubble surfaces will start to attract each other resulting in a higher pressure in the film than in the gas phase. Since this force will strongly increase with decreasing the film thickness it will eventually account for instability and rupture of the film. If the thinning mechanism lasts longer than the bubble contact time the coalescence does not occur ( Bubble interaction and bubble coalescence have been considered by many numerical and experimental studies in water and other transparent viscous liquids ( Several theoretical studies applied the potential flow approximation to analyze the interaction of gas bubbles in the limit of low Weber numbers ( Significant progress in numerical simulations of multiple bubble dynamics have been achieved during the last two decades (see for instance It is unclear to what extent the above-mentioned studies are relevant for liquid metals, since metallic fluids are characterized by very low Since liquid metals are generally more difficult to handle than water experiments and the opacity of the metals does not allow the use of powerful optical methods for bubble detection, so far there are only very few experimental studies on the dynamics of bubble motion in liquid metals. Local conductivity probes ( In the present work we study the occurrence of bubble coalescence in a bubble chain rising in a liquid metal. Experiments were carried out in GaInSn, a ternary alloy that is liquid at room temperature and whose material properties are very similar to those of liquid steel. The dynamics of the bubble interactions were visualized by means of X-ray radiography using high-speed video imaging. Many events of bubble collision were analyzed, either resulting in coalescence or not. Bubble visualization experiments were carried out at the X-ray laboratory at HZDR. The capability of the X-ray radioscopy for visualizing liquid metal two-phase flows has already been demonstrated in previous work ( The eutectic composition of the ternary alloy GaInSn which is liquid at room temperature was used as liquid metal and filled up to a height of 144 mm into a vessel made of acrylic glass with a rectangular cross section of 144 × 12 mm The inert Argon gas was injected through a single long bevel orifice with an inner diameter of 0.785 mm (Sterican®). This nozzle was made of stainless steel and positioned in the middle of the cross section just above the bottom of the vessel. A gas flow control system (MKS Instruments) is used to regulate the Ar flow in a range from 10 to 1200 cm³/min. The system is normed to Nitrogen at standard conditions (1 bar, 0 The image analysis was performed using Matlab scripts for extracting diverse parameters as bubble sizes, bubble trajectories and rising velocities. The image processing was conducted as follows: in a first step a shading correction was performed by subtracting a mean reference image measured at zero gas flow rate. Separation of individual bubbles and bubble clusters from the background was obtained by using a threshold value. All pixels whose brightness is above the threshold value were assigned to the bubble area. The corresponding threshold value was derived from a calibration measurement considering a configuration of 5 and 10 mm diameter glass balls surrounded by GaInSn at a zero gas flow rate. As a next step the images were analyzed using the Matlab function ‘regionprops’ which allows to determine bubble properties like perimeter, area, center of mass, etc. The bubble area was converted from pixel to metric values using the scaling of the image. With the assumption of spherical bubble shapes the mean bubble diameter was calculated according to A variety of experiments were performed for different gas flow rates (Q The number of coalescence events as a function of the gas flow rate in our experimental geometry is shown in For further analysis and discussion within this paper we have chosen several exemplary coalescence events from the high-speed videos. An important criterion for the selection of these events was that the process of approach and coalescence took place almost completely within the observation field of the camera. Moreover, the analysis is restricted to the situation of a fully developed flow regime which is achieved about one minute after the initiation of the Ar gas flow. In this stage, the originally straightforwardly rising bubble chain becomes bended leading to the above-mentioned S-shape of the bubble trajectories (  In general, the number of bubble coalescence events observed in the experiments was much smaller than the number of bubble collisions. If two bubbles collide there is a possibility that the bubble could either coalesce or bounce off each other. An example of such a collision without subsequent coalescence is shown in  A plot of the height of the bubble centers as a function of time ( In situations without coalescence the bubble trajectories intersect, but then separate from one another and, self-evidently, the distance between their centers starts to increase ( Even more complex schemes of bubble coalescence are conceivable inside the bubble chain. In particular, many events were observed during the experiments where coalescence occurred within a cluster of three bubbles. In our experiments bubble clustering starts at gas flow rate of 800 cm   For the first time, an experimental investigation of bubble coalescence in liquid metals has been performed on the basis of a visualization of the dynamics of bubble interaction by means of high-speed video imaging. Bubble interaction in opaque GaInSn has been studied using X-ray radiography. The analysis of the X-ray images allows for determining significant quantities such as bubble size and shape or bubble velocity. The parameter range considered here differs clearly from bubbly flows in water and highly viscous fluids which have been extensively studied in previous papers. Due to the high density and surface tension, the The onset of coalescence is observed at 200 cm Moreover, the coalescence rate is supposed to depend on the liquid metal height. A higher liquid level in the fluid container increases the bubble residence time inside the liquid metal which subsequently will promote bubble interaction and bubble collision probability. Since the coalescence rate should be higher, the larger the collision frequency is, an increasing coalescence rate is expected with increasing liquid metal height. In the experiments carried out at a gas flow rate of 800 cm The case of ideal co-axial coalescence along the vertical line, which is often considered by the numerical simulations, does not occur in this experiment. The bubble chain does not rise along a straight line. Lateral deflections of the bubble path lead to an S-shape, the position and direction of which also oscillates over time. Thus, the situation considered here corresponds more to the case of oblique coalescence. Regardless of the large deviations with respect to the non-dimensional parameters, the specific features of the experiment and the turbulent character of the flow, which becomes apparent in the dynamics of the bubble chain, the behavior of two bubbles during coalescence is very similar to that described in the literature for water and viscous fluids in the qualitative sense: The motion of the trailing bubble is strongly affected by the wake structure of the leading bubble: the rising velocity is much larger than the velocity of the leading bubble. The motion of the leading bubble is only governed by the buoyancy and drag forces and by the global flow pattern inside the vessel. The shape of the trailing bubble becomes elongated in the direction of the motion while the leading bubble undergoes strong horizontal deformation towards a spherical cap as a result of the collision. After coalescence the lower surface of the merged bubble returns to a convex shape and the bubble develops into an ellipsoid. A detailed comparison of events of bubble collision with and without coalescence does not reveal significant differences in the determining parameters which allow for identifying a quantitative criterion for coalescence. The bubble velocities and the distance of the closest approach of bubble centers are very similar for both cases and do not seem to be effective as governing parameters for coalescence. Despite qualitative similarities in underlying bubble interaction phenomena it is worth to mention that due to considerable differences in surface tension bubbles in water and in GaInSn vary with respect to shape deformation. During the experiments presented here, we have observed not only bubble coalescence but also bubble break-up. Subsequent analysis of the bubble break-up is a part of an ongoing work. The authors are grateful to the Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at  