This part of the review is devoted to the processes that take place upon the surface of Pb and Pb-alloy anodes used in hydrometallurgy. The conclusion of many authors is that Pb-alloy anodes containing Ag or Co show the lowest potential of the oxygen evolution reaction and the highest corrosion resistance as compared with those of Pb-alloy anodes, which contain other alloying additives.The cell voltage in electrowinning processes is a sum of thermodynamic equilibrium potentials of decomposition of water and metal deposition, electrode overpotential of oxygen, hydrogen evolution and ohmic potential drops. Only some of the components of cell voltage can be reduced. Thermodynamic potentials always remain the same. The ohmic potential drops due to the conductivity of electrolyte and of hardware cannot be significantly reduced. Significant improvement is possible only by reducing the anode overpotential. The main oxidation processes that take place on the lead anode are as follows On the fresh anode surface, the After the anodic film formation, 99.2% of the electricity goes to the oxygen evolution, 0.67% for obtaining PbO The electrolyte also contains Mn MnO The main possibility of reducing the energy used in electrowinning is to improve the electrocatalytical properties of the anode surface by modifications of the lead anodes. The improvement of the electrocatalytical properties will result in a lower anode potential at constant current density. This can be either due to a surface area effect or to a change in the reaction mechanism. In electrowinning processes based on sulphuric acid solutions, the main anodic reaction taking place on the anode is oxygen evolution. The major alloy used for anodes is lead–silver. König and Larssen The polarization curves for different Pb alloys (initially anodized at 10,000 A/m The behaviour of Pb–Ag anodes was investigated by Buttinelli and D'Angelo The anodic behaviour of anodic materials is different with respect to: (i) time needed to reach the maximum, (ii) the value of the maximum, and (iii) the value achieved during the stationary phase. The values of The differences between the anodic potentials are stabilized after 1–2 weeks about the following values: When the current density changes from 400 to 800 A/m Due to the high cost of Ag, other alloying elements are used in an effort to reduce the Ag content in the anodes. The most beneficial effect on the oxygen overpotential is shown by Co alloyed with Pb or added into the electrolyte. According to the data of Krivolapova and Kabanov This process runs faster than On the basis of the overpotential ( The effect of temperature on the overpotential ( Cobalt is deposited on lead dioxide to a small extent during electrolysis and it is possible that this reaction is partly reversible and potential-dependent so that cobalt goes into solution when the potential is decreased, thus giving an increased cobalt concentration near the electrode surface. It was also found that the agitation of the solution near the electrode by a stream of oxygen decreased the observed potentials, particularly at the lower current densities, but increasing the acid concentration to 2 M H In both cases, the values of the Tafel constant ( In order to determine the effect of the anode material on overpotential, the In the absence of Co When Co A rate-determining discharge such as Discharge of a water molecule is more likely than OH Kiryakov and Stender Dunaev and Kiryakov The alloying process of Pb with metal additives, which always increase the anodic resistance, is accompanied by the deviation of the potentials to the electronegative side. Similar behaviour is observed for the metal-ceramics anodes. The highest deviation of the potential to a negative side is observed at anodes containing Ag or Co and the potential of anodes containing Fe is similar to the potential of Pb anode. A considerable decrease of the potential is registered when Mn-containing anode is tested. Mn does not form an alloy with Pb, which is why Pb–Mn anode can be prepared by using the method for obtaining metal-ceramics anodes. The considerable decrease of the potential on this anode could be explained with the dissolution process of Mn, accompanied by a decrease of the anodic potential. The increase of Co concentration in the composition of metal-ceramics anodes up to 0.8% leads to a deviation of the potential of 75–80 mV at low current density, and of 100–150 mV at high current density. The efficiency of Ag is higher than that of Co. With a low amount of Ag in the anode, the anodic potential at all current densities is shifted to the more electronegative side than that of the anode with the same amount of Co. A considerable deviation of the potential of Pb–Ag or Pb–Co anodes is not observed after a long polarization and over a wide range of current densities. A considerable deviation of the anodic potential of pure Pb is registered and this effect could be connected with loosening of the anodic surface as a result of the corrosion process. The increase of H Hein et al. Lead alloy coatings over the Pb substrate were made by Forsen et al. The process of oxygen evolution runs through intermediate stages with the formation of O The amount of electricity (as %), which is spent for producing PbO Co Fe Cl CH The additives Cu During the destruction process of Pb anodes, the behaviour of the metallic Pb under the protective layer plays a considerable role. The PbO Razina and Kozlovskii According to many papers, PbO According to Kiseleva and Kabanov Astahov et al. The thickness of both loose and dense layers obtained at 30°C in 1 M H On the basis of the results obtained, the following picture of the growth of the anodic layer at a long-time polarization of Pb in H Moreover, low resistant intermediate compounds, for example PbO The PbO formed either reacts with H The formation of β-PbO Buttinelli and Angelo Considering the known mechanism of disproportionation of manganese with the precipitation of dioxide: 1. Two methods are used for the production of insoluble anodes on the basis of Pb: alloying by casting and by pressing of metallic powders at room or at higher temperature. The second method has been not applied in practice. However, in using this method, it is possible to increase the amount of the alloying elements in the anodes in the case when they do not form alloys easily with Pb (for example, Co). 2. The admixtures, which increase the corrosion resistance of both cast and metal-ceramics anodes, lead to the decrease of the potential of O 3. The presence of Co 4. The potential of O The authors are grateful to the Union Miniere, Belgium, for its financial support.