An effective and simultaneous liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) method was developed for the first time, with the aim of quantification of cysteine and cystine in wheat flour. Developed LC-MS/MS method showed good linearity (R
                     2 = 0.99) with very low LOD and LOQ values as 2.0 μg/kg and 7.0 μg/kg for cystine, 3.0 μg/kg and 8.0 μg/kg for cysteine, respectively. Favorable repeatability and reproducibility were achieved. Developed highly sensitive LC-MS/MS method was successfully applied for the detection and quantification of cystine and cysteine in wheat flour samples. Cystine and cysteine contents were determined as quite similar and appropriate for 25 types of wheat flour. In addition, method has great capability for quantification of additional cysteine and cystine in the wheat flour since quite favorable recovery values were obtained.Cystine is the oxidized dimer form of the amino acid cysteine. In other words, cystine is formed by the oxidation of two cysteine molecules and cystine is considered as a semi-essential amino acid. Cysteine is a nonessential amino acid and has considerable biological importance ( Importantly, cysteine is used in food industry as a food additive in bakery applications. The role of cysteine in bakery applications is reducing disulfide bonds (protein-protein interactions) thus rising the elasticity of dough. In other words, cysteine weakens the gluten network of the dough. As a result, cysteine addition to the flour, increases liquid properties of the flour, reduces mixing time and helps dough relaxation ( The amino acid cysteine and its oxidized dimer form cystine are naturally found in wheat flour. In bakery, both of them determine the functional properties of wheat flour. Cystine improves the structure and functionality of gluten since disulfide bonds which positioned on different protein chains contributes to the formation of links between the proteins. Increased number of links results in strong gluten with large network. In other words, there is an established interrelation between the abundance of disulfide bond and the strength of the gluten ( Cysteine as a reducing agent can be added in order to relax the dough and weaken the gluten network since L-cysteine reduces the single disulfide bonds to two In literature, several studies are dedicated to detect cysteine in pharmaceutical formulations and biological materials ( The primary aim of this paper was to develop a new, rapid, sensitive and specific LC-MS/MS (liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry) method for quantification of cysteine and cystine in wheat flour. Our study explores, for the first time, detection and quantification of cysteine and cystine in different wheat flour samples. The method was validated with respect to linearity, limit of detection and quantification and accuracy. Developed method was used to quantify cysteine and cystine in different flour samples. Additionally, cysteine is used in food industry as a food additive in bakery applications due to the favorable effects on dough process but addition of this compound to the wheat flour isn't allowed in Turkey. Another aim was to assess whether cysteine is added to flours by interpreting the measured quantities. HPLC grade acetonitrile (ACN), methanol (Lichrosolve purity ≥99.9), formic acid (Emprove, 100%) and hydrochloric acid (HCl) were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). The water used to prepare the solutions was purified in a Milli-Q Plus system (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA). Pure standard (L-cysteine) and cystine was provided from Sigma Aldrich Germany. The purities of all compounds were greater than 98%. In order to fully represent Turkey, 25 different wheat flour, 2 wheat flour dough (pizza dough) and 4 wheat bread samples (lavash bread and hamburger bun) to be analyzed were collected from local markets in different cities of Turkey. Names and details of all samples are presented in Individual stock solutions of the reference standard were prepared in 0.1 N HCl at a concentration of 1000 mg/kg. A mixed intermediate standard solution was prepared by diluting the stock standard solution in 0.1 N HCl at a concentration of 100 mg/kg. Stock and intermediate standard solutions were stored at 4 °C in amber flasks and were found stable for at least 6 months. Derivatizations of samples were performed as implemented in previous studies prior to the LC-MS/MS analysis ( Flour, dough and bread samples were prepared prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. 50 mg of samples were weighed and dried by freeze-drying. 6M HCl of 20 mL was transferred onto the samples and incubated at 110 °C for 20–24 hours. After filtration by using an ordinary filter paper, 100 μL of the sample was transferred into glass tubes. 100 μL of 0.1 N HCl solution was added. 200 μL of the solution (80% n-propanol-20% pyridine) was added and vortexed for 10 sec. Similarly, 200 μL of solution (83% isooctane – 17% propylchloroformate) was added and vortexed for 10 sec. The mixture was kept waiting for 3 minutes then vortexed for 10 sec again. Then, 200 μL of solution (60% chloroform- 38% isooctane- 2% propylchloroformate) was added and vortexed for 10 sec and mixture was maintained for 1 minute. Final sample was transferred into a tube and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 500 rpm. 200 μL of the upper phase was transferred into a glass tube and was dried under a gentle stream of nitrogen. Finally, 1000 μL of mobile phase A/mobile Phase B (80/20) was added to tube and vortexed for 10 sec. The final sample was kept in an ultrasonic bath for 1 min and filtered through a 0.45 μm filter prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. The chromatographic analyses were performed using an HPLC system consisting of a binary pump (Shimadzu UFLC LC-20AD model), Shimadzu automatic injector (Auto Sampler SIL-20A HT model) and a column oven (CTO-20AC). Analytical columns, EZ: FAAST 4μ AAA-MS 250 × 2 mm (Phenomenex, CA, USA) were used. The method used a gradient program using water with 1 mmol/L formic acid as mobile phase A, and mobile phase B containing methanol with 1 mmol/L formic acid. The column temperature was maintained at 40 °C with a flow rate of 0.25 mL/min. The linear gradient profile was scheduled as follows: 0.1 min, 38% B; 12 min, 65% B; 12.1 min, 95% B; 14 min, 95% B; 14.1 min, 38% B; 20 min, 38% B. The injection volume was 10 μL. The chromatographic system was coupled to electrospray ionization (ESI) source followed by an Applied Biosystems MDS SCIEX 4000 Q TRAP mass spectrometer. The MS/MS detector conditions were as follows: curtain gas 20 mL/min, exit potential 10 V, ion source gas 1 and ion source gas 2 were set at 50 mL/min, ion spray voltage 5500 V, and turbo spray temperature was set at 550 °C. MS data were acquired in the positive ion ESI mode using two alternating MS/MS scan events. Two transitions were monitored for each analyte. The selected molecular ion and optimized collision voltages of product ions used for quantification and confirmation were summarized in The analytical method developed for determination of cysteine and cystine in samples was validated according to the Eurochem documentation ( The selectivity of the method was assessed by duplicate analysis of seven blank samples. In this selectivity study, blank samples were prepared as explained in section of sample preparation using same chemicals. Differently, distilled water was placed in tubes instead of food samples. No peaks of interfering compounds were observed within the intervals of the retention time of the analytes in any of these samples. Linearity was evaluated from the calibration curves by triplicate analyses of reference standard analytes at six (0.005, 0.01, 0.02, 0.04, 0.08 and 1 mg/kg) concentration levels. Linearity was expressed as the coefficient of linear correlation (r) and from the slope of the calibration curve. The linearity of the analytical response across the studied range was excellent, with correlation coefficients as 0.99 for cysteine and cystine linearity plots are shown in The LOD and LOQ were determined by analysis of 10 lowest concentration of calibration curve and the signal to noise ratio (S/N) is calculated at the time window in which the analyte is expected. The LOD values were calculated as three times of S/N. The LOQ was calculated by analyzing 6 lowest concentration of calibration curve at LOD. Then LOD value was added up to 3 times the corresponding standard deviation and 10 times the corresponding was calculated as LOQ. The calculated LOD and LOQ values were 2.0 μg/kg, 7.0 μg/kg for cystine and 3.0 μg/kg, 8.0 μg/kg for cysteine respectively. LOD value is expected to be three times lesser than LOQ value and ideal LOD and LOQ values were obtained in this study. Standard limit of detection and limit of quantitation values are presented in Also, standard deviation values were calculated for both cysteine and cystine. Relative standard deviation is expected to be lower than 20% according to the literature and ideal values were obtained in this study as shown in Precision of results were calculated using real samples known) for both cysteine and cystine. The precision of the method was determined in two stages: repeatability (intraday) and reproducibility. Repeatability was expressed by the RSD of the results from ten replicates analyzed on the same day by the same analyst using the same instrument. The reproducibility was expressed by the RSD of the results of twenty analyses performed by two different person (n = 2) in two different days, ten analyses/day, by the different analyst using the same instrument. The intraday RSDs (repeatability) results by the present method were 4% and 4% for cysteine and cystine, respectively. The reproducibility (RSDr) results were 3% and 3.8% for cysteine and cystine, respectively (  As seen in In general, obtained results have been quite similar for all flour samples and any significant difference wasn't observed between the flour samples in terms of cystine and cysteine contents. As mentioned previously, gluten proteins contains about 2–3% cystine and cysteine. Considering this knowledge in literature, combined cystine and cysteine content of wheat flour is approximately around 0.2%-0.4% values. As seen in An LC-MS/MS method was developed for the detection and quantification of cysteine and cystine in wheat flour. Developed method showed good linearity with very low LOD and LOQ values. The calculated LOD and LOQ values were 2.0 μg/kg, 7.0 μg/kg for cystine and 3.0 μg/kg, 8.0 μg/kg for cysteine respectively. Quite sensitive and selective results were obtained due to the use of tandem mass spectrometric detection. The parameters evaluated for the validation had a satisfactory score, for example, relative standard deviation value of 18% was obtained for 25 different types of flour samples. Statistically, developed method is usually regarded as acceptable since repeatability and reproducibility values have been less than 10%. Use of tandem mass detection for cysteine and cystine offers certain identification and confirmation in wheat flour samples. A future use of such a qualitative approach may be established by the food industry as well as second derivative study of LC-MS/MS method can be done to alleviate any doubts about the cysteine source and adulteration in bakery industry. This research is supported by the Project No. Canan Dogan declares that she has no conflict of interest. Nur Cebi declares that she has no conflict of interest. Aysen Develioglu declares that she has no conflict of interest. Elmas Oktem Olgun declares that she has no conflict of interest. Osman Sagdic declares that he has no conflict of interest. This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors. Not applicable.