A new method to test rock abrasiveness is proposed based upon the dependence of rock abrasiveness on their structural and physico-mechanical properties. The article describes the procedure of presentation of properties that govern rock abrasiveness on a canonical scale by dimensionless components, and the integrated estimation of the properties by a generalized index. The obtained results are compared with the known classifications of rock abrasiveness.In Russia, intensive studies of rock abrasivity issues date back to the 1950s–1980s, resulting in the development of dozens of experimental methods for rock abrasivity evaluation. All of them were based on the same principle, i.e. abrasion (wear) of different indenters, such as cutting heads, disks, steel rings, rods, needles, shot, in contact with rocks ( In analogy with European practice, every method was provided with specific abrasivity classifications, which appear incommensurable or inconsistent with those obtained by other methods. For example, the vein quart is classified as a medium-abrasive rock in In the specific cases ( European scientists described Schimazek's process ( The parameter The recognition of the significance of the rock abrasivity problem helps to adopt “standard” methods for the ground, mainly distinguishing their simplicity and specific validity. In Russia, the conventional standard methods involve the abrasion of lead-shot for disintegrated rocks ( In view of the above analyses, we conclude that: In spite of many years of research work conducted by the scientists worldwide, there are no evidences to state that we have gained the complete solution to the rock abrasivity evaluation problem. None of modern laboratory test procedures for rock abrasivity assessment can be considered as a perfect one, as the test results are relative and classification systems are incommensurable, because they are structured in terms of rock names, disregarding the physico-mechanical properties of rocks. Any of available test methods can be recommended as a claimer for International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISMR) Standard under the rigorous postulation of force impact limits (load on a rock specimen, velocity, etc.) on indenters as the main regulatory indices. It is evident that the main reason for the incomparability of the rock abrasivity results is the lack of the unified procedure for estimating the basic physico-mechanical properties of rocks, impacting the potential rock abrasivity, rather than the lack of a standard test method. This cumulative quantitative index for rock properties would make it possible to express the abrasivity evaluated by any method in terms of a system of physico-mechanical properties of a tested specimen, rather than in terms of rock name, and to eliminate incorrect relationships between the rock abrasivity classifications based on different methods. Hereinafter the authors explicate the new-developed method for the evaluation of rock structural and physico-mechanical properties, affecting the rock abrasivity, as an aggregate quantitative index. The rock abrasivity assessment is directly related to the process performance and is intended to establish the optimal conditions for “rock-working organ of a machine” interaction. Material properties of this coupling tend to vary under thermodynamic effects induced by friction. The abrasivity of rock ( The main problem in evaluation of There are many publications mainly on the strength and stability of rock masses where issues of the dimensionless presentation of rock properties and their aggregate presentation were considered ( Alternatively to this statement, our approach is based on the regularities in clustering geomaterials according to their properties and structures. The authors managed to establish these regularities thanks to the scientific discovery ( Eq. Thus, the authors set forth the fundamentals of the new approach to the rock abrasivity evaluation on the basis of physico-mechanical properties. Hereinafter, we identify the basic rock properties, constitutive relationship for the rock abrasivity, and represent them in a dimensionless form in a canonical scale. We consider the basic properties characterizing the rock abrasivity: grain size and shape, hardness of mineral constituents, porosity, intergrain bonding force, and rock moisture content. As the mechanism for the effect of the above properties on abrasivity is described in details in These properties can be presented in the canonical scale as follows: The hardness of mineral constituents ( It is assumed that Then the reference value of In both igneous and sedimentary consolidated rocks, the porous “surface” can be presented by a material whose properties are close to or soundly differ from those grains (crystals). The grain hardness in abrasive instruments explicitly exceeds the bonding material hardness, but this relation is far from typical of rocks. In sedimentary rocks, the roughness and hardness of void surfaces highly depend on a bonding cement type. In igneous rocks, the porous space is formed in a non-recrystallized material, whose composition specifically affects the roughness and hardness of surface pores. It is important to state that the cavitation genesis is of no specific value, whether it is porosity or fracturing, an important index representing the hardness of a porous surface. In view of the above analyses, the porosity factor ( Given that Unlike Relative to the microhardness measured by PMT-3: Relative to Mohs hardness ( The mechanism for the intergrain bond effect on the rock abrasivity has been poorly studied and is based on the assumption of sedimentary rocks on the basis of the cement strength properties. A strong cement facilitates the ground to utilize more completely the potential of every grain to lay out an instrument at contact face up to the moment of the grain detachment and its departure from the contact zone. Hence, the higher the cement strength is, the higher the abrasivity of rock grains is. This statement is valid for crystalline rocks as well. Weak intergrain bonds really intensify the abrasive surface refreshment. As the grains detach from the mother rocks, they are in an unbound state, their abrasive capacity gets weak even in angular shape. The ultimate tensile strength ( Eq. In In Eq. The rock moisture content can be ranked as a crucial factor affecting the intergrain bond strength in sedimentary rocks in particular. In The combination of Then two cases are assumed here: (1)  In Eq. To build the hierarchic rock abrasivity classification, Eq. Assuming that Let us consider the calculations of Eq. Based on In view of the high magnitude of the correlation coefficient for the abrasivity indices ( The proposed method for evaluation of rock abrasivity in terms of rock physico-mechanical properties is compared with the rock abrasivity classification by The applicability of the proposed method was identified by comparing with the classification based on the steel indenter abrasion. Of special interest is also the fact that the data on the potential abrasivity match the experimental data obtained for real rock specimens. Publication of The high correlation coefficient value (0.91) for  The main issue of the rock abrasivity evaluation is that all the available methods ignore the physico-mechanical properties of tested rocks, moreover, the substitution of rock names for rock properties is virtually incorrect. The idea to assess the rock abrasivity by rock physico-mechanical properties appears fruitful and is verified by the following facts: It is shown that the rock abrasivity classification in terms of rock physico-mechanical properties is identical to that in terms of the steel rod abrasion ( It is proved that the rock abrasivity index The use of The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.