A solvometallurgical recycling route for the recovery of samarium, cobalt, copper and iron from SmCo magnets was developed. The SmCo magnets were first crushed and milled to powder size and then leached in a 2 mol L−1 hydrochloric acid solution in ethylene glycol. Afterwards, cobalt, copper and iron were extracted from the leachate with 50 wt% Aliquat 336® in toluene, which was pre-saturated with 37 wt% HCl. The non-aqueous solvent extraction system improved the extraction efficiency of cobalt. The extraction was optimized by evaluating the extraction rates, the effects of temperature, feed/solvent ratio and the hydrochloric acid concentration. Through the construction of a McCabe-Thiele diagram it was possible to calculate the number of stages required for continuous extraction. Cobalt was recovered from the loaded solvent by stripping with a 0.5 mol L−1 aqueous hydrochloric acid solution. Copper was recovered by stripping with a 5 vol% aqueous ammonia solution, whereas iron precipitated under these conditions. The solvent could be reused after regeneration, i.e. evaporation of water and ammonia and reintegration of toluene and HCl. The samarium left in the raffinate was extracted by 20 vol% Cyanex 272 in n-dodecane. Finally, samarium was recovered from the loaded Cyanex 272 by precipitation stripping with a 0.2 mol L−1 aqueous oxalic acid solution. The purity of the recovered cobalt chloride was 98.3 wt% and that of samarium oxalate was 99.4 wt%.SmCo permanent magnets were introduced in 1967 by Strnat and co-workers, using SmCo End-of-life SmCo magnets are a very good secondary resource for cobalt and samarium. Several studies have been published recently concerning the recovery of samarium and cobalt from SmCo magnets Since recently, an alternative to traditional hydrometallurgy is appearing: i.e. solvometallurgy, which can be considered as a new branch in extractive metallurgy In this paper, we describe a solvometallurgical route for indirect recycling of SmCo scrap to recover samarium, cobalt and copper. The process involves a combination of solvoleaching and non-aqueous solvent extraction. Ethylene glycol (EG) (99.5%) and SmCo magnets were first crushed by a hydraulic press and subsequently reduced into powder by a Fritsch Planetary Mill Pulverisette 7. Automatic shaking sieves, Analysette 3 Spartan by Fritsch, were used to collect fractions of the milled powder. The particle size distribution of the SmCo powder was determined by a laser diffractometer, i.e. Malvern Masterizer 3000. The morphology of the SmCo powder was studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Philips XL 30 FEG electron microscope. The mineralogical composition was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Seifert 3003 T/T device (Seifert Analytical X-ray). Metal concentrations in the aqueous hydrochloric acid and in EG–HCl solutions were determined by an inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES), i.e. model Perkin Elmer Optima 8300. Data were processed by the software Syngistix 1.0.1.1275. All the experiments were carried out in glass vials. For the leaching tests, setups of aluminum blocks, magnetic stirring bars and heating–stirring plates (IKA, RCT basic) were used. The solvent extraction and stripping experiments were carried out in a thermo-controlled TMS-300 Turbo Thermo Shaker Incubator (nemusLIFE). The acid-saturated solvent ( The bulk solids were reduced to coarse particles by a hydraulic press and then milled in a planetary ball mill. The applied conditions for milling were: stainless steel pots and balls (diameter 10 and 1 mm), charge ratio = 3/1 balls-to-powder, speed = 600 rpm, milling time = 5 min with 5 min pause, cycles = 3, solvent = ethanol. The parameters applied to record the diffractogram of the crystalline structure of the milled, unsieved SmCo powder were: As for the leaching, the HCl concentration in EG and the liquid/solid (L/S) ratio (mL g Two equivalent solutions of leachate from, respectively, 2 mol L The next steps in the flow sheet consisted of the removal of cobalt, copper and iron from the loaded solvent, which allows to recover the metals and to regenerate the solvent. Only the extract with the highest metal concentration, i.e. the one obtained after the first extraction stage, was considered for stripping studies. Cobalt was stripped from the solvent by aqueous HCl to subsequently recover the cobalt as chloride salt. Different HCl concentrations, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0 and 4.0 mol L As for samarium, direct precipitation from the EG – HCl solutions was also investigated by adding an aqueous solution of oxalic acid (1 mol L The magnets were received in the shape of discs of about 0.5 cm in diameter. They were crushed and then reduced to powder by wet planetary ball milling, to enhance the interfacial area and, consequently, the leaching rates. In contrast to NdFeB permanent magnet powders, the SmCo powders are not pyrophoric, which implies that milling of SmCo magnets is safer with respect to NdFeB magnets. In However, when the magnet powder was manually sieved, two fractions were obtained: ≤45 µm and 45 µm < The X-ray diffractogram of the milled magnet powder is reported in In Interestingly, the iron content is similar to the samarium content, which is quite high: both samarium and iron represent one fifth of the total composition (wt%). However, one should also remember that the atomic mass of samarium is about three times higher than the atomic mass of iron. Hence, the molar fraction of iron in these SmCo permanent magnets is about three times higher than that of samarium. Copper, iron and zirconium are common additives to Sm After being characterized, the milled SmCo magnet powder was directly used for the leaching test. A non-aqueous solution of HCl in EG as lixiviant was tested to explore the opportunities of solvometallurgical leaching. EG is considered to be a green solvent. Moreover, it is a protic solvent, it has a high boiling point (197.3 °C) and it is not volatile. As such, it can be considered as a valuable alternative to water. According to the definition of solvometallurgy, the water content in the flow streams should be ≤50 vol% On average the extraction of cobalt occurs four times more efficient in the EG-based system than in the water-based system: i.e. In all following experiments, 2 mol L Based on these findings, Aliquat 336 diluted 1/1 (in mass) in toluene and saturated with 37 wt% HCl was selected as solvent. At this stage, the optimum solvent has been defined as well as the temperature and the F/E ratio. Afterwards, the extraction time was examined to evaluate if the mixing time of 60 min could be reduced ( The minimum mixing time corresponds to the time at which the equilibrium of the system is reached, i.e. when the Finally, the number of stages required for the total separation of cobalt, copper and iron from samarium was calculated with the McCabe–Thiele method. The equilibrium concentration of a single element in both the raffinate and the extract phase, at different F/E ratios, are plotted. The operating line is drawn by defining the working conditions, i.e. the F/E ratio. McCabe–Thiele diagrams of cobalt and iron are presented in Whereas, with a F/E ratio = 1/2, two stages are necessary to extract about 98% cobalt from the leachate, three stages are required for iron extraction. Since cobalt and iron occur together in the extract stream, the total number of extraction stages, to completely separate all the transition metals from the rare-earth elements, adds up to three. At the high F/E ratio of 4/1, the McCabe–Thiele diagram for cobalt shows saturation of the solvent, which the corresponding diagram for iron does not display. In fact, the cobalt concentration in the solvent drops by 21% at higher cobalt concentrations in the raffinate, i.e. also at higher F/E ratios. This is depicted in The three-stage process was tested in the lab to corroborate if all cobalt and iron could be quantitatively extracted. Based on the preceding results, the first two steps of the flow sheet, leaching and solvent extraction of the transition metals, have now been defined. The leaching conditions are: lixiviant = 2 mol L Conventionally, the raffinate from the solvent extraction is an aqueous solution. When the solution has a mono-element character, or when the solubility is different for the distinct dissolved elements, the most straightforward method to recover the metals from the raffinate is via precipitation. At lab-scale, the rare-earth metals are usually precipitated as oxalates by the addition of oxalic acid to the aqueous raffinate. Subsequently, the oxalates are converted to oxides Different commercial extractants were tested: first a mixture predominantly made up of trioctylphosphine oxides (Cyanex 923), and then a mixture mainly made up of bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272). Once more, the choice went out to a commercially available extractant, allowing to keep the process as convenient as possible in view of subsequent upscaling. Cyanex 923 was not suitable, because the significant amount of water in the feed solution, the 2 mol L Solvent extraction of samarium from the 2 mol L The transition metals were separated from the loaded solvent in two steps: (1) stripping of cobalt with an aqueous solution of HCl, and (2) stripping of copper with an aqueous solution of ammonia. In the second step, precipitation stripping of iron occurred as well. Since the thermodynamics are not influenced by the concentration, the stripping of cobalt, copper and iron was studied solely on the extract from the first extraction stage. As for cobalt stripping, the feed is the extract after stage I, whereas the copper and iron stripping feed is the raffinate from the cobalt stripping process. Aqueous HCl solutions of, respectively, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0 and 4.0 mol L As expected, a higher HCl concentration in the stripping agent leads to a lower Electrowinning can be used to recover cobalt from a chloride solution at pH ≤ 4. Although this option is also applied at large scale, it was not tested here because out of the scope of the present work The The flow sheet in A solvometallurgical process was developed to recover samarium, cobalt and copper from SmCo permanent magnets. Firstly, the bulk magnets were reduced to a powder to increase the specific surface area and the leaching kinetics. Secondly, the SmCo powder was leached in a solution of 2 mol L The research leading to these results received funding from the The authors want to thank Magneti Ljubljana d.d. (Slovenia) for providing the SmCo permanent magnets, Tony Debecker and Kevin Wierinckx for crushing the magnets, Dr. Jeroen Jordens for the particle size measurements, Dr. Jeroen Sniekers for the SEM and EDS analysis, Dr. Nagaphani Kumar Batchu for the very helpful discussion and Dr. Bieke Onghena and Dr. Peter Tom Jones for reviewing and editing the manuscript. There are no conflicts to declare.