A novel solvent-impregnated resin (SIR) with trialkylphosphate Cyanex 923 as extractants and macroporous resin HZ830 as substrate was prepared to adsorb In(III) from HCl solutions. The effects of HCl concentration on adsorption were investigated within the range of 0.5 to 7molL−1, and results showed that adsorption capacity was greatest at 2molL−1 HCl. The adsorption mechanism of In(III) in chloride medium suggested that In(III) was apt to be adsorbed as a neutral species InCl3. As the anionic species InCl4
                     − it tended to be adsorbed in the form of ion pairs combined with protons. The extraction stoichiometry of In (III) with SIR was studied, and the extracted species were found to be InCl3·nL and HInCl4·nL (n=2, 3). The isothermal adsorption of In(III) fit the Langmuir model. Kinetic data indicated that the adsorption process was consistent with a pseudo second order model, and the sorption rate was mainly controlled by an intraparticle diffusion step. A column experiment showed that In(III) could be eluted from SIR with 2molL−1 sulfuric acid, and the SIR showed good stability and reusability after five adsorption-elution cycles. When the SIR was applied for In(III) adsorption from waste liquid crystal display (LCD) leaching solution containing 102.15mgL−1 In(III), the adsorption efficiency exceeded 90% with 0.30g adsorbent.Indium is widely used in liquid crystal materials, semiconductor devices, alloys, and the nuclear field because of its special physical and chemical characteristics ( In recent years, solid-liquid extraction processes have been systematically developed in order to recover rare-earth elements and purify wastewater. Various materials have been used for solid-liquid extraction, including activated carbon ( The most frequently used extractants for SIR are as follows: (a) organo-phosphorous extractants, such as 2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid mono (2-ethylhexyl)ester (P507), di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA), tributyl phosphate (TBP), tri- Here, SIRs containing acidic extractants were prepared for separation and recovery of indium ( The nonpolar macroporous resin HZ830 support (styrene-divinylbenzene copolymer) was obtained from Shanghai Huazhen Polymer Co., Ltd., China. The specific surface area for the adsorbents was 780–820 In order to make the resin (HZ830) swell macropores to capacity, resin (HZ830) was kept in two volumes of ethanol (95%) for 4 The appearance and morphology of macroporous resin HZ830 and SIR were examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). In order to further verify that the extractant was impregnated into the macroporous resin HZ830, FTIR spectra for HZ830 and SIR were investigated, and the thermal stability of HZ830 and SIR was also carried out with a thermogravimetric analyzer. The amount of extractant immobilized on HZ830 was quantified using the following procedure ( The experimental procedure allowed the preparation of SIR containing Cyanex 923 in the concentration range 231–495 The adsorption experiments were performed by mixing a fixed amount of SIR with various concentrations of In(III) within the range of 25–200 Here, Q (mg·g The column was prepared by filling 300 The elution experiment was carried out as follows: the elution solution was fed into the column loaded with In(III) at a flow rate of 1.0 The LCD samples used in the experiments were provided by a local recycling company. After the polarizer was removed and liquid crystal display dissolved by acetone, LCD glass was separated, and its components were analyzed using X-ray Fluorescence (XRF). The solid was treated with 2 The SEM photographs of both HZ830 and SIR are shown in The HZ830 beads shown in FTIR spectra for HZ830 and SIR are shown in The thermal stability curves of HZ830 and SIR are shown in It was found that no HCl was adsorbed from the HCl (alone) solution with the SIR in the experiment. The concentration of HCl was varied from 0.5 to 7 The results given above can be explained by In(III) speciation in solutions of different concentrations of HCl.  As shown in In this investigation, HZ830 support, a nonpolar macroporous resin, had no functional groups to bind to In(III) ions, and the experiment proved that HZ830 showed no adsorption for In(III) (data not shown). For this reason, the adsorption of support was excluded from the study of the mechanism. As shown in As the HCl concentrations increased from 0.5 to 2 The extraction of metal ions from HCl solution using Cyanex 923 extractant have been investigated. Hence, this extraction of In(III) from the HCl medium with Cyanex 923 SIR can be generally expressed as follows: Here, For a fixed HCl concentration Eq. with In order to predict the stoichiometric ratio of In(III) ion and extractant in SIR, the influence of Cyanex 923 loading on SIR on In(III) distribution coefficient (D) at different HCl concentrations were carried out, and the plots of LogD versus Log[ Sorption isotherms have been established for different experimental conditions, such as varying the initial concentration of In(III) at different temperatures, and the effect of equilibrium concentrations of In(III) on the adsorption capacities was shown in The adsorption data can be analyzed using Freundlich and Langmuir isotherm models. The Freundlich equation is an empirical equation used to describe heterogeneous adsorption systems ( Here, The Langmuir model is applicable to homogeneous sorption ( Here, Q The corresponding Langmuir and Freundlich parameters for the sorption of In(III) on SIR are given in From the values of Q The value of R  The effect of contact time on the adsorption of In(III) on SIR was assessed at different temperatures. Results are depicted in Kinetic data were fitted using kinetic models to assess the mechanisms of adsorption and identify possible rate controlling steps. These models included the pseudo-first-order equation, pseudo-second-order equation, and intraparticle surface diffusion model. The linear equation of pseudo-first order kinetics is expressed as follows: Here, Q The linear form of pseudo-second-order kinetics equation is as follows: Here, Q The kinetic data of In(III) adsorption on SIR were also evaluated using the Weber-Morris equation: Here, Q The fitting parameters of pseudo-first order, pseudo-second order, and Weber-Morris model are shown in The linear portion of the curves did not cover full time in The column adsorption studies were conducted to determine the shape of the breakthrough curves and evaluate the practical usefulness of SIR for continuous adsorption of In(III) from HCl solution. The efficiency of In(III) adsorption is presented by breakthrough curves showing concentration ratios C Results showed that In(III) penetrated the column almost immediately after feeding (at 50 After adsorption, the SIR was eluted to remove metal ions and regenerated for recycling. H The concentrations of main elements in leach liquor of LCD glass panel were shown in As shown in A solvent-impregnated resin (SIR) was prepared using macroporous resin HZ830 as support and Cyanex 923 (trialkylphosphate) as extractant. The SIR showed high adsorption capacity for In(III) in 2 This project was supported by The equilibrium constant K Taking into account stability constants of individual complexes: Here, β Introducing Eqs. If Y is described as: