Starch–kaolinite interactions are of critical importance for the successful removal of kaolinite from iron ore in selective flocculation and froth flotation processes. In this work, the adsorption behaviour of starch on kaolinite surfaces and the flocculation/dispersion of the kaolinite particles coated with starch were investigated through adsorption and turbidity measurements. It was found that starch adsorption on kaolinite is pH dependent, with starch adsorption decreasing with increasing pH from 7 to 10.5. At pH 10.5, increasing ionic strength significantly enhances the adsorption density of starch on kaolinite. The enhanced starch adsorption at lower pH and higher ionic strength was attributed to the reduced electrostatic repulsion between the anionic starch molecules and the negatively charged kaolinite particles as pH and ionic strength change.
                  The steric stability of kaolinite particles was found to depend on the adsorption behaviour of starch on kaolinite surfaces. In the presence of starch, bridging flocculation of kaolinite particles is rather weak in distilled water at pH 10.5, since starch shows an extremely low affinity towards kaolinite. However, at lower pH or in the presence of electrolytes, when starch shows a higher affinity towards kaolinite surfaces, starch starts to play a significant role in the aggregation of kaolinite particles through bridging flocculation of the mineral particles at low starch dosages and by inducing steric stability of kaolinite at higher starch dosages. When the ionic strength decreases to 0.00001M NaCl, no effect of ionic strength on starch–kaolinite interactions was observed.Australia is the largest exporter of iron ore in the world. A major problem with the Australian hematite/goethite ores is their alumina content. The high alumina content in iron ore results in a highly viscous slag and high coke rate and thus is detrimental to blast furnace and sinter plant operations. Of the alumina containing minerals in iron ore, kaolinite, a layered clay mineral of general chemical formula Al Starch is the universal depressant of hematite in iron ore flotation. The role of starch is to adsorb on hematite and prevent amine collectors from adsorbing onto iron oxide in reverse flotation routes. The selective adsorption of starch onto hematite instead of the gangue minerals is of critical importance not only for the flotation of iron ore, but also for the selective flocculation of iron ore as well, since starch appears to be more selective than other flocculants such as polyacrylamides and polyacrylic acid ( In this work, the adsorption behaviour of starch on kaolinite surfaces and the flocculation/dispersion of kaolinite particles coated with starch were investigated through adsorption and turbidity measurements, in order to provide a better understanding of the starch–kaolinite interactions under typical iron ore flotation and selective flocculation conditions. The kaolinite sample, from Georgia, USA, was provided by Ward's Natural Science Establishment. Quantitative x-ray diffraction analysis shows that the sample contains 93.0% kaolinite and 7.0% illite. Particle size analysis was conducted using standard laboratory wet and dry screening methods. Subsieve sizing was performed using a modified CSIRO cyclosizing technique ( Natural corn starch was obtained from Wintersun, USA. The starch was gelatinized using sodium hydroxide at room temperature to a 1 In the adsorption tests, 2 The colloid stability of kaolinite particles was investigated through turbidity measurements with the use of a Hach 2100AN turbidimeter. In these experiments, the same suspensions prepared for adsorption measurements as mentioned above were used for turbidity measurements, so a direct correlation could be obtained between polymer adsorption and the colloid stability of the minerals. Turbidity values are expressed in nephelometric turbidity units (NTU).  At pH 10.5, starch does not adsorb on kaolinite until a certain equilibrium concentration of starch is obtained, probably caused by the strong electrostatic repulsion between the anionic starch molecules and negatively charged kaolinite particles. The extremely low affinity of starch molecules towards kaolinite surfaces at pH 10.5 enables the selective adsorption of starch in the kaolinite–hematite system, which is of critical importance for the selective flocculation and flotation of iron ores containing kaolinite. As the pH decreases to 9 and 7, the surface charge of kaolinite becomes less negative and starch demonstrates a higher affinity to the surfaces of kaolinite. At pH 7, the edges of kaolinite become positively charged ( Although various adsorption mechanisms of starch onto different minerals have been proposed, the interactions between starch and kaolinite has not been investigated in the literature. The role of electrostatic repulsion in the adsorption of starch on negatively charged quartz surfaces was established by The effect of ionic strength on starch adsorption onto kaolinite at pH 10.5 is shown in The DLVO (Derjaguin, Landau, Verwey and Overbeek) theory suggests that aggregation may be caused by polymers adsorbed on particles through bridging flocculation or prevented by polymers which keep the particles apart at such distances where attractive forces become insignificant. As At pH 7, a significant reduction in turbidity was observed in the absence of starch. Since the edges of kaolinite become positively charged (  It is noteworthy to point out that although starch is a very weak flocculant of kaolinite in distilled water at pH 10.5, traces of salts can turn starch into a strong flocculant of kaolinite. As The adsorption density of starch on kaolinite is pH and ionic strength dependent. Starch adsorption on kaolinite is significantly increased by decreasing pH or increasing ionic strength, when the electrostatic repulsion between the anionic starch molecules and the negatively charged kaolinite particles is reduced. The flocculation/dispersion of kaolinite particles coated with starch depends on the adsorption behaviour of starch on the kaolinite surfaces. The bridging flocculation of kaolinite particles by starch is rather weak in distilled water at pH 10.5, since starch shows extremely low affinity towards kaolinite surfaces. When starch shows high affinity towards kaolinite at lower pH or in the presence of electrolytes, it starts to play a significant role in the flocculation/dispersion of kaolinite particles by flocculating the mineral particles at low starch dosages and inducing steric stability of kaolinite at higher starch dosages. When ionic strength decreases to 0.00001 The authors wish to thank the library staff of CSIRO Process Science and Engineering for their help in obtaining the references cited in this paper.