A novel discrete fragmentation method (DFM) for spherical brittle particles using the discrete element method (DEM) has been developed, implemented and validated. Trajectories of individual fragments can be studied from the moment of breakage where the progeny might originate from incremental, simultaneous and/or repetitive fragmentation events. A particle breaks depending on the applied dynamic impact forces from collisions, the damage history, the particle size and material properties. This 3D model requires setting parameters solely dependent on the particle material and is consequently independent of any empirical value. Mass, momentum and energy is conserved during breakage. A theoretically consistent description from the onset of fragmentation to the cloud formation after breakage is provided and model outcomes have been compared to experimental results and other model predictions where very little deviation has been encountered. All material parameters have been varied independently to study the sensitivity of the model under dynamic fragmentation of numerous particles in a semi-autogenous mill.Maximum achievable Energy ( Coefficient of restitution (−) Momentum factor (−) Force ( Material parameter ( Spring constant ( Cumulative mass fraction in bin 1…6 (−) Particle mass ( Unit vector (−) Breakage probability (−) Time ( Breakage index ( Particle time step ( Particle velocity ( Energy (no variations compared to Overlap distance ( Damping coefficient ( Friction coefficient (−) Poisson ratio (−) After breakage After replacement At the moment of breakage Before impact Collision Child particle Elastic Number of impacts with damage Kinetic Normal Parent particle Reference value (constant) Remember Tangential Collision factor (−) Computational fluid dynamics Discrete element method Discrete fragmentation method Particle size distribution (−) Particle size reduction occurs in many engineering applications and requires a good understanding when it comes to process design optimisation. The discrete element method (DEM) is particularly adaptable for a variety of fragmentation applications and has been applied to particle comminution Almost all discrete element models describing fragmentation, adopt an agglomeration framework An alternative to the agglomeration framework is the discrete fragmentation method (DFM). In DFM models the number and size of the progeny is derived at the moment of breakage and replaces the parent particle. The advantage of this approach is the flexibility to produce any number and size distribution of fragments. The drawback is the increased complexity in describing the parent and children particles. The discrete fragmentation method combines accuracy and efficiency to cope with high particle numbers being favoured to model most applications containing granular materials. As far as the authors know, Cleary This paper presents a full description of a DFM model for implementation into other soft-sphere DEM models. The onset of fragmentation is modelled by using a breakage probability which considers incremental impact breakage by summation of accumulated damage. In principle, this model can be provided with any particle size distribution (PSD) – however, a breakage index When collision forces acting on a particle, the particle initially deforms elastically and it absorbs impact energy as elastic strain energy Not many approaches are able to model the onset of fragmentation considering the particle damage history on the basis of purely material parameters. Vogel and Peukert For DEM applications Eq. In experiments, The resulting stress field inside particles depends on the nature of loading, the deformation behaviour, the particle shape and their structural inhomogeneities which prevail the breakage event. Because of this complexity, no generally valid function can be found to describe the progeny PSD (particle size distribution) The breakage index When the PSD is known, discrete fragments of different diameters are generated. To do so, a virtual size starting from the parent particle diameter is multiplied by a value of 0.999 as often as it is required to match the mass of a new fragment (given by its diameter) and the remaining cumulative mass percent given by the size distribution curve. This procedure continues until a minimum fragment diameter Fractures in spheres approximately follow principal stress pattern depending on whether elastic or plastic deformation occurs. The deformation behaviour depends on many parameters like the material, size, stress level and temperature so that consideration by the model would quickly increase its complexity. Compared to finite element models and other agglomerate DEM models applied to fragmentation, the present model considers only incremental damage but does not resolve flaws or cracks inside the particle to maintain efficiency and applicability for models considering numerous particles. Consequently, a random distribution of fragments has been chosen. The spatial location is then modified to maximise the mutual fragment distance to avoid big overlaps (e.g. 100%) and to achieve highest code stability. Particle-particle or particle-wall collisions are modelled by the soft-sphere model as described by Cundall and Stacks During fragmentation, kinetic energy of the parent particle is transformed as fragments are halted by contact with the surroundings, destroying fragment momentum and generating forces on the surroundings At the moment of breakage, the force to trigger fragmentation has passed its culmination so that the sign of the parent particle velocity The integral over the remaining virtual collision time is approximated by linearisation in Eq. Each individual force Here, Collisions between child particles are considered as internal forces which do not change the total linear momentum of a system. Child particle collisions with the wall or other parent particles (external forces) do not exist ( Artificial overlaps between child particles need to be corrected in terms of their associated elastic energy. The artificial overlap between child particles at the moment of fragmentation is remembered in The asterisk indicates geometrically correct but not energetically correct values, the dash indicates energetically correct but geometrically incorrect values after replacement ( The total energy required for fragmentation is often more than 100 times larger than the energy required to produce new surface and which finally might get dissipated. Stretching and disruption of intermolecular force fields require work to be done where almost all of this is recovered as kinetic energy when the force fields separate and return to their unstressed states In order to model reliably the onset of fragmentation under consideration of incremental damage and to some extend the dependency of an arbitrary process, model results need to be averaged over many fragmentation events. To discuss model parameters and their influence on the onset of fragmentation (the frequency of breakage) an application is required which can be modelled for a decent period of time and considers a high number of particles. Herein, a semi-autogenous mill has been chosen. Semi-autogenous mills are loaded with large heavy balls and small charge particles which suppose to be crushed by the balls. The geometric mill data are taken from Soft-sphere DEM models in general and their results rely on the particle stiffness (Young's modulus and Poisson ratio) and so does the DFM model. Next to the particle stiffness, the material parameter  In general, The progeny PSD from a single breaking plaster sphere has been compared between experimental data from Wu et al. Creation of fragments is stopped, when roughly 96% of the original parent particle mass is used to create fragments and one single fragment has been created with the remaining mass. The same is valid for experiments where roughly 96% of the original particle mass is counted and measured by Wu et al. As highlighted by Morrison et al. Fragment velocities indicate how the impact energy is partitioned and how the fragment cloud expands into the local surrounding. The momentum factor The present discrete fragmentation method considers particle kinetic and elastic energy separately like all soft-sphere discrete element models. At the moment of fragmentation, the model solves the momentum equation to obtain the kinetic energy for each fragment (1. velocity component) and solves the energy equation to apply the remaining impact energy in the form of elastic energy between the fragments. The elastic energy is converted into kinetic energy, when all fragments have lost their mutual contact (2. velocity component). As this approach is novel for fragmentation models, it has been compared to the hyper-velocity-fragment-cloud model developed by Schäfer All points in A new model has been developed for implementation into soft-sphere DEM models to improve the understanding of discrete fragmentation and for its use to model practical applications. Discrete, incremental, repetitive and/or simultaneous fragmentation events are taken into account as it can be often found during breakage where numerous particles are involved. Particles might fragment depending on the degree they got damaged before, their size, their material strength and the impact energy involved. Material parameters used in that model are often derived from independent testing methods provided that they are not machine specific. Different approaches Compared to most other DEM model validations, we concentrate our studies on each section separately as far as possible. The onset of fragmentation has been discussed as a parametric analysis based on their sensitivity to the breakage frequency and results have been obtained according to our expectations. The fragment size distribution is modelled by using a single parameter The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from UK EPSRC Grant EP/G034281/1, EU FP7 SIMUSPRAY Project (Grant No. 230715) and Leverhulme-Royal Society Africa Award.