Nitric oxide (NO) is an important intracellular and intercellular messenger, critically affecting bone metabolism. The purpose of this research is to investigate whether the effect of sinusoidal electromagnetic field (SEMF) on the differentiation and maturation of osteoblasts is mediated by the NO–cGMP–PKG signal pathway. We examined the impact of SEMF on nitric oxide synthase (NOS) activity, and found that l-NAME, nitric oxide synthase’s inhibitor, prevents SEMF-mediated increase in NOS activity and NO levels. We showed that an inhibitor of soluble guanylyl cyclase (ODQ) blocks the increase in cGMP levels triggered by exposure to SEMF. The inhibitor PDE5, which hydrolyzes 3′,5′-cyclic-GMP to 5′-GMP, prevents the SEMF’s stimulation of PKG activity. We also blocked the NO–cGMP–PKG pathway to determine whether the maturation and mineralization of osteoblasts, stimulated by SEMF, would be inhibited. This was evaluated by measuring alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, osterix gene expression and mineralized bone modulus. After treatment with SEMF, the NOS activity increases in comparison with the control group (P<
                     0.01), reaching the highest level after 0.5h. Osterix gene expression, ALP activity and mineralized bone nodules in the SEMF experimental group also increase significantly. However, these effects are partially blocked in the l-NAME treated cultures. Surprisingly, all the osteogenic markers in the SEMF+
                     l-NAME group were slightly higher than in the control culture, but lower than in the cells exposed to SEMF only. We conclude that the NO–cGMP–PKG signal pathway is activated by SEMF treatment, the stimulatory effect of SEMF on the differentiation and mineralization of osteoblasts is attenuated when the pathway is blocked.Osteoporosis is one of the most common, chronic, age-related diseases in both the Western and Asian populations, affecting one in two post-menopausal women and one out of eight men during their lifetime The extremely low-frequency electromagnetic field (ELF-EMF) treatment is now recognized as a therapy with promising results where the conventional medical methods fail and it is used in treatment of some orthopedics diseases, including osteoporosis Nitric oxide (NO), a signaling molecule synthesized from On the basis of our observations, we hypothesized that sinusoidal electromagnetic field might promote osteogenesis by activation NO–cGMP–PKG signaling pathway. The aim of the present study is to investigate whether the effects of SEMF stimulation on the differentiation and maturation of osteoblasts are mediated by enhancing NOS activity and increasing the NO generation. Animal protocols were carried out according to the Sinusoidal electromagnetic field was applied via identical Helmholtz coils attached to two matched incubators. The field was applied at a frequency of 50 Osteoblasts were plated at a density of 2 In control group, the cells were not exposed to SEMF or blockers. SEMF group, cells were exposed to the sinusoidal electromagnetic field at 50 Osteoblast cells were plated at a density of 2 Nitrite in culture media was measured as an index of nitric oxide levels using the Griess reaction. 500 Cells were grown in 60 Total RNA was extracted from cells using Trizol (TaKaRa, Dalian, China) at 12 Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was determined for ROB cells on day 9, in triplicate cultures, using a colorimetric endpoint assay to measure the enzymatic conversion of Cells were lysed in RIPA buffers at 24 The media and their supplements were changed every 3 All data are presented as means NO is generated by the nitric oxide synthase (NOS) from molecular oxygen and the terminal guanidino nitrogen of the amino acid We used immunoblotting to examine the expression levels of NOS, sGC, and PKG in all the experimental groups. As shown in To examine further the effect of sinusoidal electromagnetic field on this pathway, we used a pharmacological approach. As shown in We used qRT-PCR to examine the OSX mRNA expression and compared the expression levels in different experimental groups. The results in To assess whether the activation of NO–cGMP–PKG signaling pathway has beneficial effects on the maturation and mineralization of rat osteoblasts, we also examined calcified nodules in the cells after exposure to SEMF and inhibitor treatment. As we shown in The endogenous formation of NO by nitric synthase and the subsequent stimulation of soluble guanylyl cyclase (sGC), cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) and cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG) constitute an important pathway in cell function and cell communication. Here, we demonstrate the activation of the NO–cGMP–PKG signaling pathway in rat osteoblasts after exposure to sinusoidal electromagnetic field. Moreover, we show that NO might be involved in the differentiation and mineralization process of osteoblasts either on its own or via a cGMP-mediated mechanism. We believe that our results will contribute to elucidation of mechanisms underlying the electromagnetic field’s effect on the accelerated bone formation. We show that the expression of NOS, sGC, and PKG proteins in rat osteoblast cells is significantly upregulated following SEMF exposure, and that activation of NOS triggers the downstream signaling pathway. After inhibition of NOS, the expression and activity of NOS and levels of NO are suppressed markedly. This differs slightly from the findings of several Nitric oxide appears to have biphasic effect on osteoblast activity. Studies ODQ, the guanylyl cyclase inhibitor, can block the osteoblastic differentiation by genistein stimulation, which indicates the dependency of NO-triggered osteogenesis on cGMP A model of the relationship between proliferation and differentiation during the development of osteoblasts could be divided into three distinct processes: (1) proliferation, (2) maturation of the extracellular matrix, and (3) mineralization. Osteoblasts express, during their developmental sequence, genes associated with differentiation, such as osterix in the proliferative period, alkaline phosphatase in the extracellular matrix maturation period, and form calcified nodules for the mineralization period. In the present study, we show that SEMF stimulates activity of ALP, a marker protein of osteoblastic maturation, increases osterix mRNA expression, and accelerates the accumulation of calcium in osteoblasts. Not surprisingly, the osteogenic differentiation markers’ levels in the blocker-treated groups are significantly lower than in the SEMF treated cultures, and slightly lower than in the SEMF plus blocker’ experimental groups. These results suggest that NO itself or cGMP produced by SEMF stimulation might promote osteoblastic metabolism. Recently, some crosstalk mechanisms between the cGMP and cAMP signaling pathways have been proposed We also show ( Altogether, our study suggests that NO–cGMP–PKG signaling pathway could be an important therapeutic target for osteogenesis-promoting clinical applications. Our data support a potential therapeutic use of pharmacological intervention in the kinase signaling pathway for the patients with osteoporosis. We have provided evidence that NO–cGMP–PKG signaling is highly active in rat osteoblasts exposed to SEMF. The pathway is known to mediate various biological responses but the potential of NO–cGMP–PKG signaling in ionic channel switch, Ca All authors have no conflicts of interest. This project was supported by grant