Confronted by failing metal prices and rising costs, progressive resource companies are examining novel methods for metal recovery. Conventional pyrometallurgical methods are subject to increasingly strict environmental regulations, high smelting charges and regional limitations resulting in potentially high transport charges. Pressure hydrometallurgical methods have several advantages including the ability to produce metal directly at the mine site thus reducing transport costs, closed circuit effluent treatment and reduced impurity penalties. Unfortunately, these processes are capital and maintenance intensive. Certainly other novel processes exist but many suffer from high reagent costs and unproven metal recovery methods. Fortunately low cost treatment alternatives exist in the form of heap biooxidation.
                  GeoBiotics, LLC, together with Kumba Resources Limited, is adapting the GEOCOAT® heap biooxidation technology to treat sphalerite concentrates. GeoBiotics originally developed the GEOCOAT® system for the treatment of refractory gold deposits and has since expanded the technology for the treatment of copper, nickel and cobalt. Now, with the industrial support of Kumba, GEOCOAT® is being successfully applied for the treatment of sphalerite concentrates. Testing indicates that zinc extractions in excess of 95% can be achieved from the Rosh Pinah concentrate.Pyrometallurgy currently accounts for more than half of all non-ferrous metal production and nearly 95% of all metals produced ( GeoBiotics has developed the GEOCOAT The GEOCOAT The hydrophobic nature of the concentrate assists in the formation of a coating on the support rock. No binding agents are required. The concentrate naturally adheres to the support rock and does not wash out of the heap during solution application or during heavy rainstorms. A 30 mm event was recorded over a half hour at a pilot heap test without consequence. Depending on the desired temperature of operation, the heap is inoculated with naturally occurring sulphide-oxidizing bacteria, such as the moderate thermophiles; Nutrients are added to the heap via recirculating solutions. As biooxidation progresses, the sulphides in the concentrate are oxidized and the solubilized zinc, iron, arsenic and sulphate are carried from the heap by the recirculating solution. A portion of the solution stream is bled from the circuit for purification and metal recovery. The relatively uniform size of the support rock leads to large interstitial spaces within the heap and subsequently a low resistance to air and liquid flows. Sufficient air for biooxidation and heat removal is supplied to the heap by low-pressure blowers through a system of perforated pipes laid in the drain rock below the base of the heap. After biooxidation additional lifts may be placed on the pad or the coated rock may be unloaded from the pad and the oxidized concentrate removed by trommeling or wet screening if precious metal recovery is warranted. The concentrate residue would be neutralized and then subjected to conventional recovery methods. The support can be recycled or, in the case of low grade sulphide ore, a portion can be bled out for disposal and replaced with fresh zinc bearing ore. This process offers several advantages over the more established refractory processes and hydrometallurgical base metal recovery systems; lower operating costs due to its simplicity, ease of operation, lower requirements for exotic, hard to procure, materials of construction, it is inherently safer, and exhibits lower capital requirements. This technology has been proven in a wide variety of column tests (10 cm to 1 m diameter) and demonstrated in two field trials. Kumba Resources is planning a field demonstration of the GEOCOAT The Rosh Pinah slimes dam contains approximately 15 million tonnes of historic sphalerite tailings grading 1.9% zinc for a total resource of 285 Kumba Resources has embarked on an extensive laboratory program with the aid of GeoBiotics to develop the GEOCOAT The Kumba slimes material represents a historic tailings from the Rosh Pinah mine. This material was not effectively recovered in the zinc flotation circuit and consists of sphalerite, pyrite, dolomite, feldspars and silica with the gangue minerals predominating. Although flotation optimization is still underway reasonable zinc recoveries have been achieved while rejecting significant pyrite and dolomite. Flotation recoveries in excess of 70% have been achieved. The concentrate sample comprises pyrite and lesser sphalerite in a matrix of quartz, dolomite, trace feldspar and muscovite (from XRD analysis). Pyrite is present as discrete, disseminated, euhedral cubic crystals or clusters throughout the matrix. Pyrite crystals may be partially or entirely enclosed within gangue, otherwise it occurs interstitially between gangue minerals. Locally, anhedral aggregates of pyrite occur interstitial to quartz and dolomite. Pyrite grain size is highly variable ranging from <5 μm to 150 μm ( Sphalerite occurs as anhedral interstitial aggregates. Locally, it may be intimately intergrown with quartz ( From this mineralogy it became apparent that further mineral liberation would have to be explored in order to enhance zinc selectivity for both flotation and the subsequent bioleach. The concentrate as produced was 63% passing 75 μm. Lakefield was supplied flotation concentrate by Kumba for the preliminary GEOCOAT As shown by The initial period of negative iron extraction is caused by the precipitation of iron that was added to the column with the inoculum solutions. A period of approximately 8 days was required to stabilize the pH below 1.8. It is evident that significant zinc dissolution can take place with out total sulphide biooxidation, this is illustrated by As shown by The initial tests conducted by Lakefield provided the impetus for Kumba to pursue further testing at their pilot plant located in Pretoria, South Africa. Further investigations were planned to define the GEOCOAT Achieving the ideal biooxidation of the Rosh Pinah slimes concentrate would entail achieving high zinc extraction while maintaining minimal iron dissolution and balancing the acid demand. Given that the concentrate has a significant amount of dolomite and that the only acid producing biooxidation reaction is that of pyrite, a tradeoff exists between balancing the acid demand and minimizing the iron dissolution. A series of GEOCOAT Based on the mineralogical investigations it was envisioned that a finer grind may provide better zinc selectivity in the bioleach. Only a moderately finer grind was first attempted in order to keep the potential additional operating costs lower. A grind of 88% minus 75 μm was selected. As shown increased selectivity was achieved using this finer grind compared to the initial test performed by Lakefield ( The results presented here have shown that sphalerite concentrates from Rosh Pinah slimes respond well to the GEOCOAT Kumba Resources and GeoBiotics have embarked on a joint technology development program to advance the GEOCOAT