Plenty of operational and geometric parameters have effects on spiral jet milling. Changes in the parameters cause distinctions in the flow conditions inside the mill and thereby also lead to consequences regarding the milled product. A new type of experimental spiral jet mill apparatus with almost entire optical accessibility enables a very convenient variation of the operational and geometric parameters as well as the determination of the flow conditions inside the spiral jet mill via non-invasive optical methods. Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) measurements with diethylhexyl sebacat (DEHS) tracer droplets as well as solid barium sulphate micro particles were carried out to investigate the flow conditions inside the spiral jet mill. The differences between the net milling gas velocity fields and the velocity fields of loaded spiral jet mills were exposed. With the mill being loaded, the comminution zone decreases in the horizontal direction as well as decreases and deflects in the vertical direction. Besides, the analysis of the velocity fields inside the mill apparatus showed that decreasing milling nozzle numbers lead to increasing velocities inside the spiral jet mill, even if the mass flow rate of the gas supply is kept constant and the nozzle jet velocity is limited to sonic velocity at choked flow. With decreasing milling nozzle numbers, broader comminution zones and increasing lengths of the milling jets were investigated. As a consequence, a better grinding efficiency was expected and also confirmed with decreasing milling nozzle number by grinding experiments, as the new type of experimental apparatus was constructed in a fully operative way concerning the grinding ability.critical conditions - pressure in the milling chamber kg · m milling gas pressure kg · m heat capacity ratio - milling nozzle outlet velocity m · s milling gas density kg · m sonic velocity m · s specific gas constant J · kg Stokes number - temperature K milling gas mass flow rate kg · s total milling nozzles outlet area m number of milling nozzles - milling nozzle outlet diameter m discharge coefficient - maximum flow function - volumetric single particle diameter (10%) m volumetric single particle median diameter m volumetric single particle diameter (90%) m The possibility of accelerating fluids through nozzles up to several 100 m/s, the absence of agitated built-in elements and therefore the absence of contamination through mechanical wear are the most important benefits of jet milling. When particles with diameters below 10μm are recommended, spiral jet mills are often used in the industry despite of their relatively high energy consumption. A lot of research concerning the spiral jet milling was done, starting with first exploratory and explanatory investigations by Rumpf [ In this study, in order to analyse the flow conditions inside the spiral jet mill and to describe the phenomenology of the grinding process, a new type of highly modular spiral jet mill apparatus with an almost entire optical accessibility was used [ As described in previous work [ For the PIV investigations of the unloaded net air flow conditions in the experimental spiral jet mill apparatus, liquid diethylhexyl sebacat (DEHS) seeding tracer droplets were used. These soluble, colourless and odourless tracers were generated by a high volume liquid droplet seeding generator (Dantec Dynamics GmbH) with an average droplet size of approximately 2 μm. These particles were expected to follow the air flow mostly without slip. The Stokes Number When operating the new-type spiral jet mill apparatus with solid particles like mentioned in The new type of experimental spiral jet mill apparatus was constructed in a fully operative way concerning the grinding ability [ In order to compare the milling gas flow conditions affected only by the gas flow through the milling nozzles, a high volume liquid droplet seeding generator (Dantec Dynamics GmbH) was used. Diethylhexyl sebacat (DEHS) was seeded via generator through the feed inlet. In respect of the comparability with industrial spiral jet mills, the nozzles were operated with choked flow in each case. This means that milling gas pressure is higher than a critical milling gas pressure following the critical pressure ratio: The milling nozzle outlet velocity can be calculated via the Saint-Venant-Wantzel's formula [ As convergent milling nozzles were used, milling nozzle outlet velocity was limited at the sonic velocity witch is defined under ideal gas conditions as Furthermore, the air mass flow rate under ideal gas conditions was limited at  with The convergent milling nozzles with an outlet diameter of 0.8 mm were varied in their number among twelve, eight and four nozzles. For optical reasons the field of view was placed at the opposite side of the feed injector and the injector seeding pressure was reduced to approximately 0.8 bar. Higher injector seeding pressures caused an over-load of seeding droplets and therefore massive refraction of the LASER light cut at the milling chamber inner wall. Lower injector seeding pressures prevented an entirely visible droplet-distributed field of view. For consistence reasons the mass flow rate and thereby the pressure of the milling gas was kept at the values that ensured a constant total mass flow rate of the total air supply (milling The mass flow rates of the milling gas were set at 16.7 kg/h for twelve, 14.9 kg/h for eight and 11.3 kg/h for four milling nozzles, so the absolute pressures were 3.8 bar (twelve nozzles), 4.9 bar (eight nozzles) and 7.0 bar (four nozzles). With the injector gas pressure being 0.5 bar higher than the milling gas pressure, this settings would lead to a constant total mass flow rate of air supply of 23.5 kg/h in each case. In order to get an optimal droplet load and thus an optimal optical appearance, the injector gas pressure at the high volume liquid droplet seeding generator had to be set to only 0.8 bar in every configuration. Thereby the total mass flow rate of the air supply was 19.5 kg/h with twelve milling nozzles, 17.7 kg/h with eight milling nozzles and 14.1 kg/h with four milling nozzles. The total mass flow rate could therefore not be kept exactly constant for metrological reasons. As can be seen in later section, this fact even reinforces the later insights as the air mass flow rate is slightly decreasing with decreasing number of milling nozzles in this investigation. In each configuration the velocity fields were recorded at three heights of the mill: 2.5 mm above the bottom, at the milling nozzles level and 2.5 mm under the cover. The velocity fields of the droplet-distributed fields of view inside the spiral jet mill apparatus are shown in Regarding the configuration with twelve nozzles ( In As the velocity field is separated in one zone with higher velocities (above 40 m/s) and one zone with lower velocities (under 40 m/s) quite sharply in all configurations, this abrupt loss of speed can be interpreted as the transition from comminution to classifying zone. Regarding appropriate phenomenological literature [ For comparison reasons a velocity profile over the width of the milling chamber (x [mm]) at the length y = 0 mm is shown in The above mentioned insights can be correlated with the grinding results of the appropriate grinding configurations. Letting the pressure and milling gas mass flow rate constant, the seeding generator was replaced by the vibratory feeder, injector nozzle and feed funnel and the injector pressure was adjusted 0.5 bar above the respective milling gas pressure as recommended in common-used design specifications and also approved in this research project. The total gas mass flow rate was 23.5 kg/h in each case. For each configuration two grinding experiments were conducted as the mass flow rate of the barium sulfate micro particles was varied in two steps: 15 g/min and 30 g/min. All grinding experiments were conducted with a total feed of 150 g of solid barium sulphate micro particles for consistency reasons. The milled product of each configuration (twelve, eight and four nozzles) and each feed mass flow rate step was extracted from the collecting vessel and analysed regarding the volumetric single particle diameter as for the unmilled feed via laser diffraction. The single particle median diameters As expected, the particles are coarser with 30 g/min feed mass flow rate than with 15 g/min. Regarding the efficiency for grinding products that are as narrow as possible, a feed mass flow rate of 15 g/min is clearly better suited. The cumulative distribution functions of the feed material and milled products with a feed mass flow rate of 15 g/min are shown in After acquiring and analysing the velocity fields of the droplet-seeded mill configurations, the same configurations (0.8 mm nozzle diameter) with choked flow were once again investigated with PIV. This time injector gas pressure was kept 0.5 bar higher than the milling gas pressure in each case like recommended in common-used design specifications and also approved in this research project. The total mass flow rate of the air supply (injector and milling gas) was kept constant for all configurations at 23.5 kg/h. Furthermore, the high volume liquid droplet seeding generator was replaced by the vibratory feeder and feed funnel in order to operate the mill with barium sulphate micro particles. Due to optical reasons, the feed mass flow rate was not arbitrary. Insufficient mass flow rate of the feed led to an incomplete visible particle-distributed field of view whereas a too high mass flow rate of the feed caused a high particle load accompanied by a strong illumination of the particles at the outer area of the mill and therefore insufficient illumination of the particles at the inner area of the mill. Additionally, a strong shadowing at the whole milling chamber occurred. A feed mass flow rate of 0.5 g/min resulted in the best optical outcomes.  In comparison to the solid particle-unloaded spiral jet mill ( With a new type of experimental spiral jet mill apparatus, non-invasive investigations of the flow conditions inside the spiral jet mill were conducted and the results were correlated with the appropriate results of the grinding experiments, as the experimental apparatus was constructed in a fully operative way concerning the grinding ability. The net air flow through the spiral jet mill was investigated via Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) and diethylhexyl sebacat (DEHS) seeding droplets, generated by a seeding generator, were used as tracers. Comminution zones can be defined directly on the basis of the PIV velocity fields as there is an abrupt loss of speed in the radial direction of the milling chamber. Except of the shape of the nozzle jets, which is clearly recognizable at the height of the milling nozzle outlet, the comminution zones are highly homogenous regarding the shape and velocities at every investigated height for each configuration. As a result, there is a rectangular shape of the vertical cross-section of the comminution zone, clearly filling the outer part of the milling chamber. Letting the total air flow rate nearly constant, there are several effects that are caused by the decreasing of the milling nozzle number: velocities inside the milling chamber are increasing, nozzle jets operate for a longer distance with higher velocities nozzle jets are less deflected by the superimposed spiral vortex comminution zones are increasing These insights are consistent with results of the grinding experiments: The single particle median diameter and the width of the particle size distribution are decreasing with decreasing number of milling nozzles. With the mill being loaded with solid particles, there can be observed several differences in comparison to the unloaded mill: stronger friction causes lower particle velocities at the inner walls and leads to a decreasing of the horizontal and vertical shape of the comminution zone nozzle jets eject a proportion of the flowing particles in the spiral vortex from the comminution zone towards the outlet zone The combined results according to flow conditions and grinding experiments help to describe the phenomenology of the spiral jet milling process. Further work will focus on the variation of milling nozzle outlet diameter as well as the milling nozzle angle. In these cases the grinding results will also be compared with the flow conditions inside the mill for several horizontal heights. Additionally, investigations with laval nozzles instead of convergent nozzles are planned in order to indicate the effect of this nozzle design. For further insights into the processes and coherences inside the spiral jet mill, the investigation of the holdup inside the milling chamber will be of great interest. This important parameter influences the grinding process as well as the following classification. The aim is to deepen the understanding of the main influencing characteristics on grinding in spiral jet mills in dependence on flow regime and varied process parameters. The effects of milling nozzle number as well as solid feed mass flow rate are explained in this paper. This work was supported by the