Recent research progress in hard rock mineral flotation shows that froth stability can be represented by air recovery, which is defined as the fraction of air entering a flotation cell that overflows the weir in unburst bubbles, and that air recovery has strong correlation with the separation performance of mineral flotation. Yet no experimental work on air recovery has been devoted to coal flotation. This paper studies air recovery in coal flotation and examines the links between air recovery, froth stability and coal flotation performance. A series of experiments were conducted using a laboratory-scale mechanical flotation cell at various methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) concentrations and aeration rates. It was found that air recovery has a strong correlation with dynamic froth stability determined by measuring the maximum froth height in a non-overflowing froth column. At a fixed aeration rate (hydrodynamic condition) and various MIBC concentrations, a strong correlation between air recovery and coal flotation performance was also observed.Froth flotation is one of the most important and widely used methods to separate one type of particles from another. Froth monitoring and control is increasingly being adopted in hard rock mineral flotation plants for improving separation efficiency since froth structure and stability plays an important role in determining flotation product grade, throughput and coarse particle recovery ( Froth stability can be characterized by techniques such as the dynamic and static froth stability tests ( Research progress in hard rock mineral flotation has shown that froth stability can also be represented by the fraction of air entering a flotation cell that overflows the weir in unburst bubbles, referred to as air recovery ( The air recovery concept was first used in modelling coal flotation by Among the most widely used frothers in coal flotation is MIBC (methyl isobutyl carbinol). The effect of MIBC concentration on the recovery of coal flotation has been studied by many researchers ( Aeration rate has a significant impact on froth stability in coal flotation. In the present work, we measured the air recovery and the separation performance of coal flotation in a laboratory-scale mechanical flotation cell with 5% coal, as a function of MIBC concentration and aeration rate. Dynamic froth stability was measured under the same conditions as the flotation tests except using a non-overflowing froth column mounted onto the flotation cell. Important links among air recovery, maximum froth height and flotation separation performance were identified, and their implication on coal flotation was discussed. A laboratory-scale mechanical flotation cell (a bottom-driven flotation cell manufactured by the JKMRC, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia) was used for the froth stability and flotation tests. The dimension of the flotation cell (1.5 The flotation frother used in the present work was methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) (99%, Acros Organics, USA), which was used without further purification. The flotation collector used was diesel. Sodium chloride (99.5%, Sigma Aldrich, USA) was purified by roasting at 700 By applying an approach similar to The air recovery ( The separation performance of coal flotation is calculated as the combustible recovery ( A modified Bikerman test (foam rise) method was used to measure froth stability using the same laboratory-scale mechanical flotation cell as in the air recovery measurement, with a rectangular column (112 Air recovery, maximum froth height, combustible recovery and product ash content were measured as a function of MIBC concentration in the presence of 150 The significant changes in air recovery from 5% to 47% are mainly due to the variations in the overflowing velocity and depth of froth over the lip. With increasing the MIBC concentration over the MIBC concentration range of 10 The maximum froth height versus MIBC concentration data are strongly correlated with the air recovery data and are consistent with those froth stability data reported by other workers ( The combustible recovery data presented in Increase in MIBC concentration considerably changed the product ash content from 6% to 12%. The increase in product ash content in the range of 1 From Air recovery, maximum froth height, combustible recovery and product ash content were measured as a function of aeration rate in the presence of 5% coal by weight, 150 The increase in air recovery with increasing aeration rate was mainly due to increased froth overflowing velocity and the height of froth over the lip. Over the aeration rate range of 1.48–3.92  The combustible recovery data presented in The product ash content steadily increased with increasing aeration rate, despite in a minute manner, suggesting that product ash content may correlate with air recovery and froth stability. The increase in product ash content was consistent with the observation made by Again, since the flotation time was fixed, the combustible recoveries reported here also represent the rate of flotation. This means that in our work flotation rate first increased then decreased. Similar observation was made by Note that in The air recovery data reported in this communication with 5% coal at different MIBC concentrations follow the same trend as those with 0.5% coal ( The present work was undertaken over a broad range of MIBC concentration, which illustrates the strong correlation between air recovery and froth stability. Perhaps one might question that the MIBC concentration range is too broad to be meaningful to understanding flotation since typical frother dosages in flotation practice are in the order of 10 A monotonic increase in air recovery at the aeration rate range under study was seen in the present work ( In mineral flotation trials at industrial scale, peak air recoveries were obtained at relatively low aeration rates, say 0.8–1.2 The bubble surface loading is different between hard-rock mineral flotation and coal flotation. Coal flotation has much higher mass recovery, and the flotation time is often much shorter. This means coal flotation has relatively high concentration of particles in the froth phase so the drainage rate of the interstitial liquid in the froth is retarded. In contrast, most of the work of the Cilliers group was conducted in Platinum group mineral flotation, where froths had relatively low solids loading and were generally brittle. The coal particles used in the present work were much coarser than the ultrafine platinum-containing mineral particles reported in most of the work of the Cilliers group (e.g. These industrial hard-rock mineral flotation trials involved much thicker froth layer (e.g. 24 Other factors such as the surface properties of flotation feed might also lead to different response of flotation recovery against aeration rate between hard rock mineral flotation and coal flotation. Fundamental understanding of bubble coalescence and bursting in flotation is important to elucidate air recovery and froth behavior in flotation. By assuming that the stability of thin foam films is constant or decreases with respect to the aeration rate of a flotation cell, Air recovery, maximum froth height, and coal flotation performance were measured as a function of MIBC concentration and aeration rate with 5% coal, 150 The authors thank BMA for providing the coal samples. Xuan Qu gratefully acknowledges The University of Queensland for the UQIRTA and UQRS scholarships.