The effect of silver ion, silver sulfide and silver-bearing concentrate (Ag–C) on the bioleaching of chalcopyrite has been investigated. It has been found that the addition of silver-bearing catalyst greatly enhanced copper dissolution from chalcopyrite and copper ores. The dissolved copper from chalcopyrite ore was increased from 25% to 75%, 65% and 67%, respectively, by addition of 0.32 g Ag, 4 g argentite (Ag2S) and 20 g Ag–C, per kilogram of ore after 20-day bioleaching in shake flasks. The bioleaching tests for a column charged with 18 kg chalcopyrite-containing waste rock showed that the copper extraction increased from 3.4% to 21.7% and 16.5%, respectively, by using 0.21 g Ag2S and 15 g Ag–C per kilogram of rock. The results indicated the possibility of using silver-bearing concentrate as an effective and cheap catalyst for bioleaching of chalcopyrite ore instead of the expensive silver. The mechanism of enhancement of chalcopyrite bioleaching in these systems was discussed, based on the “mixed potential model”, the mineralogy of silver-bearing concentrate as well as by using X-ray diffraction and electrochemical measurement.The increasing role of hydrometallurgy in modern mining due to both economic and environmental factors makes bioleaching processes more attractive, especially in treating copper ores. Chalcopyrite is the most important copper mineral. It is, however, relatively recalcitrant to chemical and microbiological oxidation, because of its special crystal structure and electrochemistry It has been reported that some catalytic ions, such as Ag(I), Sn(II), Bi(III), Co(II), Hg(II) and Mn(II), accelerate copper dissolution from chalcopyrite in the presence of Although the existence of Ag Silver is considerably expensive and it is difficult to recover the silver added in the processes; this greatly limits the industrial application of silver-catalyzed techniques. Although a continuous silver-catalyzed indirect bioleaching with effects separation (IBES) process recently developed at the University of Seville, Spain, has been applied to treat a Spanish copper–zinc concentrate, in which the silver used as catalyst can be recovered by acidic brine leaching of the residue In the present work, the effects of silver-bearing species, including silver ion, silver sulfide and a silver-bearing concentrate, on the bacterial leaching of chalcopyrite-containing samples in both shake flasks and column reactors have been investigated. The results showed some evidence of the mechanism of silver-catalyzed bioleaching of chalcopyrite, and provided an effective and economic technology for silver-catalyzed bioleaching of copper ores by using a silver-bearing concentrate. The pure and natural chalcopyrite used in this study was purchased from Beijing Geology Museum. The chalcopyrite-containing ore and the copper waste rock were provided by Dexing Copper Mine (Jiangxi Province, China). Chalcopyrite and copper ores were ground to pass a 320-mesh sieve and samples were used for bacterial leaching in shake flasks. The copper waste rock was crushed to 3–20-mm size and leached in columns. An enrichment culture mainly containing The nutrient medium, of 95 mL and an amount of ore sample suitable for a pulp density of 5 g solid/100 ml, were added into a 250-mL Erlenmeyer flask before the inoculation. The pH was maintained around 2.0 using 5 M H Two perspex columns (height: 100 cm, diameter: 15 cm), named as C X-ray powder diffraction patterns were obtained using a Siemens D-500 diffractiometer with Ni-filtered Cu–K Electrochemical measurement was conducted using a conventional three-electrode system with a chalcopyrite as a working electrode for anodic polarization, a platinum auxiliary electrode and a saturated calomel reference electrode. The data were converted into the standard hydrogen electron potential (SHE). A Potentiostat/Galvanostat, Princeton Model 273A and the EG&G electrochemical analysis system were used. The results of chalcopyrite bioleaching in the presence and in the absence of silver are shown in  As shown from Once the film of Ag In the presence of With regard to A careful analysis by the cyclic voltammetry of a CuFeS Finally, it should be pointed out that As shown in   As mentioned above, there is some difference between using Ag  It is worth mentioning that the tests were kept at uncontrolled room temperature, and the results obtained in column C Mineralogical studies indicated that the predominant silver mineral phase in silver-bearing concentrates was argentite, which could be considered as the “effective component”. Argentite (Ag Quantitative mineralogical analysis of the residue after ore bioleaching showed that the content of argentite in the sample decreased from 42.4 to 12.0 g/t at the end of attack, whereas an important increase in the content of native silver was detected Silver-bearing species such as silver ion, silver sulfide and silver-bearing concentrates can catalyze copper dissolution during the bioleaching of chalcopyrite and chalcopyrite-containing ores. Thermodynamic calculation and XRD results showed that the enhancement of chalcopyrite bioleaching by silver ion was due to the formation of Ag The authors would like to thank the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars No. 59925412 for support of this research.