It has been well documented that heavily-drawn, Cu-Nb microcomposites possess a conductivity greater than 60% IACS (International Annealed Copper Standard), and a tensile strength approaching 1 GPa Cu-15 wt. % Nb (Cu-15.6 vol.% Nb) was double consummable arc melted in an atmosphere of ultra high purity argon. Following the second melt, the ingot was 7.6 cm in diameter and 34.3 cm long. The ingots were subsequently machined to 7.0 cm in diameter and canned in a copper can with a 7.6 cm outer diameter prior to extrusion. The Cu-Nb was then extruded at 750°C to a 2.5 cm diameter rod and cold drawn to 1.5 mm. The Cu-Nb drawn to 1.5 mm was bundled inside a copper can, hot isostatically pressed at 750°C at a pressure of 100 MPa, machined to a 7.6 cm diameter, and extruded to a 2 cm diameter. The previously deformation processed wires (to 1.5 mm) become sub-elements in a bundle and each bundled wire will be called subelemental wires hereafter. The extruded bundled wire was then swaged and drawn to achieve its final size of a 2 mm × 3 mm rectangular cross section. During the final drawing stage, it was necessary to anneal the wires to avoid cracking in the wire. Long wire lengths were required to wind a magnet coil. The wires could be drawn to a length of 65 meters following annealing at 400°C during the final reduction stage. It should be noted here that the overall Nb content is 12.8 wt. % because the copper can was used. Heavily drawn Cu-Nb (long) wires were heat treated at 300°C, 400°C, and 500°C for one hour. TEM specimens were prepared by mechanically thinning followed by dimpling and ion milling on a liquid nitrogen stage. To ensure the samples were adequately cooled, the specimen rotation drive rod was submersed in liquid nitrogen for one hour prior to ion milling. TEM observations were carried out using a Phillips CM30 electron microscope operated at 300 kV. The resistivity was measured using a standard four-probe d.c. technique at room temperature, 293 K, and in a liquid nitrogen bath at 75 K.     One of the most pronounced microstructural feature in Cu-Nb microcomposites fabricated by the bundling and drawing process is that few Nb filaments appeared kinked or curled in cross-section as compared to previous studies The resistivity of Cu-Nb microcomposites can be partitioned into the contribution of various scattering mechanisms The contribution of the phonon scattering component, ρ Earlier, Karasek and Bevk The relatively low ratio of the resistivities (ρ Based upon a study of microstructure and electrical conductivities of Cu-Nb microcomposite wires, the following conclusions can be drawn: The cross sectional shape of Nb filaments in wires fabricated by bundling and drawing appear straight or slightly curved. Nb filaments were distributed irregularly and heavily kinked Nb filaments were never observed. The different shape of Nb filaments is attributed to the break-up and cylinderization of Nb filaments during the bundling process at high temperatures. The decrease of the conductivity below the annealing temperature of 400°C is due to the increasing contribution of the scattering associated with coherency strains of needle-shaped precipitates. The slight decrease of the resistivity ratio (ρ The preeminent contribution to resistivity in Cu-Nb microcomposites is electron scattering at Cu-Nb interfaces. The increase in conductivity in Cu-Nb microcomposites at an annealing temperature of 500°C due to the coarsening and spheroidization of Nb filaments. The authors acknowledge support of the United States Department of Energy (W7405-ENG36), the National Science Foundation, and the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (971-0803-034-2).