Thermoelectric devices (TEDs) are solid-state devices capable of converting a temperature gradient into electric power. Due to their robust physical composition, the importance of TEDs has increased recently as their applications have broadened from the aerospace industry to the recovery of waste energy from heat sources. As a consequence, an increase in their consumption and future disposal is expected. Nowadays, there is no recycling process designed for TEDs, thus representing an open-loop stream of end-of-life products, which results in the loss of valuable materials. This work aims to address this future problem. Hereby, commercial thermoelectric devices were mechanically processed and characterised. With the experimental results thus produced, statistical entropy analysis was performed to propose a suitable recycling process. Three different mechanical processing systems are compared by their liberation and concentration efficiencies. Based on the final values of statistical entropy, a final mechanical processing system is proposed consisting of grinding in a ring mill, followed by sieving with 3350 µm and 1000 µm openings. Furthermore, the characterization results suggest the possible addition of a dense media separation step to enrich the different material present in the fraction <1000 µm. The recommended system achieves a significant entropy reduction of Cu and separation of plastics from ceramics and semiconductors in only four steps. The final recoveries are TED components that may be suitable for metal refinement by other metallurgical means.Thermoelectric devices (TEDs) are solid-state heat and energy pumps designed to operate based on the Seebeck effect, where a gradient of temperature passed through a semiconductor generates an electric current, the inverse effect known as the Peltier effect ( The standard structure of commercially available TEDs, The semiconductors (yellow in The use of material flow analysis (MFA) in conjunction with relative statistical entropy (RSE), presents a suitable option to describe a process in terms of its concentration capabilities ( Te is reported to be one of the scarcest elements on the Earth's crust with a concentration of 1 ppb, and its economic importance is increasing due to its use for solar panel,TEDs production and as alloying compound in steel, Pb and Cu ( Te remains listed as a non-critical material by the European Union, even though its economic importance factor surpasses the criticality threshold ( Bi is reported by the European Union as a critical raw material, presenting an Earth's crust concentration of 8 ppb ( Cu extraction and refinement from primary sources is an on-going activity. However, the increasing need for this metal in addition to its high economic value renders extraction from secondary sources, i.e. recycling, a necessary operation. Cu recycling recovers almost 50% of the Cu in the US and 95% in Europe, according to official reports by ( Al recycling is a widely and well-established operation worldwide, in comparison, recycling of its ceramic form is lagging. There are different after-life options for Al A total of 149 TEDs were divided into four samples (A, B, C, D) and treated mechanically by different processes, as seen in Sample A in Manual disassembly was carried out employing a hammer, pliers, and tweezers following the next procedure: Tap with a hammer to expose the internal components. Extract semiconductors utilising a tweezer. Extract Cu-connectors from the ceramic by pliers. Hand-sorting of components based on their aspect ( As seen in Sample B processing was carried out with a As seen in Samples C and D were processed utilising a The preparation time for Sample C ( The material resulting from mechanical processing was sieved for 10 min in a From The X-ray Diffractometry (XRD) apparatus used for composition analysis is a Density measurements were carried out in a A brief description of the RSE-MFA mathematical background is provided next, although a more detailed description of this methodology can be found in the works of ( The  Furthermore, the values presented in The processing setups of Samples B and C were designed to produce particles with matching particle size distributions. In The chemical characterisation was performed in search for the typical materials reported by the published literature (  As shown in  As seen in Sample D was designed to obtain three well-defined fractions exploiting the differences in the malleability of the compounds. From  In To explore further separation possibilities, the fractions of Samples B and C were tested for density. The values obtained are as presented in  Statistical Entropy Analysis (SEA) is employed in this section to describe the concentration efficiency of the mechanicall processing of Samples B, C, and D. In total, B, C, and D samples (top of In As seen in Similarly to the previous section, the treatment process for Sample C ( In this case, the 1 mm sieve presents the most critical entropy reduction of the system, as especially seen in the Cu fraction. However, after the 1 mm sieve, the reduction of entropy is negligible, thus turning the subsequent stages redundant in a similar fashion than Sample B. In Sample C, the 3.35 mm sieve may also be redundant since it only reduces de entropy of the small fractions of plastic. The SEA suggests to remove sieves smaller than 1 mm, and possibly the 3.35 mm sieve. Despite the similarities in size characteristics, upon a comparison of the final statistical entropy values in Samples B and C, it is seen that the latter is only advantageous in the separation of plastic, which is a low valuable fraction. Considering these perspectives, short processing time in the ring mill is less suitable for entropy reduction than the cutting mill. As explained in As seen in As observed in Semiconductor and Ceramic: Semiconductor and Ceramic curves report to the same streams due to their similar brittle mechanical properties. The 60 s processing in the ring mill pulverises these compounds. Thus, they are only recoverable from the 1 mm sieve underflow as a heterogeneous mixture. These materials, however unlikely to be separated from each other by particle size, can be separated by density based on the properties reported in Sn-Coated Cu connectors: The extended time in the ring mill affects the Cu connector, as they do with the Semiconductor and Ceramic. During processing in the ring mill, the malleability of the copper comes into play flattening, instead of pulverising Cu, resulting in the efficient capture of this material at size opening sizes >1 mm. However, the RSE value of Cu does not reach a null entropy value because of its presence in two different fractions, wire fraction and the retained by the 1 mm sieve. Plastic fraction In Sample D, this fraction reaches its final entropy after the 3.35 mm as the extended processing time, promote the formation of clusters with large sizes. The link between plastic and the rest of the materials ends, as at the 3.35 mm there is no plastic passing to the subsequent fraction. The plastic does not reach a null RSE value because of its presence as an impurity into different streams, i.e., wire fraction and the retained by the 3.35 mm sieve. Furthermore, an ideal scenario, (i.e., RSE = 0 for all components), would require the use of additional processing steps. As an example, the plastic and Cu fractions likely require additional liberation process for the extracted wire, in addition to the separation of the Cu and Plastic by the 3.35 mm and 1 mm sieves, as found in this work. The fine fraction, semiconductor and ceramic, may be subsequently separated by a dense media separation process. However, it should be kept in mind that additional steps inevitably imply an increased resource quota of the process. Based on the results above, the mechanical processing system to treat TEDs, presented in The process begins with the removal of the wiring system from the TEDs, a well-established practice in recycling plants ( This work presents a first approach to the study of recycling of Thermoelectric Devices (TEDs). Commercially available TEDs were processed mechanically using different milling equipment (cutting and ring mill) and processing time (15 and 60 s). Once liberated, the components were then sieved and analysed to obtain characterisations based on particle size, chemical composition and density. The different processing set-ups of the samples produced (labelled B, C, and D) were evaluated by statistical entropy analysis (SEA) to identify a process with the highest concentration action. The SEA results reflect that a combination of extended processing time in the ring mill along with 2 sieves (3.35 mm and 1 mm) present a sharper decrease on entropy value of Cu and plastics. Whereas, the other equipment and sieves employed presented higher levels of entropy (lower concentration) amongst all the compounds. Consequently, the proposed system entails a ring mill step and the two sieves mentioned above, and, it is capable of reducing the entropy of the throughput efficiently thus, reflecting a highly efficient separation process especially seen in the Cu and plastic fractions. The rest of the compounds, i.e. Bi  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The research presented was supported the “Closing the loop for high-added-value materials (CloseLoop)” project supported by the O.V.M. thanks the Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 