Since a pseudotachylyte is generated through a combination of comminution and frictional melting, it may record an ambient Earth's magnetic field as a thermal remanence during the cooling from friction melt. To test the reliability of determining the paleointensity, the Coe-modified Thellier method was carried out on a small suite of pseudotachylytes in large-displacement fault zones from the North-range Sudbury impact structure. Pseudotachylytes studied here are classified into two types in their protolith lithology: gneiss-origin and granitoid-origin pseudotachylyte. Petrologic observations confirm the presence of abundant fine-grained magnetite inclusions and coarse-grained titanomagnetites with exsolved ilmenite lamella in gneiss-origin pseudotachylyte. In granitoid-origin pseudotachylyte, we found a scatter distribution of multidomain magnetite. Although the granitoid-origin pseudotachylyte fails to estimate the paleointensity, the gneiss-origin pseudotachylytes yield weak paleointensity values, which are consistent with previous paleointensity data from the norite in Sudbury Igneous Complex. These results suggest that the protolith petrology controls a magnetic mineralogy in pseudotachylytes and the reliability as recorder of ancient Earth's magnetic field.High-speed slips on fault surfaces generate pseudotachylytes due to friction-induced cataclastic milling and melting during co-seismic faulting ( It is considered that quickly cooled single plagioclase crystals ( Four pseudotachylyte samples were collected from a north–northwest-transect through the North Range of Sudbury as exposed alongside Highway 144 in road cuttings ( The Sudbury pseudotachylyte is characterized by a black and fine grained matrix so that they are difficult to examine in detail using conventional-light microscopy. Alternatively, we employed back-scattered electron imaging on an analytical JEOL 5800LV scanning electron microscope (SEM) attached with energy-dispersive X-ray spectrum. The matrices exhibit cryptocrystalline to microcrystalline igneous textures ( Magnetic properties of these pseudotachylytes are summarized in The presence of coarse-grained titanomagnetite associated with exsolved ilmenite lamella suggests that the matrix in gneiss-origin pseudotachylyte developed at temperatures higher than the Curie point of magnetite (∼ Gneiss-origin pseudotachylyte samples were step-wise thermally demagnetized in zero field to 630 °C, and was subjected to alternating field (AF) up to 140 mT. All demagnetization diagrams obtained with both thermal and AF techniques are shown in The characteristic remanence was isolated within a narrow (20–40 °C) temperature range above 500 °C ( Coe's version of the Thellier method ( Much of the remanence carried by the gneiss-origin pseudotachylytes was removed in a narrow range of unblocking temperatures between 500 and 580 °C. In contrast, the granitoid-origin pseudotachylyte shows two unblocking temperatures of 460 °C and 585 °C. Plots of NRM lost versus pTRM gained (‘Arai’ plots) are linear with We tested the reliability of several meters-scale pseudotachylytes as a paleointensity recorder through post-impact pseudotachylytes from the North Range of the 1.85 Ga Sudbury impact structure, Canada using the Coe-modified Thellier method. Our preliminary results indicate that gneiss-origin pseudotachylytes estimate a low field intensity value at 1.85 Ga ( Rock magnetic and SEM analyses performed on Sudbury pseudotachylytes show that gneiss-origin pseudotachylytes are likely to retain reliable paleointensity information of ancient magnetic field because of the presence of cryptocrystalline-silicate armored magnetites, which prevent from alteration during experimental heating and natural alteration occurring on geological time scale. However, they also exhibits holocrystalline matrix with much larger grain sizes more than 300 μm and coarse-grained (MD) titanomagnetites ( Through the study of impactites in the Janisjarvi and Popogay impact craters, Paleointensity study of gneiss-origin pseudotachylytes at the North Range of Sudbury provides an important view for Proterozoic geomagnetic field. High unblocking temperatures of NRM (> We thank H. Tsunakawa and N. Mochizuki at Tokyo Institute of Technology for instructing a Thellier method and for valuable discussions, S. Cattalani and V. Varderklift (INCO Technical Services Ltd.) for providing the geological map of the Sudbury area. Thorough and constructive reviews by M. Perrin and an anonymous reviewer greatly improved the final version of the manuscript. N.N. expresses his profound gratitude to Eric Ferre for his encouragement. N.N. is grateful to the JSPS postdoctoral fellowships for research abroad, and thanks H. Nakamura for sampling. This work was partly supported by the 21st century Center-Of-Excellence (COE) program (Earth Sciences) at Tohoku University and the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (B).