In this work, zero–valent iron powders were supported onto polyethylene pellet using thermal attachment method at low temperature (120 °C). Polyethylene–supported zero–valent iron was used as a photo–Fenton buoyant catalyst for the removal of Ponceau 4R dye from aqueous solution under visible light. The material was characterized by X–ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) coupled with energy dispersive X–ray spectroscopy (EDS), Fourier–transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and photographic images. Through the results, excellent adherence of zero–valent iron powders onto the polyethylene pellet surface was obtained. The material showed satisfactory catalytic activity, reaching total decolorization of Ponceau 4R dye at 15 min of reaction. In addition, the buoyant catalyst exhibited other advantages such as easy separation from aqueous solution, good stability and recyclability. Therefore, this research exhibited the great potential of polyethylene–supported zero–valent iron as a photo–Fenton buoyant catalyst to apply in environmental remediation.Organic dyes are widely used in various industrial segments such as textile, pharmaceutical and food industries, cosmetics and leather industry. The dyes that present azo group (N Among the conventional techniques used in remediation of wastewater containing organic pollutants, especially colored effluents, the Advanced Oxidative Processes (AOPs) have emerged as promising alternative technologies for efficient elimination of the organic pollutant molecules from aqueous solution [ Recently, Raman and Kanmani [ A material which will support the catalyst impregnation has to present characteristics for such applicability, such as, affinity with the catalyst material, does not affect catalytic activity in the impregnation process, has stability for long–term use and, finally, prevent that the catalyst being leached during the reaction [ In order to associate all these relevant characteristics, this work aimed to develop a floating catalyst using ZVI particles supported on low density polyethylene (LDPE). It was investigated the feasibility of its application in photo–Fenton process for the treatment of synthetic effluent containing dye. Low density polyethylene (LDPE) pellets were used as support for zero–valent iron (ZVI/Fe°). ZVI sample (CAS number: 7439–89–6; molecular weight of 55.85 g mol The LDPE–supported ZVI buoyant catalyst was prepared by heat treatment, and the procedure for fixing ZVI onto the LDPE pellet occurred as follows: the LDPE pellets were placed in crucibles and covered by the ZVI powder. The crucibles were then put in an oven at 120 °C (LDPE melting point) in order adhere the ZVI particles on the surface of polyethylene pellets. After 180 min, the crucibles were taken out and allowed to cool at room temperature. Once cooled sufficiently, it was then mechanically sealed and residual ZVI powder was washed and rinsed off using distilled water. The X–ray diffraction (XRD) was used to identify the crystalline phase structure of ZVI. XRD was performed on a Rigaku MiniFlex 300 diffractometer with a Cu–Kα (λ = 1.5418 Å) radiation source, 30 kV, 10 mA. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) measurements of ZVI were carried out by a Shimadzu IR–Prestige–21 spectrometer. FTIR spectra were measured in the range of 4500 to 500 cm The simulated wastewater was prepared by dilution of commercial dye Ponceau 4R onto distilled water. The dye aqueous solution was subjected to photo–Fenton treatment. A glass batch reactor (150 mL capacity, 8 cm inner length, 5 cm inner diameter) opened to the atmosphere at room temperature, and irradiated by spiral commercial fluorescent lamp (85 W, Empalux, luminous efficacy of 65 lumens/W) was employed in experiments. The lamp was fixed 10 cm above the surface of the aqueous solution. In a typical experiment, the reactor was charged with one unit of catalyst (LDPE–supported ZVI) and 50 mL of aqueous solution, kept under continuous magnetic and continuous stirring in dark to attain the adsorption equilibrium. After the adsorption stage, H The dye concentration in the collected aliquots was determined by the absorbance reading on an UV–Vis spectrophotometer (Kasuaki, IL–226–NM), at the wavelength of maximum absorbance ( The radical scavengers isopropanol (IPA), benzoquinone (BQ), sodium azide (NaN The XRD pattern of the ZVI sample is shown in FTIR spectrum of the ZVI is displayed in    Experiments were carried out to observe the effect of the initial pH of the solution on the Ponceau 4R decolorization. The decolorization efficiency at different pH is shown in It can be stated from Moreover, this predisposition for better efficiency in acid pH is explained, because at low pH, the removal of the passivation layers of the ZVI nucleus can occur, making them free to react with the azo bond of the dye molecule [ The effect observed in the reaction on the Ponceau 4R decolorization at different dosages of H The decolorization efficiency of a compound also depends on its initial concentration. In order to study this effect, experiments were carried out by varying the initial concentration of the Ponceau 4R dye from aqueous solution, keeping constant the other parameters (pH and H The efficiency of recycling of the LDPE–supported buoyant ZVI catalyst was investigated under the ideal conditions reported in the previous sections (dye initial concentration = 50 mg L To emphasize further the efficiency of the LDPE–supported buoyant ZVI catalyst in heterogeneous photo–Fenton reaction, processes such as Fenton, photo–Fenton, catalyst/light, H In photo–Fenton degradation process, it is possible to verify the generation of some active species, which are responsible for the degradation efficiency of the organic compound. In order to indicate which of the species are dominant, tests were carried out using different scavengers. The results obtained are shown in Based on the experimental observations as aforementioned and those reported in literature [ Then, oxidative species are produced by a series of photogenerated electron–hole reactions (Eqs. The LDPE–supported ZVI buoyant catalyst proposed in this study have been successfully prepared using a fast and simple method, and this application for remediation of contaminated water was very promising. This material was used in a heterogeneous photo–Fenton system and exhibited favorable catalytic activity in decolorization of Ponceau 4R dye, reaching 100% of efficiency at 15 min of reaction. The hydroxyl ( The authors would like to thank