The effects of mechanical perturbations on two soil microarthropod communities (oribatid mites and collembolans) were investigated in a moder beech forest on sandstone. We disturbed the soil matrix by sieving and mixing the litter and soil of the moder profile. The top litter layer (L material) and the deep mineral soil (Bv) remained intact. Three amounts of disturbance were established: a single perturbation, perturbations once every 2 months (60d) and once every 2 weeks (14d). Densities of most groups of oribatid mites and all groups of collembolans declined in the disturbance treatments. In most cases, densities were lowest in the strong perturbation treatment (14d). Desmonomata were the only group of oribatid mites that benefited from intermediate amounts of disturbance but not from the strongest disturbance. Also, disturbances reduced diversity of oribatid mites and collembolans. According to their sensitivity to disturbances oribatid mites ranked Poronota=Enarthronota=Suctobelbidae (the most sensitive)>Oppiidae>Tectocepheus>Desmonomata. The ranking of collembolans was Folsomia (the most sensitive)>Hypogastruridae/Neanuridae>Onychiuridae=Isotomidae>Entomobryidae. Generally, tolerance of disturbance was wider for oribatid mites than for collembolans. The results indicate that disturbances such as mixing of litter and soil and comminution of litter material strongly affect the density and diversity of soil microarthropods. However, they also indicate that the soil microarthropod community is resistant to weaker disturbances. In the field, mechanical disturbances are often caused by burrowing of earthworms. Our results suggest that the high density of microarthropods in moder soils may be due to the low intensities of mechanical disturbances by earthworms.Environmental factors that prevent organisms from exponential growth by causing density-independent mortality can be regarded as disturbances. Biotic and abiotic factors may function as disturbances ( Disturbance regimes affect species diversity. Our aim was to understand the reason for the high diversity of soil microarthropods in temperate forest ecosystems. In contrast to the intermediate disturbance hypothesis, there is increasing evidence that even moderate amounts of disturbance reduce the diversity and density of soil microarthropods ( Earthworms may cause periodic disturbance for soil microarthropods in deciduous forests. Especially in calcareous forests, high densities of endogeic and anecic earthworms can be regarded as agents of disturbance ( The evidence that earthworms detrimentally affect soil microarthropods mainly resulted from laboratory experiments (Migge, personal communication) and from comparisons of microarthropod densities and community structure from different forest types with large and small densities of earthworms ( The study site, a mature beech ( In August 1998, 20 circular experimental plots with an area of 1 m In December 1998, after 4 months of the experimental regime, soil microarthropods were sampled by taking soil cores of 5 cm dia (one soil core per plot). We separated the horizons L, F–H/Ah and Bv and extracted soil microarthropods using heat extraction ( Abundances of collembolans, oribatid mites, juvenile and parthenogenetic oribatid mites were analysed by analysis of variance (ANOVA) using SAS 8e (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, USA). Effects of perturbation (control, single perturbation and the rates of two perturbation) and horizon (L-layer, intermediate layer, soil) were analysed. However, due to limited effects of the factor ‘horizon’ (reduction of density of most soil animal taxa with soil density but no interaction of horizon with other factors investigated) we pooled the data on soil microarthropods for this factor. For comparison of means Tukey's honestly significant difference was calculated. The response of supraspecific taxa of collembolans and oribatid mites was analysed by one-way multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA, Pillai's Trace; A discriminant function analysis (DFA) was carried out with the abundance data of all species of Collembola and Oribatida together to investigate if the community structure of the microarthropods differed between disturbance regimes. Squared Mahalanobis distances between group centroids were calculated to evaluate significant differences among disturbance regimes. Before the DFA we performed a multidimensional scaling (MDS). MDS generates a distance matrix (distances between the sites) that regroups the samples in Single and repeated perturbations strongly reduced the abundance and the number of species. The influence of the perturbations was different for different taxa and species of oribatid mites and collembolans. In the control and in the single perturbation treatment 16 oribatid mite species were present which were reduced to 14 in the BM treatment and to seven in the BW treatment (ANOVA: The density of oribatid mites was gradually reduced with increasing intensity of perturbations (ANOVA: The density of collembolans also declined with the intensity of perturbations but the reduction was much stronger compared to oribatid mites (ANOVA: MANOVA indicated that oribatid mite groups responded differently to the perturbations (Pillai's Trace, MANOVA of collembolan groups also indicated that collembolan taxa differentially responded to the perturbations (Pillai's Trace; The proportion of juvenile oribatid mites significantly increased from 27% in the control to 45% in the single perturbation treatment ( The structure of the oribatid mite and collembolan community differed significantly among treatments (Wilks' lambda=0.136; approx. Disturbance is a key process in understanding density and diversity of plant and animal species ( Organisms may be subject to disturbances but they may also function as agents of disturbances and affect other organisms in a positive or negative way (metabiosis or engineering; Our results indicate that disturbances strongly affect the community structure of microarthropods. The density and diversity of oribatid mites and collembolans was generally reduced due to disturbances but compared to oribatid mites effects on collembolans were more pronounced indicating that collembolans are more sensitive towards mechanical disturbances. The results also indicate that even low rates of disturbances are detrimental. Therefore, it appears that the intermediate disturbance hypothesis may not apply for soil microarthropods. Of the oribatid mites, Poronota, Suctobelbidae and Enarthronota were adversely affected by the mechanical disturbance. These results are in accordance with results from our previous studies ( Interestingly, Desmonomata increased in response to the single and BM perturbations. Even in the stronger BW perturbation treatment their density was similar to that in the control. The main reason for the high density of Desmonomata was the large number of juveniles in the disturbed plots. In the single perturbation treatment 50% of all juveniles of oribatid mites were Desmonomata and in the periodic perturbation plots 65% of the juveniles were Desmonomata. These results confirm that Desmonomata are able to reproduce very quickly after disturbances ( Among Collembola the taxa  We thank Dr Alexei V. Tiunov and Dr Sonja Migge for comments on the statistical analysis. This study was supported by the Germany Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Technology (BMBF) and the German research council (DFG). Taxonomic composition of oribatid mites and collembolans as used for the MANOVA.  