The uptake of trivalent chromium by protonated dry alginate beads from aqueous solutions was investigated at 25 °C in batch-type experiments. The differences between the mechanisms associated with formation of alginate beads and with metal uptake were demonstrated. Uptake was coupled with a release of protons; this ion exchange was found to be the mechanism of the uptake.
                  The uptake was strongly dependent on the Cr-bearing solution pH up to a value of around 4.5. Uptake reaches a value as high as 112 mg of chromium per g of alginate beads (dry wt.) at pH 4.5; this uptake is higher than that reported for several biosorbents. The experimental data fitted the Langmuir adsorption model; however, the maximum uptake computed from it was 32% lower than the value measured. SEM analysis of the cross section of beads after uptake experiments showed no evidence of precipitation of chromium within the alginate beads at the pH ranges tested.
                  A residual concentration around 0.3 mg/L of chromium, which allows safe discharge of solutions having Cr(III), was reached when alginate beads were challenged with a solution initially having as low as 10 mg/L of the metal.
                  EPMA-EDX analysis of Cr-loaded beads showed a uniform distribution of chromic species throughout the structure of alginate beads, regardless of the solution pH.The capacity of certain biological entities (such as algae, bacteria, fungi and yeast) to sequester heavy metal ions from dilute aqueous solutions has attracted significant attention in recent years ( Alginate is often used for immobilization of biological entities, extractans and exchangers Trivalent chromium is often present in waste waters from tannery, electroplating, metal finishing and printed circuit plants, and manufacturing of mineral colors and fillers. The legal discharge limit of Cr(III) varies from 0.05 mg/L (in surface waters) to 2.0 mg/L (in sewers) depending on the processing, country and waste water treatment methods The complex behavior of this heavy metal This paper reports on the use of protonated dry alginate beads as a potential sorbent material for the uptake of trivalent chromium and the mechanism involved in this process. All chemicals were of analytical reagent grade and were used without further purification. Stock and test solutions of chromium were prepared from Cr(NO Calcium protonated dry alginate beads (Ca-PDAB) were produced according to the protocol described in our previous work In the uptake experiments, 400 mL of the Cr-bearing solution with a desired concentration was contacted with a given amount of PDAB for a fixed time at 25.0±0.1 °C under a constant value of pH. The experimental set-up was a cylindrical round-bottom glass reactor of 500 mL capacity placed in a thermostatically controlled water bath. The reactor was charged with the solution having concentrations ranging from 10 to 500 mg/L of chromium ions. Stirring of the system was provided by a rotor having an overhead Teflon-coated mixing wing. After the operating temperature was reached, the solution pH was adjusted to the desired value with nitric acid or sodium hydroxide solutions. Then, 80 mg of PDAB was added, at time zero, to the solution. During the uptake experiments, the pH of the solution was kept constant by adding sodium hydroxide solution. Samples of 1 mL, for chemical analysis, were withdrawn at selected time intervals. The samples were diluted to 10 mL with doubly distilled water and then filtered through a cellulose acetate membrane filter. The concentrations of the remaining chromium and released calcium in the filtrates were analyzed by ICP-AES. The beads were collected at the end of the experiments, washed several times with doubly distilled water, air dried and stored for SEM observation and EPMA-EDX analysis. Most of the experiments were conducted in single. Experimental reproducibility was evaluated with experiments in duplicate, which showed variations lower than 3%. For those experiments the average values of uptake are reported.  A release of protons from the PDAB was observed to occur during the uptake of chromic ions  Since the main component of the PDAB is alginic acid, a weak acid, an increase of the solution pH will increase the amount of active sites available for interaction with chromic ions. Hence, the uptake will be favored by increasing the pH of the solution as shown by the experimental results. On the other hand, because of the low dissociation nature of the functional group of the alginate (COOH) at low pH, the uptake will be suppressed as shown in The size and shape of beads were not detectably affected during experiments; this, coupled with the fact that no cross-linking Ca was released during Cr uptake, suggests the chemical and structural stability of the PDAB in the pH range studied. Replacement of structural calcium of the alginate beads with chromium ions is not occurring. The mechanism associated with the formation of the alginate beads probably differs from the mechanism of Cr uptake because no Cr uptake was observed at extremely low pH values. Evidence to support this was found when alginate was cross-linked with barium. There are no morphological differences between beads cross-linked with barium and those cross-linked with calcium, and they exhibit the same behavior in aqueous solution The uptake of chromic ions was coupled with a release of protons as shown in  In Saturation of alginate beads with chromic ions was studied by increasing the concentrations of metal ion in the solutions in contact with the beads, from 10 to 500 mg/L. The results are illustrated in The experimental data were fitted with the common adsorption isotherms of Langmuir and Freundlich, whose parameters are shown in The drying process of the beads resulted in PDAB of high porosity with channels and open pores throughout the structure. Hence, the ions interacted with the functional groups on the external surface of the beads and the surface of the channels.  The uptake of chromic species having a complex chemical speciation was studied using protonated alginate beads, which were dried prior to use. The different mechanisms for alginate beads formation and Cr uptake were demonstrated. The uptake of chromic species significantly increases with a rise in pH of the Cr-bearing solution up to 4.5; above this point to pH 5.5 Cr uptake becomes constant. The uptake of different chromic species by alginate beads was found to be an ion exchange process, which can be represented by Drying the sorbent material generated open pores and fine channels that allowed the Cr uptake throughout the external and internal structure of the beads. This makes the sorbent material a porous ion exchanger having high permeability and high capacity. The maximum uptake of chromium at pH values of 4.5 was found to be 112 mg/g (dry wt.), which was 32% higher than the One of the authors, JPI, thanks the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture of Japan for the financial support provided through the Monbusho Scholarship Program.