Magmatic volatiles are critically important in the petrogenesis of igneous rocks but their inherent transience hampers the identification of their role in magmatic and mineralization processes. We present evidence that magmatic volatiles played a critical role in the formation of the 1894Ma Paleoproterozoic Montviel alkaline–carbonatite complex, Canada, and the related carbonatite-hosted REE–Nb deposit. Field and drill core relationships indicate that lithological units of the complex were emplaced in the following order: clinopyroxenites, melteigites, ijolites, melanosyenites, leucosyenites, granites, lamprophyric silicocarbonatites, rare magnesiocarbonatites, calciocarbonatites, ferrocarbonatites, late mixed carbonatites, kimberlitic silicocarbonatites and polygenic breccias. Magmatic minerals within these units were systematically metasomatized. In undersaturated silicate rocks, augite recrystallized to aegirine–augite and aegirine, plagioclase recrystallized to albite, and nepheline recrystallized with analcime, cancrinite and albite. Primary biotite was replaced by secondary, REE-rich metasomatic biotite, particularly along fractures and alteration pockets. In carbonatites, liquidus phases consisted of calcite and dolomite and were recrystallized to ferroan dolomite, ankerite, siderite, barytocalcite, witherite and strontianite, which are intimately related to the REE-bearing carbonates and fluorocarbonates. Biotite is common to all lithologies, ranges in REE concentrations from 1.5 to 230 ppm and yielded subsolidus crystallization temperatures ranging from 770°C to 370°C. Sm–Nd isotope analyses from biotite and aegirine–augite yield a range of ε
                     Nd values (+3.4 to −3.0) that suggests mixing of fluids from three sources during the crystallization of the Montviel magmas. The clinopyroxenites to melteigite, ijolites and melanosyenites crystallized augite and biotite with initial ε
                     Nd value≥3.4 and these minerals were metasomatized by a 1st fluid, lowering their ε
                     Nd to values comprised between 0.8 and 3.4. Silicocarbonatites and carbonatites subsequently crystallized aegirine–augite and biotite with initial ε
                     Nd value ≥2.6 and a 2nd fluid metasomatized the minerals to lower ɛ values. Both the 1st and the 2nd fluids eventually mixed with a 3rd recrystallizing aegirine–augite and biotite and lower their εNd values down to −3.0. The results presented herein suggest that the mantle magmas evolved through 4 distinct mantle pulses by fractional crystallization, mixing of depleted mantle fluids with crustal fluids, and metasomatism. Some of the silicate rocks also show evidence of assimilation of wall rock as part of their petrogenetic evolution. During the last stages of its evolution in carbonatites, the fluid source transited from the depleted mantle to the crust and we speculate that this resulted in a violent explosive eruption creating the diatreme-shaped, HREE-rich polygenic breccia.Magmatic volatiles are critically important in the petrogenesis of igneous rocks but their inherent transience hampers the identification of their role in magmatic and mineralization processes (e.g., Metasomatism is widely used to describe the chemical alteration of solid rocks and minerals by external fluids, but the definition of metasomatism (e.g., Alkali metasomatism by K and Na has been documented in several types of magmatic–hydrothermal systems such as in the high temperature K alteration of porphyry deposits (e.g., The Montviel alkaline complex, Canada, represents and ideal setting to study the role of metasomatism in the evolution of magmatic–hydrothermal systems because: (1) of the presence of diverse lithologies, (2) each of the lithologies was metasomatized; and (3) the alkaline complex was extensively drilled for core samples which were readily available for this study. This study presents the petrography of the lithologies and establishes a paragenetic mineral sequence based on field work and drill core relations ( The Subprovinces of the Superior Craton of Laurentia were assembled into a single Archean craton by the end of the Archean ( The Paleoproterozoic Montviel alkaline–carbonatite complex intruded foliated Archean tonalites in the northeastern part of the Abitibi Subprovince at 1894 Polished sections were prepared and observed using a Leica DMLP petrographic microscope equipped with Leica DFC450 digital camera and using a Hitachi TM3000 tabletop scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with a Bruker Quantax 70 energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS). Powdered bulk rock samples were scanned using a Siemens D500 X-ray diffractometer equipped with a Co tube and a Si detector at UQAM. X-ray diffraction spectra were identified using Eva software version 1.3. Biotite, clinopyroxene, amphibole and a variety of tectosilicates were analyzed for a selection of major to minor elements using a JEOL JXA-8900 Attempts to analyze the same biotite crystals for REE concentrations using a laser ablation ICPMS system were made at the Geotop, UQAM. The system consists of a Photon-machines Analyte.193 Sm–Nd isotopes were analyzed at Geotop, UQAM. Sample weighing and chemistry were performed in a class 100 (ISO5) clean room. Powdered samples were weighed (about 0.1 In the field and in drill cores, clinopyroxenites, melteigites, ijolites and melanosyenites are observed as dykes, pods and sills that cross-cut each other. For example, clinopyroxenite commonly hosts dykes, pods and sills of ijolite and melanosyenite whereas ijolites and melanosyenites commonly host dykes, pods and sills of clinopyroxenite. The geological map in The melteigites and ijolites are found in association with clinopyroxenites and melanosyenites and are always metasomatized. Melteigites consist of coarse augite altered to aegirine–augite and aegirine, along with significant amounts of coarse biotite, titanite and fluorapatite ( The syenites are commonly associated with melteigites–ijolites and clinopyroxenites and range in composition from K-feldspar clinopyroxenites to quartz leucosyenites. They resemble ijolites but contain greater amounts of microcline and albite and less nepheline, cancrinite and analcime. The melanosyenites consist of ferropotassic magnesio-hastingsite, riebeckite, aegirine–augite and microcline. Aegirine–augite and albite are secondary. The leucosyenites ( The riebeckite granites outcrop only in the southern part of the intrusion and are mapped as a single unit ( Silicocarbonatites at Montviel have compositions intermediate between ultramafic undersaturated silicate rocks (clinopyroxenites, melteigites, ijolites and melanosyenites) and carbonatites, and contain 10–50% magmatic carbonate minerals. Silicocarbonatites are subdivided into lamprophyric- ( The magnesiocarbonatites are rare and occur as pods and lenses intermixed with other types of carbonatites and silicocarbonatites, and are dominated by dolomite of magmatic origin. Carbonates of Ba–Ca–Mg (Ca-bearing norsethite or Ba-bearing dolomite?), barytocalcite, strontianite, fluorite, REE carbonates and fluorocarbonates and albite are hydrothermal and present in major concentrations ( Calciocarbonatites are dominated by calcite and range from barren and unaltered calcite carbonatite to REE-bearing, hydrothermally altered calciocarbonatites. Calciocarbonatites contain major amounts of primary calcite and dolomite which are cut by veinlets of ankerite, strontianite, witherite and barytocalcite and contain minor to trace concentrations of aegirine–augite, biotite, fluorapatite ( Ferrocarbonatites are the most abundant type of carbonatites, cross-cut the calciocarbonatites and are strongly and pervasively hydrothermally altered. They are dominated by hydrothermal or metasomatic ankerite and Fe-dolomite, siderite, barytocalcite, strontianite, witherite, fluorite, fluorapatite and minor to trace amounts of biotite, aegirine, arfvedsonite, barite, REE carbonate and fluorocarbonate, monazite-(Ce), xenotime-(Y), loparite (REE perovskite), sphalerite and galena ( The hydrothermally altered ferrocarbonatites are cross-cut by injections of mixed silicocarbonatites, calciocarbonatites and ferrocarbonatites gathered under the term of ‘mixed carbonatites’. These mixed carbonatites were also hydrothermally altered to various degrees with alteration products similar to those described above. Their existence clearly demonstrates that carbonatites were injected repeatedly and that episodes of magmatism both preceded and followed episodes of hydrothermal alteration. The mixed carbonatites show zones of alterations with REE fluorocarbonates (qaqarssukite, carbocernaite), barite, biotite and chlorite in calcite ( The polygenic breccias consist of clasts and xenocrysts of silicocarbonatites and carbonatites in a pervasively altered matrix of dolomite, calcite, ankerite, strontianite, barytocalcite, fluorapatite, biotite, aegirine–augite, and ferropotassic magnesio-hastingsite. Three-dimensional modeling of the breccia fragments suggests that the shapes are a hybrid between dykes and a diatreme ( A mineral paragenesis ( Olivine was only observed in three of the lithologies: as pseudomorphs in clinopyroxenites and kimberlitic silicocarbonatites and as a minor unaltered occurrence in the polygenic breccias. Augite is only found in clinopyroxenites and melteigites whereas aegirine–augite was the most common clinopyroxene in all ultramafic and mafic silica-deficient rocks. Aegirine was observed in ferrocarbonatites. Alkaline amphiboles such as ferropotassic magnesio-hastingsite, riebeckite and arfvedsonite were identified in melanosyenites, ferrocarbonatites and kimberlitic silicocarbonatites, respectively. It is noteworthy that biotite and fluorapatite were present throughout the evolution of the complex. Nepheline, sodalite, cancrinite and analcime were observed in clinopyroxenites, melteigites and ijolites ( Except for ankerite which was hydrothermal, calcite and dolomite were the only carbonates to crystallize in the primitive silicate rocks. In contrast, strontianite, siderite, barytocalcite and witherite were always hydrothermal and found solely in carbonatites. Primary sulfides consisted on pyrrhotite, chalcopyrite, sphalerite and galena. Mostpyrite is secondary and appears to have resulted from low temperature recrystallization, except for some primary pyrite which formed during the last stages of the petrogenesis. Primary oxides consist largely of ilmenite with some magnetite. Rare earth element-bearing phases including carbonates and fluorocarbonates (see Major element analyses of representative whole rock samples of the Montviel alkaline complex are presented in Major element analyses of representative whole rock samples of the Montviel alkaline complex are presented in Table A1 and The nomenclature of carbonatite used herein follows that in Biotite is ubiquitous at Montviel both in silicate and carbonatite rocks and displays highly variable textures and habits, i.e., coarse to aphanitic, green to brown, euhedral to anhedral, cumulate, disseminated and vein-shaped. Biotite was analyzed for major elements and Ti, Ce, F, Cl and S ( Biotite is ubiquitous at Montviel both in silicate and carbonatite rocks and displays highly variable textures and habits, i.e., coarse to aphanitic, green to brown, euhedral to anhedral, cumulate, disseminated and vein-shaped. Biotite was analyzed for major elements and Ti, Ce, F, Cl and S (Table A2). Cerium and S were always below the limit of detection of about 800 and 250 A plot of TiO Biotite crystallization temperatures were calculated using the algorithm by Biotite crystallization temperatures were calculated using the algorithm by The laser ablation of biotite for REE analyses ( The laser ablation of biotite for REE analyses (Table A3) proved to be challenging and extreme care was taken to avoid inclusions of mineral such as pyrochlore, rutile and zircon. Chondrite-normalized REE patterns generally show a smooth negative slope from 1 to 100 times chondrite for La to 0.1–10 times chondrite for Lu ( REE element profiles for biotites from the clinopyroxenites have highly variable REE contents that range from an essentially flat 1-time-chondrite pattern to an enriched pattern at 100 times chondrite for LREE, MREE values near 10–100 times chondrite and HREE near 10 times chondrite. In melteigite and ijolite, the biotites are very similar and cluster tightly in the center of the envelope near intermediate values, showing an LREE enrichment of 10–20 times chondrite, mild negative slopes, and HREE values near 1 time chondrite. The granites hosts biotites which are among the most REE depleted, with La around 1–10 times chondrite and HREE values around 0.1–1 times chondrite. Biotites from silicocarbonatites vary widely from the most REE depleted to some of the most REE enriched values, similar to biotite in the clinopyroxenites. However, these biotites have a relatively steep LREE-enriched slope, unlike those of the clinopyroxenites and polygenic breccias. LREE varies from 1 to 100 times chondrite, down to 0.1–5 times chondrite at Y, with the heavier HREE (Y to Lu) displaying strongly negative to mildly positive slopes. Most rare earth element patterns for biotite from the calciocarbonatites and ferrocarbonatites are very similar to those of the silicocarbonatites and clinopyroxenites that are enriched in REE. Apart from one which is flat and depleted, most are enriched in LREE with 1–100 times chondrite, down to Y values around 0.2–2 and remain strongly negative from Y to Lu. Biotite from the matrix of the polygenic breccias is relatively REE enriched and displays mildly negative to nearly flat, concave downward patterns with medium to heavy REE enrichment, similar to, but even more enriched than some found in clinopyroxenites. Clinopyroxene was analyzed for major elements and ranged in composition from augite to aegirine ( Clinopyroxene was analyzed for major elements and ranged in composition from augite to aegirine (Table A4). Pure augite was rare and found exclusively in relatively fresh clinopyroxenite and melteigite. Most of the clinopyroxene was aegirine–augite, found in clinopyroxenites, melano- and leucosyenites, ijolites and silicocarbonatites. A few pure aegirines were identified in melteigites and ferrocarbonatites. X-ray diffraction ( X-ray diffraction (Table A7), SEM-EDS and an electron microprobe were used to help distinguish and characterizing the various feldspars, feldspathoids, zeolites and pseudo-zeolites present at Montviel (Table A5). In general, nepheline, sodalite, cancrinite and analcime were observed in clinopyroxenites, melteigites and ijolites whereas microcline and plagioclase were found in melanosyenites, leucosyenites and granites. Albite was present in all feldspatoidal and K feldspar bearing rocks. Neodymium isotope ratios from metasomatic biotite and aegirine–augite do not form an isochron and yield Neodymium isotope ratios from metasomatic biotite and aegirine–augite do not form an isochron and yield Cross-cutting relationships observed in outcrops and drill cores provide the most compelling evidence that the alkaline complex evolved from clinopyroxenites to more evolved silicate rocks, silicocarbonatites and carbonatites ( The evolution of the clinopyroxenites to melteigites and ijolites is typically reflected in the relative increase in nepheline and sodalite and the resulting decrease in clinopyroxene (e.g., The Na–K–Fe metasomatism at Montviel is evident in the replacement of augite by aegirine–augite and aegirine by Na-Fe Petrographic textures also suggest that nepheline + analcime ( The metasomatizing fluid replaced the magmatic biotite with lower temperature biotite ( The metasomatizing fluid replaced the magmatic biotite with lower temperature biotite ( The role of Fe in the metasomatic fluid is evident from the aegirinization of augite ( The clinopyroxenites represent the first magmas injected at Montviel, although the presence of olivine pseudomorphs in some rocks suggests that the original compositions may have been olivine clinopyroxenitic or wherlitic magmas. Biotite in the clinopyroxenites crystallized from – or equilibrated with – a fluid, returning model crystallization temperatures of 640–700 Biotites from the clinopyroxenite have flat to mildly negative REE patterns extending between 1 and 100 times chondrite ( Cross-cutting field relations and core samples as well as major element geochemistry ( Model crystallization temperatures calculated for the biotite compositions of the melteigites and ijolites 670–770 Two biotites from the carbonatites returned temperatures of 470 All calculated fluids have REE concentrations about 1 to 3 orders of magnitude lower than fluid inclusions from the Kalkfeld and the Okorusu carbonatite complexes, Namibia ( The presence of a thermal divide along the albite-K feldspar in the NaAlSiO Field and drill core cross-cutting relationships, mineralogy, bulk rock composition and The early lamprophyric and the late kimberlitic silicocarbonatites are ‘true’ silicocarbonatites in the sense that they contain 10–50% magmatic carbonate minerals which were co-magmatic with the other (silicate, etc.) minerals present in the rock. By contrast, the glimmerite breccias are not ‘true’ silicocarbonatites as they formed by infiltration of calciocarbonatite melt into glimmerites. Chondrite-normalized REE patterns for silicocarbonatites are very similar to those of the clinopyroxenites but different from those from the melteigites, ijolite and granites indicating that the silicocarbonatites were not products of the clinopyroxenite–melteigite–ijolite series. In fact the lamprophyric silicocarbonatites cut through all silicate rocks indicating a subsequent magmatic pulse. Although melteigites and ijolites did crystallize some calcite and dolomite, the silicocarbonatites represent a large increase in the amount of magmatic calcite and dolomite and hydrothermal ankerite. This suggests that the clinopyroxenite–melteigite–ijolite series and accompanying syenites and granites were followed by a subsequent pulse of lamprophyric silicocarbonatites. Two biotite fractions from the glimmerites yielded The lamprophyric silicocarbonatites and glimmerite breccias represent a second pulse of magmas that cut through the previous melteigite–ijolite–syenite series and evolved to magmatic calciocarbonatites and metasomatic ferrocarbonatites. A 3rd pulse of repeated mantle injections led to a mixture of dykes, pods and lenses of silicocarbonatites, calciocarbonatites and ferrocarbonatites. The mixed carbonatites were followed by the intrusion of a 50 The polygenic breccia is the last unit to be emplaced during the evolution of the alkaline complex. Like the preceding kimberlitic silicocarbonatite dyke, it contains olivine and it is highly brecciated and metasomatized ( The polygenic breccias contain the HREE-enriched ore zone ( Whether or not carbonatites result from immiscibility and unmixing of silicate and carbonate melts is an ongoing debate and results generally tend to show that it is possible but not always the case ( There appears to have been at least 3 end members for the metasomatic fluid. The first fluid was associated with the clinopyroxenites and other silicate rocks and was distinct from the second fluid, which was associated with silicocarbonatites and carbonatites. Both of these fluids displayed Nd-isotope ratios suggesting that they originated from depleted regions of the mantle and subsequently mixed with a third fluid originating from enriched regions of the crust. Since true silicocarbonatites (lamprophyric and kimberlitic) display mineralogy and chemical compositions that are intermediate between clinopyroxenite and carbonatites, we argue that the carbonatites did not form by partial melting of pre-metasomatized and carbonated mantle ( Silicate and carbonatite magmas at Montviel were dominated by pyrrhotite as the sulfide-, and ilmenite as the oxide liquidus phases, which shows that the system was relatively reduced. Pyrrhotite and chalcopyrite were more abundant in primitive silicate magmas and silicocarbonatites whereas sphalerite and galena became more concentrated in silicocarbonatites and carbonatites ( Acidic fluids are not compatible with carbonates and carbonatite-hosted magmatic fluids are bound to be neutral to alkaline and contain OH Hydrochloric acidic fluids in contact with carbonatites would have liberated an important quantity of H The present paper demonstrates that volatile-saturated alkaline magmas at Montviel evolved by a combination of fractional crystallization, fluid mixing and metasomatism through 4 distinct mantle injections. Each injection had its own mantellic magmatic fluids which mixed with crustal fluids and metasomatized the crystallizing magmas before subsequent fluid-saturated magmas were injected. At Montviel during the Paleoproterozoic, at 1.894 A second mantle pulse resulted in the injection of silicocarbonatites and calciocarbonatites which evolved to REE-bearing ferrocarbonatites also by fractional crystallization, mantle and crustal fluid mixing and metasomatic recrystallization of calcite and dolomite to ferroan dolomite, ankerite and siderite. A third mantle pulse resulted in inter-mixed dykes, lenses and pods of mineralized silicocarbonatites, calciocarbonatites and ferrocarbonatites and a fourth mantle pulse resulted in the injection of a dyke of volatile-saturated kimberlitic silicocarbonatite. The source of the metasomatic fluids shifted from the mantle to the crust and a catastrophic explosion resulted in the formation of the polygenic breccia. This explosion, which marked the extinction of the system, may have resulted from the interaction of acidic brines from silicate magmas with carbonatites, remobilized the LREE and preferentially enriched the HREE. At Montviel, it is likely that the carbonatites were not generated directly from partial melting of a pre-metasomatized and carbonated mantle source but instead appear to have resulted from the evolution of clinopyroxenites to silicocarbonatites and carbonatites. At some point during this evolution, carbonatites were separated from silicate magmas so immiscibility cannot be ruled out. The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at This research was funded by