Bulk magneto-dielectric composites with a 3-0 configuration comprised of ferroelectric-magnetostrictive phases have been synthesized using (Sr0.5Ba0.5)Nb2O6–Co(Cr0.4Fe1.6)O4 as the two constituents, respectively. The ferroelectric phase made by a dual stage sintering process has a uniform grain size of 15μm while the magnetostrictive phase has a grain size of 2–3μm. Composites synthesized by conventional solid state processing using these two constituents exhibit large magneto-dielectric coupling at room temperature which increases with increasing magnetic field. The composite with 30% magnetostrictive phase distributed uniformly in the ferroelectric phase has the most desirable microstructure and exhibits a large coupling with 3.2% change in the dielectric constant at 1kHz and 8kOe magnetic field. This change in dielectric constant was found to be a maximum with respect to variation of the fraction of magnetostrictive phase, indicating that 30% is the optimal value to realize large coupling between the two phases. The decrease in magneto-dielectric constant upon application of an external magnetic field is possibly due to the inherent magnetoresistance of the magnetic component. The resistivity of the magnetic component decreases in an external magnetic field leading to the formation of 3D percolating conducting paths. This causes the coupling to decrease in composites with >30% magnetostrictive phase.Materials which exhibit at least two of several types of ordering phenomena such as ferromagnetism, ferroelectricity, ferroelasticity and non-collinear magnetic spiral structures are of considerable importance as they find application in multifunctional devices Choosing constituent materials which have inherently large Controlling the structure of the composite such that The extrinsic coupling factor The composites comprising of Cr-substituted Co-ferrite, Co(Cr The Sr-Ba-Niobate (SBN) and Cr-substituted Co-ferrite (CCF) were synthesized using conventional solid state reaction method. Stoichiometric amounts of high purity SrCO The structural characterization was performed by X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray analysis for chemical composition. The X-ray diffraction patterns obtained using Cu K The results of X-ray diffraction together with that of structural refinement are shown in The magnetostrictive/piezoelectric as well as the dielectric constants in composites are a strong function of the microstructure. In order to realize a large coupling constant and hence a large magneto-dielectric change it is essential that the two constituents are in effective, optimal contact with each other. The microstructure of the composites as observed in a scanning electron microscope is shown in The variation of magnetization The dielectric response of SBN, CCF and the composites with different fractions of the two phases was studied as a function of temperature from 223 The variation of dielectric constant with temperature at three different frequencies, 1.17 Since the ferroelectric transition temperature of SBN is ∼380 A bulk magneto-dielectric composite with Sr-Ba-niobate and Cr-substituted Co-ferrite as the ferroelectric and magnetostrictive phases has been synthesized using simple, conventional solid state techniques. The uniform grain size in the two phases coupled with an order of magnitude difference in their size leads to an efficient packing as well as a highly effective strain transfer between the two phases. This results in producing a large magneto-dielectric change at room temperature in the presence of an external magnetic field. The magnitude of change in dielectric constant is found to be ∼3.2%, a large value for a bulk composite synthesized using standard techniques. For a 3-0 composite wherein the magnetostrictive phase is uniformly distributed around the ferroelectric phase, the volume fraction of the magnetic, conducting phase should be below the conduction percolation limit to realize maximum magnetoelectric coupling. As compared to materials such as Terfenol-D, PVDF, nanoparticulate LSMO and BTO used in earlier reports, SBN and CCF used in the present work are synthesized using simple techniques from low cost precursors. This makes the present magneto-dielectric bulk composite highly attractive for application in various types of devices. The authors acknowledge provision of access to Central Facilities of IIT Bombay.