Combining powdered activated carbon (PAC) with magnetic iron oxides has been proposed in the past to produce adsorbents for natural organic matter (NOM) removal that can be easily separated using a magnetic field. However, the trade-off between the iron oxides' benefits and the reduced carbon content, porosity, and surface area has not yet been investigated systematically. We produced 3 magnetic powdered activated carbons (MPAC) with mass fractions of 10%, 38% and 54% maghemite nanoparticles and compared them to bare PAC and pure nanoparticles with respect to NOM adsorption kinetics and isotherms. While adsorption kinetics were not influenced by the presence of the iron oxide nanoparticles (IONP), as shown by calculated diffusion coefficients from the homogeneous surface diffusion model, nanoparticles reduced the adsorption capacity of NOM due to their lower adsorption capacity. Although the nanoparticles added mesoporosity to the composite materials they blocked intrinsic PAC mesopores at mass fractions >38% as measured by N2-adsorption isotherms. Below this mass fraction, the adsorption capacity was mainly dependent on the carbon content in MPAC and mesopore blocking was negligible. If NOM adsorption with MPAC is desired, a highly mesoporous PAC and a low IONP mass fraction should be chosen during MPAC synthesis.Average relative error (%) Brunauer-Emmett and Teller theory Dissolved organic carbon Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy Iron oxide nanoparticle(s) Root mean squared error Magnetic powdered activated carbon(s) Non-local density function theory Natural organic matter Powdered activated carbon(s) Suwannee River NOM Specific ultraviolet absorbance at 254 nm Vibrating sample magnetometer Understanding adsorption of natural organic matter (NOM) on powdered activated carbon (PAC) is of importance in drinking water treatment for the removal of disinfection by-product precursors and the competition effect with trace organic pollutants. As NOM adsorption capacities of PAC are low and adsorption is slow compared to trace organic pollutants ( Three MPAC containing mass fractions of 10%, 38% and 54% maghemite IONP were prepared using a co-precipitation process. The role of IONP in NOM adsorption was studied with respect to PAC content, along with the distribution of pore volume and surface area as well as the NOM characteristics such as molecular size and aromaticity. The originality of this project lies in the systematic and quantitative evaluation of IONP mass fractions on NOM adsorption and the applications of isotherm and kinetic models to highlight the dominant adsorption mechanisms. Suwannee River NOM purchased from the International Humic Substance Society (IHSS) was chosen as well characterized NOM source to allow for better comparison with the existing literature. The NOM powder was stirred for 12 h in Milli-Q water (18 μS/cm, DOC 0.174 mg/L ± 0.018 mg/L standard deviation) with a background ionic strength of 1 mM (NaCl) to produce a stock solution of 500 mg DOC/L. The latter was adjusted to pH 7.0 with phosphate buffer and NaOH and filtered through a 0.45 μm polyethersulfone filter (Pall Supor®-450), previously rinsed with 1 L of Milli-Q water. For adsorption experiments, the stock solution was diluted to the desired initial DOC concentration with phosphate buffered Milli-Q water (pH 7, ionic strength 1 mM with NaCl). Coal-based Aquasorb® CB1-MW (Jacobi, formerly Picahydro MP23 from PICA™) was washed with demineralized water to reduce its basicity below pH 8 and dried at 105 °C before serving as the base material for MPAC synthesis. This carbon with an iodine number of 900 mg/g and a median volume diameter of 15–35 μm was chosen among others in adsorption pre-tests for its good DOC and MIB/geosmin removal from the water matrix used during this study (data not shown). MPAC was prepared by an alkaline co-precipitation process as proposed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of pure IONP, PAC and MPAC were recorded with a D5000 Bruker, Sol-X detector with Co Kα radiation (1.79 Å) in the 2θ range 5°–94° to identify the types of iron oxides and the average crystallite size. The content of iron oxide was analyzed by comparing the magnetic saturation value of pure IONP, PAC and MPAC as recorded by a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) as well as with a thermo-gravimetric approach. Briefly, a known mass (triplicates) of MPAC, PAC and IONP were incinerated at 900 °C for 24 h. After correcting for ash content in the residues, the iron content was determined from the remaining pure hematite phase (as confirmed by XRD). Surface characteristics of PAC and MPAC were evaluated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM Quanta 200 FEG). Maps of the iron distribution on the surface and inside of MPAC were obtained with X-ray microanalysis from MPAC particles mounted in a polished epoxy disc (SEM JEOL JSM-7600F with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) at 10 kV and Oxford XMax 80 detector). The size distribution of PAC and MPAC were analyzed by a light scattering method (Mastersizer 3000 Malvern Instruments Ltd.). Nitrogen adsorption isotherms from relative pressure The equilibrium adsorption capacity (24 h) and kinetic experiments were carried out using the bottle point technique. Carbon-free (combusted at 500 °C for 5 h) 125 mL serum bottles were used as reactors and equipped with aluminum crimp caps and Teflon-lined septa and agitated on a vertical wheel rotary shaker at 22 °C. Pre-tests had shown the vulnerability of the composite materials to the high agitation necessary to keep the dense MPAC materials in suspension on a linear shaker (decomposition of MPAC < 24 h due to abrasion). The bottles were therefore mounted horizontally to a motorized wheel that turned at a speed of 50 rpm and initiated a movement of constantly falling particles through the liquid. The adsorbents (0.005 g) were pre-wetted for 24 h in 4 mL Milli-Q water before adding 100 mL of NOM solution (preparation described in Section DOC (Standard Methods APHA 2012, TOC meter Sievers 5310-C), UVA To distinguish between the impact of surface area, porosity and surface chemistry, the adsorption isotherms of PAC, MPAC and pure IONP were normalized by equivalent PAC mass, accessible surface area as well as pore volume. The empirical Freundlich model was fitted to the experimental data. The surface diffusion coefficient The IONP detected on the PAC surface were mainly formed of maghemite and had an average diameter of 17 nm, as estimated by the line width of XRD spectra ( The particle size distribution remained the same for MPAC-54% compared to PAC for diameters < The point of zero charge of PAC and MPAC varied between pH The specific micropore volume (primary and secondary) of MPAC decreased disproportionally with increasing mass fraction of maghemite (up to 66% for MPAC-54%) compared to bare PAC (76% of the pore volume < 2 nm) ( The cumulative surface area as calculated using the NLDFT method was larger than the BET surface area for all adsorbents (up to 40% in the case of bare PAC). The NLDFT results were taken for all subsequent calculations considering that the BET equation is in a strict sense not applicable to microporous materials ( For NOM adsorption, only the fraction of the pores that is accessible for the NOM molecules is relevant. To evaluate this accessible pore fraction, the total surface area and the pore volume from the NLDFT measurements were limited to the contribution of pores with diameters larger than the size of SR-NOM molecules. Pores smaller than this critical diameter were considered inaccessible for SR-NOM. In the literature, SR-NOM diameters between 0.77 nm (fulvic acid) ( Compared to PAC, all MPAC adsorbents had lower adsorption capacities for SR-NOM with increasing IONP content ( To find out if IONP reduce the adsorption sites located in the mesopores of the carbon matrix of MPAC the solid concentration of NOM was normalized to the PAC mass fraction To confirm the reduction of adsorption capacity for the MPAC with high IONP mass fraction, measured isotherms of the composite materials MPAC-10%, MPAC-38% and MPAC-54% were compared to theoretical mixed isotherms calculated from isotherms of pure PAC and pure IONP ( For both PAC and MPAC, >85% removal of the adsorbable NOM was reached after 400 min and >75% was adsorbed after 150 min ( SUVA HPSEC/UV chromatograms of SR-NOM before and after 24 h adsorption experiments with PAC, MPAC-38%, and MPAC-54% showed that both PAC and MPAC adsorbed preferably the low molecular weight fraction ( Understanding the impact of IONP in MPAC on NOM adsorption requires a thorough analysis of the IONP mass fraction in the composite material coupled to a detailed analysis of the pore size distribution. While the benefits of magnetic IONP on PAC for NOM removal were unclear in previous studies - they were reported to either enhance ( Contrary to previous adsorption studies, we analyzed the adsorption capacity of pure IONP and PAC separately and compared the values to the adsorption capacity of the composite material MPAC at different IONP mass fractions. The adsorption capacity of our maghemite IONP (8 mg DOC/g or 0.12 mg DOC/m Our EDS and pore size distribution results show that small IONP form inside the micropore structure of PAC and that 17 nm sized spherical IONP cover the outside of PAC particles with an irregular crust or agglomerates of IONP. While the former phenomenon leads to the reduction of microporosity, the latter also partly block the mesopores of the carbon matrix in MPAC. It is important to distinguish between mesoporosity that is added due to the pore volume in the IONP crust and blocked mesopores in the carbon matrix that lead to a reduction of the adsorption capacity for NOM. However, this reduction of adsorption sites in the mesopores becomes dominant only at high IONP mass fraction as could be seen for our sample MPAC-54% when normalizing the NOM solid concentration by the PAC mass fraction. At lower IONP mass fraction the effect is not statistically significant and the observed reductions in adsorption capacity are mainly related to the reduction of the PAC mass fraction in MPAC. The added mass of IONP cannot compensate for the loss of adsorption sites in PAC as their adsorption capacity is an order of magnitude lower, even when compared based on available surface area. Reduced surface area or pore volume after impregnation of PAC with a mass fraction of an estimated 20% maghemite and goethite IONP has also been reported by In our experiments, the rate of adsorption remained similar in PAC and MPAC despite the high mass fraction of IONP. Marginally higher diffusion coefficients for MPAC compared to PAC had no tangible influence on the adsorption performance curves. Diffusion of NOM molecules from the PAC surface towards the inner core (as is described by the HSDM) was thus not impacted by the presence of IONP. Few authors studied NOM adsorption kinetics on MPAC ( Improving the generally low NOM adsorption capacities of bare PAC by depositing magnetic IONP is ineffective due to their low affinity for NOM molecules. At IONP mass fractions below 54% the necessary MPAC dose for NOM removal is proportional to its PAC content which implies higher doses of the composite material compared to bare PAC and thus slightly overall higher costs considering (i) the unit costs of iron salts and caustic soda and (ii) the energy cost related to MPAC synthesis. The advantage of using MPAC for sorbing NOM during drinking water production arises therefore only from its magnetic separability. In a drinking water treatment process, MPAC should therefore be applied in a polishing step for settled water (after coagulation-flocculation) to remove residual NOM. Its magnetic properties would allow recycling it in the reactor in order to fully exhaust its sorption capacities. The magnetic separability would also allow its application in a biological PAC reactor as proposed in our previous study ( Concerning our initial research question – do magnetic IONP on PAC improve or reduce the adsorption capacity of PAC for NOM? – our study showed that maghemite IONP do not contribute significantly to the adsorption of NOM itself and reduce the adsorption capacity of MPAC by blocking the mesopores of the carbon matrix. However, this phenomenon is only significant for high IONP mass loading and MPAC could still be of use in a variety of water treatment applications. If NOM adsorption is the targeted water pollutant and a magnetic PAC is desired, a highly mesoporous PAC and a low IONP mass fraction should be chosen during MPAC synthesis to reduce the negative impact of IONP on the high adsorption capacity of PAC. In summary, the following conclusions were drawn from this work: A thorough analysis of the pore size distribution linked to the mass fraction of IONP in the composite is of paramount importance to understand adsorption capacity changes of MPAC, IONP reduced the micropore and mesopore volume of the carbon matrix while adding mesopore volume in the voids of the IONP crust, IONP are not uniformly covering PAC particles; they form clusters and patches of IONP on the PAC surface and are also found inside the carbon matrix of MPAC, IONP contribute little to NOM adsorption due to their lower adsorption capacity per area compared to PAC, IONP block mesopores in the carbon matrix and thus reduce the NOM adsorption capacity of MPAC. This effect became important only for the highest IONP mass fractions investigated (54%), The diffusion coefficient Adsorption on MPAC and PAC targeted the same NOM fractions regarding aromatic content and molecule size. The authors are thankful for the technical support of Jacinthe Mailly, Julie Philibert, Mireille Blais and Yves Fontaine and the fruitful discussions with Christoph Reinhardt and Dieter Lompe. This work was completed at the Industrial-NSERC Chair in Drinking Water of Polytechnique Montréal with the financial support of its partners, namely the City of Montreal, The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at