Fracture of the posteromedial talar process (Cedell fracture) is a rare injury and is usually associated with other injuries such as medial subtalar dislocation. Diagnosis of the fracture necessitates a heightened clinical suspicion, and computed tomography should be performed in any suspicious cases. Timely treatment is important for restoration of proper anatomy and function of the subtalar joint. Significant morbidity is associated with an undiagnosed or nonoperatively treated fracture of the posteromedial talar process, especially in a larger fracture that is intra-articular at both the ankle and subtalar joints. In this Technical Note, the technical details of endoscopically assisted reduction and screw fixation of acute posteromedial talar fracture is described. This can allow fracture reduction and fracture fixation under endoscopic visualization.Displaced fractures of the posteromedial talar process that compromise articular congruity The fracture fragment is small without articular involvement The fracture is highly comminuted It is relatively contraindicated in completely nondisplaced fractures The posteromedial portal is established more proximal than the posterolateral portal. The K-wire and guidewire are placed a bit more lateral. The direction of wires and screw insertion is close to the sagittal plane. The flexor hallucis longus tendon is protected by the drill sleeve during insertion of K-wire, guidewire, and cannulated drill. The flexor hallucis longus tendon is further retracted medially with an arthroscopic probe during insertion of the cannulated screw. Underappreciation of articular involvement. Subtle radiographic findings. Too much ankle dorsiflexion during instrumentation at the posteromedial portal may cause impingement of the tibial neurovascular bundle. Less soft-tissue trauma Better cosmetic result Fewer wound complications Fracture reduction and screw fixation under endoscopic visualization Non-union Avascular necrosis Implant failure Chronic pain Stiffness Post-traumatic arthrosis Neurovascular injury Fracture of the posteromedial talar process (Cedell fracture) is a rare injury. It can be caused by a high-energy trauma, which is usually associated with other injuries of the foot, such as subtalar dislocation and talar neck fractures. Delayed diagnosis of posteromedial talus fracture is not uncommon because of its rarity and similarity to an ankle sprain on standard ankle radiographs. Conservative management is reserved for completely nondisplaced fractures that can be managed with non–weight-bearing cast immobilization for 4 to 6 weeks. The purpose of this Technical Note is to describe the details of endoscopically assisted reduction and screw fixation of acute fracture of the posteromedial talar process. It is indicated for displaced fractures of the posteromedial talar process that compromise articular congruity because unreduced large, displaced, articular fragments have a high propensity for nonunion, and the subsequent articular malunion may progress to arthrosis of the ankle and posterior subtalar joint. Fractures of the posteromedial talar process are particularly difficult to detect on standard radiographs, although a 30° external rotation view may be helpful. The patient is placed in the prone position and an ipsilateral thigh tourniquet is used to provide a bloodless surgical field. Fluid inflow is driven by gravity, an arthro-pump is not used, and a 4.0-mm, 30° arthroscope (DYONICS; Smith & Nephew, Andover, MA) is used. The procedure is performed via the posteromedial and posterolateral portals. The posterolateral portal is at the lateral side of the Achilles tendon, just above the posterosuperior calcaneal tubercle. The posteromedial portal is at the intersection point between the medial border of the Achilles tendon and the line joining the undersurface of the first metatarsal and sustentaculum tali ( The posterolateral portal is the viewing portal and the posteromedial portal is the working portal. The fibro-osseous tunnel between the medial and lateral tubercles of the posterior talar process is released with a SuperCut scissors (STILLE, Lombard, IL) to improve the mobility of the FHL tendon. The tendon is retracted medially can expose the posterior ankle capsule and the posteromedial talar process. Posterior ankle capsulotomy is performed with an arthroscopic shaver (DYONICS) and the fracture is exposed ( The posterolateral portal is the viewing portal and the posteromedial portal is the working portal. The FHL tendon is retracted medially and the instrumentation is lateral to the tendon. The fracture is reduced and temporarily fixed with a 1.6-mm K- wire (Zimmer, Warsaw, IN). The size of the fracture fragment is assessed and the appropriate screw size is determined. In this illustrated case, the fracture is planned to be fixed with a 4.0-mm cannulated screws (Synthes, West Chester, PA). The corresponding guide wire (Synthes) is then inserted ( The posterolateral portal is the viewing portal and the screw length is measured with a cannulated measuring device (Synthes) via the posteromedial portal ( The posterolateral portal is the viewing portal and the screw tract is drilled with a cannulated drill via the posteromedial portal ( The posterolateral portal is the viewing portal and the posteromedial portal is the working portal. A 4.0-mm cannulated screws (Synthes) of appropriate length is inserted. To protect the FHL tendon, the tendon is further retracted medially by an arthroscopic probe (ACUFEX; Smith & Nephew) via the posteromedial portal and the screw is turned anticlockwise before it hits the bone ( The posterolateral portal is the viewing portal and the posteromedial portal is the working portal. The fracture reduction at the ankle and posterior subtalar joints is assessed ( Diagnosis of fracture of the posteromedial talar process necessitates a heightened clinical suspicion, and computed tomography should be performed in any suspicious cases. Timely treatment is important for restoration of proper anatomy and function of the subtalar joint. Significant morbidity is associated with an undiagnosed or nonoperatively treated fracture of the posteromedial talar process, especially in a larger fracture that is intra-articular at both the ankle and subtalar joints. To reduce surgical trauma, minimally invasive approaches of fracture fixation have been developed. Percutaneous screw fixation as a minimally invasive surgical approach can be difficult for posteromedial talar fracture, as the safe zone is narrow. In our technique, the fracture can be reduced under endoscopic visualization, and mobilization of the FHL tendon facilitates safe insertion of screw. However, the posteromedial talar fracture requires exposure of the medial corner of the posterior ankle and places the tibial neurovascular bundle at risk. The ankle should be kept in a plantar-flexed position to relax the neurovascular bundle, especially during insertion of guidewire and screw. This minimally invasive technique has the advantage of less soft-tissue trauma, better cosmetic results, fewer wound complications, and fracture reduction and screw fixation under endoscopic visualization. The potential risks of this technique include non-union, avascular necrosis, implant failure, chronic pain, stiffness, post-traumatic arthrosis, and neurovascular injury ( 