Rock bursts have become one of the most severe risks in underground coal mining and its forecasting is an important component in the safety management. Subsurface microseismic (MS) monitoring is considered potentially as a powerful tool for rock burst forecasting. In this study, a methodology for rock burst forecasting involving the use of a fuzzy comprehensive evaluation model was developed, which allows for a more quantitative evaluation of the likelihood for the occurrence of a rock burst incident. In the fuzzy model, the membership function was built using Gaussian shape combined with the exponential distribution function from the reliability theory. The weight of each index was determined utilising the performance metric F score from the confusion matrix. The comprehensive forecasting result was obtained by integrating the maximum membership degree principle (MMDP) and the variable fuzzy pattern recognition (VFPR). This methodology has been applied to a coal mine in China to forecast rock bursts. To select MS indices for rock burst forecasting using the fuzzy evaluation model, laboratory acoustic emission (AE) measurements of coal samples collected from the mine were performed. The model parameters were first calibrated using historical MS data over a period of four months, during which six rock burst incidents were observed. This calibrated model was able to forecast the occurrence of a subsequent rock burst incident in the mine.Rock bursts, characterised by rapid and violent release of the elastic strain energy due to rock mass failure, pose a serious risk to the safety of underground engineering ( During underground longwall mining, the removal of solid coal results in the abutment stresses shift along with the direction of face advance. Three disturbance zones are usually formed in the overburden strata when a longwall panel of sufficient width and length is excavated, i.e., caved zone, fractured zone and continuous deformation zone, which corresponds to the post-peak fractured zone DE, pre-peak plastic zone BD and elastic zone AB in the horizontal mining direction, respectively, as shown in Building upon above stress behaviours of underground coal mining, various mechanisms for rock bursts have been proposed from the perspectives of rock strength, strain energy, rock stiffness, stability and burst liability ( Based upon the analysis of MS monitoring data, a number of indices for evaluating rock burst tendency have been proposed regarding statistical features and source mechanism parameters for individual rock burst incidents ( To address above shortcoming, attempts to use a combination of indices have been made. This study aims to develop a methodology for rock burst forecasting involving the use of a fuzzy comprehensive evaluation model to evaluate the MS indices, which allows for a more quantitative evaluation of the likelihood for the occurrence of a rock burst incident. In the fuzzy evaluation model, the Gaussian shape membership function, the confusion matrix, the maximum membership degree principle (MMDP) and the variable fuzzy pattern recognition (VFPR) are used. The application of this methodology has been successfully demonstrated in a coal mine in China. Microfracturing and associated dynamic instability and energy release in rocks can occur at different scales ( In this study, uniaxial tests on cylindrical specimens, measuring 100 mm in length and 50 mm in diameter, taken from a coal seam with strong burst tendency in Binchang Hujiahe coal mine, Shaanxi Province, China, were performed using the electro-hydraulic servo rock mechanics testing system (MTS-C64.106) and the PCI-2 AE system. A total of eight AE sensors (Nano 30 with a frequency domain of 100 to 400 kHz) were uniformly attached to the upper and lower parts of the sample (  Compaction phase OA: there are only few random micro-cracks and, correspondingly, random AE events with very small amplitudes. Elastic deformation phase AB: micro-cracks are initiated at point B and a few AE events with relatively large amplitudes are observed. Stable micro-crack growth and extension phase BC: the micro-cracks initiated inside the specimen start to propagate stably, and the number and energy of the AE events significantly increase. Unstable crack extension phase CD: macro-fractures are formed in the specimen, and AE events and their amplitudes fluctuate markedly to release a large amount of energy. Post-failure phase DE: the specimen is broken and has lost bearing capacity. During this period, the sensors became detached thus failed to capture AE activities. Following In As a result, 10 MS indices ( Fuzzy comprehensive evaluation methodology has been applied in rock burst liability assessment ( In the reliability theory, the exponential distribution function shows the failure time of a product: For the negative indices ( None level: Weak level: Moderate level: Strong level: Rock burst forecasting is a two-class prediction problem ( Based on these definitions and forecasting levels introduced in Based on the concept of fuzzy comprehensive evaluation ( Build the factor set Build the alternative set Build the single-factor evaluation matrix Determine the weight set Obtain the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation vector Locate the evaluation result combined with the maximum membership degree principle (MMDP) and the variable fuzzy pattern recognition (VFPR) ( Since MMDP neglects the information of other membership degrees, the evaluation may often be rough and even fail for some special situations. For this case, an index When When When When When Fortunately, the parameter of level characteristic values in VFPR model can be used to supplement better evaluation results for those invalid cases. Thus, the combination model MMDP-VFPR is established as: The 4# coal seam in Hujiahe coal mine has an average mining depth and an average coal thickness of 680 m and 23 m, respectively, and an average dip angle of less than 5°. The fully-mechanised top coal caving method was used to retreat the longwall panel. By the end of July 2015 (see Since September 2013, a 16-channel MS monitoring system “ARAMIS M/E”, developed by the Institute of Innovative Technologies EMAG, Poland, has been installed in this mine. This system includes a number of low frequency underground G-series geophones and SPI-70 seismometers. They are combined with SN/DTSS transmission stations to acquire and transmit MS signals via electric transmission lines to the surface SP/DTSS receiving system and the ARAMIS_REJ recording system (see During the period from 1 September 2014 to 31 December 2014, LW401102 suffered from rock burst risk, making it an appropriate site for a case study. Over this period, there were 3872 effective MS events recorded and six rock burst events (see To determine the weight of each forecasting index and then calibrate the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation model, the time-sequence curves of forecasting indices To quantify the forecasting accuracy of these MS indices, the common performance metrics from the confusion matrix (see On the basis above, the time-sequence curves obtained from MMDP, MMDP-VFPR and the validity check index LW 402103 was mined following LW 401102, and also suffered from rock burst risk even in the process of entry excavation. This longwall panel began to be mined from July 2015, and a rock burst event occurred at 22:21 pm October 27, 2016 (local time). According to the MS monitoring, this rock burst was caused by a large MS event with 2.76 × 10 Using the MS indices and their weights (see A methodology for rock burst forecasting involving the use of a fuzzy comprehensive evaluation model to evaluate the MS indices was developed, which allows for a more quantitative evaluation of the likelihood for the occurrence of a rock burst incident. In the fuzzy model, the membership function was built using Gaussian shape combined with the exponential distribution function from the reliability theory. The weight of each index was determined utilising the performance metric One key element of this methodology is the use of laboratory AE measurements of the coal samples collected from the mine to build the selection of MS indices used as input to the fuzzy model. In addition, the 10 MS indices selected in this way cover all the three elements of MS, i.e., magnitude, spatial and temporal distribution. The application of this methodology has been successfully demonstrated in a coal mine in China. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support for this work provided by the  A(b) value As a quantitative parameter measuring MS activities, the A( Seismicity degree SD Seismicity degree Equivalent energy magnitude  Z value The Algorithm complexity In order to reveal the systematic unstable information of MS magnitude, the index named as algorithm complexity Time information entropy Qt According to the dissipative structure theory, the development process of the MS event occurrence can be regarded as an open system exchanging energy with the surrounding environment. When the stress field reaches a certain threshold, the temporal features of MS activities change from a disordered state to an ordered one, which is most likely when a rock burst occurs. This time feature information can be quantified as (