The paper discusses the energy-transformation efficiency during the formation of high-speed waterjets, and during the mixing of solid particles and air into high-speed waterjets with velocities up to 850 m/s. The measurements are basically impact-force measurements on high-speed waterjets and on high-speed three-phase slurries. In detail, the energy transfer during high-speed waterjet formation, air mixing-and-acceleration, solid particle mixing-and-acceleration, and during abrasive waterjet (AWJ) formation have been analysed. The measurements are performed by using a piezoelectric dynamometer. It is found that this technique can be applied successfully to analyse the jet and slurry formation processes in AWJ systems. The results are compared with results obtained from laser-based jet velocity measurements.orifice diameter kinetic energy particle comminution energy turbulence energy impact-force initial static force mean static force impulse flow mass-flow rate pump pressure hydraulic pump power pressure loss volumetric flow rate ratio exposure time turbulence velocity pipe flow velocity modulus of elasticity coefficient of discharge energy-transfer coefficient for air entrainment energy-transfer coefficient for particle acceleration energy-transfer coefficient for high-speed suspension formation energy-transfer coefficient for waterjet formation coefficient of waterjet velocity particle velocity standard deviation compressibility density air flow solid particle radial suspension waterjet The erosion by solid particles suspended in a high-speed waterjet is the basic process of abrasive waterjet (AWJ) machining. The introduction of this tool into manufacturing offers possibilities to machine difficult-to-machine materials, such as ceramics A typical commercial AWJ system consists of a pressure generator, typically an intensifier pump, a mixing-and-acceleration head, a positioning system, and a catcher. On the basis of jet generation, AWJs can generally be categorised as injection jets or suspension jets. For practical applications, injection jets are more commonly used. An injection AWJ is formed by accelerating small solid particles (garnet, aluminium oxide, silica carbide) through contact with a high-speed waterjet. The high-speed waterjet is formed in an orifice placed on top of the mixing-and-acceleration head. The solid particles are dragged into the mixing-and-acceleration head through a separate inlet due to the vacuum created by the waterjet in the mixing chamber. The mixing between the solid particles, waterjet and air takes place in the mixing chamber, and the acceleration process occurs in a focusing tube. After the mixing-and-acceleration process, a high-speed three-phase suspension leaves this tube at velocities of several hundred meters per second. This suspension is the actual machining tool for AWJ applications. The mixing-and-acceleration process is an extremely complex performance, and several methods have been used to study it. Among these methods are finite-element-method The basic physical parameter used in this paper is the impulse flow of a high-speed flow given by This impulse flow has the unit of a force and can be measured by the experimental set-up used in this paper. Measurements of impact-force are successfully applied in several fields of high-speed waterjets and AWJs. Among others, Decker et al. This problem corresponds to the situation shown in Here, the left term is the hydraulic power of the pressure generating unit, including the pressure loss between the unit and the orifice entry. The right term is the kinetic energy of the exiting high-speed waterjet. The energy-transfer efficiency in an orifice can be estimated by Therefore, values for An alternative method is the replacement of the waterjet velocity by another physical parameter which can be measured directly as well. Form Bernoulli's law and Also, compressibility of the water plays a role at high operating pressures. Consequently, changes in the water density must be taken into account: This equation allows the estimation of the energy-transfer efficiency of the waterjet formation process by directly measuring the impact-force of the high-speed waterjet, as the other parameters, namely volumetric flow rate and operating pressure are known. The process of mixing-and-acceleration is an energy transfer from the high-speed waterjet to the solid particles that are injected at comparatively low velocities, and the air sucked with the particles. In course of this process, the high-speed waterjet decelerates. The exit energy is the kinetic energy of a high-speed three-phase suspension consisting of water, solid particles and air. This performance is illustrated in The left term is the kinetic energy of the suspension. Energy loss due to inelastic impacts between water and solid particles is not considered. For simplification, an identical velocity of the three portions in the high-speed slurry is assumed, and radial velocity components are neglected. The amount of the mass-flow rate of the air on the entire slurry mass-flow rate is about 3% The parameter The parameter Firstly, Here, Secondly, the impulse flow of a high-speed fluid according to The air that is entrained during the suction of the solid particles is accelerated by the high-speed waterjet. The corresponding energy balance from Here, Therefore, In this equation, The amount of energy that is directly transferred to the entrained solid particles can be estimated based on the following balance according to With Again, energy loss due to inelastic impacts between water and solid particles is neglected. The experimental set-up consisted basically of a high-pressure water unit and a four component piezoelectric dynamometer as shown in The high-pressure water unit included an intensifier pump, a waterjet generating orifice, a mixing-and-acceleration head, a particle storage and metering system, a catcher tank, and an The particle material was a commercial abrasive material Garnet #36. Technical data and physical properties of this material are listed in In order to measure the vertical forces exerted by the waterjet and the high-speed suspension, a four component dynamometer (Kistler model 9273) was employed. The four component measuring platform was a piezo-electric transducer capable of measuring simultaneously a force parallel to the transducer's axis ( The static force was taken in the `short' setting of the amplifier. The time-domain static force signal (at 200 Hz) sampling frequency was acquired in several data sets with each data set consisting of 1024 data points. The static force signal plotted in the figures is a combination of 4 such data sets acquired continuously over a period of 20 s. The mean static force In this equation, Three different sets of force measurements were performed. The first set included measurements on high-speed waterjets after leaving the orifice. These measurements correspond to the situation in In order to protect the dynamometer platform against erosive wear by the high-speed suspension, it was covered by a cast iron plate with a thickness of 4 cm. After having placed this plate, the dynamometer was calibrated.   Generally, the energy-transfer efficiency of the high-speed waterjet formation is between According to The pressure loss in a pipe, From the pump-characteristics of the used pressure intensifier follows an increase in the volumetric flow rate with rising pump pressure. Therefore, any increase in the pump pressure increases the pressure loss due to friction and, thus, decreases the velocity coefficient Results from Hashish A linear-elastic approximation for the density as a function of fluid pressure is given by Truckenbrodt Thus, losses due to fluid compression increase as pump pressure increases. For the pressure range in this study, the compressibility is 0.90< The left term in Typical plots of impact-force signals from air-entrained high-speed waterjets are shown in Himmelreich Typical impact-force signal of a high-speed three-phase suspension are plotted in  It is of general interest to briefly discuss the efficiency parameters offered in Therefore, if the particle-size distributions of the solid particles are known as they enter ( The energy dissipated due to turbulence, A very typical value measured by Himmelreich The influence of the entrained air on the mixing-and-acceleration process is already shown in This problem corresponds to the The results of the investigation can be summarised as follows: Impact-forces, generated by high-speed jet flow have been used successfully to discuss the energy dissipation phenomena during the formation of high-speed waterjets, and during the mixing-and-acceleration of solid particles and air by a high-speed waterjet. During the formation of a high-speed waterjet, between 30% and 55% of the input energy is dissipated. These values depend on the applied pressure. An optimum energy transformation was detected at medium waterjet velocities. During the mixing-and-acceleration of the solid particles and air, between 30% and 70% of the high-speed waterjet energy is dissipated. The energy-transfer improves with an increase in the waterjet velocity. Up to 20% of the waterjet energy is transferred directly to the injected solid particles. The transfer slightly deteriorates as the waterjet energy increases. This amount is basically available for material treatment applications by AWJ.  The author is thankful to the Alexander-von-Humboldt Foundation and to the German Research Association, Bonn, Germany, for financial support. Thanks is addressed to WOMA Apparatebau GmbH, Duisburg, Germany, for administrative support.