Composite mineral particles in a monolayer were X-ray radiographed with monochromatic beams at different incident energies. The digital radiographic images were subtracted according to the dual-energy (DE) principle, which is extended to multiple-energy (ME) for the purpose of this work. The subtraction allows the selective derivation of two images thicknesses, one for each mineralogical phase component. The integration of the thickness gives the volumetric content in the phase. Preliminary experimental results were compared to the grade obtained by micro-CT, showing good agreement. The possible developments related to the fast DE evaluation of particle grades are discussed.The development of an on-line sensor involves various steps, starting from the initial laboratory tests to verify the suitability of the physical principle, through pilot plant prototypes, full scale testing, elaboration of protocols for calibration and standardization of procedures, ending with the commercialization of a rugged and reliable equipment. The development may have to be abandoned at any step due to encountered technological limitations or to lack of financial support. Some successful experiences show that the full development cycle often takes several years. In this context, this work is a preliminary study to investigate the possibility of evaluating the grade of two phase particles with a fast multiple-energy (ME) radiographic method. Thus we are at year zero and step one of the development process. Composite coal particles were used for these studies. The unclear interface between the coal and ash phases, which results in non-negligible variance of the linear attenuation coefficients of the two phases is a peculiar feature that further complicates the particle grade estimation problem. Furthermore, the choice of particle size was based on a compromise between the interest in fine particles, and the equipment already available in our laboratories. However, the scope of these experiments is broader than the development of a coal sorting or washability sensor, because the application of DE and ME principles is not limited by the size of the particle or by the type of material. For example, one possible area of interest is the detection of valuable phases locked––i.e., non-exposed––in the matrix phase. Most of the current individual particle sensors (in contrast to bulk flow sensors) are based on optical technology, and discriminate between colours that are often of insufficient contrast. Essentially the development of a new sensor needs technology and hardware that were unavailable just a few years ago. It also needs the capacity to process radiological images––i.e., large amounts of data––in a short time––i.e., high computational speed. An earlier fundamental study ( The intensity of the X-rays traveling through a composite particle is attenuated. The radiographic image recorded by the detector is determined by the sum of the attenuations of all the encountered structures. Thus morphological and compositional effects concur to produce a (poorly intelligible) radiographic image which does not allow particle composition retrieval. The 3D structures are compressed into a 2D image with an obvious loss of information. In principle it is not possible to discriminate between a thick, low stopping power, and a thin, high stopping power, attenuating component. For two phases particles, the DE principle can be used to discriminate between the attenuation due each phase. The DE principle exploits the different behaviour of the absorption coefficients of two phases as a function of the photon energy. A pair of radiographs are taken at different energies and ‘digitally subtracted’ to project out one phase while suppressing the attenuation effects of the other. Thus compositional and morphological effects can be resolved, and the ‘through the wall thickness’ of the two phases––i.e., along the X-ray direction––can be calculated. The decomposition method requires the a priori knowledge of the attenuation of the two materials at the X-ray energies used. The basic idea is to split the total attenuation between the two basis materials. The attenuation of each basis material is the product of the material-specific linear attenuation coefficients multiplied by the material thickness. The problem can be presented as a system of linear equations. To solve for the thickness of the two phases at least two equations are needed. The system of equations is solved for each pair of matching pixels of the two radiographs at different energies. From two radiographic images one obtains two thickness images. The digital subtraction method suffers from poor noise properties, but more than two radiographs, and specialized mathematical techniques, can enhance the accuracy of the thickness calculation. The DE principle is used by the γ-ray ash gauging systems widely employed in coal processing plants since the early 1980s. These sensors are often installed on belt conveyors––i.e., operating on moving material. Strictly, the DE principle is valid for measurements on static coal samples. Outokumpu Oy patented ( One recent patent ( X-ray DE absorptiometry is one of the well-established methods for the measurement of bone mineral density in osteoporosis screening. In the aviation security area, DE is the principle used by some last-generation airport luggage scanners. In these and other fields the R&D investments are greater than in the processing industry thus more new developments in the fast evolving photonic technology can be found here; one should look for the possible spin-off technology from these areas not directly related to mineral and coal processing. Finally, the possibility of simultaneously using more than one physical principle to complement and corroborate DE or ME measurements is worth evaluation (see the following sections). For the total attenuation of an X-ray beam through a two-phase (denoted by the sub-scripts A and B, respectively) particle one can write As an example, when three energies are used (with lowest, medium and highest energies denoted by the sub-scripts L, M and H, respectively): In this case, the system of equations is overdetermined. Rather than the simple Least Square minimization of the residuals––i.e., Thus In the special case, where Thus For For Essentially the operator Further improvements of the method are possible due to the development of new instruments (e.g., from Optimet Optical Metrology Ltd) which make use of conoscopic holography principles for the precise calculation of the total object thickness, Thus, in the case of three energies: For a DE experiment (and The monochromatic and collimated high flux X-ray beam available at the SYRMEP beamline of the ELETTRA (  The particles studied were made up of a carbonaceous phase and a marlstone mineral matrix. High-resolution tomographic reconstructions at various energies (in the range 17–31 keV) of these composite particles allowed the evaluation of the linear attenuation coefficients of the two phases. The histogram of the pixel values of the reconstructed tomographic slice has a typical bimodal shape. The values of the peaks of the two phases are shown in Monolayers of particles were radiographed at 19, 23, 27 and 31 keV. The digital radiographs recorded by the 16 bit dynamic range detector were acquired and subsequently corrected for the offset detector reading––i.e., the dark-field image  The radiographs were subtracted according to ME theory (see  The integration of these thickness data allows the phase volume evaluation and the derivation of the particle grade, The particles were also tomographed with a dense scanning program (720 projections around 180° rotation). If one is not concerned with the information for the projected thickness of the phases (in the direction perpendicular to the projection of the particle) and takes into account only the grade value: The values in These results are easy to interprete; at low-energy levels there is a higher dependence of the attenuation on the composition of the two mineralogical phases––i.e., highest difference in the values of the linear attenuation coefficients In most of the cases the error is less than 15%: this level is confirmed by a number of measurements on different particles and by a ‘lower level’ investigation on the areal grade of single slices reconstructed by FBP ( In principle, conventional sources can also be monochromatized, but at the price of a strongly reduced radiation flux, which may result in an excessive increase of the overall acquisition time. Quasi-monochromatic beams can be produced by a standard (e.g., tungsten anode) X-ray tube exploiting the Bragg diffraction on graphite mosaic crystals ( Quasi-monochromatic X-ray production from the plasma flash X-ray generator with a cerium-target is also reported in the literature. DE can be implemented industrially by a double X-ray exposure with a conventional (bremsstrahlung) source with a fast switching tube voltage. The detector alternatively acquires the low- and the high-energy radiographic images. It should be noted that by setting a high kilovolt value in the X-ray generator, shorter wavelengths are included in the spectrum, these wavelengths not existing in the lower kilovolt spectrum. The higher voltage produced X-rays are used for the penetration of thicker and heavier materials. DE radiography can also be performed with a single X-ray exposure with energy resolving detectors. These are sandwich detectors with the first part of the volume––i.e., the one facing the incoming radiation––counting the low-energy photons and the rear one counting the high-energy photons. These are also termed ‘one-shot’ DE detectors. Some detectors alternate one pixel row resolving high-energy photons to one resolving low-energy photons on the same active surface. A suitable prefilter is placed in front of the poly-chromatic spectrum in order to tentatively form a bimodal spectrum with separated peaks for the low and high energies. The advantage of this technique is perfect pixel-by-pixel correspondence of the energy images, which the DE material thickness profiling requires. A two source–two detector (2S–2D) arrangement is shown in The X-ray beam passing through the particle object can be seen as a linear probe: the breadth of the probe is given by the detector pixel size. The full sheaf of X-rays samples all the particle. The estimation of the volumes of the phases in the particle is independent of the orientation of the particle (or the direction of the beam). Ideally, by aligning all the probes the full volume of both phases seen. Notably, the total length of the aligned probes is dependent on the pixel size. For the 2S–2D acquisition geometry and for both detectors with the same pixel size, the following equations allow particle grade estimation: There is also a constant improvement in High-Speed Photonics. High-speed radiography (also termed flash radiography (FXR) technology) can be used to imagine moving objects as belt-conveyed material. The apparatus differs from the usual industrial X-ray equipment in design of both the high-voltage generator and the X-ray tube. The generator contains large high-voltage condensers that are suddenly discharged through the X-ray tube, giving a high-voltage pulse of very short duration. The X-ray tube has a cold cathode rather than the conventional heated filament. Emission from the cold cathode is triggered by means of a third electrode placed near it. When electron emission has started, the discharge immediately transfers to the target, which is of conventional design. The tube current may reach a value as high as 2000 A (two million milliamperes), but because of the extremely short exposure times, the load on the focal spot is not excessive, thus there is no blurring of the acquired radiographs. Traditionally, fractionation into density classes by heavy liquids has been used in laboratories for the characterization particle systems. This method is suitable only for particles composed of two phases, for which there is a linear relationship between the average density and the volumetric composition. The laboratory procedures are tedious and use hazardous and costly chemicals (i.e., heavy liquids); the limitations of these techniques are well known, such that they are infrequently used in practice. Microscopic observation of the particle surface is difficult and provides biased information because the fraction of phase exposed can be different from the volumetric composition. Observation on polished sections made up of particles classified in narrow sizes and embedded in epoxy resin provides biased information; basically there is a high probability of seeing only one phase when sectioning composite particles. Stereological methods, e.g., the kernel inversion method, have been suggested to convert distribution of areal grades, read from sections, into distribution of volumetric grades. These methods require the a priori knowledge of the probability of seeing an areal grade from a particle with a given volumetric grade. High-resolution X-ray computer tomography, i.e. None of the methods mentioned above appears capable of rapidly characterizing a system of particles. In this paper experimental evidence that ME X-ray radiography is a simple technique that appears viable for the determination of the volume of the two phases that make up a composite particle has been presented. Two or more radiographs are taken at different X-ray energies. The corresponding pair of pixels of these digital images are ‘subtracted’ for ‘projecting out’ one phase suppressing the other. The ‘weighted subtraction’ of two energy images produces a ‘thickness’ image. The integration of the thickness images gives the volume of the projected phases. Basically the different attenuation properties of the two phases in the particle are used to retrieve geometric information. Notwithstanding the very encouraging experiences presented, it also appears that further investigation is necessary in order to test the ME methods with polychromatic radiation prior to concluding on the possibility of prototyping a sensor. To date any estimation of the time needed for processing a sample, or any comparison with traditional washability methods, is premature.