In the future, an oxidation approach using SO2/O2 could be an important technique for extracting manganese from leach liquors. The aim of this work was to analyse the effect of temperature on the oxidative precipitation of Mn(II) in solutions derived from low-grade ore leaching using a SO2/air gas mixture. This oxidation method is frequently used to eliminate Mn impurities from Ni and Co leach liquors. It was observed that controlling the temperature favoured the selective oxidation of Mn(II) to produce different oxidised species, such as MnO2, α-MnOOH, γ-MnOOH and Mn3O4. The experimental results also showed that higher temperatures promoted the production of species with a lower manganese oxidation state. Moreover, in the range of studied operation variables, it was found that the best oxidation kinetics were obtained at pH=6, 5% SO2/95% O2 and 75°C. In addition, for efficiency reasons, a gas mixture flow rate of 200mL/min is suggested.Manganese is an important element in the steel industry because of its utility in deoxidation and desulphurisation. Specifically, it allows the formation of manganese sulphide and avoids the formation of interstitial ferric sulphide. Moreover, manganese sulphide increases the fracture resistance during the lamination of steel at high temperatures. Of the manganese added to steel, approximately 30% is added because of its properties as a sulphide former and as a deoxidant, while the other 70% is added purely as an alloying element ( The elimination of manganese impurities from leach liquors of cobalt, nickel and zinc is the most common objective of manganese precipitation with a SO    The same authors postulated that during this reaction, a     Furthermore, the authors stated that the dissolution of O  Considering that there are few mature technologies for the processing of low-grade manganese ores, the developing of such technologies presents an important research opportunity. This paper proposes the use of the oxidative method with SO Manganese liquor was obtained from reductive leaching of a low-grade pyrolusite ore using SO The leach liquor contained 90% and 0.17% of the Mn and Fe originally contained in the pyrolusite ore. The poor Fe dissolution was possible because almost all the Fe was occluded in the quartz particles. Thus, the manganese concentration in this liquor was approximately 0.085 The oxidative tests were carried out in a 2 Considering the fact that almost all of the technical literature on this subject refers to the SO The oxidation potential was measured using a platinum electrode in combination with a reference electrode of Ag/AgCl, but the ORP reported in this paper is referenced to a standard hydrogen electrode (SHE). The ORP was continuously measured during the oxidation test, and a sample value was recorded every 10 To estimate the manganese oxidation kinetics, a sample of solution was withdrawn every 30  Furthermore, it was observed that increasing the temperature decreases the oxidation potential ( Studying the effect of the ORP manipulated with the SO As shown in The effect of temperature on the selective precipitation of different manganese oxides may be thermodynamically examined in an Eh–pH diagram. The Eh–pH diagram was obtained with HSC Chemistry 6.1® software, utilising a 0.085 In terms of the chemical analysis of manganese content in the oxide mixture, the results show that the manganese content was higher in the products obtained at higher temperatures, as established by the composition analysis ( Interestingly, despite the use of a sulphated oxidant, the sulphur content of the products is relatively small. Sodium traces are detected because the pH was regulated with NaOH additions, and a small amount was recovered with the precipitate. The presence of traces of Na and S in the oxidation products may be explained because the precipitates were not washed thoroughly and these elements may have been entrained with the leach liquor. Another explanation is that at higher temperatures generally the density of the oxides increases and volume of the solid decreases, carrying less entrained liquor and transporting fewer impurities. As shown in  These tests were conducted under the following conditions: 2%, 5% and 10% SO  These results are in agreement with those obtained by This set of tests was carried out by keeping the gas mixture ratio constant at 5% SO The manganese oxide precipitation kinetics are favoured by the increase of temperature, which promotes the formation of three different species (MnO In the range of the studied experimental conditions, four operation variables that favour the reaction rate are the temperature (from 25 The authors are grateful to CONACYT (Mexico) and to Huajicari S.A. de C.V. for the scholarship and financial support received.