As the changes on the mechanical properties with depth of indentation provide valuable information that may be suitable for design purposes, nanoindentation is an adequate technique for investigating the nanomechanical changes in the surface and in the inner polymers. This research focuses on the study of the nanomechanical properties of two grades of polypropylene (PP) after the long term exposure to an organic fluid, such as paraffin wax used as a phase change materials (PCM). PCM are used for thermal energy storage (TES) in buildings applications for passive systems or heating and cooling usages. In any of these uses PCM must be encapsulated and PP is a possibility within the container materials used. Four different samples of the polypropylene were evaluated: PP, filled polypropylene with 60% Mg(OH)2 (PP-60Mg), PP-60Mg with PCM (RT-25), and PP-60Mg with PCM (RT-42). It was studied the thermal stability by Thermogravimetrical analysis of these samples, and also it was evaluated the Hardness (H), Elastic modulus (E) and Loss modulus (Eloss
                     ) for the unfilled PP and PP-60Mg in contact with two different PCM at different temperatures (30°C, 45°C and 60°C for RT-25 and 45°C for RT-42) for 32days. Results show that the mechanical properties H, E, and Eloss
                      are higher for PP-60Mg than for PP. Nevertheless, these properties decrease significantly when the PP and the PP-60Mg are in contact with PCM, because it acts as a plasticizer, softening the polymer. Besides, the higher PCM’s melting point, the lowest mechanical properties were observed.Phase change materials (PCM) have the principal advantage of high capacity energy storage in form of latent heat PCM can be used in passive systems such as floors The nanoindentation technique was used to measure the nanomechanical properties of selected materials containing PCM. Nanoindentation technique is perhaps the most commonly applied means of testing the mechanical properties of materials at micrometric and nanometric scale. The ability to measure the microscopic regions responses is a key to understand the mechanical behavior of technological material systems The probe in nanoindentation technique is forced into the surface at a programmed rate and to a selected maximum force or depth. By means of special transducers the load and penetration depth are registered during the experiment. The area of contact between indenter and sample is then estimated using the known geometry of the indenter. For a Berkovich indenter, which is used in this work, the relationship between the projected area There are a great number of studies using the nanoindentation technique in polymers showing that is a simple but effective mechanical testing method. Nanoindentation has been successfully used to study the hardness and elastic properties of several polymers and nanocomposites. To give some examples of these studies on several polymers under different experimental strategies, Lee et al. Nanoindentation has been successfully compared with other techniques normally used to study the mechanical properties of polymers such as the Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) and the Dynamic Mechanical Analysis (DMA) instruments; Griepentrog et al. In this study were used two different types of paraffin waxes provided by Rubitherm® with different melting temperatures ( Polymeric samples were prepared at the Centre Català del Plastic (CCP). Two kinds of polypropylene samples were used, PP homopolymer and PP filled with 60% Mg(OH) Paraffin waxes used were commercial products from Rubitherm (RT-25 and RT-42), having melting temperatures around 25 Polymeric specimens of 1 Thermogravimetrical analysis (TGA) was used to study the thermal stability of the materials It was performed nanoindentation assays to evaluate the mechanical response in an indentation analysis with the purpose to calculate Hardness ( A Nanoindenter G-200 (Agilent Technologies) was employed using a diamond three-sided Berkovich indenter geometry. This was calibrated with a silica standard specimen with a known Young’s modulus. The stiffness was acquired under the continuous stiffness measurement (CSM) at an oscillating frequency of 75 An array of 100 nanoindentation imprints was performed at 600 The thermal oxidative degradation of PP-60Mg was complete at temperatures up to 450 The thermal degradation curve of the PP-60Mg, after being submerged in PCM RT-25 during 32 The first degradation is because of Mg(OH) The filler effect on mechanical properties can be observed in A prolonged contact of PP with PCM softens the material. The results for PP samples in contact with RT-25 during 32 For this reason, after 32 Notably, when it is used the same paraffin (RT-25) in contact with the filled PP, it is observed that the studied mechanical properties decrease in the same way as the temperature increase after 32 If the properties of When a paraffin of a higher melting point as RT-42 is used as organic fluid, no significant differences were observed in the measured elastic modulus of unfilled PP respect to the sample submerged in RT-25, showing both samples a modulus reduction around 35% over the measured modulus for reference PP sample, as is shown in Another effect observed between samples immersed in different paraffin waxes is the low value of elastic modulus at penetrations lower than 2000 Otherwise, there are some differences in the However, when a filled PP is considered, the results are quite different. In  Nanoindentation technique is an adequate tool to evaluate nanomechanical properties for polymers. The usage of the fire retardant inorganic filler Mg(OH) The authors would like to thank the CCP for their kindly supply of the polymeric samples. The work is partially funded by the Spanish government (ENE2011-28269-C03-02). The authors would like to thank the Catalan Government for the quality accreditation given to their research group DIOPMA (2014 SGR 1543). The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no PIRSES-GA-2013-610692 (INNOSTORAGE).