This paper reported on the synthesis of silica nanosheets (SNSs) by structurally modifying natural coal-series kaolinite mineral (Kc). Ag nanoparticles (AgNPs) of about 5nm were uniformly attached on the surface of Sn2+-activated SNSs to form an emerging hierarchical porous nanostructure, which was further hybridized with polyethylene glycol (PEG) to produce PEG@Ag/Sn2+-SNSs. The maximum loading capacity and melting enthalpy of PEG@Ag/Sn2+-SNSs could reach 66.1% and 113.9J/g, respectively, and its thermal conductivity showed up to 0.84W/(mK). The results demonstrated that well dispersion of AgNPs and hierarchical porous structure of Ag/Sn2+-SNSs could synergically enhance the thermal conductivity. Intriguingly, the introduction of AgNPs could lead to the obvious decrease of the melting and solidifying period, and simultaneously promoted the heat transfer of the composite phase change material (PCM). Furthermore, the composite PCM could retain good thermal reliability after 200 cycles, indicating its potential application in the thermal energy storage system. Atomic-level mechanism for the enhanced thermal conductivity of the composite PCM was also discussed.The demand and consumption of energy is increasing significantly along with the blooming of the industry and agriculture. As a consequence, it is important to use existing energy resources effectively. Both sensible heat and latent heat thermal energy storage (LHTES) have been confirmed as efficient techniques for energy conservation. The phase change material (PCM) used in the LHTES possesses the advantages of high energy density and chemical stability compared with the sensible heat thermal energy storage. Therefore, application of PCM in LHTES has become a common choice Although the thermal conductivity of clay-based PCMs has been increased remarkably, the highly efficient heat transfer technology is still in demand This paper aims to prepare an emerging nanocomposite with high thermal conductivity for thermal energy storage. Natural Kc was structurally modified to prepare silica nanosheets (SNSs), which was later activated by adding Sn Pristine Kc used in our experiments was obtained from Shanxi, China. 1 Chemically pure PEG ( X-ray diffraction (XRD) of the samples was carried out using a Rigaku D/max-2550VBR+18 Thermal storage performances of the samples were measured by differential scanning calorimeter (DSC, TA instruments DSC Q10) at a heating rate of 5 The chemical compatibility of Ag/Sn The microstructures of Kc, SNSs, Ag/Sn  TEM-EDS, HRTEM and STEM images of Ag/Sn The N The corresponding pore size distribution curves determined by BJH method exhibit micropores <2  The thermal conductivities of PEG, PEG@SNS, PEG@Sn The thermal storage/release properties of PEG@SNSs, PEG@Sn Thermal stability of PEG@Ag/Sn The chemical structure and thermal properties of the composite PCM should be stable and show a relatively small change after long time cycling. In consequence, a 200-thermal cycling test was conducted to investigate the chemical and thermal reliability of the composite PCM. The survey spectra of SNSs, Sn In order to investigate the effect of AgNPs on the heat transfer enhancement of the composite PCM, the photomicrograph was used to record the morphology and explore the states of PEG@SNSs, PEG@Sn The enhanced surface thermal conductivity of the composite PCM at atomic level is schematically depicted ( An emerging Ag/Sn This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 