A further modification of the Hopkinson pressure bar has been developed for the accurate measurement of the force–deformation response from impact of single particles and particle beds. The striker employed is a steel rod that is driven by gravity. The procedure for calculating forces and deformations using this device is described in detail. A model that combines principles of Hertzian contact theory and the theory of longitudinal wave propagation in rods has been proposed and predictions are compared to forces and deformations measured experimentally under one- and two-point contact configurations. The excellent agreement between theory and experiments demonstrates the high accuracy and reproducibility of the device and the calculation procedures used. The greater instrumentation available along with the fewer assumptions required in the calculation of deformations than its predecessor—the Ultrafast Load Cell (UFLC)—makes it a particularly useful tool for in-depth single-particle breakage studies. Measurements on rock particles have shown that the device was able to detect deviations in the materials deformation and fracture response from what is expected assuming perfectly brittle behavior.In mills and crushers, particles are stressed either individually or in beds in large-scale machines that operate at high throughputs in often complex size reduction circuits. It is a very energy-intensive operation and the efficiency of commonly used machines is very low. Several authors ( Useful information about the material mechanical behavior in comminution equipment can be obtained by determining precisely the load–deformation response from fracturing particles at moderate to high loading rates. Important measures include the particle fracture energy and the particle stiffness ( The present paper describes a further modification of the split Hopkinson pressure bar by using a steel rod driven by gravity as the striker. In this device, particles are subject to impact at moderate speeds, which allow reproducing the dominant breakage mode found in most comminution equipment, including ball mills. Force–time and force–deformation profiles determined using this apparatus are compared to the Hertzian theory and to those determined using its predecessor, the Impact Load Cell, and it is demonstrated the greatest accuracy of the new apparatus. The apparatus, shown in The main difference between the modified Hopkinson pressure bar (MHPB) and its predecessor, the Ultrafast Load Cell (UFLC), is that it uses a drop bar instead of a steel sphere as the striker. The device is equipped with three alternative systems that can be used for measuring forces that act on the particle and its deformations during impact. Two of those correspond to solid-state strain gauges that are mounted directly on the bars. The third measuring system corresponds to a piezoelectric accelerometer (model 8309 from Brüel and Kjaer) that is attached to the top of the incident bar ( Each test is performed by releasing the drop (or incident) bar onto the individual particle or particle bed, which is placed on the upper face of the transmitting bar. The impact generates two compressive strain waves: one that travels downward through the transmitting bar and another travels upward through the incident bar. These two compressive waves produce a change in resistance as they pass two sets of strain gauges that are positioned separately on the cylindrical surfaces of both rods. This in turn results in a voltage change in the Wheatstone bridge, which is then recorded as a function of time (at sampling rates of typically 2 MHz) using a Nicolet Pro digital oscilloscope. The oscilloscope is equipped with 12-bit, 10-MHz digitizers, allowing to achieve high resolutions in both time and voltage. Data stored in the oscilloscope are then transferred to a floppy disk for later analysis in the computer. The triggering of the oscilloscope is carried out with the aid of a laser-photodiode system ( Presuming that the rods behave elastically and follow Hooke's law, the relationship between the force ( In calculating the displacement of the incident rod, it must also be considered that it is also falling under free-fall conditions, which gives The approach Eq. The integrals in Eq. Eq. Eq. As previously discussed, in the equipment, forces acting on the particle sitting on top of the rod can be calculated from results obtained in one of the following alternative systems: the strain gauges on the transmitting bar, the strain gauges on the incident bar or the accelerometer. In the case of the strain gauges on either the transmitting or the incident bars, it is given by ( Alternatively, forces on the incident bar can also be calculated from the accelerometer response. Differentiating Eq. From the velocities of the strain waves In the case of the voltages measured using the accelerometer/amplifier placed on the top of the incident bar, and alternative expression must be used, The law of contact of curved surfaces is given by Hertzian theory ( Substituting Eq. Eq. The constant On the other hand, for the case of a sphere compressed between two nearly flat surfaces, it is given by Force–time profiles measured using the apparatus under well-defined controlled conditions can be calibrated using this theoretical model based on wave propagation theory and the elastic theory of contacts. Experiments were undertaken under different contact patterns and results are given as follows. Longitudinal collinear collision of two plane-ended circular rods can be described by simple application of the classical theory of wave propagation in rods, which predicts a perfectly rectangular strain wave ( Experiments were undertaken under various impact velocities with a flat–flat contact pattern ( Calibration tests with the flat–flat contact pattern established that the device is able to measure forces accurately and that measurements conducted from the signals of each strain gauge station and the accelerometer are in agreement. Flat–flat impacts, however, do not reflect the conditions in which experiments are carried out in the apparatus. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate the accuracy of the system in measuring deformations of samples subject to impact. This is accomplished by subjecting individual spheres of known elastic constants and diameters to impact in flat–sphere–flat contact patterns. A summary of the elastic constants of the materials tested is given in The experimental procedure consisted of placing each sphere on the top of the anvil coated with a thin layer of high-vacuum grease in order to improve contact and minimize vibrations. Each sphere was then impacted and the force–time history recorded. Force–time profiles resulting from impact of 6.4-mm stainless steel spheres at different impact velocities are given in Force–time profiles resulting from impact of 3.2 mm spheres of the different materials listed in In order to demonstrate the significance of the results presented in It has been demonstrated by several researchers ( Experiments have been conducted by impacting spheres of different materials ( Samples of a variety of materials have been subjected to breakage using the newly calibrated device. Particles selected for testing were either nearly spherical or, at least, with uniform aspect ratio. From data such as those in A very comprehensive calibration study has been undertaken on the modified Hopkinson pressure bar. All relevant aspects of testing have been analyzed and calibrated using this theoretical model that combines wave propagation theory and Hertzian theory of contacts and careful experimentation. It has been shown that the apparatus measures forces accurately and that the measuring and dropping systems are reproducible. Comparable measurements of loads can be obtained by alternative systems. Two-point (flat–sphere–flat) compression experiments showed that the system accurately measures deformations in the specimen, with the theoretical model describing both the compression and the restitution parts of the loading cycle. Incipient plastic deformations were detected during compression of metal spheres, which were consistent with their lower hardness. On the other hand, the momentum balance approach used to estimate deformations when a sphere is used as the striker produced good descriptions only during the compression part of the loading cycle, generating unrealistic descriptions of the deformations during restitution. That was attributed to intense vibrations, which are typically not observed during testing of irregularly shaped particulate. This research has been supported by the Department of the Interior's Mineral Institute program administered by the US Bureau of Mines through the Generic Mineral Center for Comminution under grant numbers G1125249 and G1135249 and by the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq) of Brazil.