Acrylonitrile butadiene rubber (NBR) has been used in the automotive industry. To change the strength of NBR, the double bond in NBR can be converted to a single bond using palladium particles immobilized on a support as a catalyst. During this catalytic reaction, palladium particles might leak into the solution. In this study, to recover palladium particles from highly concentrated NBR acetone solution, poly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate) (poly(DMAEMA)) solution was added to the palladium-containing solution. The amino group of poly(DMAEMA) captured palladium particles and poly(DMAEMA) shrunk by dehydration in acetone, resulting in rapid precipitation of poly(DMAEMA) complexed with palladium particles. The percentage of recovered palladium particles after 1 h was 60%. By immersing the complex in HNO3 solution including thiourea, 90% of the recovered palladium was eluted from the precipitated poly(DMAEMA).Palladium particles immobilized on silica and carbon have been used as a catalyst in Suzuki–Miyaura coupling ( Dissolved or dispersed NBR in acetone displays a high viscosity of 1000 mPa·s. When NBR is reacted with immobilized palladium particles, palladium particles can possibly leak into the highly viscous NBR solution. Palladium is a precious metal and thus its recovery is desirable. Several methods to recover palladium particles dissolved in water solution have been proposed. For example, palladium ions leached from waste electrical and electronic devices have been recovered selectively using solvent extraction ( In this study, the rapid recovery of palladium particles from highly viscous NBR solution through the precipitation of an amino group-containing polymer is proposed, as shown in DMAEMA, activated alumina, ammonium persulfate (APS), and palladium(II) acetate were purchased from Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd., Japan. Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP; average molecular mass: 40,000) was obtained from Tokyo Chemical Industry Co., Ltd., Japan. NBR (average molecular weight 40,000, acrylonitrile composition: 37–39 wt%) was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA. Polyethylene oxide (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA) was used as a standard for size-exclusion chromatography (SEC). WA30 (porous spherical resin, functional group: tertiary amine, functional group density: 3.0 mol/kg) was purchased from Mitsubishi Chemical Corporation, Japan. Other chemicals were of analytical grade or higher. DMAEMA (18 g) was mixed with activated alumina (1 g) for 15 min to remove the polymerization inhibitor. Then, the activated alumina was removed via vacuum filtration. Nitrogen-flushed DMAEMA (9.30 g), APS (0.33 g), and pure water (34.4 g) were mixed at 303 K for 24 h at 360 rpm. The resulting solution was added to acetone (50 mL) to obtain a white gel-like precipitate. The precipitate was filtered twice (Advantec 5C, Toyo Roshi Kaisha, Ltd., Japan). The polymer weight was characterized by SEC with a column (TSKgel G2000PW Palladium acetate (0.224 g), PVP (0.539 g), and ethanol (25 mL) were heated under reflux at 343 K for 2 h. The dispersion (1 mL) was diluted with acetone to give a total volume of 100 mL. NBR (2.0 g) was dissolved in acetone (60 mL) at 298 K to obtain NBR solution (33 g/L). The palladium particle dispersion was mixed with the NBR solution to obtain the acetone solution of palladium particles and NBR. The size of the palladium particles was observed using transmission electron microscopy (TEM; JEOL-2100, JEOL Ltd., Japan). The acetone solution containing palladium particles and NBR (5.0 mL) was added to a glass vial (diameter: 2.2 cm, height: 4.0 cm) and then poly(DMAEMA) solution dissolved in pure water (0.10 mL) was added to the palladium solution at 303 K and stirred at 150 rpm in an incubator (AS ONE, Japan). The concentration of poly(DMAEMA) ranged from 0.0010 to 0.10 g/mL. The viscosity of poly(DMAEMA) (10 g/L) and NBR (25 g/L) were determined by Brookfield viscometer (LVDV-II+, spindle CPE042, MA, USA). The volume of the samples was 1.0 mL and temperature was set at 288 K. The sampled solution was filtered (Toyo Roshi Kaisha, Ltd., 5C). The filtrate was stirred with a rotator (RT30MINI, Taitec, Japan) at 30 rpm for 5 min to prevent the formation of a concentration distribution of palladium particles. The concentration of palladium particles was analyzed by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS; AA-6800, Shimadzu). The percentage and amount of palladium particles captured were calculated using the following equations, To allow comparison of our approach with conventional adsorption, WA30 (100 mg), a commercially available resin, was added to the acetone solution containing palladium particles and NBR for a prescribed time. After adsorption, the concentration of palladium particles remaining in this solution was determined by AAS. A solution of poly(DMAEMA) (0.1 g/mL, 0.6 mL) was added to an acetone solution of palladium particles and NBR (30 mL, concentration of NBR: 25 g/L, concentration of palladium: 15 mg/L). The amount of precipitated poly(DMAEMA) after drying was weighed. The concentration of palladium particles remaining in acetone was determined by AAS. The composition of the precipitate was analyzed by Fourier transform-infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy (IRAffinity-1, Shimadzu). The precipitate of poly(DMAEMA) and palladium particles (0.050 g) was mixed with different solutions (5.0 mL) with various HCl and HNO Palladium particles were recovered from the highly viscous acetone solution containing NBR through precipitation of poly(DMAEMA). Dissolved poly(DMAEMA) in water was required to form the precipitate via dehydration in acetone solution containing NBR and palladium particles. During the precipitation of poly(DMAEMA), palladium particles were captured by the amino groups in poly(DMAEMA). Poly(DMAEMA) with a low molecular weight would dissolve in the acetone solution, while that with a high molecular weight would precipitate through dehydration in acetone. DMAEMA was polymerized at 303 K for 24 h to obtain poly(DMAEMA) with a high molecular weight. Chromatograms obtained from SEC of the obtained poly(DMAEMA) are presented in To synthesize palladium particles, palladium ions were reduced to palladium(0) particles. A TEM image and the size distribution of palladium particles are shown in A solution of poly(DMAEMA) dissolved in water was added to the acetone solution containing palladium particles and NBR to recover palladium particles through capture by the amino groups of poly(DMAEMA) and it subsequent dehydration and precipitation. The viscosity of poly(DMAEMA) solution (10 g/L) added and NBR (25 g/L) were 2.1 mPa·s and 1.2 mPa·s, respectively. In conventional adsorption methods, palladium particles are difficult to transfer in the highly viscous NBR solution. The method proposed in this study is compared with the conventional adsorption method in The concentration of poly(DMAEMA) in water was changed to influence the recovery of palladium particles, as shown in The recovery of palladium was calculated to be 60% when 2 mg of Pd was added per gram of poly(DMAEMA). The number of amino groups in 1 g of poly(DMAEMA) was calculated as follows, The number of palladium particle ( The size and density of palladium particles ( When the system volume was scaled up from 5 to 30 mL, the presence of NBR in the precipitate of poly(DMAEMA) was confirmed by FT-IR spectroscopy, as shown in To recover palladium particles captured in poly(DMAEMA), the precipitate was treated with HCl solution, HNO Precipitation of poly(DMAEMA) was developed as a method to recover palladium particles from highly viscous NBR acetone solution. The amino groups in the hydrated poly(DMAEMA) captured palladium particles during the dehydration of poly(DMAEMA) in acetone, which gave a precipitate that did not including NBR. The recovery of palladium particles was rapid compared with that achieved by a conventional adsorption method. The palladium particles in the poly(DMAEMA) precipitate could be effectively recovered as an ion complex using HCl and thiourea solution. We thank Natasha Lundin, PhD, from Edanz Group (