Spiral concentrators are widely used in the iron ore industries to concentrate heavy iron oxides from light silica gangue minerals. The operation of a WW-6 spiral for the concentration of an iron oxide ore is analyzed through the size recovery or partition curves of the minerals. Several tests conducted following a factorial design using wash water addition, feed rate and slurry solid concentration as studied factors show that for the tested conditions the wash water addition has the most important effect on the spiral performance with its effect being mainly located on coarse particles.Spiral concentrators are gravity based separation devices used for the preparation of coal, iron and heavy mineral ores (  This paper uses the mineral size recovery curves to investigate, using a 2 The tests are conducted using a spiral operated in a close circuit at the COREM pilot plant in Quebec, QC, Canada. The set up used for the tests is described first followed by the test conditions. The spiral used for the tests is a 7 turn WW-6E from Roche Mining. The set-up used for the experiments is shown in The tests conducted follow a 2 For each test the feed rate, slurry solid concentration and wash water are adjusted to the planned values. The spiral is then allowed to stabilize for 10 the mass flow rate; the head assays (Fe, SiO the size distribution (from 1.6 to 0.038 the chemical composition (Fe, SiO the solid concentration of the slurry; the specific gravity of the ore. All measurements are reconciled using the BILMAT algorithm ( The recovery in the concentrate stream of a species The variable The effects of the studied experimental factors (wash water addition, spiral feed rate and solid concentration) are analyzed first using global performance indices such as concentrate grade and recovery and then by using the size recovery curves for iron and silica carriers. An example of a set of reconciled data is presented in A stepwise regression ( This result is primary due to the washing of the silica carrier particles away from the inner part of the spiral trough from where the concentrate is recovered. When light silica carrier particles are flushed away from the inner trough it is possible that the density of the particle bed restricts the return of these particles to the inner trough while denser hematite particles are able to travel back toward the concentrate traps. The size recovery curve for the silica carriers shown later confirms that the effect of the wash water is dominant for coarse particles. This result is an indication that the Bagnold force is probably the dominant action in cleaning the slurry within the inner trough of the spiral ( The insensitivity of the spiral performances to the changes of spiral feed rate and slurry solid concentration is not consistent with the observations reported by The previous analysis shows that increasing the wash water addition leads to a higher concentrate grade at the expense of recovery. The analysis of the partition curves of the iron and silica carriers provides information about the particle size range that is mostly influenced by the wash water addition. The partition curves observed for the iron and silica carriers for the reference operating conditions (tests 1 and 10 of The average partition curves for iron and silica observed with the spiral operating with high wash water addition (average of tests 6, 7, 8 and 9) and low wash water addition (average of tests 2, 3, 4 and 5) are compared to the average partition curves obtained at the reference conditions (tests 1 and 10) in A series of tests were conducted using an iron oxide ore to analyze the effect of the wash water addition, spiral slurry feed rate and solid concentration on a WW-6 spiral performance. The test results clearly show that the spiral operation is fairly insensitive to change of feed rate and slurry solid concentration when these variables are maintained within the operating range recommended by the manufacturer. On the other hand, the spiral operation is found to be sensitive to the wash water flow addition. Increasing the wash water flow rate increases the concentrate grade at the expense of the iron recovery. The wash water flow rate significantly impacts the recovery of coarse particles with higher recoveries observed at low wash water addition rate.