The physical meaning of the finite-width-correction factors (FWCF), which commonly appear in stress intensity factor solutions of fracture mechanics, is mysterious. The present work is an attempt to resolve this mystery. Specifically, it is shown that for the middle-crack-tension (M(T)) specimen and for the embedded-circular-crack in a specimen of round cross-section, the FWCF factor is related to the average net-section stress for a given crack size. An increase in K at the crack tip means an increase in the average net-section stress ahead of the crack, in addition to the increase in the level of normal stress in the near-tip (or singularity-dominated) zone of fracture mechanics. It is also shown that this increase in net-section stress can be determined, in a straightforward manner, using a simple approach based on strength of materials (SOM). The agreement between the net-section stress determined from the strength of materials approach and that from fracture mechanics is surprisingly good. This connection between the finite-width-correction factor and the net-section stress has not been demonstrated before, and, hence it provides a new point of view to analyze fracture mechanics problems. More importantly, the connection validates the correlation of fatigue crack growth on the basis of the change in the net-section cyclic strain energy, which has recently been demonstrated by the author elsewhere.crack length distance from crack tip distance from center of the crack distance in terms of complex variable finite-width correction factor specimen width stress intensity factor stress intensity factor in an infinite plate stress intensity factor in a finite plate stress function for infinite plate stress function for finite plate (collinear crack problem) middle-crack-tension double-edge notched tension finite-width-correction factor Strength of Materials applied stress on infinite plate applied stress on finite plate normal stress in the crack plane in an infinite plate calculated normal stress in the crack plane in a fictitious finite plate normal stress in the crack plane for Westergaard collinear crack applied stress net stress in the crack plane of uncracked ligament increase in net-section stress in the crack plane relative to applied stress increase in global stress increase in global strain In fracture mechanics, the stress intensity factor, K, has been used to characterize the fracture and fatigue problems encountered in engineering materials and structures. The stress intensity factor for a crack of length, 2a, in an infinite plate under applied stress, σ The key premise of the fracture mechanics is that the stress intensity factor, K, governs the state of stress at the tip of a crack in elastic solid. In the near-tip-field approximation of fracture mechanics, the distribution of normal stress, σ The stress distribution given by Eq. Dimensionless geometry correction factors, commonly denoted as F(a/W), are employed The F(a/W) is the tangent formula provided by Irwin  What does the finite-width-correction-factor correct? Since the vertical boundaries of a finite M(T) specimen must be stress free, does the correction mean to eliminate the transverse stresses at these boundaries? Since the elastic displacements along the horizontal (loading) edges of the M(T) specimen are different from that in an infinite specimen, does the correction factor account for the vertical displacements along these edges, relative to that in a infinite specimen? Since the definition of K characterizes only the near-crack-tip singular stress field (Eq. Does the increase in K increase only the near-tip-distribution of stress or the entire normal stress distribution in the uncracked or net-section of a finite-width M(T) specimen is altered? The objective of the present work is to examine the actual normal stress distribution in the entire un-cracked ligament or the net-section of a finite M(T) specimen. The increase in net-section stress determined from this distribution is then compared with that calculated from a simpler strength-of-materials approach. It is shown that (i) the finite-width-correction-factor behaves as a stress amplification factor for a finite specimen; (ii) an increase in K means an increase in the average net-section stress, and not merely the increase in near-crack-tip stress distribution and (iii) several competing FWCF formulae give the average net-section stresses that are in good agreement with that determined from a simple strength-of-materials (SOM) approach. This finding is then used to justify the correlation of fatigue crack growth based on the change in net-section cyclic strain energy, in M(T) specimen, and its equivalency to ΔK-based correlation. The physical meaning of finite-width-correction-factor is explored in this section through a thought experiment involving the cutting and loading of a finite-sized specimen from an infinite plate. The hypothesis is that the finite-width-correction-factor can be interpreted as a stress amplification factor that converts the applied stress level (for a given K) in the finite specimen, into an equivalent applied stress level on the infinite plate, which will be needed produce a level of K in the infinite plate equal to the K level in the finite plate. Let us examine the states of stresses in the infinite and finite plate configurations at equivalent K values. Taking K The interpretation of Eq. The stress amplification effect can be understood using One way to validate the stress amplification hypothesis is to show that the net-section stress distribution for the In the crack plane, for –a < x < a the stress function Z is imaginary and it is real for absolute values of x > a. Hence, the corresponding normal stress distributions in the infinite plate is Because the stress on the infinite plate σ If the hypothesis that F(a/W) is a stress amplification factor is correct, then the σ The stress distribution in the biaxial periodic collinear crack problem is therefore  The average net-section stress for the M(T) specimen, as a function of a/W, can be determined from the fictional M(T) specimen discussed above. This stress is the average stress over the fictitious net-section defined by crack length and the width of the finite plate, 2W, as illustrated in The increase in the average net-section stress due to the presence of the crack (a/W), relative to the stress in the uncracked specimen, is therefore It is important to note that Eq. The finite Following the above analogy, the superimposition of additional stresses on the sides of the biaxially loaded On the basis of the true uniaxial tensile stress, (1-ν)σ The relative increase in the net-section stress is then given by The increase in the net-section stress corresponding to a given a/W, relative to the applied stress, can be directly calculated from the strength-of-materials (SOM) approach. The partitioning of remotely applied stress amplitude, σ Replacing σ Consider now the The relative increase in net section stress is therefore (and writing σ For a circular crack embedded in a uniformly stressed specimen with a circular cross-section, the partitioning of stresses between the cracked and the uncracked section, before the crack is introduced, is The net-section stresses calculated using the present strength-of-materials approach (Eq. Tada Feddersen Chen It can be seen that the net-section stress increase from the strength-of-material approach very closely corresponds to that obtained from fracture mechanics FWCF when ν = 0.5 is used to eliminate the biaxiality present in the theoretical M(T) specimen.  The finite-width-correction factor for the circular embedded crack in a cylindrical rod is given by Tada The agreement of the net-section stress increase form the SOM calculation with that from the F(a/W) factor for DEC(T) sample is very good. In Eq. The very good agreement between the increase in net-section stress calculated by the SOM approach and that calculated from the finite-width correction factors of fracture mechanics specimens is remarkable, and is indeed quite surprising. Since the Irwin’s tangent F(a/W) formula seems to have been obtained from the Westergaard stress function, which also covers stresses away from the crack tip, the agreement of the net-section stress determined using Irwin’s tangent formula with that determined from the SOM approach can be explained. However, this connection has not been demonstrated in fracture mechanics before. The above argument also applies to the competing FWCFs for M(T) specimens including (i) the F(a/W) factor proposed by Feddersen, which is a guess on the basis of the numerical results of Isida The present work may provide a resolution of the mystery of the finite-width-correction factor. The fact that all the F(a/W) formulae give nearly the same result is an indication that they are physically related to the same phenomenon, which is likely to be the net-section stress increase in the fracture mechanics specimens. As shown in earlier sections, the effect of F(a/W) is to increase the applied stress on the infinite specimen, causing increase in the average net-section stress in the fictional finite specimen embedded in it, as a function of crack length. Therefore, it may be preferable to call F(a/W) a The connection between the finite-width-correction factor and the net-section stress increase, as demonstrated here, is a new finding of this work, and, hence could provide a new direction to analyze fracture mechanics problems with cracks. More importantly, the connection validates the correlation of fatigue crack growth on the basis of the change in the net-section cyclic strain energy, which has recently been demonstrated by the author. In these recent works The excellent correlations of fatigue crack growth rates based on the change in net-section cyclic strain energy, as have been found in Refs.  The physical meaning of F(a/W) is that it is the stress amplification factor that accounts for the increase in the net-section stress as the crack extends in a fracture mechanics specimen. This interpretation was validated by comparing the calculated net-section stress distribution in a fictional finite specimen, embedded in an infinite plate, with that given by the Westergaard stress function for the periodic collinear crack problem. On the basis of this interpretation, it is shown that the net-section stresses in fracture mechanics samples can be calculated using F(a/W). This can be very useful to determine the limit load analysis, especially in determining the limit of plastic yielding or fracture of the net-section. A very good agreement of the net-section stresses calculated from F(a/W) factors with that determined by the strength of materials approach is demonstrated for some common facture mechanics specimens. This reinforces the idea that all finite-width-correction factors actually work to account for the increase in net section stress with crack extension in fracture mechanics samples loaded in tension. The F(a/W) factor is therefore not a correction factor, and this term may be misleading. It may be more appropriate to call it a