 Fortunately for orthodontics, this area remained the major focus of his research. Of his more than 200 articles in the research literature, nearly half were on orthodontic topics. Among his wide array of contributions were mechanics-oriented treatments of the behavior of orthodontic wires in bending and torsion, in which he used advanced experimental methodologies to obtain precise measurements. Calling on his expertise with polymers and mechanics, he provided insightful research on polyurethane modules and a stress relaxation model that described their initial rapid and later slow force decay. Bob had strong interests in the fabrication of new nonmetallic brackets and archwires, with the goal of introducing products of unquestioned biocompatibility to the specialty. Perhaps his greatest contributions were the insights from his investigations into the friction and binding between archwires and brackets, a topic that is particularly relevant today. In his teaching, Bob challenged his students to explore beyond the basic scope of the information presented and to apply what they learned to new situations elsewhere. In addition to courses in biomechanics and materials, he taught orthodontic residents to be knowledgeable and critical consumers when they would later evaluate new clinical materials and techniques in their practices. He received a Teaching Excellence award at UNC. Bob loved music and was an accomplished accordionist. He also loved to sing and sang in his church choir for 20 years. He had a beautiful tenor voice and, even when he could no longer read because of his illness, would sing most of the songs from memory. In the most recent years, Bob applied his same high criteria in research to photography and jewelry creation. Through his publications, the hundreds of orthodontic residents and engineering students he taught at UNC, and the thousands with whom he interacted across the world, Bob has left an enduring legacy in dental and orthodontic research. Even near the end of his life when he could no longer read or remain sitting for long periods, he wanted to teach long-time associates additional aspects of orthodontic materials so that the knowledge would not be lost. He will be greatly missed by all who knew and loved him, especially his family, friends, and students.