Carbon and glass fiber reinforced epoxy polymer hybrid composites facilitate to tailor the mechanical properties of the composites. However, the machining of hybrid fiber reinforced polymer composite is a challenge by conventional processes due to the different types of fiber reinforcements and anisotropic nature of composites. Researchers and scientists have evaluated the machinability of plain or single fiber reinforced polymer composites through abrasive water jet machining and abrasive air jet machining. Therefore, the present investigation emphasizes on the development of symmetrical hybrid composites, evaluation of mechanical properties and machining of the hybrid composites through abrasive air jet machining (AAJM). There are three types of hybrid composites such as C2G3]S, [CG3C]S and [CG2CG]S along with plain glass ([G]10) and carbon ([C]10) fiber reinforced polymer composites fabricated by hand lay-up technique. It is observed that the [CG2CG]S type hybrid composite has the optimum tensile and flexural strength as compared to other composites. Hence, [CG2CG]S type hybrid composites along with plain glass and carbon fiber reinforced polymer composites was considered for the machinability study. The sensitivity of AAJM process parameters on material removal rate (MRR), depth of cut (DOC) and surface roughness (Ra) are investigated and optimized through response surface methodology (RSM). The optimum machining process output predicted by the RSM model for [CG2CG]S type hybrid composite is MRR = 3.26 × 10−3 g/sec, DOC = 1.48 mm and surface roughness (Ra) = 1.48 μm. The predicted model results compared with the experimental values and found a good agreement between them. The surface morphology of the drilled composite sample is investigated under scanning electron microscope. It is observed that the surface damage of the drilled surface of the composites is minimal. Thus, the abrasive air jet machining process can be employed for drilling of polymer matrix composites to overcome the conventional machining issues.Glass/Carbon fiber reinforced polymer composites are gradually replacing the traditional metallic materials in aerospace, automobile and marine industries to achieve higher fuel efficiency and durability [ During assembling of composite components mechanically, drilling is required to make holes in the composites. The machining of fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) composites by conventional methods often leads to failure of the composite assembly due to different damage mechanisms such as fiber pull out, delamination and matrix cracking [ The machining of fiber reinforced polymer composites by conventional cutting tools can be replaced by alternative nonconventional machining techniques such as abrasive water jet machining (AWJM) and abrasive air jet machining (AAJM) [ In abrasive air jet machining (AAJM), the operating air pressure is much lower about 3–10 bar. Nassef et al. [ In abrasive air jet machining, the operating pressure is much lower which reduces the possibility of delamination. The material removal rate and surface quality is satisfactory. However, there is hardly any literature on machining of hybrid composites of different fiber sequence by abrasive air jet machining. Therefore, in this article, abrasive air jet machining was adopted for machining of hybrid carbon and glass fiber reinforced polymer composites. The objective is to understand the effect of stacking sequence on mechanical properties and machinability of the hybrid composites. Furthermore, multi-optimization of different process output parameters of AAJM process was carried out through response surface methodology to achieve the desire process parameters for better machinability. Plain glass, carbon and hybrid carbon/glass reinforced polymer composites consisting of ten layers for each type of composites were fabricated by hand lay-up technique. The carbon fiber (C) is 200gsm and bidirectional twill woven roving type. The glass fiber (G) is 360 gsm and plain woven roving type. The carbon and glass fiber were obtained from Soller Composites and Owens Corning, India respectively. The epoxy polymer Diglycidyl ether of Bisphenol A and hardener Triethylene tetraamine were bought from Atul Industries, India. The ratio of epoxy to hardener was 10:1. The ratio of total fiber (carbon and glass) to epoxy ratio was 55:45 by weight. Uniform rolling was done on every fiber layer to reduce voids and air bubbles entrapped during the fabrication. The composites were preliminarily cured at room temperature for 24 h and followed by post cured at 140 °C for 6 h prior to characterization [ The fiber layer sequence of the hybrid composites is sensitive to the mechanical properties. Therefore, three hybrid composites having symmetrical stacking sequence of [C2G3]S, [CG3C]S and [CG2CG]S were considered for this investigation and shown in Flexural strength and modulus were determined according to ASTM D7264 standard. The sample dimensions were 70 mm (length) × 13 mm (width) × 3 mm (thickness). The span length of 60 mm and cross head speed of 2 mm/min was taken. Similarly, the tensile strength and modulus were evaluated according to ASTM D3039−76 standard. The sample dimensions were 250 mm (length) × 25 mm (width) × 3 mm (thickness). The gauge length of 150 mm and cross head speed was 2 mm/min. The Instron 3369 Universal testing machine (UTM) was used to determine the tensile and flexural properties. Five samples for each type of test were tested and their average values with standard deviation (SD) were reported. The tensile and flexural properties of the composites are reported in The abrasive air jet machining experimental set up consists of an air supply system, abrasive particle feeder, nozzle, and the machining chamber. The schematic diagram of AAJM experimental set up is shown in In the current investigation, hybrid composite [CG The material removal rate is measured in terms of weight of material removed per second (g/s) and was calculated as per Eq. The surface roughness of composite samples was measured with Mitutoyo 400 roughness tester of least count of 0.001 μm. The cut-off length = 0.8 mm and traverse length = 4 mm was consider during the measurement. The surface roughness was taken thrice at different locations of drilled surface, and the average value was considered and reported for each sample. The depth of cut (DOC) was measured by means of the coordinate measuring machine. The coordinate point of the bottom surface of the sample was measured by the probe. The measurement was taken three times at different positions and the average value is reported. The probe's displacement from a reference coordinate system’s axes is monitored to measure the depth of surface. The Box-Behnken Design of experiment (DOE) of response surface methodology is carried out to evaluate the different machining process outputs such as material removal rate (MRR), surface roughness (Ra) and the depth of cut (DOC). The relation between the process outputs (MRR, Ra and DOC) and the independent input parameters are obtained by ANOVA analysis. A mathematical model between the independent input variables is developed by taking into account the p-value of multiple regression models. The process output or response is generally modeled by a quadratic mathematical expression given in Eq. The composite desirability function (CD) of the multiple responses having equal weight is given as the geometric mean of individual desirability functions in Eq. The statistical analysis and the multi-optimization of machining process outputs parameters such as material removal rate (MRR), depth of cut (DOC) and surface roughness (Ra) were performed. The effect of input parameters towards machining performance of hybrid composite of [CG The ANOVA results of materials removal rate is reported in The three-dimensional plot of the material removal rate is given in The analysis of variance (ANOVA) results for the depth of cut (DOC) are given in The ANOVA result for surface roughness (Ra) is reported in The surface plot of Ra is shown in The model equations of machining process outputs (MRR, DOC and Ra) are given in equation 3–5 where P represents the operating pressure, NTD is the nozzle tip distance and C is the composite type. The relation between the input parameters and the process outputs (MRR, DOC and Ra) is obtained by multiple linear regressions. The second order and interaction terms of parameters influence the accuracy of the predicted model. The optimum machining input parameters are different for one specific process output to another. The different machining parameters values for different process outputs makes it complicated to arrive at optimum values of machining parameters that can simultaneously optimize several process output parameters. This can be achieved by multi-optimization of several process outputs to arrive at optimum conditions of machining parameters. The multi-optimization of process outputs is performed by response surface methodology to arrive at optimum input process parameters of machining that maximizes the machining process output parameters such as MRR, DOC and minimizes Ra. The multi-optimization of several responses is performed in terms of individual desirability functions (i The abrasive air jet machined samples of model predicted optimum process parameters are shown in The high velocity abrasive particles having sufficient kinetic energy to strike the work piece and form small fractures along lateral and longitudinal directions causing wear and resulting in material removal [ The SEM micrographs of the machined composite samples are shown in The trending technology to reduce the weight and improve the mechanical properties of engineering materials is through the development of hybrid composites. Hybrid composites minimize the weakness of individual fibers leading to improvement of structural properties. For assembly of components/parts of hybrid composites, the conventional drilling of fiber reinforced polymer composites can lead to defects such as delamination, fiber pullout and thermal degradation resulting in poor machinability. Therefore, abrasive air jet machining, a non-conventional process was adopted in this investigation for machining of the hybrid fiber reinforced polymer composites. Multi-optimization of AAJM process parameters of carbon and glass fiber reinforced polymer hybrid composites was performed by response surface methodology. It is observed that the operating pressure (P) has a major influence on the machinability characteristics i.e. MRR and DOC. Higher operating pressure resulted in higher kinetic energy of the abrasive particles leading to increase in MRR and DOC, but is effective at optimum values of nozzle tip distance at which the abrasive jet is more directed towards the work piece. The DOC reduces with increase in NTD as the abrasive particles lose energy. The nozzle tip distance (NTD) is also a significant factor for Ra. The surface roughness increases with rise in NTD as scattering of abrasive particle jet occurs. Thus, nozzle tip distance has to be set according to the required surface finish. The ANOVA analysis indicates there is interaction between operating pressure and nozzle tip distance. For higher MRR and DOC, the operating pressure is high, but the surface roughness increases. At moderate operating pressure, MRR, DOC decrease and surface roughness improves. Therefore, the multi-optimization of machining process parameters was carried out to evaluate the process parameters for optimum output. The response surface methodology model predicted optimum process output for the hybrid composite are MRR = 3.26 × 10 The Authors like to confirm that there is no funding received from any source to execute the research. There is no ethical issue from author’s side. The authors declare that they have no known competing financialinterestsor personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank KIIT deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, ABIT, Cuttack and Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology, Bhopal for giving opportunity to carry out the experiments and data analysis. The authors also like to thank Mr. H K Dhal for his help during conducting the experiments.