Three dinuclear copper(II) macrocyclic complexes, formulated as [Cu2L(N3)2(0.5H2O)2]n (1), [Cu2L(ClO4)2(CH3CH2OH)] (2) and [Cu2L(CH3OH)2](ClO4)2 (3) (LH2
                     =[2+2] Schiff base macrocyclic ligand condensed from 4-chloro-2,6-diformylphenol and 1,3-diaminopropane), have been prepared and determined by X-ray single-crystal diffraction. Complex 1 shows two six-coordinate Cu(II) centers in which two monodentate 
                        
                           
                              
                                 N
                              
                              
                                 3
                              
                              
                                 -
                              
                           
                        
                      anions and two half-water molecules are bonded at the apical positions in the trans configuration. Furthermore, the dimeric half-water molecules serve as a μ
                     2-bridge linking adjacent macrocyclic units together with the multiple OH…N hydrogen bonds with azide anions, forming a novel 1D chain-like coordination polymer. Complexes 2 and 3 are obtained from different solvents (ethanol and methanol) and they can be converted into each other. The molecular structures and packing mode of 2 and 3 are different where six-coordinate and five-coordinate copper(II) centers are present, respectively.In the early 1970s, Robson and Pilkington first synthesized a new series of homodinuclear macrocyclic complexes [M In our previous work, we have succeeded in preparing a series of [2+2], [3+3], and [4+4] Schiff base macrocyclic ligands and their transition-metal complexes using a sodium template method All solvents and reagents were of analytical grade and used without further purification. 4-Chloro-2,6-diformylphenol was prepared with high yields by an improved oxidation method using active manganese(IV) dioxide Analyses for carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen were performed on a Perkin-Elmer 1400  To the solution of Na Complex To the solution of Single crystals of All non-hydrogen atoms were refined on All the macrocyclic dinuclear copper(II) complexes described herein are facilely synthesized in high yields under mild conditions and are fully characterized ( The FT-IR spectra of The X-ray determination result of As shown in The distance between the phenolic oxygen bridged Cu(II) centers is 3.102(3) Weak offset π–π packing interactions are present between the phenyl rings of macrocycles belonging to adjacent 1D chains, where one phenyl ring from one 1D chain is inserted into the middle of two phenyl rings of another 1D chain to some extend with the same centroid–centroid separation of 3.748 To date, there are a few investigations on 1D chain-like coordination polymer of Robson-type binucleating macrocycles. Besides our systematic studies on the self-assembly of dinuclear zinc(II) complexes, only two acetylene dicarboxylate The X-ray structural analysis of Strong O With regard to complex In the crystal packing of In summary, one 1D coordination polymer with parallel macrocyclic dinuclear copper(II) platform ( CCDC 685701–685703 contain the supplementary crystallographic data for W.H. would like to acknowledge the Major State Basic Research Development Programs (Nos. 2007CB925101 and 2006CB806104), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 20871065) and the Scientific Research Foundation for the Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars, State Education Ministry for financial aid.