This study utilizes a self-designed experimental apparatus to heat inert silicon carbide and reactive coal particles via thermal radiation in order to ignite methane-air mixtures. The objective of these ignition experiments is to determine the difference in ignition characteristics between inert and reactive particles. Therefore, a series of ignition experiments with varying types of particles, irradiances, particle sizes, and fuel mixture equivalence ratios were performed to determine the effects of these parameters on ignition time and ignition temperature. The results of the experiments indicate that ignition time and ignition temperature are both influenced by the fuel mixture equivalence ratio, particle type, and particle size, while irradiance only influences ignition time. Ignition temperature and time were observed to be higher and longer, respectively, for reactive particles than inert particles. Furthermore, ignition temperature is inversely proportional to particle size; while, ignition time is directly proportional to particle size and inversely proportional to irradiance. Chemical reaction of coal particles narrowed the flammability limit of the fuel mixtures, results in a longer time and higher ignition temperature, and causes a more powerful ignition than that of inert particles due to the possibility of secondary ignition.The threat of accidental explosions remains a persistent hazard in industries where fine particles and combustible gas are involved. In explosion accidents, thermal radiation produced by a fire or an explosion may contribute to the causation of dust explosions in open and large-scale space, while it was not considered in the previous studies of explosions. The thermal radiation will continue to form ignition kernels by heating particles in front of the flame front, thus igniting the combustible gas around the ignition kernel causing the spread and intensification of the unconfined dust explosion Though lasers can be used to directly ignite combustible gases via mechanisms such as direct thermal ignition The ignition mechanisms of varying reactive materials are still not fully understood due to the varying complex chemical reactions that occur on the surface of varying reactive particles; in contrast, the ignition mechanisms of inert particles are comparatively simple and, in turn, more well understood. The results of ignition experiments with multiple varied parameters should be analyzed to obtain a clearer and more thorough understanding of ignition mechanisms. This study will conduct experiments to ignite methane-air mixtures by heating reactive coal particles and inert silicon carbide particles with a laser, and the results of the experiments will be analyzed to determine their respective ignition characteristics. Irradiance, particle size and material, and fuel mixture equivalent ratio will be varied between each experiment to determine their respective effects on ignition time and ignition temperature. The results of these experiments can be used as evidence for the calibration of future numerical simulations. The experimental apparatus consists of a cylindrical explosion chamber, laser heating system, high-speed schlieren camera, and infrared temperature measurement system, as shown in The explosion chamber is a cylindrical cavity with an inner diameter of 200 mm, height of 200 mm, and transparent circular quartz glass installed on the two circular ends to facilitate observation of the experiments. To facilitate the heating of the particle and the measurement of particle temperature, a 30 mm × 50 mm rectangular window was made on the sidewall of the explosion chamber. The explosion chamber is equipped with interfaces for placing a vacuum meter and fuel recirculation lines so that the desired fuel-mixture composition can be obtained using a pressure transducer with instrumentation error of ±0.5% and applying the method of partial pressures. The uniformity of the fuel mixture can be assured and the effect of turbulence can be reduced once the fuel mixture is left to stand for 15 min. The thermal radiation source for this study’s experiments is a 915 nm semiconductor laser that has a maximum power of 100 W. The accuracy and validity of the results of the experiment can be ensured because the charging speed, 0 to 100 W in less than 2 ms, of the laser will not affect time to ignition, and the output of the laser is measured using a laser power meter as the laser beam reaches the particle. This study has elected to use a spot area of 20 mm A two-wavelength infrared thermometer, with a response time of less than 2 ms, was used to measure and record temperature throughout the experiment. The measured temperature is gray-body temperature because an assumption that emissivity does not change with wavelength has to be made. The infrared thermometer operates on two wavebands, 1450 ~ 1650 nm and 1650 ~ 1800 nm, respectively. Refs. This study has elected to use inert silicon carbide, reactive coal particles (medium particle sizes ( Ignition time is the parameter that determines whether or not multi-point ignition can be achieved before the arrival of the flame front. A comparative analysis of ignition by inert silicon carbide and reactive coal particles is used to assess the role of chemical reactions and particle properties in the ignition process.  A graph was plotted for ignition time as a function of irradiance for Kaowool Silicon carbide and coal particles ( Ignition time is not only affected by the chemical and physical properties of the particles, but also the equivalent ratio of the fuel mixture. Therefore, experiments were conducted with varying equivalence ratios, constant irradiance, and particle sizes for both silicon carbide and coal particles. The results of the experiment are shown in The ignition temperatures at varying irradiances and particle sizes, with a constant equivalence ratio of 1.06, are shown in The results show that the ignition temperature of both the coal and silicon carbide particles are distributed in their respective narrow temperature ranges and that the ignition temperatures for the coal particles are significantly higher than those of the silicon carbide particles. The results also show that ignition temperature is inversely proportional to particle size because larger surface area to volume ratio allow for rapid dissipation of thermal energy; this relationship agrees with those of Refs. The graph shown in Thorough analyses of the time-resolved temperature, or the heating process, is vital for the improved understanding of the ignition mechanism, moreover comparative analyses of the heating processes of different particles can be used to explain the role of chemical reactions in the ignition process. Two sets of experiments were conducted to determine the effects of particle sizes and irradiances on temperature histories for both silicon carbide and coal particles, as shown in The resultant trends of the varying irradiances were as expected, where higher irradiances resulted in a shorter amount of time needed to obtain the same temperature as lower irradiances due to the fact that higher irradiances inherently entail higher energy provided to the particles. As shown in This study systematically and accurately measured the ignition time and ignition temperature of methane-air mixtures in a series of experiments where the ignition is triggered by either silicon carbide and coal particles that were heated using thermal radiation. Shorter ignition time corresponds with higher irradiance and smaller particles, while ignition temperature is negligibly influenced by irradiance. This study also contends that coal particles take longer to ignite the methane-air mixture due to the volatilization and combustion of the evolved gaseous volatiles prior to ignition. The ignition temperature for the coal particles is higher than that of the silicon carbide particles due to the complex endothermic reactions that occur in the initial stages of the heating process. Furthermore, the chemical reaction of coal particles narrowed the flammability limit of fuel mixture and cause ignition more powerful. For fuel mixtures that are close to the flammability limits, the difficulty of ignition increases significantly, wherein the required ignition time and temperature increases for both inert and reactive particles.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the