We explore microstructure-related anisotropy of acoustic emission (AE) in coal and investigate connections to time-sequence-related fractal dimension (TRFD) and AE parameters of counts and cumulative energy. We characterize microstructure and anisotropy by imaging via X-ray CT. The anisotropic features of AE in coal are measured during uniaxial compression on a series of coal samples with varying inclinations of the anisotropy (bedding plane) relative to the loading direction (0°, 15°, 30°, 45°, 60°, and 90°). The form of the cumulative absolute AE energy released during loading is U-shaped with respect to increasing anisotropic angle. The maximum cumulative absolute AE energy occurs at an anisotropic angle of 90° (perpendicular to loading) and the minimum magnitude is when loading is at 45°. Cumulative AE counts have a complex structure with bedding plane inclination, decreasing to a minimum at an anisotropic angle of 30°, and peaking at 45° with terminal AE counts at 0° and 90° intermediate between these. The TRFD correlates positively with the cumulative AE counts with a trough at 15° and peak at 45°. The greater value of the TRFD in coal indicates a more uniform distribution of the AE count in time sequence, a smaller difference in the number of AE count between each time interval and less AE energy dissipated during the loading process. A theoretical basis for the observed negative exponential correlation between TRFD and AE energy dissipation during the loading process is developed. In samples with different anisotropic angles, this correlation conforms to the empirical relations that developed based on the space-related fractal dimension (SRFD) and AE energy dissipated by micro-seismic events recorded in situ.Acoustic emission (AE) is generated by the rapid growth and interaction of micro-cracks In rock mechanics, the AE experiment was initiated as part of a study on problems associated with mine design and alleviation of rock bursts or coal bump, since the late 1930s X-ray computed tomography (X-CT) is a nondestructive imaging technique Acoustic emission has fractal features in space, time and magnitude distribution Thus, to reveal the microstructure-related anisotropy of AE in coal, microstructures in coal are first characterized by X-ray CT, and then subject to destructive uniaxial compression tests with concurrent AE measurement. This is completed on a series of coal specimens with bedding anisotropic angles of 0°, 15°, 30°, 45°, 60°, and 90° (relative to the loading direction) with the TRFD for each angle of anisotropy calculated and used to correlate with other observed AE parameters. These observations are used to build mechanistically-driven correlations in response. A series of coal samples with different inclinations of anisotropy are prepared. Interior structure is obtained via X-ray CT with the features of the AE response measured under uniaxial deformation, through failure. The block coal samples used in this research are from the No. 45 coal seam of the Wudong Mine, Xinjiang Province, China. The samples are wrapped at the working face in water-polycrylic resin to prevent oxidation and drying during transportation. The density of the coal is 1.46 g/cm Standard cylindrical specimens are prepared with length to diameter ratio of two Due to the sedimentary process and the geological movement during the coal formation, mineral inclusions and cleats are randomly existed in coal, while the orientation of them in coal blocks are certain in an area and can be reasonably revealed by the X-ray CT scanning result of a specimen After CT scanning, uniaxial compression tests are conducted on a double controlled electronic universal testing machine, WDW-100E, with a capacity of 100 kN and a displacement precision of ±0.5%. The tests are at room temperature and under displacement-control at 1 mm/min. The AE signal is recorded by a PCI-2 device (Physical Acoustic Corporation-PAC) in waveform streaming mode. The AE testing set-up consists of 4 Micro 30S sensors (10 mm in diameter) and a 6-type preamplifier. The bandwidth frequency is 1 kHz∼3 MHz with a maximum signal amplitude of 100 dB with a dynamic range greater than 85 dB. We characterize the distribution of microstructures in coal and define the anisotropic features of the AE response (space, time and frequency-magnitude) and relate this to the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS). A series of CT images obtained from X-ray CT scanning are used to define and reconstruct the interior structure of the coal as shown in Since the anisotropic angle is defined as the angle of drilling direction relative to the orientation of the bedding plane, as shown in Uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) is a fundamental mechanical parameter of coal. Based on the foregoing classification on UCS-Anisotropic angle curves, the average UCS in this experiment is a U-shaped curve relative to the anisotropic angle, as shown in The form of the strength anisotropy in coal demonstrates that the weakness plane, comprising bedding plane cracks, mineral inclusions, and fining cycles, dominates the strength of coal The AE count, AE energy, and fractal dimension are three fundamental parameters that describing the AE features of coal and rock We use the average cumulative AE counts and absolute AE energy to illustrate the specific anisotropic features of AE in coal, here the absolute AE energy is calculated based on the duration, the sampling voltage of the analog-to-digital converter (ADC), and the impedance, namely, absolute AE energy = sum (ADC sample voltage) AE counts reduce with an increase of anisotropic angle within the range 0°−30° and reach a minimum at 30° (3.89 × 10 The cumulative absolute AE energy response in coal is related to the orientation of weakness plane. Based on the positive correlation of the UCS and stress needed for crack initiation The anisotropy of the cumulative AE counts is dominated by the influence of the bedding plane due to the decrease of the stress threshold for crack initiation as the anisotropic angle increases from 0° to 30°. This results in an increase in AE counts generated before this progressive failure, fewer AE counts produced during progressive failure, and a shorter time needed for the entire failure of the specimen The dramatic increase in the cumulative AE counts when the anisotropic angle is in the range 30°–45° is affected by both bedding plane and cleats. Since the weakness plane is parallel to the bedding plane and cleats are perpendicular, angles between the orientation of cleats and weakness plane and the loading direction are closer to the critical (45°− The reduction of cumulative AE counts, as the anisotropic angle increases from 45° to 90°, is attributed to the increasing inclination of weakness plane. The initiation stress threshold for cracks that parallel the bedding plane increases with the anisotropic angle within this range of anisotropic angles. This contributes to less AE counts produced before progressive failure, with more energy accumulated around cracks, and greater AE counts measured at the rapid failure process, as shown in Fractal dimensions of AE in coal samples with different inclinations of bedding planes are calculated, based on the time sequence related AE count. The anisotropy of the fractal dimension of AE is summarized and correlations between TRFD and other AE parameters are explored. The correlation dimension was initially developed by Grassberger and Procaccia (G–P) In this work, the phase space is reconstructed on the basis of an experimentally acquired time sequence of AE counts with fractal dimension evaluated via the G-P algorithm. For a certain time sequence of AE counts X The correlation integral is the probability that distances between any two vectors in the In general, the standard correlation function is expressed as If the acoustic emission has a fractal structure, the relation between If the value of Parameters The value of time sequence related fractal dimensions (TRFD) of specimens with different anisotropic angles is positively correlated with the cumulative AE counts, as shown in Based on the fractal theory developed in the previous section, the greater value of TRFD indicates a smaller scatter of the vector lengths in the The smaller value of TRFD represents the greater concentration of the AE count during the progressive failure, as the stress-time and AE count-time curves show in The relation between fractal dimension and AE energy dissipated during the loading process is significant in the prevention of dynamic failures (rock bursts) in coal mines Based on the correlation dimension theory introduced in the previous section, the AE energy dissipated in any vector of the Since the time sequence related AE counts during the failure process has fractal features, based on the definition of fractal geometry Namely, the AE energy dissipation can be represented by the space dimension value Meanwhile, the correlation of TRFD and the cumulative AE energy revealed by However, since the variation of The regression results shown in In addition, We characterize the microstructure related anisotropy of AE in coal, based on the measurement of AE response on a series of coal samples with anisotropic angles of 0°, 15°, 30°, 45°, 60°, and 90°. This is measured under uniaxial compression together with X-ray CT imaging. These data are used to evaluate the time sequence related fractal dimension of the AE signals using the G–P algorithm. We use this to explore the fractal anisotropy of AE and the connection between TRFD and other parameters on acoustic emission during the loading process. The conclusions are summarized as below: The cumulative absolute energy has a U-shape form with increasing anisotropic angle. The maximum value is observed at an anisotropic angle of 90° with a minimum value at an anisotropic angle of 45°. Unlike this distribution, the cumulative acoustic counts exhibit a trough at an anisotropic angle of 30° and peaks at an anisotropic angle of 45°. The orientation of the bedding planes dominate the anisotropy of average cumulative absolute energy, while the variation of average cumulative AE counts is affected by both bedding plane and cleats. The TRFD is positively correlated with the cumulative AE counts. It also has a peak and trough with maximum at 45° and a minimum at 15°. The greater value of TRFD indicates a more uniform distribution of AE counts in the time sequence, a smaller difference in the number of AE counts during each time interval and less AE energy dissipated during the loading process. The TRFD has a negative exponential correlation with the cumulative AE energy dissipation. Furthermore, this correlation in different specimens with different angles of anisotropy is similar to the empirical equation summarized by former researchers on the basis of the SRFD and AE energy dissipated by micro seismicity in the coal mining process. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research is supported by the