Bacteria play an important role in bio-desilication of high silica bauxites. However, low bio-desilication efficiency and unknown mechanisms limit the use of bacteria in bio-desilication of bauxite. In this study, two highly effective Si-solubilizing bacteria (Arthrobacter pascens H19 and Burkholderia anthina G21) were obtained and characterized for their impact on Si and Al release from a high-silica (18.1%) bauxite and the mechanisms involved. Dissolved Si and Al concentrations in the culture medium were 3.3–13.9 mM and 0.04–0.41 mM, and total Si and Al released from the bauxite were 2.76–11.64 mg and 0.03–0.39 mg, respectively, in the presence of these strains. Strain G21 released more Si from the bauxite than strain H19 at the end of the experiment. These strains produced malic (791–1700 µM), citric (94–447 µM), and succinic (228–494 µM) acids, and expolyssaccharides (EPS) (39–420 mg L−1) during the bio-desilication processes. Furthermore, strain G21 produced more organic acids (19–65%) than strain H19, while strain H19 produced more EPS (1.7–4.9-fold) than strain G21. The metabolites (fermentation broth, organic acids, and EPS) of these strains also significantly increased dissolved Si concentration compared to the control. Notably, the ratios of Al2O3 to SiO2 in the bauxite treated with strains H19 and G21 were 9.14 and 9.64, respectively, which met the requirement in the Bayer process for alumina production. The results showed distinct and high bio-desilication effectiveness of these strains and suggested that the highly effective Si-solubilizing bacterial strains increased bio-desilication efficiency through the production of organic acids and EPS.Bauxite resources are widely distributed in the world and are the main resources for aluminum production ( Bio-beneficiation refers to the removal of undesirable mineral components from ores through the selective dissolution and removal of microorganisms, resulting in the enrichment of the desired mineral constituents in the solid ores ( Although different microorganisms have been reported to be used in ore leaching, very few investigations have been reported on the use of microorganisms to remove silica from high silica bauxites. Bio-desilication by bacteria is a potential and promising technology for its characteristics of environmental protection, low energy consumption and sustainable development. However, low bio-desilication efficiency, unknown mechanisms of bio-desilication, and genetic instability of bacteria may limit the industrial use of this technology at present ( The objectives of the present study were to characterize the effectiveness of Si and Al release from a high silica bauxite in the presence of Si-solubilizing bacteria, to obtain highly effective Si-solubilizing bacteria, and to analyze the bio-desilication efficiency of the bauxite and the mechanisms involved. The results may give us to better understand the role of Si-solubilizing bacteria in Si removal from high silica bauxites and provide an environmentally friendly and cost-effective method for bio-beneficiation of high silica bauxites. The high silica bauxite was obtained from Shanxi Aluminum of Hejin, Shanxi province (China). The bauxite was crushed in a disc vibration grinder (RS 200; Retsch, Germany), sieved to isolate the 75- to 150-μm mineral powders, and cleaned based on the method of Twelve Si-solubilizing bacterial strains isolated from weathered rock (trachyte and mica schist) surfaces were tested for their Si and Al release from the bauxite. The Si and Al dissolution experiment of the bacterial strains was performed based on the method of Based on Si and Al dissolution experiment of the bacteria, strains H19 and G21 were found to be the highly effective Si-solubilizing bacteria. Strains H19 and G21 were characterized and identified based on their morphological, physiological, and biochemical properties with reference to The bio-desilication experiment was performed as described above with some modifications. The flasks were incubated at 28 °C on a rotary shaker at 150 rpm for 15 days. The dissolved Si and Al, pH, organic acid, and EPS in the culture medium were measured at different incubation times. In this study, we prepared individual flasks for each time point. To compensate for the evaporation of liquid from the culture medium during incubation, the volume in each flask was adjusted to 30 mL with distilled water at the time of sampling for the determination of Si and Al mobilization, pH, and organic acid and EPS production. At the end of the experiment, solid residue of the bauxite was separated by filtration through a 0.45-μm Millipore filter and washed gently in sterile distilled water, dried at 50 °C and analyzed for elemental composition of the bauxite. The role of bacterial metabolites in Si and Al removal from the bauxite was also assessed. The experimental design was as follows- treatment 1: 30 mL sterilized distilled water with 0.1 g bauxite (control); treatment 2: 30 mL sterilized bacterial fermentation broth of H19 (at 3 days of incubation in liquid SSM) with 0.1 g bauxite; treatment 3: 30 mL sterilized bacterial fermentation broth of G21 (at 3 days of incubation in liquid SSM) with 0.1 g bauxite; treatment 4: 30 mL mixed organic acids (the concentrations of malic, citric, and succinic acids were 900, 100, and 350 mg L For Si and Al analysis, 20 mL of medium was collected from a given flask and filtered through a 0.45-µm Millipore filter. Of the filtrate, 15 mL was then centrifuged at 8943 For elemental composition analysis, bauxite grains were removed from the cultures after 15 days of incubation, washed gently in distilled water, and dried at room temperature. The elemental compositions of the bauxite were determined as described in One-way analysis of variance and Fisher’s least significant difference test ( XRD showed diaspore and kaolinite in the bauxite ( The co-leaching of alumina will suppress silica release in the cultural medium when trying to release silica from high silica bauxites ( The colonies of strain H19 grown on the SSM plates were circular, moist, and smooth. Cells of strain H19 are non-spore forming, gram positive, nonmotile, and rod-coccus shaped. Strain H19 was positive for α-galactosidase, α-glucosidase, and α-mannosidase, negative for nitrate reductase, pyrrolidonyl arylamidase, and urease, and in the assimilation of D-Glucose, raffinose, melibiose, D-mannitol, L-inositol sucrose, and L-arabinose. The colonies of strain G21 grown on the SSM plates were circular, moist, and smooth. Cells of strain G21 are non-spore forming, gram negative, nonmotile, and rod shaped. Strain G21 was positive for oxidase, β-galactosidase, and lysine decarboxylase, negative for ornithine decarboxylase, tryptophanase, arginine dihydrolase, aesculin hydrolase, gelatinase or urease, and in the assimilation of glucose, In order to evaluate the bio-desilication efficiency of the highly effective Si-solubilizing strains H19 and G21, the concentrations of dissolved Si and Al in the culture medium and the relative contents of Si and Al in the bioleached bauxite were determined ( Bacteria have been reported to play important roles in Si elimination from bauxite ores ( The cell numbers of strains H19 and G21 significantly ( No significantly change in the pH of the culture medium was found in the absence of these strains ( No proteins were detected in the EPS. The concentration of EPS in the culture medium significantly ( Bacterial strains were found to produce organic acids to increase the dissolution rates of alumino-silicates in laboratory experiments ( Si and Al removal from the bauxite by the metabolites of strains H19 and G21 is shown in Two highly effective Si-solubilizing bacteria This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (41473075, 41501257) and the Chinese Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2015M570459). The authors have no competing interests to declare. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:  