The role of polyaluminum chloride (PAC) in kaolinite aggregation is studied in this paper by the aggregation of kaolinite with the single and combined use of PAC and polyethylene oxide (PEO). The sequent coagulation and flocculation pattern with the combined use of PAC and PEO shows higher aggregation efficiency than that with the single use of PAC or PEO. In the sequent coagulation and flocculation pattern, the settling velocity and the Zeta potential of kaolinite steadily increase with the PAC concentration, which indicates that the role of PAC is to render the interaction between kaolinite and PEO rather than charge neutralization. This conclusion is supported by the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis, which shows steady increase of Al–OH group on kaolinite with the PAC concentration.Coagulants and flocculants are often used to enhance the aggregation of dispersed particles so as to achieve the solid/liquid separation in wastewater disposal, mineral processing and papermaking industries Flocculants usually shows better size enlarging effect than coagulant due to the higher molecular weight. In some cases, however, the sole use of flocculant is also ineffective. The main reasons are that the interaction between the flocculant and particle is too weak or there is repulsive force between the flocculant chain and the particle surface. Therefore, it is developed to pretreat the particles with coagulant, afterwards, flocculant is added to enlarge the particle size and provoke the aggregation Polyaluminum chloride (PAC) is a commonly used coagulant for the aggregation of industrial and domestic sewages and clay suspensions Polyethylene oxide (PEO) is an effective flocculant for minerals such as quartz, kaolinite and smectite In this study, PAC and PEO were solely and combinedly used to aggregate kaolinite. The sequent coagulation and flocculation pattern shows higher aggregation efficiency, which is interpreted by the connection between coagulation and flocculation mechanisms. The Zeta potential and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis indicates that the main contribution of the pretreatment by PAC is the formation of more hydroxyl groups on kaolinite surfaces to interact with PEO rather than the neutralization of the surface charge on kaolinite. Pure kaolinite particles were provided by Wanquan Co. Ltd, China. The XRD (D8 Advance, Bruker, Germany) and XRF (S8 Tiger, Bruker, Germany) measurements showed that the only impurity in the sample was the trace proportion of mica. The laser diffraction measurement (S3500, Microtrac, USA) showed that the d The PAC with the basicity of 0.5–0.7 and PEO with the molecular weight of 6,000,000 were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd, China. The PAC was dissolved in deionized water at the pH of 5.0–5.5 with the concentration of 1 Analytically pure hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide were used as the pH modifiers. Deionized water was used in all experiments. The kaolinite settling experiments were conducted in a cylinder of 100 For the experiments with the sole use of PAC or with the combined use of PAC and PEO, the kaolinite particles of 5 The preparation of kaolinite suspension was the same as that in the settling experiments. The suspension was kept settling for 24 After the same kaolinite suspension preparation, the suspension was kept settling for 24  When PAC was used to pretreat the kaolinite at pH around 5.5, significant increase of the settling velocity was found. The Zeta potential variations of kaolinite versus PAC concentration with the single addition of PAC and combined addition of PAC and PEO are shown in When 4 It is proposed by many researchers that PEO flocculate kaolinite and other phyllosilicates mainly by hydrogen bonding   In the work of Addai-Mensah The kaolinite settling experiments showed that the combined use of PAC and PEO can achieve more significant aggregation of kaolinite than that with the single use of PAC or PEO. The underlying reason is interpreted by the increase of Al–OH group on kaolinite with the assistance of Zeta potential and XPS analysis. The increase of Al–OH group results from the adsorption of Al(OH) This work is supported by