The results of a laboratory-scale study of an environmentally friendly water treatment method are presented, where the cyanide was removed by photocatalytic process. TiO2–SiO2 aerogel as photocatalyst has been prepared via sol–gel technique. Several factors were studied in order to find the conditions that could be used to synthesize this photocatalyst for optimum degradation of the cyanide pollutant in aqueous solutions. Best degradation was obtained by TiO2–SiO2 aerogel prepared by using a molar ratio of Ti:Si equivalent to 6:1. In addition, the molar ratios of other reactants such as TEOS:H2O:C2H5OH:HNO3 were taken as 1:8:10:0.25. These chemicals were reacted for 90min at 25°C. The produced gel was supercritical dried at 105bar and 295°C. Under the best conditions, TiO2–SiO2 aerogel, of a specific surface area of 850m2/g, resulted in cyanide removal efficiency of 98.74%. Details of the synthesis procedure and results of the characterization studies of the produced gel are presented in this paper.Cyanide is used in the production of organic chemicals such as nitrile, nylon, and acrylic plastics. Other industrial applications of cyanide include electroplating, metal processing, steel hardening, photographic applications, and synthetic rubber production. Gold mining operations use dilute solutions of sodium cyanide (100–500 All chemicals used in this study were analytical grade reagents; the following high purity raw materials were used for TiO TEOS was added to ethyl alcohol (EtOH:TEOS) and (1 All the experiments were carried out by using a horizontal cylinder annular batch reactor. A black light-blue florescent bulb (F18W-BLB) was positioned at the axis of the reactor to supply UV illumination. The light intensity after passing through a reaction suspension was 365 The surface area of the samples was measured by nitrogen physisoption using micro-meritics surface area analyzer. X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) was carried out using Philips X-ray diffractometer (type PW 1730). Infrared spectra were measured in potassium bromide with fourier transform and pye-unicam SP 300 instruments. Influence of Si/Ti molar ratio on cyanide removal efficiency and surface area was studied under the following conditions TEOS:H Effect of C The hydrolysis reaction was performed at H In addition, a series of experiments has been carried out to study photoactivity of the samples at different Under acidic conditions, it is likely that an ethoxide group is protonated rapidly as a first step. Electron density is withdrawn from silicon, making it more electrophilic and thus, more susceptible to attack by water The results given in The apparent activation energy has been determined by the following Arrhenius equation The data are plotted to give a linear relationship between ln The IR spectra of the TiO The TiO Si:Ti: molar ratio of 1:6; C H HNO The optimized sample has been used as photocatalyst for degradation of cyanide and the removal efficiency of cyanide is 98.7% at 850