The population balance equation (PBE) has received an unprecedented amount of attention in recent years from both academics and industrial practitioners because of its long history, widespread use in engineering, and applicability to a wide variety of particulate and discrete-phase processes. However it is typically impossible to obtain analytical solutions, although in almost every case a numerical solution of the PBEs can be obtained. In this article, the symmetries of PBEs with homogeneous coagulation kernels involving aggregation, breakage and growth processes and particle transport in one dimension are found by direct solving the determining equations. Using the optimal system of one and two-dimensional subalgebras, all invariant solutions and reduced equations are obtained. In particular, an explicit analytical physical solution is also presented.We investigate analytical solutions of PBEs for aggregation, breakage and growth processes where there is one internal coordinate (the particle size) and one external coordinate (the position of the particle along an axis). Ramkrishna PBE may be regarded either as an old subject that has its origin in the Boltzmann equation more than a century ago, or as a relatively new one in light of the variety of applications in which engineers have more recently put it to use. PBEs are essential to scientists and engineers of widely varying disciplines. They are of interest to physicists (astrophysicists, high-energy physicists, geophysicists, meteorologists). For instance, Smoluchowski’s coagulation equation is widely used for modelling growth in many fields of science. Examples include planetesimal accumulation, mergers in dense clusters of stars, coalescence of interstellar dust grains and galaxy mergers in astrophysics, aerosol coalescence in atmospheric physics, colloids and polymerization and gelation (see, PBEs have been generally used to model a wide range of chemical and physical particulate processes The most important property for the characterisation of particles is particle size. Randolph and Larson The PBE The aggregation kernel Different kernels, such as the Brownian motion kernel and the aerosol kernel, may arise in particular applications. By far the largest application area is physical chemistry, although other fields of application include astronomy, biological entities and bubble swarms. Examples of kernels used in physical chemistry are given in The first term on the right hand side of From a mathematical point of view, the aggregation PBE Group analysis is an universal and effective method for solving differential equations analytically even when other techniques fail. However, classical group analysis theory cannot be directly applied to integro-differential equations. The major obstacle for application of classical group analysis theory to integro-differential equations is that the frames of these equations are not locally defined in the space of differential functions (see, e.g. In recent years, some approaches to overcome this obstacle have been proposed The exact solutions and symmetries of PBE Exact solutions in low-dimensions are often key to advancing the accuracy of numerical techniques in The paper is organized as follows. In In this section In the case where the growth rate In case where the growth rate is constant, A generator of the admitted Lie group is sought in the form Differentiating The main difficulty in finding an admitted Lie group of the integro-differential For integro-differential The approach for constructing the general solution of the determining It is worth noting that the particular class of solutions allows us to find the general solutions of the determining Calculating the derivatives of function Hence, the determining To study Applying the arbitrariness of the value It contains four arbitrary constants Similarly, In this section, symmetries of For the homogeneous kernel In the previous section we studied the case where Here we check directly using the algorithm Differentiating Let us check that generator Notice that because of homogeneous kernel Substituting Thus, the generator The fact that the generators For the homogeneous kernel For constructing all invariant solutions of The inner automorphisms are The effect of the group of inner automorphisms upon the coordinates of the operator In a similar way, for Lie algebra The inner automorphisms are Invariants of the subalgebra The invariant solutions of where Notice that one can readily check that For the subalgebra { Similar to the previous section, the invariant solutions of The classical Lie group analysis was applied for finding solutions of partial differential equations. Recently in [20, 21] this analysis was extended for equations with nonlocal terms, in particular, for integro-differential equations. PBEs with homogeneous coagulation kernels considered in the present paper involve aggregation, breakage and growth processes and particle transport in one dimension. We started from applications of developed group analysis [20, 21] for constructing exact solutions of PBEs with the constant kernel for zero growth rate and constant growth rate. Then the group analysis was also applied to investigate symmetries of one-dimensional PBEs with general homogeneous coagulation kernels for zero growth rate and constant growth rate. All invariant solutions were considered. Analysis of the reduced equations is provided. In particular, an explicit analytical physical solution is presented. Details of finding the general solution of the determining If For  For Splitting it with respect to Equating to zero the coefficients with Notice that Assume that Assume that In summary, for arbitrary positive real number If Substituting Equating the coefficients of Equating the coefficients of The obtained conditions As considered earlier, one needs to study cases where Assuming that Therefore, Equating the coefficients with respect to Hence, Finally, consider Splitting it with respect to Using Thus, In summary, the presented above study gives that the general solution of the determining