Hybrid ZrB2-based composite having 10 vol% nano-sized carbon black and 20 vol% SiC was fabricated by vacuum hot pressing at 1850 °C under 20 MPa for 60 min. The microstructure and sinterability of the as-sintered ceramic was studied by X-ray powder diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, X-ray spectroscopy, scanning transmission electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy analyses. A fully-dense hybrid composite could be achieved by hot pressing method under the aforementioned conditions. No new in-situ phase formation was detected after sintering process. Although the densification progressed in a non-reactive manner, the addition of carbonaceous material assisted the sinterability acting as the surface oxides cleaner. The precise phase and nanostructural investigations of the prepared ceramic verified the partial graphitization of carbon black and conversion of amorphous nano-additive into crystalline graphite nano-flakes.Refractory borides and carbides of transition metals have exceptionally high melting temperatures of over 3000 °C and therefore are referred to as ultrahigh temperature ceramics (UHTCs) [ To overcome the aforementioned disadvantageous, composite technology has been employed and several secondary phases have been introduced to the ZrB The addition of carbon black which is a nano-sized carbon allotrope with an amorphous structure, resulted in improvement of the characteristics of ZrB Available crystalline powders of ZrB Bulk density of hot pressed composite was measured by immersion of the sample in distilled water based on the Archimedes principles. Relative density was estimated via dividing the bulk density by the theoretical density calculated employing the rule of mixtures. For phase identification, X-ray diffraction (XRD, German D8 Advance, Bruker) analysis was performed on the sintered sample. Microstructural characterization was carried out using scanning (Czech Mira 3, Tescan) and transmission (Japanese JEM-3000 F, Jeol) electron microscopes. Focused Ion Beam lift-out technique (Japanese SMI3050SE FIB-SEM, Hitachi) was used for sample preparation before the TEM analysis. Chemical (elemental) identification was carried out by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS, digital DXP-X10P X-ray analyzer).  The result of relative density estimation by the rule of mixtures and Archimedes methodology revealed that the as-sintered ZrB Supposing the correctness of relative density measurement, no porosity should be remained in the hot pressed composite. This supposition is in agreement with an outlook TEM image of ZrB  Although the carbothermal reactions of Eqs. It should be mentioned that the carbon additive not only can act as a sintering aid via removal of the surface ZrO  The microstructural investigation of hot pressed ZrB   As previously explained, some crystalline peaks of graphite were distinctly detected in the XRD pattern of Ternary ZrB