Objectives
                  The aim of this study was to analyse the variability among Turkish spinal surgeons in the management of thoracolumbar fractures by carrying out a web survey.
               
                  Methods
                  An invitation text and web-link of the survey were sent to the members of the Turkish Spine Society mail group. A fictitious spine trauma vignette, a 23 year-old male with a L1 burst fracture, was presented and 25 questions were asked to participants. Variability of answers in a given question was assessed with the Index of Qualitative Variation (IQV). Questions with high IQV values (>%80) were selected to evaluate the relation between participant factors (speciality, age, degree and experience level of the surgeon, type of the work centre and volume of the trauma patients).
               
                  Results
                  Sixty-four (88%) among the 73 participating surgeons completed the survey. 45 (70%) of them were orthopaedic surgeons and 19 (30%) were neurosurgeons. 11 questions had very high variability (IQV ≥ 0.80), 5 had high variability (0.58–0.75) and 2 had low variability (IQV≤0.20). The question with the highest variability was related to the use of brace after surgery (IQV = 0.93). Following one was about the selection of fixation levels (IQV = 0.91). Neurosurgeons were more likely to use brace postoperatively and professors were less likely to perform decompression.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This survey shows that thoracolumbar spine trauma practice significantly varies among Turkish spine surgeons. Surgeons' characteristics affected some specific answers. Lack of enough knowledge about spine trauma care, fracture classifications and surgical techniques and/or ethical factors may be other reasons for this variability.Management of thoracolumbar fractures is one of the main issues in spine surgeons' practice. Although there are well accepted, treatment guiding classification systems, it is possible to observe quite different methods even in the treatment of similar type of fractures. Differences in experience levels, type of the work centre, volume of the trauma patients, perspective differences between disciplines (orthopaedics and neurosurgery) and/or lack of evidence based knowledge may be reasons for this variability. Lonjon et al studied variability in spine trauma practices among French spine surgeons in 2013 and they defined the influencing factors. Study was designed as a cross sectional study. An invitation text and web-link of the survey were sent to the members of the Turkish Spine Society mail group, which has 350 members. In the first section of the survey, a fictitious spine trauma vignette was presented as, “A 23 year-old male with a L1 burst fracture was presented to the emergency department of your centre, following a traffic accident occurred at 30 min ago, around midnight. Patient was conscious and complaining about back pain. Physical examination revealed paraesthesia in both lower extremities with normal motor and sphincter functions. You can find the sagittal and axial computed tomography images of the patient below” ( The survey was prepared on SurveyMonkey Inc (San Mateo, California, USA, An invitation for participation to survey was sent with a brief explanation and with survey word in the subject line of email. The invitation process was repeated 2 more times in 7 days interval. This process was conducted in accordance with published guideline to improve the response rate. All valid data for each question were used for statistical analysis, even if the questionnaire was not answered fully. Variability of answers in a given question was assessed with the Index of Qualitative Variation (IQV). The IQV is based on the ratio of the total number of differences in the distribution to the maximum number of possible differences. The IQV can vary from 0.0 to 1.0. If all cases of the distribution fall within one category, without any diversity or variation, the IQV is 0.0. Conversely, the maximum value 1 occurs if, an identical number of cases fall within each category Questions with high IQV values (>%80) were selected to evaluate the relation between participant factors (speciality, age, degree and experience level of the surgeon, type of the work centre and volume of the trauma patients). Chi square test with Yates correction and Fisher's exact test were used to analyse nominal variables. The statistical significance was set as p <0.05. Statistical analyses were carried out using the NCSS 10 Statistical Software programme (2015. Kaysville, Utah, USA, 64 (88%) among the 73 participating surgeons completed the survey. The rest answered some questions but not all of the obligatory personal information questions. All of the respondents were male (n = 64), with a mean age of 45 ± 7 years (range, 30–60). 45 (70%) of them were orthopaedic surgeons and 19 (30%) were neurosurgeons. Type of the work centres were distributed as, 44% university hospital, %28 training and research hospital, 28% private hospital, 9% private practice and 3% public hospital (7 respondents selected more than one centre). Respondents were 30% professor, 30% associate professor, 23% specialist, 14% assistant professor and 3% chief assistant. Experience in spinal surgery was more than 15 years for 41% of the respondents; respectively 23% between 5 and 10 years, 22% between 10 and 15 years and 14% less than 5 years. Lastly, number of vertebral fractures have been treated in a year was distributed as, between 10 and 15 for 39% of the respondents and respectively <10 for 33%, 25–50 for 22%, 50–100 for 3% and >100 for 3% ( 11 questions had very high variability (IQV ≥ 0.80), 5 had high variability (0.58–0.75) and 2 had low variability (IQV ≤ 0.20) ( 64% of the respondents answered as they would definitely or probably obtain an emergent MRI examination while 36% would not. 67% preferred to perform an emergent surgery at night and 73% preferred to perform posterior decompression, while 27% not. 59% preferred long segment posterior fixation, 23% fixation between two levels above and one level below the fractured vertebra. 46% preferred pedicle screw fixation to the fractured level. 48% answered, as they would use brace following the surgery. 63% preferred ≥2 years follow up duration. Most frequently preferred classification system was TLICS (67%) and the others were AOSpine classification system (38%), Denis classification (31%), McCormack Load sharing system (9%) and others (4%) respectively. Most of the respondents (38%) answered, as hey have no idea about AOSpine classification of our case, 20% classified as B2, 16% A3, 13% A4, 8% C, 3% B3, 2% B1. Distributions of answers for each corresponding question were given in Relation between surgeons' characteristics and answers was significant in two questions. 1) 72% of the neurosurgeons (n = 13) preferred to use post-operative brace while 64% of the orthopaedic surgeons (n = 28) did not (p = 0.02). 2) 64% of the professors (full and associate) (n = 23) preferred to perform posterior decompression which was significantly lower than the others' (specialists, assistant professors and chief assistants) preference, 91% of them (n = 20) answered as, they would perform posterior decompression (p = 0.26). There was not any statistically significant relation between participants' studied characteristics and answers in other questions. Our survey showed significant variability exists between Turkish spinal surgeons' practices in spine trauma care. 11 questions among 18 had very high variability, 5 had high variability and only two questions had low variability. Few answers influenced by surgeons' speciality and degree. Some of the questions with very high IQV values and related literature will be discussed briefly in 6 topics to be able to interpret our findings. MRI is a useful tool for visualizing the neural elements, integrity of posterior ligamentous complex (PLC) and status of the intervertebral discs. It is also valuable to evaluate the entire spinal column to identify distant fractures or space occupying lesions. Avulsion fracture of the interspinous process, interspinous spacing, diastasis of the facet joints, local kyphosis > 20°, loss of vertebral body height >50% are some parameters have been studied on to estimate the integrity of PLC. But there were no universally accepted radiological criteria to demonstrate PLC injury on X-rays and CT. In a prospective study including 30 patients, Pizones et al showed that addition of MRI to X-rays and CT had modified their diagnosis in %40 of patients, classification fracture pattern (AO type) in 24% of fractures and therapeutic management in 16% of patients. Our clinical vignette had L1 burst fracture, with superior and inferior end plate involvement and moderate to severe canal compromise. CT scans did not exhibit any facet joint dislocation. Patient had incomplete sensory deficit in both limbs. According to TLICS system, patient's score is greater than 4, which is suggesting a surgical treatment. The IQV was high for the question asking AOSpine type of the fracture. The most frequent answer was I have no idea (38%). One of the reasons may be because most of the respondents were using TLICS classification and another one may be the absence of an MR image. AOSpine classification was the most recent introduced classification accounts simply for the various patterns of spinal fracture and soft-tissue injury, the extent of neurological deficit and the presence or absence of key medical comorbidities. Mostly based on features identifiable using CT scans. One of the important criticisms about TLICS system that it does not accurately represent treatment algorithms commonly used in many parts of the world; and this was one of the motivation behind development of AOSpine classification. The knowledge about optimal surgical timing in spinal fractures mostly comes from retrospective studies and databases. Briefly, early surgical stabilization of spinal fractures (within 72 h of injury) has been shown to decrease the length of hospital stay, respiratory complications and mortality. Degree of canal compromise may be quite variable with burst fractures. There is not a specific rule for surgical intervention without neurological involvement. It has been demonstrated that retropulsed bony fragments were resorbed and canal modelled up to %50 over time in patients without any neurological involvement. Various surgical techniques have been described for surgical stabilization of thoracolumbar fractures. Vertebral column reconstruction and instrumentation through an anterior approach, posterior short or long segment pedicle screw fixations or combined methods may be the choices. Posterior techniques are frequently preferred to avoid potential complications of anterior surgery in majority of the cases. Also it is possible to obtain a better sagittal alignment with posterior techniques. Short segment posterior instrumentation, fixation between one level above and below the fractured vertebra, has motion segment sparing advantage. Clinical outcomes were mostly satisfying and comparable with long segment fixations for burst fractures. There is not enough evidence behind post-operative bracing. In a systematic review evaluating brace usage after surgical stabilization of thoracolumbar fractures, it was reported that there were no significant differences between pain, screw breakage, infection, or return to work with post-operative bracing. Overall complication rates and loss of kyphotic correction were significantly higher with brace group while pseudoarthrosis rate was higher in non-brace group. We could not find any studies about the optimum follow-up duration after thoracolumbar fracture surgery. Most of the clinical studies in the literature evaluate ≥2 years follow-up data. While 37% of the respondents preferred ≤1 year follow-up for our clinical vignette, 63% preferred ≥2 years follow up. We also prefer at least 2 years follow-up duration after thoracolumbar trauma surgery. Two answers were influenced by surgeons' speciality and degree. Neurosurgeons were more likely to use brace postoperatively and professors (full and associate) were less likely to perform decompression according to others. Other studied surgeon factors seemed did not have significant effect on the answers. Lack of enough knowledge about spine trauma care, fracture classifications and surgical techniques and/or ethical factors were considered as possible reasons for observed significant variability in this study. Our findings were comparable with the similar French study. In a similar survey, they also found great variability between French spinal surgeons practice in the management of a trauma case. They found very high variability in questions about need for emergent MRI (IQV = 0.93), emergency surgery (IQV = 0.93), need for fusion (IQV = 0.92), post-operative brace (IQV = 0.91) and routine instrument removal in asymptomatic patient (IQV = 0.94). They also reported that neurosurgeons were more likely to request an MRI, younger surgeons operate at night and orthopaedic surgeons to consider post-operative bracing unnecessary. Limitation of this study may be the number of the respondents. Our target population was the members of the Turkish Spine Society mail group (n = 350). Actually, with %5 Type 1 error and 5% confidence interval the sample size was calculated to be 183, 76 with 10% confidence interval, 65 with 11% confidence interval. It was 73 in our study. This survey shows that thoracolumbar spine trauma practice significantly varies among Turkish spine surgeons. Surgeons' characteristics affected some specific answers. Lack of enough knowledge about spine trauma care, fracture classifications and surgical techniques and/or ethical factors may be other reasons for this variability. The following are the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at