The history of iron and Damascus steels is described through the eyes of ancient blacksmiths. For example, evidence is presented that questions why the Iron Age could not have begun at about the same time as the early Bronze Age (i.e. approximately 7000 b.c.). It is also clear that ancient blacksmiths had enough information from their forging work, together with their observation of color changes during heating and their estimate of hardness by scratch tests, to have determined some key parts of the present-day iron–carbon phase diagram. The blacksmiths’ greatest artistic accomplishments were the Damascus and Japanese steel swords. The Damascus sword was famous not only for its exceptional cutting edge and toughness, but also for its beautiful surface markings. Damascus steels are ultrahigh carbon steels (UHCSs) that contain from 1.0 to 2.1% carbon. The modern metallurgical understanding of UHCSs has revealed that remarkable properties can be obtained in these hypereutectoid steels. The results achieved in UHCSs are attributed to the ability to place the carbon, in excess of the eutectoid composition, to do useful work that enhances the high temperature processing of carbon steels and that improves the low and intermediate temperature mechanical properties.Blacksmiths and astronomers were among the elite occupations of ancient times because their work led to an understanding of the nature of earthly and extraterrestrial aspects of life. The blacksmith was the principal contributor to creating the earliest concepts of the behavior and understanding of man-made materials. The astronomer contributed to the mobility of mankind by establishing rules of travel through observation of the stars. Without any doubt, blacksmiths and astronomers were the respected technologists and scientists of their time. Spiritual guidance was provided by astrologers. The Iron Age is commonly thought to have begun around 1000 The likelihood of wrought iron being utilized extensively at the start of, and even before, the copper and early Bronze Age is certainly supported by the fact that it is easier to produce. It would also have been motivated by the knowledge that wrought iron is considerably stronger than copper and early (unintentionally alloyed) bronze. This difference in strength (given as hardness) is illustrated in A proposed and provocative sequence of the Iron and Bronze Ages is reconstructed in Prehistory is generally considered to be the period before the creation of the Great Pyramids of Egypt, i.e., before 3000 A fascinating source on the early history of iron making is that from the former US President Herbert Hoover. Prior to becoming President, Hoover had an illustrious career in mining and metallurgical engineering. He entered Stanford University in the first freshman class of 1892 and graduated with an AB degree in mining, metallurgy, and geology. With his wife, Lou Henry, also a Stanford graduate, he translated the 16th century Latin book The iron plate found in the Pyramid of Kephron ( The ancient blacksmith had many methods available to create a thorough understanding of the behavior of iron and Damascus steel. The five principal tools were as follows: (1) The first tool is the observation of the color of the iron as it is heated for forging or for heat treating. This is the basis of all good blacksmithing. (2) The second tool is determining the strength of iron, characterized by the ease of forging, which is a function of temperature. (3) The third tool is determining the strength and hardness of iron at ambient temperature. This is readily determined by scratching or bending the iron, and is dependent on the temperature of forging and on the cooling rate after forging. (4) The fourth tool, representing a rather scientific method, is the use of lodestone to measure the magnetic qualities of iron (lodestone is a natural magnetic iron oxide mineral). (5) The last tool is having an imagination that iron has two distinct internal structures, a compact one and a less compact one.  The blacksmith noted that the properties of wrought iron changed when the iron was combining with carbon. New temperatures were observed for the glitter effect. Nevertheless, a pattern evolved that contains the essence of a primitive iron–carbon phase diagram. This is shown in An example of Damascus steel swords (Persian scimitars) is shown in  In recent years, investigations at Stanford University, at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and at the National Center for Metallurgical Investigations (CENIM) in Madrid, have focused on practical applications of UHCSs. A number of thermal–mechanical processing procedures have been developed to achieve ultrafine structures in these materials and a symposium was held on UHCSs in 1997 Historical studies of ancient metallurgy are an important contribution to understanding the evolution of man and civilization. Knowledge gained from understanding the practices of ancient blacksmiths may well contribute to the development of new processes and new materials. An old Russian proverb states, “The best of the new is often the long forgotten past.” The authors acknowledge close collaboration with many colleagues on the subject of ultrahigh carbon steels. These include Drs. Donald R. Lesuer, Chol K. Syn, Oscar A. Ruano, and Prof. Eric Taleff. The work was performed in part under the auspices of the US Department of Energy by the University of California, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under contract No. W-7405-Eng-48.