The results of theoretical and experimental studies of a comminution process are presented. There are two random functions: the selection function and the breakage function in the stochastic model based on a population balance. This model enables prediction of particle size distributions of comminution products after determination of both random functions. Maximum entropy method is used in the entropy model for determining the breakage function. Two cases are analysed, based on continuous and discrete particle size distribution functions of the fed material. Apart from mass balance, the energy balance of comminution process is also used. Searched form of breakage function is determined with the application of methodology of calculus of variations. The results of experimental identification of both models are presented. The parameters that occur in the discrete form of the selection and breakage functions were the identification objects. The results of experimental investigations of quartz sand single comminution in a laboratory jet mill provided an identification base. The experimentally identified results of the entropy model confirmed the adequacy of the theoretical analysis and demonstrated the possibility of adequate prediction of particle size distributions resulting from single comminution.The rapid development of the chemical, cement and mining industries as well as the power industry has focused attention on the problem of the efficiency and energy-consumption of comminution. The mechanism of comminution and the various systems of forces and stresses present in the particles of any comminuted material are very complicated. As a result, there is currently no universal theory of comminution. The extensive literature dealing with this problem presents results of research and measurements. The formulation and modification of adequate mathematical models of the phenomena occurring during the comminution process is the best way of gaining an understanding of comminution. Technical development has made the application of highly comminuted materials increasingly necessary. The comminution of brittle solids is a highly energy-consuming process. So, in the second half of the 19th century, the first theories aimed at establishing the relationship between solid comminution effect and energy used during comminution were formed. These theories, also called hypotheses, are known by the surnames of their authors, such as: Rittinger The main task of research into loose material comminution is to determine general laws concerning the evolution of the particle size distribution during comminution. Mathematical models predicting the particle size distribution of the comminution product are called stochastic or statistic models. The models, based on the population balance, are numerous and represented by a highly developed group of stochastic models. Two probability functions, namely breakage and selection, are introduced in stochastic modelling. Epstein The equation of the population balance is a linear differential–integral equation. Many ways of solving the population balance equation have been formed, especially over the last few years. Gaudin and Meloy In the stochastic modelling of comminution the following methods are also applied: statistic moment method (Heim and Pietrzykowski The review of selected methods of comminution modelling, presented in this section, shows the importance of the subject of comminution modelling. It should also be added that the modelling methods could be divided into two main groups. The dependence between energy and comminution effect is analysed in deterministic models, while stochastic models deal with the evolution of the particle size distribution of the comminuted substance. There is a lack of universal models of comminution which take into account the energy balance and mass balance of the particle population simultaneously (Zhukov et al. The modelling of the comminution process presented in this paper is similar to the inverse breakage problem — a case where the selection function is known and the breakage function is sought (Kostoglou and Karabelas The breakage function As The (0, If the size of the output and feed material are measured in the same way, the domain of  From the definition of the breakage function, the above relationship fulfils the following relationships: The selection and breakage functions take the following values: The population balance of the fed material particles and comminution product for the ( After integrating Eq. It is possible to predict the particle size distribution of the comminution product on the basis of Eq. single comminution of samples of the narrow fraction (Austin and Bhatia single comminution of samples containing marked fraction (Gardner and Sukanjanajtee single comminution of samples containing different masses of selected single fraction (for example: lack of class or double mass) (Liu and Schönert numerical optimization and approximation on the basis of results of experimental research (Williams et al. None of the above methods is universal. In many cases it is difficult to find an adequate marker for a single fraction. It is difficult, sometimes even impossible, to obtain samples of the narrow fraction for small sizes of particles by screening. If polydispersed material is represented as a set of size classes, then the process of comminution relies on the transition of particles from one class to the other. This transition can proceed in different ways. The formation of the particle size distribution of a single comminution product is a random process as depicted by the theory of probability. In statistical physics the concept of entropy is strictly connected with the theory of information. According to Shannon The above definition of entropy is known as Shannon's definition. Informational entropy takes the following values If Quantity of informational entropy This border case is characterised by the maximum uncertainty and simultaneously by the maximum probability. Informational entropy On the basis of the Shannon's theory of information, Jaynes introduced the maximum entropy method (MEM) into statistical mechanics According to Jaynes, the distribution closest to the actual distribution, is the one which maximalizes Shannon's informational entropy as given by Eq. Let us assume that the energy supplied by the comminution device is transferred to all the particles of a fed material irrespective of whether they underwent comminution or not. The density of the energy absorbed by a unit of a normalized mass of particles with Energy taken (0, Total energy Two parts can be distinguished in an elementary mass of ( the part comminuted with the normalized mass the part non-comminuted with the normalized mass [1- It is also assumed that absorbed energy is proportional to partial masses: energy absorbed by the comminuted particles energy absorbed by non-comminuted particles Energy balance takes the form Let By comparing relationships Substituting Eq. energy absorbed by an elementary class ( energy absorbed by (0, energy absorbed by the particles of whole fed material The functions of particle size distribution, present in the entropy model of comminution, can be written in continuous or discrete forms. Owing to this, both forms of the functions were applied to the entropy model of single comminution. The comminution of a fed material in the form of a polydispersed sample is examined in this section. The hypothesis of independent comminution of particular size classes (this means that there is no energy exchange between the size classes) has been taken into account in the considerations mentioned below. It arises from the assumed hypothesis that the effect of concurrent comminution of a system of size classes and the comminution of every class separately will be the same for the same energy absorbed. Eq. The breakage function equation of the informational entropy equation of normalization balance of the total absorbed energy Variational calculus was used to solve the above system of equations (Forray Lagrange multiplier Eq. Because Expression The numerical solutions of non-linear equations are used in the practical applications of the maximum entropy method. Therefore the discrete forms of the particle size distribution functions and matrix models of comminution are considered in this part of the paper. The equation of population balance of the particles It is assumed that the size classes are identical for the fed material and product, and the computation method for an average particle of the size classes is also identical. Eq. In Eq. unicolumn matrix of the density of the particle size distribution of the fed material unicolumn matrix of the density of the particle size distribution of the comminution product unit scalar matrix diagonal matrix of selection strictly lower triangular matrix of breakage The values of elements of The elements of the Analysing the above equation or Eq. The breakage function The consumed specific energy Rittinger's hypothesis Kick's hypothesis The most important formal difference between Kick's and Rittinger's hypothesis is that Kick's hypothesis does not contain the absolute value of particle size: only the degree of size reduction. It also simplifies the conditions of comparison of different regimes of comminution. Rittinger's hypothesis gave better correlation for fine comminution and Kick's hypothesis for crushing. The particle size distribution of the comminution product can be determined for the given values The experimental identification of the stochastic and entropy comminution model is aimed at the parameters occurring in the discrete forms of the breakage and selection functions. The identification was carried out on the basis of Eq. The task of estimating the unknown parameters of the random function distribution, based on the results of an experiment, is present in mathematical statistics. The statistical simulation is applied to the data analysis. It relies on the computer realization of the probabilistic mathematical model, physical phenomenon or technical object. In the narrower range the statistical simulation is often understood as a realization of the Monte Carlo method, which relies on the generation of random variables to estimate the parameters of their distribution (Nowak Assumptions and methodology of the conducted identification were as follows: The particle size distribution of the fed material and single comminuted product are given. The linear form of the experimentally determined selection function is assumed The breakage function in the stochastic model is specified by the following experimental equation The comminution tests on anthracite and coke were carried out in different types of mills: a ball mill, a roller mill and a jet mill to determine the selection and breakage functions (Otwinowski The breakage function in the model of entropy takes the form given by Eq. The correctness of one of the comminution hypotheses: Rittinger's (Eq. The following parameters are the subject of identification: in both models the constant The parameters are estimated by applying the least squares method; the Monte Carlo method is applied to conduct the computer estimation. The numerical optimisation is carried out to achieve the best accordance between the calculated function – the cumulative distribution function of the product particle size distribution – and the experimental dependence; this aim is realized by choosing sufficiently high values of the iteration index in numerical algorithm with the simultaneous assurance of convergence of the iterative process (Brandt The parametrical identification of the stochastic and entropy model was carried out on the basis of research on a single comminution in a laboratory jet mill with a flat metal barrier. A schematic of the experimental stand is presented in The results of identification carried out for the comminuted samples of the fed material with different particle sizes are presented in Many authors (Berthiaux and Dodds Sometimes the equation of the population balance occurs in modified form (Bertrand et al. Authors of paper (Zhukov et al. The results of the experimental identification of the entropy model confirm the accuracy of the theoretical analysis and the possibility of a satisfactory prediction of the particle size distribution of the single comminution product. On the basis of the comparative analysis of the results of identification of both comminution models, carried out for the same experimental data, it can be stated that the entropy model provides a more accurate prediction of the particle size distribution of the single comminution product. Analysis of the results of the experiment, the theoretical analysis of stochastic model and the formulated entropy model as well as the parametrical identification carried out for both comminution models, allows the following conclusions: The stochastic model, based on the population mass balance of the particles for linear forms of selection and breakage functions, adequately predicts the particle size distribution of a single comminution product. Introducing the energy balance, applying the maximum informational entropy method and taking into consideration the normalized condition, enables us to formulate and solve the variational problem and determine the breakage function by Lagrange's multipliers method. The sought form of the breakage function is an argument of the constrained extremum of an integral functional with two indirect conditions. The obtained form of the breakage function was applied to the equation of the population balance. This leads to the prediction of the particle size distribution of the single comminution product with an additional assumption concerning the form of the selection function. The results of identification show that the entropy model enables the theoretical prediction of the variation of particle size distribution in ground material with a wide range of milling parameters. Future work needs to be done to identify other forms of the selection function for different mills and materials.  breakage function density of used energy density of absorbed energy total absorbed energy particle size distribution of product particle size distribution of fed material selection function linear size of product and feed particles The author is grateful to Prof. Jakub Bodziony from Polish Academy of Sciences in Cracow for scientific support in this work. It is assumed that the breakage function mass balance energy balance This is the isepiphanic case of variational problems (Tatarkiewicz In this case the Lagrange–Brunacci equation takes the following form On the left side of the equals sign in Eq. Finally Eq. The extremum of the informational entropy functional