The removal of radioactive elements thorium and uranium from the leach solution of ion-adsorption rare earth ores by aluminum sulfate was studied using di(2-ethylhexyl) [N-(2-ethylhexyl)aminomethyl] phosphonate (Cextrant 230, L).The extraction of thorium, uranium, rare earths, aluminum and other elements was investigated in detail, especially for uranium. The extracted complex was inferred to be UO2SO4·2L, in which phosphoryl oxygen atom of Cextrant 230 was involved in the coordination of UO2
                     2+. The thermodynamic parameters, such as ΔH, ΔG, ΔS were calculated. The negative value of ΔH suggests that the extraction of U(VI) by Cextrant 230 is an exothermic process. The extraction capacities of 5% (v/v) Cextrant 230 for Th(IV) and U(VI) were determined to be 4.08 g/L and 6.16 g/L, respectively. The loaded U(VI) and Th(IV) can be stripped using common inorganic acids. By just one stage extraction, the concentrations of thorium and uranium in the simulated leaching solution decreased obviously from 2.73 mg/L and 0.82 mg/L to <0.1 mg/L.Ion-adsorption type rare earth ores are an important kind of rare earth resources which are rich in the middle and heavy rare earths. They also contain trace radioactive elements such as uranium and thorium (20–30 ppm of the total rare earths) ( Solvent extraction is an effective technique for the recovery and separation of thorium and uranium from rare earths ( Aminophosphorus ligands have been proved to be the efficient extractants for alkali metals ( Recently, our group synthesized a series of neutral aminophosphonate ligands for the separation of Ce(IV), Th(IV), Zr(IV), Hf(IV), Sc(III), Cu(II), Ga(III) and RE(III) by extraction method ( Cextrant 230 was synthesized according to our previous work ( Stock solutions of RE(III) and Th(IV) were prepared by dissolving the corresponding oxides in concentrated sulfuric acid and diluting with deionized water to the required volume. The stock solution of U(VI) was prepared by precipitating uranyl nitrate with NaOH, dissolving the precipitation with sulfuric acid and diluting with water to the required concentration. The solutions of Al(III) and Fe(III) were prepared by dissolving their sulfate salts Al Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, PerkinElmer Optimal 8000) was used to analyze the metal concentration. Infrared spectra of the extractant and the extraction complex were recorded on a Bruker Vertex 70 spectrometer. PHS-3C digital pH meter (Shanghai Rex Instrument Factory) was employed to determine the pH of the aqueous solutions, which was calibrated by buffer solutions with pH of 6.86 and 4.00 before measurement. Equal volumes (5 mL each) of aqueous solution and organic phase were placed into a 15 mL equilibrium tube, which was sealed and shaken for 25 min at 298 ± 1 K. The concentrations of the metal ions in the aqueous phase were determined by ICP-OES. The metal concentrations in the organic phase were calculated by the mass balance. The organic solutions preloaded with Th(IV) and U(VI) were prepared as follows: 50 mL of 5% Cextrant 230 solution and 100 mL of aqueous solution containing 0.00808 mol/L Th(IV) or 0.021 mol/L U(VI) and 0.40 mol/L H The distribution ratio The effect of contact time on the extraction of U(VI), Th(IV), Al(III), La(III) or Yb(III) was studied at a same equilibrium acidity of 0.36 mol/L H For comparison, the extraction of Th(IV) and U(VI) as well as rare earth ions such as La(III), Gd(III) and Yb(III) and the impurity ions such as Fe(III) and Al(III) by Cextrant 230 was investigated under the same conditions. The effect of the aqueous acidity (0.086–4.5 mol/L H The extraction sequence follows the order of U(VI) > Th(IV) > Fe(III) > RE(III) > Al(III). In general, the higher charge the metal ion has, the stronger interaction between the metal and the extractant there is ( The separation factors ( The extraction of uranyl ion from sulfate solution using neutral extractant Cextrant 230 can be described by the following equation: The distribution ratio The equilibrium constant By combining Eqs. To deduce the extraction stoichiometry of uranium by Cextrant 230, a series of experiments were performed by varying the concentrations of Cextrant 230 and bisulfate ion while keeping other parameters unchanged. As shown in Based on the above discussion and the charge balance of the complex, the extracted species of uranium by Cextrant 230 is proposed as UO Differently, bisulfate anions were involved into the extraction of thorium by Cextrant 230 in sulfate medium ( To further elaborate the coordination between uranium and the extractant Cextrant 230, the extracted complex UO The effect of temperature on the extraction of U(VI) by Cextrant 230 was studied in the range of 289–308 K. As shown in The plot of log The change of Gibbs energy (Δ The thermodynamic parameters are given in The loading capacity of Cextrant 230 for thorium and uranium was studied by repeatedly contacting 5% Cextrant 230 with an equal volume of fresh aqueous solution containing 0.00808 mol/L Th(IV) or 0.021 mol/L U(VI) and 0.4 mol/L H Stripping property is another significant parameter for assessing the effectiveness of the extraction system. The stripping of thorium and uranium from the loaded organic phase was conducted using distilled water and different inorganic acids such as HCl, HNO A simulated leaching solution for ion-adsorption rare earth ore leached by aluminum sulfate was prepared with the proportions of REs being as follows: 9.8% Pr Cextrant 230 is a desirable extractant for the removal of radioactive elements thorium and uranium from an aqueous solution containing rare earths, aluminum and iron in sulfate medium. The extracted complex of uranium with Cextrant 230 was deduced to be UO The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interestsor personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the