The peer-reviewed, clinical data focusing on foot and ankle gunshot wounds are limited. The present study aimed to evaluate functional outcomes in a case series according to the area of injury, articular involvement, and the presence of infection. From January 2003 through February 2011 (8 years), 37 patients treated at Sinai-Grace Hospital (Detroit, MI) for civilian gunshot wounds localized to the foot and/or ankle were reviewed. Of these, 27 (72.97%) met the inclusion criteria. All acute wounds were thoroughly irrigated in the emergency room (8 of 27, 29.63%) or operating room (19 of 27, 70.37%) within 1 hour of presentation. The injuries were categorized as either zone 1 or 2, if localized distally or proximally to the midtarsal joint, respectively. The Maryland Foot Score was recorded and compared based on the location, articular involvement, and infection status, using analysis of variance. The mean Maryland Foot Score in patients with zone 1 injuries was 89.3 (range 72 to 100) and in patients with zone 2 injures was 61.8 (range 13 to 97; p = .001). The mean Maryland Foot Score in patients with type A injuries was 93.1 (range 72 to 100) and in patients with type B injures was 69.2 (range 13 to 99; p = .001), regardless of location. Intraoperative cultures yielded Staphylococcus epidermidis (7 of 27, 25.93%) and Enterococcus cloacae (1 of 27, 3.7%). No cases of Pseudomonas aeruginosa were found, although 9 cases (33.33%) involved shoe penetration. One third of the cases (9 of 27) yielded intra-articular pain, of which 4 (14.82%) required joint arthrodesis.Varying degrees of morbidity are seen with gunshot wounds (GSWs) to the feet, ranging from no effect on daily life to significant debility and deformity From January 2003 to February 2011 (an 8-year period), the data from patients with a documented GSW localized to the foot and/or ankle who had been treated by the senior author (Z.S.H.) were reviewed. The Sinai-Grace Hospital (Detroit, MI) institutional review board approved the protocol for our retrospective study. Potential eligible patients were identified by manually searching the personal operative logs of the senior author (Z.S.H.) for specific cases that included a diagnosis of “gunshot wound.” A total of 37 potentially eligible patient medical records, describing patients with GSWs localized to the foot and/or ankle, were identified. Those patients who had only been treated in the emergency department (ED) and who had had no follow-up visits documented in the medical record were excluded. Patients with polytrauma involving injuries proximal to the ankle were also excluded. The medical record review was performed by 2 of us (N.L., S.S.) to abstract the following variables of interest: location of the GSW (open wounds, fracture), organisms (if any) isolated from deep wound site culture specimens, prophylactic antibiotics used acutely and at discharge from the hospital, shoe involvement by the bullet before entry into the foot, site of irrigation and debridement (ED or operating room), type of fixation used to stabilize the fractures, follow-up duration, Maryland Foot Score (MFS) For the purposes of the present retrospective investigation, the foot was arbitrarily divided into 2 anatomic zones according to the location of the GSW. Injuries located distal to Chopart's midtarsal joint (MTJ) were designated as zone 1, and injuries located proximal to Chopart's joint were designated zone 2. If an injury included the MTJs (talonavicular or calcaneocuboid), the zone that sustained most of the trauma was used to categorize the injury location. The GSWs were further categorized according to whether the injury had or had not violated the joint structures: nonarticular designated as type A and articular as type B. These 4 divisions were selected to simplify localization of the GSW to either the forefoot or rearfoot and to categorize the injury regarding articular involvement. Data analyses were conducted using SPSS Statistics, version 17.0 (IBM, Armonk, NY) by a statistician. A post hoc bivariate analysis comparing 2 groups at a time using analysis of variance was used to compare the MFS according to the 4 injury categories of interest: location distal to Chopart's joint (zone 1), location proximal to Chopart's joint (zone 2), nonarticular involvement (type A), and articular involvement (type B). For all the analyses, statistical significance was defined at the 5% ( Of the 27 patients in our series, 26 (96.3%) were male. All the patients in the present study had a unilateral GSW to the foot. The mean patient age was 27.7 ± 14.0 (range 17 to 71) years. Four cases (14.82%) involved shotguns, 22 cases (81.48%) involved low-velocity bullets, and 1 case (3.70%) involved a high-velocity bullet. Treatment was performed in the operating room in 19 (70.37%) of the 27 patients. The other 8 patients (29.63%) were treated with pulse irrigation in the ED setting. Ten patients (37.04%) were discharged within 24 hours, and their stay was recorded as a 0-day length of stay. Seventeen patients (62.96%) required full hospital admission with an overall mean duration of hospitalization of 1.5 ± 2.7 (range 0 to 13) days. One patient (3.7%) developed a pulmonary embolism resulting in the longest hospitalization (13 days). Fractures were present in 26 (96.3%) of the 27 patients. The bullet had passed through the shoe sole before entering the foot in 9 patients (33.33%). All patients were treated primarily with irrigation and debridement, with a minimum of 3 L of 0.9% normal sterile saline. Ten fracture cases (37.04%) were stabilized only with external fixation until osseous healing. One fracture case (3.70%) was initially stabilized with external fixation and later revised with internal fixation. Three fracture cases (11.11%) were primarily treated with internal fixation. Two separate patients (7.41%) required amputation of digits because of extensive soft tissue damage. Four cases (14.82%) that involved joints required arthrodesis once the patient had attempted to return to normal activities but experienced isolated joint pain. All the data collected for each patient are listed in  Of the 27 GSWs, 26 (96.3%) displayed a concomitant fracture. All injuries that involved fractures were classified according to the Gustilo-Anderson system Anti-pseudomonal antibiotics were administered in 7 (25.93%) of the 9 cases in which the bullet had traveled through the shoe sole and into the foot. The other 2 patients (7.41%) received a first-generation cephalosporin initially and orally at discharge. The breakdown for anti-pseudomonal antibiotic coverage administered when the bullet penetrated the shoe sole before entering the foot is provided in Three factors should be considered when managing low-velocity GSWs: wound management, fracture management, and antibiotic therapy Much of the published data pertaining to functional outcomes after GSWs have focused primarily on amputation versus limb salvage in Gustillo-Anderson type IIIC injuries Overall, our experience with pedal GSWs has led us to believe that a standard treatment protocol for these injuries would be beneficial to patients and surgeons. We also believe that the practice of culturing the wound before irrigation should be a part of the protocol. Although we isolated Similar to most retrospective clinical observational studies, we believe our report was influenced by a number of methodological shortcomings that could threaten the validity of our conclusions. Among these, the small sample size and the limited follow-up duration were likely to have compromised our ability to identify statistically significant differences between the different fracture zones and types. We noted, too, that the 18 patients (66.67%) without complications had a shorter follow-up duration (mean 125, range 14 to 920 days) than did the 9 patients (33.33%) with complications (mean 263, range 58 to 634 days; In conclusion, we explored the association between the location and presence of articular involvement observed in GSWs, with the outcomes measured using the MFS. We believe that the results of our case series can be used in the development of a prospective investigation focusing on the management of pedal GSWs. We think that attention to the microbiology and outcomes associated with bullet penetration through the shoe, in particular, the sole of the shoe, with subsequent entrance into the foot, would be interesting, because a general consensus exists that The authors acknowledge Amanda Esquivel, PhD, for her assistance with statistical analysis used in this report.