This work was aimed to study the relative floatability of phosphate flotation by means of kinetic analysis. The relative floatability is important to determine how selectively the phosphate is separated from its impurities. The effects of pulp pH, solid content, reagents dosage (depressant, collector and co-collector) and conditioning time were investigated on the ratio of the modified rate constant of phosphate to the modified rate constant of iron (relative floatability). The results showed that a large dosage of depressant associated with a low value of collector resulted in a better relative floatability. Increasing the co-collector dosage, conditioning time and pH increased the relative floatability up to a certain value and thereafter resulted in diminishing the relative floatability. Meanwhile, the results indicated that increment of solid concentration increased the relative floatability in range investigated. It was also found that that maximum relative floatability (16.05) could be obtained in pulp pH, 9.32, solid percentage, 30, depressant dosage, 440g/t, collector dosage, 560g/t, co-collector dosage, 84.63g/t and conditioning time, 9.43min.Phosphorus (P) is a primary constituent of plant and animal life. This element plays multiple roles in plant metabolism and is one of the essential nutrients required for plant growth and development The composition of phosphate rocks varies from one deposit to another. Therefore, phosphate rocks from different sources may be expected to behave differently in beneficiation and acidulation processes. Phosphate rocks are primarily composed of the apatite group in association with a wide assortment of accessory minerals, mainly fluorides, carbonates, clays, quartz, silicates, and metal oxides Apatite flotation is difficult due to its physicochemical properties being similar to other minerals present in phosphate ores Using these concepts, this work was aimed to study of the kinetics and selectivity of the apatite flotation process. Many studies have been carried out to increase understanding of the principles of apatite flotation and its separation from other minerals, comparatively; relatively few studies have been done on the effect of operating parameters, such as pulp conditions (pH, solid content) and collector dosage on the kinetics of apatite flotation especially relative floatability of igneous phosphate ores. Hence, paper focuses on the flotation of igneous phosphate ore and investigates the role and influence of controllable operational factors on relative floatability or selectivity index of phosphate flotation process. In present research work, experimental design technique, response surface method, and central composite design were employed to optimize and evaluate the effects and interactions of the operational parameters on relative floatability of phosphate ore in rougher flotation process. The statistical design of experiments is widely used for controlling the effects of parameters in many processes. Its usage decreases the number of experiments, time and material resources. Furthermore, the analysis carried out on the results is easily realized and the experimental errors are minimized. Statistical methods measure the effects of change in operating variables and their mutual interactions on the process In order to conduct the experiments of flotation, samples from underflow of hydrocyclone cluster of the Esfordi phosphate processing plant which was input of the rougher flotation were collected and prepared. Esfordi Mine is the main phosphate producer in Iran which is located in Yazd province, 35 Sodium hydroxide was used as pH modifier to maintain the pH at the targeted value during flotation. FLO-Y-S20 and procol 3496 (a modified fatty acid) were applied as the collector, and co-collector of apatite, respectively. Also, starch was used to depress iron minerals. Flotation experiments were carried out with a Denver laboratory flotation machine using 250 As mentioned in literature, very important aspect of flotation is its kinetics. It can be characterized by rate constant. The flotation kinetic constant can be linked to the cumulative recovery ( According to Agar, this is normally set when the air flow starts, but it takes a finite time for a stable froth to accumulate and to overflow, so a negative correction time should be required. This behavior is often observed with the least floatable component Since, one of the main problems in Esfordi plant is achieving an acceptable separation of iron minerals from the apatite components; the efficiency of rougher stage has a significant effect on the overall efficiency of mineral processing plants. Hence, performance of rougher flotation circuit was evaluated. In the previous researches, two works were carried out on the flotation circuit of the Esfordi phosphate ore, which in the first work, differences between recoveries of iron and phosphate were used to study and optimize the performance of rougher flotation of the Esfordi phosphate ore The flotation selectivity between phosphate and the main gangue minerals can be quantified by the selectivity ratio. The selectivity ratio indicates how much the P According to Xu and Oliveira, the relative floatability ( In this research, two kinetics parameters of According to central composite design, a series of 47 experiments including a two-level randomized 2 The higher level was designated as ‘+’ and lower level as ‘−’. The matrix for six variables varied at two levels (+, −) and corresponding relative floatability ( The experimental data were analyzed statistically. The effect of the factors and also the interactions between factors were quantified and interpreted. Results obtained from the statistical analysis are summarized in  According to the analysis of variance, f-value for the overall regression model (9.9) is significant at 5% level and the lack of fit is insignificant (6.64) indicating that the second-order model with interaction is very adequate in approximating the response surface of the experimental design. The coefficient of determination ( In addition, the analysis of variance was employed for the determination of significant variables. The regression analysis of the experimental design shows that the linear model terms (A, B, C, D and E), quadratic model terms (A Also, the predicted values of relative floatability (selectivity index) were obtained using the regression model suggested and were plotted versus experimental data which are shown in The P  According to According to Mehrotra and Singh, and Singh and Sinha, increasing recovery at higher solids concentration could be due to the higher probability of collision of particles with air bubbles According to Leja, the solution pH determines the extent of ionization and hydrolysis of collector; this helps or hinders the adsorption of the collector at the various ionized solid/liquid interfaces, contributing to greater or lesser selectivity of flotation   In order to obtain the optimum levels of operational parameters that maximize the objective function (relative floatability ratio of P The experimental design technique was used to investigate the influence of the operational factors affecting the relative floatability ratio of P It was found that the relative floatability ratio P A full quadratic model based on response surface methodology, central composite design was suggested for the relationship between the operating factors and response variable (relative floatability ratio of P Results showed that the linear effects of pH, solid concentration, reagents (depressant, collector, co-collector) dosage, the interaction effects of pH and depressant dosage, solid concentration and depressant dosage and collector dosage and depressant dosage and the quadratic effects of pH, solid content, collector dosage, depressant dosage and conditioning time were significant on the relative floatability ratio P An increase in solid concentration resulted in an increment of relative floatability ratio. This was because of decrease of the amount of Fe into the concentrate. The relative floatability enhanced with increasing the pulp pH values starting from pH 9 to a certain value and then with further increment reduced. Regents dosage values (depressant, collector and co-collector) were considered as some of the important factors that have high effects on phosphate flotation performance. It was observed that a large dosage of depressant associated with a low collector value resulted in a better relative floatability ratio of P The relative floatability ratio P It was seen that conditioning time had a little linear influence than other factors on the relative floatability. Longer conditioning time reduced the relative floatability and performance of separation. Increasing the conditioning time showed improvement up to a time about 9 It was found that the maximum relative floatability could be obtained about 16.05 with a desirable value of 90% by numerical optimization. The optimum condition was pulp pH, 9.32, solid percentage, 30, depressant dosage, 440 The authors wish to thank the phosphate Esfordi Mine and