Background
                  Radial head replacement is indicated to treat complex proximal radial fractures that are not amenable to internal fixation.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  Implantation of a bipolar radial head prosthesis after radial head excision ensures stability of the elbow and forearm, thereby promoting ligament healing and restoring elbow function.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Twenty-two patients managed with implantation of a bipolar radial head prosthesis (Guepar®) were evaluated after a mean follow-up of 50 months. The procedure was performed in the acute setting in 16 patients, including 13 with associated injuries; and at the stage of sequelae in 6 patients.
               
                  Results
                  Prosthesis removal was required in 4 patients. Of the remaining 18 patients, 14 (77%) had satisfactory Mayo Elbow Performance Score values, 14 (77%) little or no functional impairment, and 11 (61%) little or no pain. Mean motion arcs were 100° in flexion-extension and 143° in pronation-supination. Mean elbow strength in flexion and mean wrist strength were 67% and 86%, respectively, of those on the contralateral normal side. Radio-lucent lines were visible around the prosthesis in 5 patients, radial neck osteolysis in 10 patients, and capitellar erosion in 7 patients. Seven patients each experienced a complication. Early revision surgery to treat elbow instability was required in 6 patients.
               
                  Discussion
                  Outcomes after Guepar® bipolar radial head prosthesis implantation were disappointing in patients with complex radial head fractures seen in the acute or chronic setting. The associated injuries to bones and ligaments and the measures taken to repair them influence the prognosis. The complication rate is non-negligible and seems to increase over time.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV, retrospective study.Comminuted radial head fractures can jeopardise the stability of the elbow and forearm. When internal fixation is not feasible, the surgeon must choose between radial head excision alone or followed by radial head replacement Implantation of a radial head prosthesis restores the lateral column and ensures both elbow stability in the coronal plane and vertical stability of the forearm Since 2002, the modular bipolar radial head prosthesis Guepar A retrospective non-comparative study of consecutive patients treated at a single orthopaedics and trauma surgery centre in a university hospital was performed. All patients managed with a Guepar Twenty-two patients, 7 women and 15 men, with a mean age of 44 years (range, 22–65 years) were included in this study. The dominant arm was involved in 10 patients. The mechanism of injury was a fall on the hand in 5 patients, a fall from a ladder or roof in 9 patients, a motor vehicle accident in 4 patients, a fall on stairs in 2 patients, and a sports-related injury in 2 patients. In the Mason classification The radial head prosthesis was implanted in the acute setting in 16 patients (mean time since injury, 4 days) and at a distance from the injury in 6 patients (mean time since injury, 14 months). The Guepar A lateral approach was used in 19 patients and a postero-lateral approach in 3 patients with associated olecranon fractures. During this approach, the radial collateral ligament was preserved if it was intact. After incision of the annular ligament, the elbow was explored to determine the full extent of the injuries. Coronoid process fractures were managed by retrograde screw fixation with intra-articular verification of the quality of reduction. Olecranon fractures were treated by plate fixation. For the radial head prosthesis, only two head diameters were available, 14 and 16 A posterior long-arm splint was used, with the wrist pronated if radial ligament re-attachment was performed and in the neutral position otherwise. Between the 15th and 20th postoperative day, the patients were switched to an articulated splint that limited extension to 30°; the wrist was protected in the event of ligament re-attachment and left free otherwise. Associated injuries required 6 weeks of complete immobilisation in 6 patients. On the 45th postoperative day, the splint was removed and rehabilitation started, with emphasis on active elbow movements to promote joint coaptation. All patients were re-evaluated by an independent assessor at least 24 months after radial head replacement. The physical examination included comparison of the elbow and wrist to the contralateral side, patient report of the visual analogue scale (VAS) pain score, goniometric determination of motion ranges, and symmetrical muscle strength measurement comparatively with the contralateral normal side using a Kinedyn The statistical analysis was performed using Excel and PASW The reported results were recorded after a mean follow-up of 50 months and a minimum follow-up of 24 months ( Of the 22 patients, 6 (27%) experienced early postero-lateral subluxation of the elbow, which was consistently managed with revision surgery; 3 patients required re-attachment of the radial capsule and ligaments, combined in 1 patient with external fixation to stabilise the elbow; 2 other patients were managed with external fixation alone; and the remaining patient had elbow instability related to prosthetic head disassembly with ulnar non-union and was managed with revision surgery of the ulnar internal fixation, press-fit implantation of a new radial head prosthesis, and repair of the radial collateral ligament. Delayed complications consisted of complex regional pain syndrome type I in 2 patients and sensory ulnar nerve dysfunction in 5 patients, all of whom had complex elbow injuries with other lesions in addition to the radial head fracture. The radial head prosthesis was removed in 4 (18%) patients. In 3 patients, removal occurred after 6, 14, and 28 months, respectively, because of lateral elbow pain with radiographic evidence of impingement of the prosthesis on the humeral condyle. The remaining patient had the prosthesis removed after 42 months because of symptomatic loosening. Of these 4 patients, 3 were pain-free at last follow-up after prosthesis removal and 1 had persistent pain with evidence of humero-ulnar osteoarthritis. The clinical outcomes were analysed in the 18 patients who still had their initial radial head prosthesis at last follow-up. Their main features are listed in The radiographic outcomes were analysed in all 22 patients, after 50 months of follow-up in the 18 patients who still had their original implant and 22 months in the 4 patients who required early implant removal ( The statistical analysis showed no significant differences in clinical outcomes between the patients managed in the acute setting and those managed at a distance from the injury. Neither were any significant differences found between the subgroup with isolated radial head fracture and the subgroup with associated injures. Of the 8 prostheses considered well centred, 2 had to be removed, whereas only 2 of the remaining 14 prostheses required removal. Of the 11 prostheses whose position was considered too high, 3 were removed, compared to only 1 of the remaining 11 prostheses. Importantly, all 6 patients with capitellar erosions had an excessively high position of the implant. No correlation was noted between implant position and clinical outcomes other than the development of capitellar erosions. Comminuted fractures of the radial head constitute a therapeutic challenge. When internal fixation is not feasible, the treatment options are simple radial head excision in the absence of other injuries and radial head replacement otherwise. Radial head fractures are rarely isolated: most patients also have injuries to the humero-ulnar collateral ligaments or inter-osseous membrane Biomechanical studies have established that radial head excision alters elbow joint kinematics and stability, even when the collateral ligaments are intact Most of the currently used radial head prostheses are metallic mono-block implants that are not consistently adaptable and raise technical challenges since their implantation requires lateral elbow subluxation Previously published studies do not allow comparisons across implants, as no comparative studies are available and indications vary with each type of implant. A meta-analysis of the most recently published case-series studies suggests that the outcomes are satisfactory in 88% of patients managed in the acute setting and 66% of those managed at the stage of sequelae, after a mean follow-up of 3–4 years ( The main limitations of our study are the retrospective design and small number of patients in each of the two groups. In addition, the variability of the associated lesions across patients may have adversely affected the quality of the results. However, the use of the same prosthesis in all patients and the mean follow-up of 50 months allowed an evaluation of the effectiveness of this implant in complex elbow injuries and a comparison with previously published data. The clinical outcomes obtained with the bipolar radial head prosthesis Guepar The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.