This article reports on the simultaneous measurement of foam structure and attached particles employing neutron imaging. An aqueous foam sample is placed in the NEUTRA beamline at the Paul Scherrer Institut, enabling a spatial resolution of less than 200 
                        
                           μ
                        
                     m to be achieved at a frame rate of more than 1 Hz. A forced drainage setup allows the liquid content of the foam to be controlled. The averaged attenuation of the neutrons is demonstrated to yield the liquid fraction of the foam. Hydrophobized gadolinium particles with a diameter of 200 
                        
                           μ
                        
                     m are added to the foam. Using two surfactants, different levels of hydrophobicity are achieved. Depending on the drainage flow and the hydrophobicity, the particles are washed out of the foam at different rates. An avalanche-like motion of particle clusters is observed. Neutron radiography is demonstrated to yield unique insights into the unsteady froth flotation process.Froth flotation, exploiting differences in surface properties of mineral particles, is the most important process in ore beneficiation in mineral processing. In the froth zone, the bubble-particle aggregates, crossing the pulp-froth interface, move upwards towards the concentrate launder ( Measurements were carried out at the Paul Scherrer Institut (PSI) in Villigen, Switzerland. The NEUTRA beam line of the neutron spallation source SINQ was employed ( The measurement object is a glass vessel with a triangular cross section, partially filled with liquid (see The measurements are carried out using a dispersion of hydrophobic, irregularly shaped Gd particles (Section To mimic a flotation process, the Gd particles are hydrophobized. To that end, 2.5 g particles are added to 100 ml of deionized water with 0.01 M KCl and 0.002 M sodium oleate (NaOl), and stirred for 15 min. The level of hydrophobicity is evaluated in a prestudy by submerging a 0.25 In the first step, the attenuation of aqueous SDS foam with large bubbles under a steady drainage flow without particles is investigated. This measurement validates the capability of neutron imaging to measure the distribution of liquid content inside the foam or froth. Sample images are shown in Uncertainties mainly result from the large scatter of drainage literature values ( In the next step, particle-laden foam is considered. As mentioned above, the Gd particles are treated with NaOl to ensure their hydrophobicity. Moreover, two different foaming agents (NaOl, SDS) are employed in the vessele, yielding different levels of hydrophobicity. In all cases, approximately 10 Applying threshold binarisation and noise cancellation, particles and particle clusters are detected. The center of mass of the combination of all particles is evaluated over time and fitted linearly, yielding the average downward movement of the particles.  In the less hydrophobic case of SDS foam, the particles are flushed out of the foam at much lower drainage flow rates (  The neutron imaging technique is applicable to carry out a quantitative investigation into the interaction of drainage flow with attached particles in froth. Therefore, neutron imaging is able to give valuable insights into froth flotation. Including the applied filtering, frame rates above 1 Hz and spatial resolutions below 200 This visualization of foam structures allows conclusions to be drawn about the positioning and the movement of particles inside the foam. Steady or slowly moving Gd particles and particle clusters can be tracked reliably. This was possible over the whole range of The support of the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 