It is well recognised that the product of sulphate reduction, i.e. the sulphide species formed, may inhibit the biological process. In this paper, we further the kinetic study of biological sulphate reduction using the mixed population of complete oxidisers growing on acetate for which kinetic data has been reported previously as a function of sulphate concentration, temperature, dilution rate and volumetric sulphate loading using chemostat culture by Moosa et al. to provide kinetic insight into this inhibition.
                  The effect of a feed sulphide concentration in the range 0.50 to 1.25 kg m−3 on the biological sulphate reduction process is established using chemostat culture at pH 7.0±0.2. Further, the chemical speciation of sulphide as undissociated H2S or dissociated HS− on process inhibition is reported through the variation of operating pH across the range pH 6.0 to pH 7.5 at a sulphate feed concentration of 2.5 kg m−3. It is clearly shown that inhibition is chiefly mediated by the undissociated H2S sulphide species, rather than the total sulphide concentration. This inhibition was shown to affect the maximum specific growth rate constant and the death rate constant in the Contois rate equation presented previously while having negligible effect on KS describing substrate affinity.Acid mine drainage (AMD) is a major source of water pollution worldwide with significant cost implications. AMD originates from the bacterially catalysed oxidation of sulphide minerals, most commonly pyrite (FeS Additional exposure to oxygen, typically at the surface discharge point, results in the oxidation and subsequent hydrolysis of the ferrous iron, generating additional proton acidity. Therefore, the oxidation of one mole of pyrite can ultimately produce four moles of proton acidity, making this one of the most prolific acid generating reactions in nature While a number of treatment options have been proposed for the remediation of AMD, the use of biological sulphate reduction (BSR) is increasingly of interest. In this process, sulphate is reduced biologically to sulphide species, which may either precipitate accompanying metal species or be partially re-oxidised to elemental sulphur. In order to provide necessary design data for BSR processes, adequate kinetic data and its modelling are required. Modelling of the kinetics of BSR as a function of sulphate concentration, temperature, dilution rate and volumetric sulphate loading has been published for both mixed and monocultures of SRB, including our previous studies The hydrogen sulphide product resulting, in the absence (or limiting presence) of metal species, may dissociate according to the equilibrium reactions given in Eqs. Total hydrogen sulphide concentration can be determined by the relationship: While the SRB have the highest tolerance to sulphide of anaerobic microorganisms, their activity is inhibited by its presence Owing to the successful implementation of anaerobic sulphate reduction on a large scale being dependent on the understanding of the reaction kinetics and the effect of inhibitory compounds on the process kinetics, a rigorous study of the effects of sulphide speciation and concentration on the rate and extent of anaerobic sulphate reduction is presented here. The objectives of this study were two-fold, centred on providing a rigorous understanding of the sulphide species mediating sulphide inhibition of bacterial sulphate reduction and on determining the critical total soluble sulphide concentration and concentration of pertinent sulphide species at which this inhibition was mediated. These were achieved by investigating the kinetics of anaerobic sulphate reduction in continuous stirred tank reactors. To achieve a good spread of the ratio of soluble sulphide species present, four pH values were chosen to allow the interconnectedness between pH and sulphide speciation to be realised. These pH values of 6.0, 6.5, 7.0 and 7.5 were selected over the range in which the most significant transition from the undissociated form of H A mixed bacterial culture, enriched with respect to sulphidogens and from which methanogens had been eliminated as described by Hansford et al. A soluble complex medium, detailed in The experiments were conducted in 1-l Quickfit stirred tank reactors with all connections sealed with vacuum grease to ensure that anaerobic conditions were maintained. Each reactor was agitated by a Heidolph overhead stirrer driving a two-bladed impeller at 400 rpm. Fresh medium was fed into the reactor by a variable speed peristaltic pump. To avoid short circuiting, the feed was introduced near the base of the reactor. The effluent was discharged by gravity through a U-shaped overflow tube, designed to maintain the working volume at 1 l. A constant temperature of 35 °C was maintained by placing the reactor in a constant temperature water bath. The pH was controlled manually by the addition of concentrated NaOH or HCl as required. The experimental apparatus is shown schematically in A volume of 800-ml media was equilibrated at 35 °C in the reactor prior to adding 200-ml inoculum. The reactor was operated in batch until the initial sulphate concentration decreased to a stable value, whereafter continuous operation was initiated at a residence time of 10 days. The feed addition rate was increased stepwise during the course of the experiment to provide a range of dilution rates. Flow rates in the range 0.004 and 0.021 l h The effect of sulphide speciation on the sulphate reduction process was studied at a temperature of 35 °C, sulphate feed concentration of 2.5 kg m The effect of soluble sulphide concentration on the sulphate reduction process was studied at a temperature of 35 °C, a sulphate feed concentration of 2.5 kg m A turbidimetric method was used to measure the residual sulphate concentration The kinetic data for bacterial growth and bio-reduction of sulphate in chemostat culture with a feed concentration of 2.5 kg m In the chemostat at a pH of 6.0, the maximum bacterial concentration of 2.3 g l At a reactor pH of 7.5 and volumetric loading rates in the range 0.010 to 0.026 kg m  The modified Contois model, developed to account for high biomass concentration and described by Moosa et al. The kinetic parameters are presented in Steady state chemostat data was collected for the continuous stirred tank reactors at 35 °C and pH 7.8 receiving 0.00, 0.50, 0.75, 1.0 and 1.25 kg m When the inlet sulphide concentration was 0.75 kg m On further increasing the feed sulphide concentration to 1.25 kg m From For the reactors with a feed concentration of 0.50, 0.75 and 1.00 g l Through varying pH across the range in which the dissociation of H The financial support of the Water Research Commission of South Africa is gratefully acknowledged. Technical assistance of Thembile Jacobs is noted with appreciation.