The citrus processing industry for juice and concentrate generates a huge quantity of various by-products. As a waste, these by-products constitute a serious environmental problem. Processed, they can be transformed to marketable products and generate additional revenue. According to (Kesterson, J.W., Hendrickson, R., 1958. Econ. Botany, 12, 164–185): “Proceeds from the production of by-products may spell the difference between profit and loss in the citrus canning industry.” Quantitatively, the peels and rag discarded at the juice extractors constitute the most important of citrus by-products, accounting for 50–55% of the weight of processed fruit. Fresh or dried they are chiefly utilized as animal feed. Liming and pressing liberates sugar containing fluids that are converted to molasses or fermented to alcohol or vinegar. Bases for the manufacture of citrus flavored beverages are producing by comminuting together fruit, peels, pulp, juice, etc. Colloid mills and homogenizers are utilized for their production. Excess pulp and juice sacs are recovered, frozen, and added back to juice. Pectin is a valuable by-product of the citrus processing industry. Over 80% of the pectin in the world is obtained from citrus peels. Essential oils are fractionated into terpeneless oils and d-limonene. Citrus fiber is a relatively new and profitable by-product with multiple uses. Seeds of citrus fruit have been utilized for oil and meal until the 1970s.The citrus processing industry treats the largest quantity of industrial fruits and, at the same time, generates the biggest amount of by-products ( An interesting area with considerable potential of further development is the isolation of citrus components with alleged medical, physiological, or cosmetic properties, particularly flavonoids and other phenolic substances for their antioxidant properties. These will be discussed in the final chapter of the book. Quantitatively, the peels and rag discarded at the juice extractors constitute the most important of citrus by-products, as they account for 50–55% of the weight of processed fruit. Relatively small quantities of peel are utilized in the production of citrus pectin and even smaller amounts go to the manufacture of candied peel. Comminuted bases (to be described later) and specialty products such as citrus fiber also draw some of the peel. With these and other exceptions, the large majority of peels and rag, with or without further treatment, are used as animal feed. Because of their quantity and perishable nature, citrus peels constitute a problematic waste. They contain about 80% moisture, rot rapidly, release liquids, attract flies, can become moldy, and create mycotoxins, etc. This is clearly a waste that must be removed from the plant as rapidly as possible. Thus, utilization of the peels is a waste management necessity, much more than it is an attempt to increase income. Economically, the most profitable solution for the citrus processor is to sell the peels without any further treatment to nearby farmers, for direct feeding of ruminants or for silage. Fresh citrus peels, known in the feed literature as “fresh citrus pulp,” are readily accepted by ruminants. They have good digestibility and high energy content. They are fairly successful as a cereal substitute. They contribute to the diet some of the much needed water. Their chief nutritional disadvantage is deficiency in nitrogen but this is easily remedied by ammoniation with liquid ammonia, urea, or ammonium salts. Silage is also an excellent option ( Unfortunately, however, availability of steady demand for fresh pulp feed in the vicinity of citrus processing plants cannot be always taken for granted. For economic and environmental reasons, long-distance transportation of untreated peels is not an option. Citrus processors are, therefore, often forced to adopt the more costly route of stabilizing the peels by drying. As mentioned before, citrus peels contain about 80% moisture, mostly as water bound to pectin. Removing all the moisture by drying would be, energy wise, too costly. The standard solution is liming. Lime (calcium hydroxide as powder or slurry) is added. Calcium reacts with the pectin, causing release of the bound water, most of which can be removed by simply pressing. The peels are coarsely disintegrated using hammer mills. Lime is added at the rate of about 0.3–0.5%. After through mixing, usually in a pug mill, and a short reaction time, the mixture is pressed, using a mechanical, hydraulic, or screw press. Up to half of the water is expelled with the press liquor. The press cake, now containing only about 50–40% moisture, is dried to about 10% moisture, in a rotary kiln ( The press liquor contains about 12–13% of total soluble solids, with 7–9% fermentable sugars ( Citrus is the preferred flavor for soft drinks, both still and sparking, and some alcoholic beverages. According to marketing experts, citrus flavors are the top choice for beverages round the world. All citrus varieties, orange, lemon, lime, grapefruit, and tangerines, share this leading position. Most leading brands of thirst quenchers in the world are either citrus flavored or contain a certain quantity of ingredients of citrus origin. Citrus flavors have maintained their leading position as “classics” in the beverage sector for many decades and are predicted to do so in the future. Consumers like them, are familiar with them, and take their availability for granted. Bases for the production of citrus flavored beverages originated, apparently, in the United Kingdom, but have been manufactured and exported for many years by citrus processing companies in the United States, Brazil, and Israel. The beverages made with these bases include carbonated “soda pops,” The citrus flavor and in most cases the color and turbidity (cloud) in the final beverage are achieved by the incorporation of a wide range of tailor-made blends made in the citrus processing plant ( In addition to their flavor and color, the distinguishing characteristic of comminuted bases is, as their name implies, their being finely ground and homogenized mixtures, containing solid particles in suspension and essential oils in emulsion. The central pieces of equipment used for their production are, therefore, colloid mills ( Comminuted bases may often contain raw fruit components and therefore cannot be incorporated in beverages without proper pasteurization and inactivation of the enzymes. In the context of citrus processing, pulp may mean different things. In some texts “pulp” is the entire edible portion of the fruit. In the field of animal feeding, “pulp” means citrus peels. In this section as in The presence of floating juice sacs in juices is believed to induce a sensation of freshness. Floating juice sacs of lemon are particularly desirable in lemonades. If desired, juice sacs are separated from the juice immediately after juice extraction, by using a finisher with large perforations, where moderate pressure is applied. The juice sacs may or may not be washed. They are usually frozen, stored, and added to juice from concentrate when needed. Frozen citrus juice sacs are available in the trade. The air-jet juice extraction method developed by Pulp and juice sacs to be added back to juice must be pasteurized to inactivate enzymes (  Pectin is a valuable by-product of the citrus processing industry ( The chemistry of pectin and its location in the citrus fruit have been discussed in The raw material for pectin production may be fresh peels or washed and dried peels of lemon, grapefruit, and oranges. Fresh peels contain about 1.5–3% and dried peels 9–18% pectin. Lemon albedo has 2.5–5.5% pectin when fresh and 30–40% when dried ( A simplified flow diagram of the process of citrus pectin manufacture is shown in Thoroughly leached peels (fresh or dehydrated) are first extracted in boiling water, acidified to about pH = 2 with an acid, usually hydrochloric acid. The pectin is solubilized and the viscosity of the extract increases in the course of extraction. To increase the yield, a number of extraction stages are carried out in countercurrent fashion. The spent peels are separated by filtration or decantation and gently pressed to recover more extract. The press cake may be used as cattle feed but it has little nutritional value. A more profitable way of valorization is drying, grinding, and selling as insoluble citrus fiber (see Pectins are categorized by their methoxyl content and their jellifying power. High methoxy pectins are more than 50% esterified, while esterification in low methoxy pectins is less than 50%. Natural pectins are usually esterified to the level of about 80%. Low methoxy pectins are therefore produced by deesterification of high methoxy pectin, by treating with ammonia. The applications of high and low methoxy pectins will be discussed in the next chapter. The jellifying power of commercial pectins is defined as “grade.” One part of 100 grade pectin can jellify 100 parts of sugar under well-defined test conditions. Pectins are standardized to the desired “grade” by blending with powdered sugar. Fiber, as a dietary supplement and as a constituent of natural as well as engineered foods, is in strong demand. Consumers are interested in fiber for its beneficial physiological effects. The desire of consumers to increase their intake of fiber is prompting the industry to include more fiber in their formulations. In addition, fiber is important to the food industry for its functional properties. Citrus fiber is considered one of the best sources, both for its health effects and for its functional action ( The AACS Committee for the Definition of Dietary Fiber (2001) stated as follows: “Dietary fiber is the edible parts of plants that are resistant to digestion and absorption in the human small intestine with complete or partial fermentation in the large intestine.” ( Numerous citrus fiber products are available on the market ( Peel residues after extraction of pectin are excellent sources of insoluble fiber. Insoluble citrus pectin is prized for its excellent water and fat absorption capacity and structure stabilizing action. It is used extensively in bakery and meat products ( The properties of fiber can be modified by extrusion cooking. Physiologically, soluble fiber, of which total citrus fiber products are particularly rich, acts as a probiotic and produces healthful substances by fermentation in the digestive track. It is also said to reduce blood cholesterol and attenuate blood glucose level. Insoluble fiber acts as a bulking agent and facilitates transit through the intestinal track. An extensive treatise on citrus essential oils is available ( The production of essential oils, simultaneously with the extraction of juice, was described in Only part of the essential oil content of the fruit is recovered via juice extraction. Peels, frit, and the watery discharge of the centrifugal separators contain some oil and water-soluble essence that can be recovered by steam distillation or extraction ( The monoterpene d-limonene is the major constituent of citrus peel and juice essential oils. It represents over 90% of the mass of orange oil. Technically, it can be obtained as a product of deterpenizing of cold pressed essential oil or from steam-distilled oil. The former is known as food grade limonene and used in foods, beverages, and pharmacy. The later is technical limonene. Although it has an orange-like odor, d-limonene contributes little to the aroma of citrus essential oil. By removing d-limonene, the odor of essential oils is intensified. Furthermore, the stability of the essential oil is improved, as d-limonene has a tendency to oxidize and racemize to compounds with turpentine-like odor. Essential oils with little or no d-limonene are called “terpineless” or “folded” oils ( Once a by-product of little value, d-limonene has lately known growing market interest. Most of it is used for technical purposes as a solvent and cleanser. In such applications its slight orange or lemon-like odor is a bonus. As a solvent, it replaces products of petroleum origin. It is also used as a cosmetic solvent and cleanser. Some of the fruit processed for juice belongs to seeded varieties. The seed content of citrus fruit varies from about 7% in grapefruit to 2% in seeded oranges. Seeds are easily separated from the extracted juice by finishers. Citrus seeds can be commercially interesting as a source of oil and protein (  Citrus seed oil is no longer produced in Florida, but there is considerable interest in the subject elsewhere. A controversial product known as “grapefruit seed extract (GSE)” or “citrus seed extract” is commercially available. It is made by grinding together grapefruit seeds, pulp, and glycerol and sold as a natural antimicrobial and food supplement, recommended by alternative medicine promoters. Its qualification as “natural” and its antimicrobial efficacy are questioned since the presence of synthetic preservatives has been detected in its composition.