This paper examines the effect of damage location and size on the modal sensitivity of suspended cables. A numerical finite difference approach that takes account of sag-extensibility and bending stiffness is programmed and adapted to investigate the modal behaviour of suspended cables with induced damage. The finite difference program developed is used to conduct an extensive parametric study on 12 cables with different combinations of sag-extensibility and bending stiffness parameters. A systematic study of the dynamic behaviour of the cables under various damage cases is carried out and original findings are thoroughly discussed. It is shown that despite the complexity of the relationship between damage and the dynamic properties of the cables, definite trends could be identified, especially for out-of-plane vibrations.Cables are widely used as structural elements especially when lightness, flexibility and aesthetics are key design factors. However, cable structures including overhead transmission lines, cable-supported roofs, guyed towers, suspension and cable-stayed bridges are generally exposed to wind, rain, ice and long-term fatigue during their design life. Subjected to such loadings, the cables become increasingly vulnerable to damage and deterioration, making their condition assessment a priority to prevent premature or catastrophic failure. Considerable research has been devoted to the general design and analysis of cable structures and a thorough account of these investigations can be found in Refs. The finite difference formulation used is based on an accurate mathematical model, taking account of sag-extensibility and bending stiffness effects. Only the basic elements of the formulation are briefly reviewed for convenient reference in this section. A detailed description of the method can be found in Ref. The horizontal span suspended cable shown in Fig. Eq. The horizontal span suspended cable is now subjected to small in-plane and out-of-plane vibrations around its static profile. Again, the equations of motion result from equilibrium of forces of a differential horizontal length Expressing the displacements in terms of their complex-valued frequency responses and using the separation of variables technique derived by Mehrabi and Tabatabai Again using central difference discretization, the two differential equations are transformed to yield two systems of equations The eigenvectors obtained by solving the eigenproblems The finite difference formulation described has been programmed and linked to general purpose eigenproblem solvers. To validate the computer program developed, the first three in-plane and out-of-plane frequencies of the main span cable of the Tsing Ma Suspension Bridge are computed. The geometric and mechanical properties of the cable were reported by Xu et al. Tables As mentioned before, only recently have research efforts been concentrated on studying the interaction between sag, bending stiffness and cable vibrations The bending stiffness parameter, The sag-extensibility parameter, To cover a wide range of cases within the framework of the present research, cable models with the same span length It is expected that an induced damage to the cable affects its frequencies and mode shapes, but it is not clear how definite are the trends of such influence. In the following sections, this interaction is investigated through examination of the effects of damage location and size on the first in-plane and out-of-plane frequencies and mode shapes of the cable. Damage is induced in each cable model by locally reducing its cross-sectional area and moment of inertia, to simulate a section loss or a stiffness degradation. It is, however, assumed that the cable mass matrix remains unchanged after damage. The damage location is defined by the dimensionless coordinate ratio Comparison between the damaged cases and a reference undamaged case is carried out by calculating a frequency percentage change Using the finite difference scheme programmed by the author, the eigenparameters defined in Section Table For cables with small sag-extensibility (cables 1–6), the curves exhibit a monotonic change in first in-plane frequency when damage location varies from For cables with medium to high sag-extensibility (cables 7–12), the curves indicate a non-monotonic change in the first in-plane frequency when damage location varies from Further understanding of these responses can be gained by examining the relationship between in-plane frequencies of symmetric and antisymmetric mode shapes on one hand, and bending stiffness and sag-extensibility parameters on the other. Mehrabi and Tabatabai It is also important to investigate the effect of damage location on the eigenparameters The same systematic procedure described in the previous section is applied to study the effect of damage location on out-of-plane vibration. Table The effect of damage location on the out-of-plane eigenparameters The numerical results discussed in Section Fig. The effect of damage size on the Variations of the out-of-plane frequency change parameter Fig. The present paper was primarily intended to numerically investigate the interaction between damage location, damage size and the modes of vibration of simple suspended cables. For this purpose, a finite difference formulation originally developed elsewhere for studying in-plane vibration of cables is extended herein to investigate out-of-plane vibration as well. The finite difference scheme, which includes sag and bending stiffness effects, is programmed and adapted to study locally damaged suspended cables. An extensive parametric study is conducted for twelve types of cables with different combinations of sag-extensibility and bending stiffness parameters. Percentage change in the first in-plane and out-of-plane frequency and the corresponding eigenparameter characterizing mode shapes are defined to determine the dynamic behaviour of the cables under various damage cases. The orders of magnitude of these parameters are shown to be closely related to the cable parameters. It is clearly shown that despite the complexity of the relationship between damage and the dynamic properties of the cables, some definite trends could be identified, especially for out-of-plane vibration. It is important to mention that the present study was carried out under the simplified assumption of decoupled in-plane and out-of-plane motions and that only single damage scenarios were considered. Extending the results of this study to cover more complex cases would require further investigation.