Using coal–oil agglomeration method for free or native gold recovery has been a research subject for many researchers over the years. In this study, a new approach “coal–oil assisted gold flotation” was used to recover gold particles. The coal–oil–gold agglomeration process considers the preferential wetting of coal and gold particles. The method takes advantage of the greater hydrophobicity and oleophilicity of coal and gold compared to that the most gangue materials. Unlike the previous studies about coal–oil–gold agglomeration, this method uses a very small amount of coal and agglomerating agents. Some experiments were conducted on synthetic gold ore samples to reveal the reaction of the coal–oil assisted gold flotation process against the size and the number of gold particles in the feed. It was observed that there is no significant difference in process gold recoveries for feeds assaying different Au. Although there was a slight decrease for coarse gold particles, the process seems to be effective for the recovery of gold grains as coarse as 300μm. The decrease in the finest size (<53μm) is considered to be the decrease in the collision efficiency between the agglomerates and the finest gold particles. The effect of changing coal quantity for constant ore and oil amounts was also investigated. The experiments showed that the process gives very similar results for both artificial and natural ore samples; the best results have been obtained by using 30/1 coal–oil ratio.The optimal processing method for recovering gold is determined by many factors. These factors can be summarized as follows ( Mineralogical mode of occurrence of gold. Identities of gold bearing minerals. Identities of associated metallic and non-metallic minerals. Proportion of gold occurring in different host minerals. Gold grain size distribution. Host and gangue mineral grain size distribution. Mineral alterations. Variations of the above within a deposit or with time. Textures of the gold ores. The subject of designing an effective gold recovery process for a specific ore sample has always been a challenge for researchers. Conventional gold recovery methods include gravity, flotation, amalgamation and leaching processes ( Previous studies on the flotation of native and free gold have focused on many different factors affecting the gold recovery ( Using the coal–oil agglomeration method for free or native gold recovery has been a research subject for many researchers since a patent was granted to BP Australia Ltd in 1986. Though, it is possible to agglomerate gold particles with oil due to its high natural oleophilicity, gold ores do not contain enough gold particles to form agglomerates. For this reason, a highly hydrophobic/oleophilic material is needed to produce agglomerates with oil and gold ( Coal–oil–gold agglomeration combines flotation with a fine coal treatment process to yield a high grade concentrate and to minimize processing time while providing maximum efficiency. In coal–oil agglomeration the suspension of finely ground coal particles in water is strongly agitated with a small amount of oil. Intensive agitation provides for the reduction of the immiscible liquid into fine spherical droplets ( Characterization of the oil utilized processes is shown in Different applications have been proposed by researchers for the production of coal–oil–gold agglomerates ( Placers, tailings, and free milling ores can be evaluated by coal–oil–gold agglomeration. It has been reported that there is no significant difference in gold recoveries with up to 5% sulfides in the feed ( The recovery of gold by CGA process depends on many factors: Degree of inter-particle collisions; agglomerate strength and stability; mineralogy of gold ( Unlike the previous studies (  Lignite coal (−150 Pure quartz (−120 Natural gold ore samples averaging 12 Flotation reagents and agglomeration agents, as listed in Different vegetable oils (crude olive oil and crude cotton oil) by 20% and diesel oil by 60%, amyl alcohol by 10%, Dowfroth 1012 by 10% were emulsified in a four-baffled emulsifying cell to produce oil emulsions. Amyl alcohol and Dowfroth 1012 were used to assist oil emulsification and to provide frothing agents for further flotation steps. Coal particles and oil were added to the gold bearing pulp directly and coal–oil–gold agglomerates were produced in the flotation cell. A Denver sub-A flotation machine with speed control was used for the agglomerate production and separation. One thousand grams of synthetic gold-bearing ore (25% solids by weight) was used in the experiments. Coal particles (20 Coal particles were agglomerated using oil prior to mixing with the gold-bearing ore pulp. An IKA-Eurostar (Power control-visc) stirrer was used for emulsification and a Denver sub-A flotation machine with speed control was used for the agglomerate separation. Pre-agglomeration of coal particles and conditioning of flotation pulp were started simultaneously. Thus, oil emulsion was added to the emulsifying cell, agitated at 2000 A Denver sub-A flotation machine with speed control was used for the tests. A natural gold ore sample from Efem Çukuru/Izmir gold ore deposit (12 After being separated, agglomerates were burned in a furnace at 900 The two different experimental paths followed are given in Production of coal–oil–gold agglomerates in ore slurry was not successful without a pre-agglomeration stage due to low oil concentrations in pulp and slime coating on the coal particles. Hence, only a limited number of agglomerates could be generated, about 25% of coal particles were converted to coal agglomerates. As previously stated by The pre-agglomeration stage (see  A gold concentrate of about 4375.00 The effect of gold particle size on the process efficiency has been studied using pre-agglomeration. Artificial ore samples containing gold particles in different size fractions assaying at 6.417 The process considers assisting flotation by coal–oil agglomerates for the recovery of gold particles. Therefore, the mechanism of the each process should be scrutiny before making any statements about the reasons for interpretation of the results. Firstly, particle size plays an important role in the probability of particles for collision, and attachment processes, as well as remaining attached in the pulp phase in flotation. Fine particles typically have decreased particle–bubble collisions and this characteristic can significantly influence and lowers the process recoveries. Coarse particles generally badly float mostly due to the inevitability of the bubble–particle aggregates to prevent the particle detachment from the bubble surface caused by the particle weight and turbulence eddies during flotation. In addition, coarse particles may need longer induction times (  As a result, coal–oil assisted gold flotation gave relatively high recovery and superior grade values in comparison to the conventional flotation. The process is still carrying some disadvantages of flotation but it can be clearly seen that assistance of coal–oil agglomerates improved the flotation performance for coarse and fine gold particles. Experiments were conducted on both artificial ore samples assaying at 4.58 The amount of oil and degree of agitation control the size of the agglomerates for CGA ( The experiments showed that the process gives very similar results for both artificial and natural ore samples. The best results were obtained by using a 30/1 coal–oil ratio ( According to Unlike the previous studies about coal–oil–gold agglomeration, this method uses very small amounts of coal and agglomerating agents. Therefore, the method can be called “coal–oil assisted gold flotation” and it seems to be effective for gold ore processing. The experiments showed that use of oil and coal particles to assist gold flotation successfully increases the flotation performance. In fact, there is a reciprocal interaction between the flotation and coal–oil agglomeration in this process. Researchers have found that presence of flotation collectors such as xanthate in the pulp help coal–oil–gold agglomeration ( The pre-agglomeration stage provides to use higher number of coal–oil agglomerates in the slurry, agglomerates surface area is larger for gold penetration and similar to the literature about CGA, it gives the opportunity to achieve higher gold recoveries. Experiments showed that the recovery values of coal–oil assisted gold flotation are not affected by the initial number of gold particles. The process is still carrying some disadvantages of flotation but it can be clearly seen that assistance of coal–oil agglomerates improves the flotation performance for coarse and fine gold particles. Relatively high recovery and superior grade values in comparison to the conventional flotation can be obtained by coal–oil assisted gold flotation for these problematic particles. The process gave very similar results for both artificial and natural ore samples. Higher gold recovery values have been obtained by using lower oil/coal (higher coal/oil) ratios, but larger agglomerate surface area also increases the fine gangue entrainment into the agglomerates. Therefore, increasing the coal/oil ratio gave rise to the recovery, whereas the grade of the concentrates decreased for both synthetic and natural gold ore samples. High recovery values can be obtained by coal–oil assisted gold flotation without any recycling stages of coal–oil–gold agglomerates. The process needs small amount of oil and coal particles addition into the flotation slurry to enhance the gold recovery and it makes the method economically applicable. The results of this investigation seem to be very encouraging for the development of coal–oil assisted flotation technology as an alternative process for the recovery of gold.