Coal surface oxidation plays a dominant role in differential coal flotation and the utilization of coal products. However, a robust and reliable tool to determine coal surface oxidation in coal preparation plants is not currently available. In this study, a novel technique was developed to determine the degree of coal surface oxidation by measuring the adsorption rate of oxygen on coal surfaces after understanding the nature of oxygen transfer in water and oxygen adsorption on oxidized and un-oxidized coal surfaces. In this study, coal samples with different extents of surface oxidation were prepared and the degree of coal surface oxidation was quantified by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) as the percentage of oxidized carbon. Oxygen was purged into the coal suspension at a constant flow rate and the change of dissolved oxygen (DO) concentration was monitored. It was found that the DO concentration increased with oxygen purging time and the rate of increase was dependent on the degree of coal surface oxidation. A faster increase in DO concentration was observed for more oxidized coals, which is related to a slower adsorption of oxygen on oxidized coal surfaces and, therefore, more dissolved oxygen remained in the suspension. The kinetics of the change of DO concentration was calculated using the oxygen transfer equation, based on which the rate of oxygen adsorption on coal surfaces was obtained. A linear relationship was found between the oxygen adsorption rate and the degree of coal surface oxidation. This technique may be implemented in coal preparation plants as a daily tool to closely monitor the coal oxidation status due to its simplicity and accuracy.Coal oxidation commences once it is unearthed and/or removed from the coal seam and proceeds in the subsequent processes during coal production such as stockpiling and beneficiation. Coal oxidation is a complicated process starting with physical adsorption of oxygen on the surface to form an oxy-complex, followed by chemical adsorption of oxygen to form oxygenated species such as hydroxyl, carbonyl and carboxyl groups Coal oxidation needs to be closely monitored in coal preparation plants due to its significant influences on coal beneficiation and the utilization of coal products. In coal preparation plants, fine particles and coarse particles are separated with a cut size of about 200 Various methods and instruments including chemical methods, FTIR/DRIFT, UV–Vis, XPS, and NMR have been reported to quantify coal surface oxidation in literature It has been reported that the oxidation history of coals can have a significant influence on further reactions of coal surfaces with oxygen The coal sample used in this study was purchased from Geo Discoveries, Sydney and originated from Bulli Mine, New South Wales, Australia. It was a high volatile bituminous coal with an ash content of 7.93%. The mineral matters in this coal sample were mainly quartz and kaolinite as identified by XRD analysis. To simulate the coal processed in coal preparation plants, the raw coal was firstly crushed and then dry ground in a stainless steel rod mill. The P The degree of coal oxidation was measured using KRATOS Axis Ultra with a monochromatic Al X-ray source operating at 15 The oxygen transfer rate in coal slurry was measured in a specially designed airtight 600 For each test, 50 In this study, coal samples with different degrees of surface oxidation were prepared by heating the samples in air at 150 The generation of oxygenated groups can shift the binding energy of carbon, and the curve fitting of C1 In this study, the percentage of oxidized carbon in total carbon was used to represent the degree of coal surface oxidation which was calculated by summing up the percentage of all the three types of oxidized carbon, C When purging oxygen into the slurry containing coals, oxygen will dissolve in the water and, at the same time, part of the dissolved oxygen will adsorb on coal surfaces through both physical adsorption and chemical reactions. Before studying the oxygen transfer in coal suspensions, the oxygen transfer in water in the absence of coal particles was studied. It is generally agreed that the transfer of gas to a liquid follows the two-film theory  where The derivative of DO concentration with respect to oxygen purging time, dC/dt, was calculated and plotted as a function of DO concentration, which is shown in After adding coals into water, the oxygen transfer kinetics obtained by measuring the DO concentration in coal suspensions will be changed because part of the oxygen dissolved into water will adsorb onto coal surfaces. The oxygen adsorption on coal surfaces is a complicated process and has been intensively studied in literature  The oxygen transfer in the suspensions of coals with different degrees of surface oxidation was studied under the same oxygenation condition. The change of DO concentration in coal suspensions with oxygenation time was shown in The oxygen transfer rate, dC/dt, as a function of DO concentration in the suspensions of coals with different degrees of surface oxidation after DO concentration was higher than 20 The kinetics of oxygen adsorption on coal surfaces, especially in water, has not been well reported in literature. In this study, to simplify the calculation, it is assumed that the oxygen adsorption on coal surfaces in water follows the first-order kinetics as recommended by Taraba and Kupka where For the un-oxidized coal sample, after curving fitting as shown in The current study developed a novel technique to predict the degree of coal surface oxidation. It was based on measuring the oxygen transfer kinetics in coal suspensions when purging oxygen at a constant rate. Coal samples with different degrees of surface oxidation were used in this study and the degree of coal surface oxidation was quantified by XPS. The DO concentration increased with oxygen purging, and the kinetics was dependent on the degree of coal surface oxidation. The DO concentration increased faster in the suspension of un-oxidized coal than in the suspension of oxidized coal due to the higher adsorption of oxygen on un-oxidized coal surfaces. The change of DO concentration with oxygen purging time was fitted by an oxygen transfer equation from which the adsorption rate constant of oxygen on coal surfaces was calculated. The oxygen adsorption rate constant for the fresh coal sample with 6.7% oxidized carbon was 0.26 The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from