Sulfuric acid, a highly corrosive substance with a high risk of accidental spills, is important worldwide as a raw material in chemical production. This research aims to develop the best analytical method to determine sulfur contents from the accidental spill sites of sulfuric acid. Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence (WDXRF) spectrometry was selected because of its suitability for mass solid samples and calibration standards were prepared to fit the spill conditions. When the calibration standards were prepared by a solution spiking method, the sulfur concentration showed large differences, especially at the 5.0wt.% as sulfur standard, for which a concentration of only 4.40wt.% was detected using inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) analysis. Therefore, the method of reagent addition to the base material was selected in this study. Natural soil and purchased cellulose powder were used as the base material and calcium sulfate as the reagent. The instrument conditions, such as tube current, generator voltage, and measuring time, were tested with two instruments from different manufacturers and were subsequently optimized. The detectable concentration range of sulfur in this research was 0.001–23.6wt.% in soil media and 0.002–4.0wt.% in plant media. When six samples from the spilled site were analyzed, the results of WDXRF spectrometry showed 80–117% recovery compared with those from ICP-AES after microwave-assisted acid digestion as reference values.Sulfuric acid is one of the important raw materials in chemical production, with large quantities distributed and consumed worldwide Because sulfuric acid is highly corrosive, when accidental spills occur, it is capable of causing not only direct and immediate damage, such as burns, but also indirect damage, such as releasing toxic metals from sediment or soil The major form of sulfur in areas affected by spills of sulfuric acid is sulfate, because concentrated sulfuric acid is a strong oxidizer and sulfate the most stable form under oxidizing condition When selecting the best analytical technique for the assessment of chemical spills, the most important factor should be the suitability of the technique for mass samples. Fast analyses, with short steps, under stable instrument conditions are also mandatory requirements. “Green analytical chemistry” which minimizes waste and generation of hazardous substances is also preferable. In our research, XRF techniques were studied because they can analyze solid samples directly (without a mineralization process, non-destructive analysis) and have advantages in terms of instrumental stability, wide detection range, numerous applications, and the possibility of The aim of this research is to develop the best analytical method to assess sulfuric acid spills in soil and plants. First, the instrumental conditions of WDXRF spectrometry were optimized to make it more efficient for mass samples and suitable for general lab use. The methods for preparing calibration standards by contamination (solution spiking or reagent addition methods) of base materials (natural or artificial) were studied, and the outcome that best minimized experimental and inter-laboratory errors was selected. Detectable concentration ranges for sulfur in soils and plants were assessed under the optimized instrumental conditions. Finally, samples taken from the sulfuric acid spill site were analyzed using the developed determination method. Two WDXRF spectrometers, PW2404 (Phillips, Netherland) and S8 Tiger (Bruker, Germany), were used to measure sulfur in this research. The detailed instrumental conditions are shown in Two types of base material were used to prepare calibration standards. Natural soil and plants (rice straw) were taken from Gumi in Korea. Soil under 2 Anhydrous sodium sulfate (Na Calibration standards were prepared by contamination of base materials with specific concentrations of sulfur. Two different contamination methods were tested: solution spiking and reagent addition. The solution spiking method used solutions of specific sulfur concentrations in sulfate form to contaminate base materials. The solution of 1.0 To confirm the sulfur concentration of calibration standards prepared by solution spiking method, ICP-AES analysis was applied. About 0.1 The powder briquette method was used to prepare samples because of the possibility of sulfur heat loss. The pellet (40 Samples from the site of spilled sulfuric acid were analyzed by both WDXRF (using the method developed here) and ICP-AES after microwave-assisted acid digestion. The results were then compared. On November 5 Several standard reference materials (SRMs) with certified or recommended sulfur contents of 0.0630–0.96 The instrument settings were tested then optimized for measuring mass samples. Generator voltage and tube current are important parameters in XRF analysis. In this research, around 30 Measuring times in the XRF spectrometer were usually set at 20–60 For the assessment of chemical spill site, methods for preparing calibration standards were tested. Calibration standards were prepared with natural and artificial base materials by two contamination methods, solution spiking and reagent addition. The sulfur contents of the calibration standards made by the solution spiking method were determined by ICP-AES analysis ( The reagent addition method was practical for making any concentration by design. However, chemical reagent selection was critical. Gazulla et al. The base material present in the calibration standard can also cause a matrix effect in XRF analysis. Natural base materials have the advantage of having matrices similar to those of samples, but require characteristic confirmation because laboratories are not always able to use exactly the same materials. As a result, the characteristics of base materials used must be confirmed each time. The purchased artificial materials, if suitable, would be a good alternative as they were already well defined and could be used in multiple labs universally. This could contribute to minimizing of inter-laboratory errors. Kaolin and cellulose in powder form were tested in this study as artificial substitutes for soil and plant samples.  The calibration curves were drawn from the standards prepared by the selected method: reagent addition to natural soil or artificial plant base ( Several standard reference materials were used to verify the accuracy of WDXRF analysis in the determination of sulfur concentrations in soil and plants ( Soils and plants were sampled within 100 Although there was no evidence of remaining harmful effects at the site of the sulfuric acid spill, two samples showed more than 2 The WDXRF method for the determination of sulfur concentrations in soil and plants was feasible at the site affected by sulfuric acid. Notably, this method can be applied to not only high concentrations due to the accidental spill but also low concentrations in natural soil and plants, i.e. 0.001–23.6 A method to determine sulfur contents using WDXRF was optimized for application to the assessment of accidental spill by sulfuric acid. Because the measured intensities maintained a RSD of less than 3% for various measuring times (10–60 This research was supported by a grant from the