Effect of High Pressure Grinding Rolls (HPGR) pre-grinding and two-compartment ball mill intermediate diaphragm grate design on grinding capacity of an industrial scale conventional two-compartment ball mill cement grinding and classification circuit was investigated. For this purpose, cement clinker was crushed in an industrial scale HPGR in open circuit and fed to a Polysius® two-compartment ball mill and air classifier closed circuit. Two-compartment ball mill intermediate diaphragm middle grate design was changed when HPGR crushed clinker was fed to the circuit to obtain optimum flow of material from the first compartment into the second compartment. Modifications on the diaphragm design were required due to the increased throughput when processing HPGR product. Two sampling campaigns were performed at the steady state conditions of the circuit. Raw clinker (uncrushed clinker) was fed to the conventional two-compartment ball mill air classifier circuit in sampling campaign-1 whereas HPGR crushed clinker was fed to the same circuit with modifications on the intermediate diaphragm middle grate design in sampling campaign-2. Mass balanced tonnage and particle size distributions were estimated by using JKSimMet Steady State Mineral Processing Simulator in both sampling campaigns. Polysius® two-compartment ball mill was modeled by using perfect mixing modeling approach (Whiten, 1974). Specific discharge and breakage rates in the grinding compartments were estimated by using the two-compartment ball mill model structure proposed by Genç and Benzer (2015). Specific discharge rates were found to increase at coarse size ranges when raw clinker was fed to the circuit in compartment-1. However, specific discharge rates of particles were increased slightly at coarse size ranges in the second compartment at higher mill capacity condition. Specific breakage rates were increased when the circuit was fed with HPGR crushed clinker. Modifications in the circuit and the ball mill intermediate diaphragm grate design enabled the optimization of the grinding capacity of the conventional two-compartment ball mill cement grinding and classification circuit. Ball mill grinding and classification circuit capacity was increased by 10% and specific energy consumption of the ball mill was decreased by 9.1%.particle size fraction particle size fraction particle size fraction mass flowrate of size fraction mass flowrate of size fraction specific breakage rate of size fraction specific discharge rate of size fraction single column step triangular breakage function matrix mass of size fraction ratio of specific breakage rate to specific discharge rate volumetric feed rate (m mill diameter (m) mill length (m) Energy efficient equipments such as High Pressure Grinding Rolls, Horomills®, Vertical Roller Mills are used in both finish grinding of cement and cement raw material grinding stages due to higher energy consumption of conventional ball mill grinding circuits. An overview of technical innovations to reduce the power consumption in cement plants was given by High pressure grinding rolls (roller presses) are used in both cement raw materials (limestone, clay, shale etc.) and cement grinding stages. The energy consumption is 2.5–3.5 In this study, effect of HPGR pre-grinding and two-compartment ball mill intermediate diaphragm middle grate design on grinding capacity of a conventional two-compartment ball mill air classifier closed circuit was evaluated. In this context, Polysius® two-compartment ball mill was modeled by using perfect mixing modeling approach ( In this study, grinding process of a Polysius® two-compartment ball mill with two grinding compartments was optimized. The first compartment of the Polysius® ball mill was lined with lifter plates, and was for coarse grinding and therefore had a charge of large balls. The second compartment had a classifying plate lining and a charge of smaller balls for fine grinding. Grinding compartments were separated by an intermediate diaphragm which can be equipped with adjustable lifter scoops that control the flow of material from the first to the second grinding compartment and provide optimum material flow ( Flowsheets for the HPGR pre-grinding and Polysius® two-compartment ball mill closed circuits are given in Clinker was the main circuit feed material to produce cement in the investigated grinding circuits. Portland cement clinker is a gray nodular hydraulic material, made by burning in a rotary kiln (pyro-processing), at least to sintering a specified mixture of raw materials containing CaO, SiO Two sampling campaigns were conducted around the circuits. Raw cement clinker (uncrushed) was fed to the conventional ball mill grinding and classification circuit in sampling campaign-1. Raw clinker was crushed in a HPGR in open circuit in sampling campaign-2 in the upstream of the ball mill grinding and classification closed circuit ( Mill inside samples along the long axis of the two-compartment ball mill were collected after crash stopping of the mill. The ball mill was cooled down for about 8 Partice size distributions of the samples were determined from the top size down to 150 Mass balanced tonnage flowrates and fineness of the particle size distributions as 45 Particle size distributions of the mill inside samples in sampling campaign-1 and campaign-2 are given Particle size distributions of the mill inside samples were used to estimate the mill hold up particle size distributions which were used in the estimation of the specific discharge and breakage rates based on the two-compartment ball mill model structure proposed by Standard bond work index value of raw and HPGR crushed clinkers were experimentally determined according to Breakage distribution function is required to be able to calculate specific breakage rates in a ball mill using perfect mixing mill model ( Two-compartment ball mill was modeled to estimate specific discharge and breakage rate functions in the mill by using perfect mixing modeling approach (       Specific discharge rate function in Eq. Specific discharge and breakage rate functions were estimated using the mill model structure proposed by       In this model ( The approach was to determine the arithmetic mean of the mill inside size distributions for the considered perfectly mixed tank to estimate mill hold up. Bulk density of cement was assumed to be 1.8t/m Specific discharge rates were estimated for a grinding length of 2.2 Intermediate diaphragm middle grate design was changed and middle grate openings were decreased in sampling campaign-2 which affected both material filling level and air flow through the mill. Intermediate diaphragm middle grate with square aperture dimensions of 14 It should be mentioned that, original middle grate design with 14 Specific breakage rates of particles in the first compartment of the mill in sampling campaign-2 were found to be higher than the breakage rates in sampling campaign-1 where HPGR was not applied. HPGR crushed particles were found to be ground more easily as compared to the raw clinker particles. Especially, particles coarser than 0.425 Integration of HPGR as a pre-grinding unit to the circuit resulted in mill feed grindability change. As a result, mill throughput rate was increased thus specific energy consumption of the mill was decreased. Overfilling in the first compartment of the two-compartment ball mill was observed when the mill feed material was crushed in a HPGR. Open area per cent of the intermediate diaphragm grate was increased with the new proposed diaphragm design to prevent overfilling. Optimum flow of material from the first compartment to the second compartment is an important factor controlling the grinding performance in both compartments thus circuit throughput rate. Optimum flow of material was achieved by increasing the open area percentage of middle grate of the intermediate diaphragm. By this way, more material was conveyed to the second compartment where fine grinding of the material was achieved. Circulating load ratio should also be considered in evaluating the grinding performance of the mill thus throughputrate and specific energy consumption. Circulating load ratio was defined as the ratio of circulating load from the air separator (air separator reject stream tonnage) to circuit throughputrate (air separator fine stream tonnage). Calculated circulating load ratio per cent was 225.69% when the circuit was operated with uncrushed fresh feed clinker (campaign-1) whereas circulating load ratio was determined as 241.52% when the circuit was operated with crushed fresh feed clinker (campaign-2). Circulating load was increased when HPGR crushed clinker was fed to the circuit. Increase in circulating load was expected to overfilling in the first compartment which was prevented by increasing the open area per cent of the intermediate diaphragm middle grate. Classification performance of the dynamic air classifier in the circuit was determined by using the efficiency curve approach ( Air separator classification performance is another factor controlling the grinding performance of the ball mill. By-pass amount from the air separator was increased and recorded to be 35% when HPGR crushed clinker was fed to the circuit. Increase in fine material amount in the mill feed will lead to cushioning effect ( Specific discharge and breakage rate functions in a two compartment Polysius® ball mill were estimated by using the perfect mixing modeling approach when the circuit was fed with raw and HPGR crushed clinkers. Two compartment ball mill model structure proposed by Mill inside particle size distributions was found to get finer when HPGR crushed clinker was fed to the circuit which indicated the requirement for finer ball size distribution application in the second compartment of the ball mill. Throughputrate of the conventional two-compartment ball mill air classification circuit was increased by 10% on the basis of the modifications in the circuit and the ball mill intermediate diaphragm middle grate design. Specific energy consumption of the two-compartment ball mill was decreased by 9.1% excluded of the specific energy consumption of the HPGR. Authors would like to acknowledge the