In this article, experimental results on the leaching of a chalcopyrite concentrate with oxygen at ambient pressure in H2SO4–NaCl solutions are discussed taking into account the evolution of the solution redox potential and the concentration of ferric ions during leaching. The results indicate that leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate with particle size 12.3μm in sulfate–chloride solutions was rapid. Over 90% copper was dissolved in 180min at 100°C. The results also showed that 17.7g/l (0.5M) of chloride ions in the leaching solution affected significantly the leaching rate as compared to leaching without chloride. The addition of 3g/l of ferric ions to the leaching system produced a large increase in the solution potential which in turn affected negatively the leaching rate of chalcopyrite. The leaching of chalcopyrite in H2SO4–NaCl–O2 media depends largely on the temperature, and the linear kinetics model 1−(1−X)1/3
                     =kt represents the copper dissolution well. An activation energy value of 91.2kJ/mol was determined for the temperature range of 80 to 100°C.The dissolution rate of chalcopyrite in sulfate media is slow as compared to the leaching of secondary copper sulfides. This slow dissolution rate has prevented an efficient industrial leaching of this mineral in sulfate media. Alternatively, in sulfate–chloride media the leaching rate of chalcopyrite is significantly faster as compared to the leaching in pure sulfate media. This improved dissolution has been attributed to changes in the morphology of the elemental sulfur produced ( The leaching reaction for the dissolution of chalcopyrite with oxygen in acidic aqueous solutions can be represented by: However, since this reaction produces ferrous ions, which can be oxidized to ferric ions by oxygen, the ferric oxidation of chalcopyrite can also occur as the leaching proceeds. The dissolution reaction in this case can be written as: This reaction is coupled with the regeneration of the ferric ions by: On adding reactions When chloride ions are present in the leaching solution, a second redox couple, the Cu The oxidation of cuprous to cupric ions with oxygen, reaction The oxidation of chalcopyrite by cupric ions has also been observed to occur in the last period of the ferric chloride leaching when the Fe It is now widely accepted that the reason for the slow dissolution kinetics of chalcopyrite in sulfate media is the passivation of the surface of the mineral at high solution potentials although the nature of the passivating film is still a controversial issue. On this matter, the formation of various compounds on the surface of the chalcopyrite particles have been proposed as the cause for the passivation: a dense layer of elemental sulfur ( In leaching of chalcopyrite there exists a solution potential zone just below the passivation potential where the leaching rate increases dramatically with increments in the solution potential ( Reduction of chalcopyrite by ferrous ions: Oxidation of the intermediate Cu Since reaction  Or These authors postulate also that the H The second alternative mechanism proposed by these researchers includes the formation of a “covellite-like” intermediate product: This reaction is followed by the oxidation of H From this discussion, it is clear that the leaching of chalcopyrite in oxygenated sulfate and chloride media is a complex process with some controversial issues that still need to be clarified. In this article, experimental results on the leaching of a chalcopyrite concentrate with oxygen at ambient pressure in H Chalcopyrite concentrate for the experiments was obtained from Andina Mine of CODELCO, Chile. This flotation concentrate was classified into narrow size fractions using a cyclosizer to obtain various clean size fractions. The fraction with an average size of 12.3 Batch, isothermal leaching experiments were carried out in a 2-liter glass reactor which was equipped with variable speed stirrer, a heating mantle, a thermocouple, a fritted tube for liquid sampling and for oxygen injection to the reactor, and a water cooled condenser to minimize the loss of solution by vaporization. In a typical experiment, the reactor was charged with 1 Some of the main variables that affect the leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate studied were: stirring speed, oxygen flow rate, temperature, chloride concentration, and initial ferric concentration. Leaching experiments were carried out using agitations of 360, 600 and 1000 The effect of pure oxygen flow rate on the chalcopyrite dissolution was studied in the range of 0.1 to 0.5 The variation of the solution redox potential with leaching time for 21% O Experiments were conducted in the range of 80 to 100 The variation of the solution redox potential with time at the various temperatures is shown in The effect of the chloride concentration was studied by adding various amounts of NaCl to the leaching solution. The results are presented in The effect of chloride ions found in this investigation agrees well with the data reported by Experiments were carried out adding ferric ions to the leaching solution to increase the redox potential and determine its effect on the leaching rate.  The significant effect of temperature on the leaching of chalcopyrite in H In this equation, X is the fraction of copper dissolved, k is the kinetic constant and t is the reaction time. The kinetic constants for the various temperatures were determined from the slopes of the lines in Based on the experimental results of chalcopyrite leaching in H Leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate with particle size 12.3 The chloride ion concentration of 17.7 Leaching of chalcopyrite in nitrogen–oxygen mixture with 21% oxygen decreased significantly the dissolution rate as compared to the case of 100% oxygen. This rate reduction is due to a slower oxidation of the ferrous and cuprous ions in the leaching solution because of the lower oxygen solubility at 21%. The addition of 3 The leaching of chalcopyrite in H The authors acknowledge the