The performance of coastal vertical seawalls in extreme weather events is studied numerically, aiming to provide guidance in designing and reassessing coastal structures with vertical wall. The extreme wave run-up and the pressure on the vertical seawall are investigated extensively. A time-domain higher-order boundary element method (HOBEM) is coupled with a mixed Eulerian-Lagrangian technique as a time marching technique. Focused wave groups are generated by a piston wave-maker in the numerical wave tank using a wave focusing technique for accurately reproducing extreme sea states. An acceleration-potential scheme is used to calculate the transient wave loads. Comparisons with experimental data show that the extended numerical model is able to accurately predict extreme wave run-ups and pressures on a vertical seawall. The effects of the wave spectrum bandwidth, the wall position and the wave nonlinearity on the wave run-up and the maximum wave load on the vertical seawall are investigated by doing parametric studies.Extreme waves, which are also known as freak waves, rogue waves or killer waves, are relatively large and rare local water surface elevations that pose potential threats even to navigation vessels and offshore structures. The occurrence of extreme waves has been well documented and is believed to be responsible for many reported accidents. A list of eleven documented catastrophic ship collisions off the Indian Coast of South Africa was reported as a result of freak waves Extreme conditions must be considered in the design of coastal structures to ensure safety and stability of these structures, given that over 80% of reported past freak wave events occurred in shallow waters or coastal areas In the existing design methods, extreme waves are usually simulated by periodic waves with the wave height and the wave period corresponding to identified extreme conditions. Extensive research has been carried out for investigating pressures on vertical walls due to regular waves, such as Refs. The random and broad-banded nature of ocean waves cannot be taken into account by using regular waves. This often leads to inaccuracy in the estimation of fluid loading for practical applications. The experimental study in Ref. Random wave simulation is very inefficient due to requirements of very long run-time in order to capture near-extreme events. Wave reflection due to finite sized tanks is another issue in long time-domain simulations. An accurate description of the average shape of an extreme event, in which a single large event formed by focusing all wave components tapers away either side of the large crest, provides a good alternative to random waves. This type of extreme events is commonly referred to as a focused wave group in which both the frequency spectrum and phase of the wave components are carefully controlled so that the constructive interference occurs at one point in space and time. Tromans et al. To date, the knowledge on wave pressures due to focused wave groups on vertical seawalls is still rather limited. Improved understanding of spectral and extreme characteristics of wave pressure on a vertical seawall has the potential to lead to better and safe designs of coastal and offshore structures. In this paper, the fully nonlinear numerical model developed to study the evolution of the focused wave group in Ref. The concerned problem can be described as an initial-boundary value problem mathematically and solved by a time-domain higher-order boundary element method (HOBEM) in which a mixed Eulerian-Lagrangian technique and a 4th – order Runge-Kuatta scheme are applied as a time marching technique The simplified geometry of an extreme wave hitting on a vertical seawall is shown in Additionally, rather than The first of these expressions is for regular waves, the second is for focused wave groups, where The relationship between the linear wave amplitude A ramping function is applied to increase the motion of the wave-maker gradually, As the above boundary value problem is solved in the time domain, the calm initial water surface conditions are applied in this research. Generally, the aforementioned governing equation together with a set of boundary conditions can be transformed to a boundary integral equation by using second Green’s theorem. Then the initial-boundary value problem is solved with the HOBEM by arranging Rankine sources on all surfaces. The 4th – order Runge-Kutta (RK4) scheme is applied to advance the boundary condition on the free surface in Eq. After the velocity potential is solved, the transient wave pressure over the wetted surface of the vertical wall can be calculated from the following Bernoulli’s equation, In the acceleration potential method, as the velocity potential The boundary integral equation to be solved for Once In this section, the extended numerical model described above is used to reproduce the benchmark experiments on regular waves and focused wave groups impacting on a vertical wall In Ref. In order to reproduce the experiments, a 2-D numerical wave tank is setup. The length of the numerical wave tank is set as 10 To further validate the present numerical model, a series of experiment on focused wave groups acting on a vertical wall was performed in a flume (50  The time series of the wave pressure on the vertical wall at  In the sections to follow, the validated numerical model is used to investigate the effects of the wave spectrum bandwidths, the wall positions and the wave nonlinearity on the wave run-up and the maximum wave pressure on the vertical seawall.  Time series of the free surface elevations at the focal point for the incident wave groups with the linear crest value The harmonic structure of the free surface run-up on the vertical seawall can be extracted by a phase-based harmonic separation method presented in Refs.  It can be seen from Additionally, it can be seen that contributions of higher order free surface elevation above the first-order are about 14% and 20% of the total free surface elevation for the cases without and with the vertical wall in place, respectively. This indicates that the linear potential flow theory is applicable for small waves. However, for large waves, where wave nonlinearity dominates, the use of the linear potential flow theory is inadequate and would lead to a loss of a considerable percentage of energy. The same analysis is performed for the wave loading on the vertical seawall and the results are shown in The effect of the vertical seawall is further studied by varying the wall position.  The effect of the location of vertical seawall is considered in details in The evolution of the focused wave group in the presence of vertical seawall is considered in In this section, the validated numerical model is used to study the dependence of the maximum wave run-up and the pressures on surrounding sea states. Spectrum bandwidth is one of the most important parameters that affect the characteristics of the incoming focused wave groups.  The effect of input linear wave amplitude A time-domain numerical model based on fully nonlinear potential flow theory is extended and applied in this study to investigate the performance of coastal structures with vertical wall in extreme events. The fully nonlinear wave motion is captured using a mixed Eularian-Lagrangian higher-order boundary element method, and it is advanced in time by applying 4th-order Runge-Kutta technique to the fully nonlinear kinematic and dynamic free surface boundary conditions. New boundary conditions are added to extend capabilities of the numerical model in generating focused wave groups so as to allow an investigation of focused wave group interactions with a vertical seawall. Comparisons between the numerical model and the experiments on both non-linear regular waves and focused wave groups impacting on a vertical seawall are carried out. It is found that the current numerical model captures the main physics involved, though there is some difference in prediction of wave pressure rise time. This may due to the assumptions inherent in potential flow theory, The characteristics of maximum wave run-up and consequent maximum wave pressure on the vertical seawall are investigated in depth using the validated numerical model. It is found that not only the reflection from the vertical seawall but also the wave nonlinearity contributes to the increase of the maximum crest wave elevation and wave pressure. The maximum wave run-up on the vertical seawall can be 2.6 times the height of the incident wave group with larger incident wave amplitude. Also, the wave nonlinearity is found to increase with deceasing bandwidth. This indicates that the increased wave amplitude and the decreased bandwidth would produce a rapid divergence from the linear solution. In the cases where wave nonlinearity dominates, the use of linear theory is not adequate and leads to an underestimation in the maximum wave run-up and overestimation in the maximum pressure on the vertical seawall, respectively. That is, the application of the fully nonlinear potential flow theory is necessary and important for practical applications where wave nonlinearity is significant. The proposed numerical model is also appropriate for other applications such as green waters and dynamic responses of floating structures. Further investigation by extracting the harmonic structures of the maximum wave elevation and wave loading on the vertical seawall found that the existence of the vertical seawall relates to the generation of both sub- and higher harmonics, and their contributions can be large, up to 20%. Additionally, compared with the free surface elevation, the nonlinear effect on wave pressure and wave loading on the vertical seawall is less significant, with a smaller increase for the same wave condition. Furthermore, most violent wave-structure interactions are observed when the focal point is at the vertical seawall, This work was supported by the