Herein the phase equilibria in the Si–Fe–Ca–O–S–Cu system in equilibrium with matte at controlled P(SO2) of 0.3 and 0.6 atm and fixed matte grade of 72 wt % Cu were experimentally investigated in the spinel primary phase field. The high-temperature equilibrations were realized in spinel substrate and the sample after quenching were characterized using Electron Probe Micro-analysis (EPMA). The effect of CaO on the liquidus temperature of slags was quantified with varying CaO content from 0 to 6 wt %. It was found that, the presence of CaO increased the liquidus temperature of slags and moreover, the increment effect got enhanced with increasing CaO content in the present range. The influence of P(SO2) was further clarified and it was found that, the equilibrium SiO2 content in the liquid phase, at the same temperature, remarkably increased with increasing P(SO2). The present study will not only deepen the understanding of the equilibration in the present liquid/spinel/matte/gas system, but also provide useful guidance for the industrial operations.Nowadays, most of global copper is produced by pyro-metallurgical technology, which is mainly composed of smelting, converting and refining processes. Through the smelting process, the copper concentrates are transformed into matte phase (Cu∙Fe∙S) with the target matte grade (MG, copper content in the matte) while the impurities are separated into the liquid slags. At the final state of smelting process, the matte phase will equilibrate with the slag phase and the gases containing O In modern copper smelting operations, the compositions of copper smelting slags are usually located in the spinel primary phase field, where less SiO The target MG was selected to be 72 wt % Cu, which is a common value in the copper smelting process. As one of the common components present in copper smelting slags, the effect of CaO on the phase equilibria and liquidus temperature of the slags was investigated here. FactSage calculations were also performed to assist the experimental plan and compare with the experimental results [ The experimental technique used in the present study has been described detailly in our previous publication [ The P(O The typical microstructures of the quenched samples under P(SO The effect of CaO on the liquidus temperatures of “FeO”-SiO Furthermore, based on the experimentally determined isotherms in The effect of CaO on the liquidus temperatures of “FeO”-SiO Similarly, based on the experimental data in In addition, In the foregoing sections, we mainly analysed the effect of CaO on the liquidus temperature of slags by experimental measurements. Actually, these trends could also be predicted using FactSage calculations [ The comparisons of experimental results with FactSage predictions are displayed in Most importantly, both the calculation and experimental results showed that the P(SO In addition to the thermodynamic modelling optimizing, at last we would summarize the clues obtained for industrial operations. Firstly, the relationship between the liquidus temperature and the equilibrium SiO In this study, we mainly investigated the phase equilibria of a complex liquid/spinel/matte/gas system where “FeO”-SiO The authors would like to thank