The feasibility of using ultrasound to enhance the elution of three ion exchange resins was investigated. A laboratory-scale elution column immersed in an ultrasonic bath was used to investigate three elution systems. XAD7–Au (eluted with NaOH, at a pH of 10), IR120H–Cd (eluted with HCl) and A375–SO4
                     2− (eluted with saturated lime solutions). The physico-chemical stability of the resins was not affected adversely by sonication, with the exception of the XAD7 resin, which showed very slight degradation after prolonged exposure. Ultrasonic radiation improved the elution recoveries and kinetics considerably. This could possibly be attributed to an increase in counter-ion diffusive transport caused by acoustic vortex microstreaming, as well as the prevention of precipitation that can lead to the blockage of ion exchange sites.The industrial application of ion exchange is widespread and ranges from water softening Since desorption of ions from resins is the reverse of adsorption, chemical and physical factors that inhibit adsorption will enhance elution, and conversely those that enhance adsorption will inhibit elution. Although elution can be enhanced by increasing the temperature or by using stronger extractants, these measures may not be cost effective. It is for this reason that the use of ultrasonics has recently been investigated as a means to intensify desorption processes. For example, Liu et al. In this paper, the enhancement of elution of gold, cadmium and sulphate ions from XAD7, IR120H and A375 resins in the presence of ultrasound is considered as an alternative to the use of high temperatures and strong extractants. Na Pure gold (reagent grade) was dissolved in an aqua regia solution and was heated by adding HCl until the HNO All the ion exchange resins were supplied by the Rohm and Haas. Amberlite IR120H (in H All the adsorption and elution experiments were conducted at an ambient temperature of about 20°C. Batch-type bottle roll experiments (with 1-l bottles) were conducted for the adsorption tests. The desired amount of resin was measured out using plastic cylinders, which were tapped to ensure tight packing of the resin in the cylinders. An elution column immersed in an ultrasonic bath system with solution flow provided by a peristaltic pump was used. The ultrasonic laboratory cleaner (2 l, Model B-220, Branson Cleaning Equipment) operates at a frequency of 40 kHz with a power of 125 W. In order to maintain the temperature of the ultrasonic bath constant, the water in the bath was circulated continuously with tap water at approximately 20°C. The temperature of the water in the bath was monitored at regular intervals and was found to be constant within ±1°C. The column was tapered, with a bottom inner diameter of 18 mm, a top inner diameter of 24 mm and a height of 160 mm. Resin was loaded and unloaded through the top of the column, as indicated in The concentrations of the cadmium and gold ions in solution were determined by use of atomic absorption spectroscopy. The SO The stability of the resin in the presence of ultrasound was determined by the change of resin bead size distribution and the change of the re-adsorption capacity of the resin. After sonication the resin samples were filtered and dried. Size distributions were determined by sieving the samples through a battery of sieves, followed by weighing the size fractions. A similar procedure was followed in order to obtain the particle size distribution before sonication. The adsorption of gold onto XAD7 was carried out in 4 M HCl and the solution potential was maintained at >900 mV. After loading the resins were subjected to displacement washing in 4 M HCl and rinse washing in 0.1 M HCl to get rid of entrapped ion complexes on the resin. Following displacement and rinse washing, the XAD7 resin was subjected to elution by using a caustic soda solution with pH of 10 to desorb the gold from the XAD7 The eluant flow rate through the elution column was maintained at 9 ml/min. The resin loading was 42.82 mg gold/20 ml resin. The elution results are shown in As can be seen from The adsorption of gold onto the resin XAD7 can be attributed to the polarization force between the anionic gold species AuCl In a basic system, AuCl After prolonged elution without ultrasound, characteristically purple Au(OH) When gold elution from the XAD7 resin was enhanced with ultrasound at a pH of 10, no gold precipitates were observed on the resin. This can probably be attributed to both the enhancement of the elution dynamics, as well as the removal of the gold precipitates on the resin. In principle, the elution of gold from the XAD7 resin could therefore be completed in a single stage with the aid of sonication, in contrast with the use of multiple stages with acid rinsing in between. HCl solutions were used to eluate cadmium from the IR120H-resin. The eluant flow rate through the elution column was maintained at 10 ml/min. The resin loading was 515.5 mg cadmium/20 ml resin. The results of the elution experiments are shown in As can be seen from The elution recovery and kinetics increased as the eluant HCl concentration increased, as shown in The equilibrium shifted to the right side of the above equation as the HCl concentration was increased, and elution dynamics and recovery increased. The enhanced ion diffusion in the presence of ultrasound probably contributed to the improvement of elution recovery and kinetics. A375 resin was used to desalinate high sulphate-bearing wastewater. Low cost saturated Ca(OH) As can be seen from Low cost lime was used as the eluant for the elution of SO Friable solids, such as resin beads, that are present in a liquid radiated with ultrasound are likely to be fractured and eroded, because of the high-pressure shock waves resulting from cavity implosions As indicated by In order to investigate the chemical stability of the resins subjected to sonication, elution experiments followed by re-adsorption were conducted. After elution with ultrasound, all the resins were pre-treated to ensure that regeneration of the resins was complete. The XAD7 resin was rinsed with 4 M HCl at 10 BV (6 ml/min), the IR120H resin was rinsed with 8% HCl at 10 BV, followed by 8 BV deionized water rinse (6 ml/min) and the A375 resin was rinsed with 4% NaOH at 10 BV, followed by an 8 BV deionized water rinse (6 ml/min) before re-adsorption tests. One milliliter of each resin was used for adsorption experiments. The concentration of the mother solution was 100 mg/l in each case. Five cycles of adsorption, elution and readsorption were conducted. The results are shown in As can be seen from The rate-determining step in ion exchange is the interdiffusion of counter-ions Ultrasound produces acoustic vortex microstreaming within porous solids, as well as at the solid–liquid interface. This phenomenon can be attributed to the increase in momentum brought about as the solvent adsorbs energy from the propagating sound wave and occurs even in the absence of cavitation In this work, the feasibility of the use of ultrasound for the improvement of elution of ions from ion exchange resins was demonstrated. Elution of the XAD7, IR120H and A375 resins could be enhanced considerably by sonication at 40 kHz, when compared with similar systems not sonicated. The use of ultrasound in the elution of gold from the XAD7 resin prevented gold precipitates from blocking ion exchange sites on the resin and consequently simplified the elution process that would otherwise have involved multiple stages, with acid rinsing in between. In addition, the use of ultrasound made it possible to use low-cost lime solutions to completely elute SO The physicochemical properties of the IR120H and A375 resins were not affected by sonication, even after prolonged exposure, probably due to their relatively high mechanical strength. The XAD7 was degraded very slightly by direct exposure to the ultrasound, and consequently showed a marginal loss in re-loading capacity. However, in practice this need not be a serious disadvantage. In these experiments, interdiffusion of counter-ions within the ion exchanger itself (particle diffusion) and interdiffusion of counter-ions in the films adhering to the resin beads (film diffusion) were likely to have determined ion exchange rates. Since ultrasound produces acoustic vortex microstreaming within porous solids, as well as at solid–liquid interfaces, this may well have been the reason for the observed increase in the rates of elution. Likewise, blockage of the ion exchange sites on the XAD7 resin was probably prevented by acoustic cavitation and associated high-speed microjets impinging on the resin surface, keeping the resin free from precipitates. The results in this work were obtained using three common ion exchange resins and ions, but they should also apply to other cases. The use of ultrasonics for the enhancement of elution appears to be a promising alternative to other methods, such as temperature control. However, further work is necessary to optimize these systems and to obtain a better perspective of comparative cost-advantages.