The accurate hydraulic simulation of fluid line networks is important for many applications, however, in many instances (such as surge analysis in water distribution networks) the system parameters are subject to much uncertainty. This paper presents a parameter identification method for fluid line networks based on transient-state measurements of the hydraulic variables of pressure and flow within the network. From a Laplace-domain admittance matrix representation of the system, a measurement model is derived that decouples the influence of unmeasured state variables from the measured state variables. This decoupled measurement model is used as the basis of the development of a frequency-domain maximum likelihood estimation method. The proposed method is applied to different case studies with successful results.Fluid line networks are systems comprised of pipeline elements interconnected at nodal junctions containing pressurised fluid flow. Such networks appear in many instances including material transport systems such as water, gas and petroleum Many of these methods have focused on customised approaches for single pipeline systems with either measured A popular alternative to the time-domain methods for single lines are the frequency-domain methods of Recently, Within this paper, a staged development of the new network identification model is undertaken. Fundamental to the formulation presented within this paper is the categorisation of the network nodes according to the information they provide for the identification process. This topic has received no attention previously in the literature, but the proposed framework enables the formal incorporation of nodes yielding different degrees of information. Given this nodal categorisation, the admittance matrix network model is used as the basis for the construction of an oblique decoupling filter, capable of decoupling the dynamics of the measured nodal states from that of the unmeasured nodal states. This decoupling filter, which is dependent on the system properties, is demonstrated to be stable under the condition of passivity of the network elements. This filter represents the main theoretical contribution of the paper, as it enables the identification methodology to deal with networks of an arbitrary structure. The application of the decoupling filter to the original system leads to the casting of the parameter estimation problem as a constrained complex Gaussian system, for which an maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) process is developed for the estimation of the network parameters. This paper is structured as follows. In The identification of parameters and the detection of components within pipeline networks, based on measurement of the hydraulic variables (namely pressure and flow), has been the focus of much research over the past decades. The discussion focuses only on numerical-based parameter identification methods, as these methods deal with a similar problem to the methodology presented within this paper (as formulated within Within the hydraulics literature, the parameter identification methods have tended to focus on the estimation of pipe friction parameters and the sizing of leaks. The foundational work of The ITM has been applied by other authors of which the focus has been either: the analytic determination of the error surface gradients for a special network instance ( The development of an ITM based on frequency-domain models, either directly As with the methods of To explain the objective of the paper, an example is first given. Consider the network depicted in The identification problem is formulated below. Firstly, the system of network equations that govern the hydraulic state variables is outlined. Secondly, the parameter estimation problem is explained. Lastly, the Laplace-domain admittance matrix model, the model that forms the basis of the parameter estimation procedure, is given. To facilitate the discussion of the fluid line network equations, it is convenient to describe a network as a connected graph The state space of the network When simulating a hydraulic scenario within a network, for The dynamics for pipeline The entire parameter set requiring estimation for the network The parameter space The inverse transient time-domain approach of computing an estimate An alternative model to use as the basis for the parameter estimation process was derived in In the instances where either As the network dynamics described by  This corollary is an implication of the positive realness of the network admittance matrix The advantage of the representation The parameter identification problem outlined in For a given network    This partitioning can be further refined by considering combinations for which the nodal states are either measured or unmeasured. This results in the eight unique sets that are tabulated in Given the sets in Without loss of generality it can be assumed that the known nodal states are zero. This is a reasonable assumption as either the pressure is held constant (in the case of a reservoir) or the flow injection is zero (in the case of a junction) which means that there are no dynamic fluctuations in these variables about the steady-state point. All other nodal controls ( Eq. Taking the Laplace transform of A decoupled system for the measured states     The first property is the definition of the filter In the following, a theorem for the existence of a filter  A constructive proof to this theorem is deferred to Insight into the operation of The importance of the passivity requirement in It is worth further discussing the dependency of the theorem on the link passivity. Given the system theoretic definition of passivity The development of the MLE process in the next section requires that the rank of the resulting system matrix The focus of this paper is on the development of a frequency-domain parameter identification methodology, which is driven by the flexibility and numerical efficiency of the Laplace-domain model as opposed to the time-domain model Taking the Laplace transform of It is important to note that the distribution mean values in The expression for the MLE of the decoupled system is presented in two steps. Firstly the statistical problem is framed and solved in a general context as a complex Gaussian MLE process given linear constraints on the unknown means. Secondly, the specific problem instance for the decoupled system  This theorem is not proven as it represents a special case of the Markov estimator derived in  The influence of the nonlinearities within the fluid line systems considered in this work are mild, which is particularly the case for excitations that involve only small flow perturbations about the steady-state operating point However, for systems where the nonlinear distortions are significant, the properties of the linear estimator are influenced by the form of the excitation signal. For systems with nonlinearities of the even functional form, as considered here, a simple method to diminish the influence of the nonlinearities is to include only odd harmonics in the multisine input An essential aspect of model parameter estimation is that the model parameters are uniquely identifiable given the model structure and the observed data. This property is called In general, global identifiability is difficult to establish, and so the weaker requirement of The following numerical examples demonstrate the ability of the proposed decoupling MLE method from To broaden the case studies, a range of measurement configurations were considered: case 1 consists of only pressure measurements at nodes {2,4,6}; case 2 consists of a flow measurement at node 4 and pressure measurements at nodes {2,4,6}; case 3 consists of a flow measurement at node 4 and pressure measurements at nodes {2,3,4,6}; case 4 consists of a flow measurement at node 4 and pressure measurements at nodes {2,3,4,5,6}; and case 5 consists of a flow measurement at node 4 and pressure measurements at nodes {2,3,4,5,6,7}. These different cases are depicted in The raw time-domain data for the numerical experiments was generated from a MOC simulation of the nonlinear PDE system For the purposes of the detection algorithm, the pipeline parameter values taken to be known down to an interval, where: the wavespeed  Within the first case study, the network pipelines were modelled within the MOC using the TSF resistance function given by The parameter estimation results for each of the measurement point cases from Interesting observations can be made by comparing the estimates for the different parameters. For all pipes the resistance coefficient The impedance coefficient was estimated with the lowest accuracy and highest variability of all the parameters. As illustrated in The parameters for all pipes seemed to be estimated with a similar accuracy, with the box plots for Within the second case study, the experiments of the first case study were repeated using a different pipeline resistance function model, namely the TUF model given by The results of 10 independent trials for each case are summarised in the box plots in Consistent with Case Study 1, the parameters that influence the harmonic locations (wavespeed The parameters The maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) decoupled measurement model presented within this paper involves the development of a dynamic system involving only the measured nodes decoupled from the influence of the unmeasured nodes. The development of this model first involved deriving the form of a decoupling filter. The filter was designed to essentially nullify the influence of the unmeasured nodes on the resulting system, thus creating a decoupled system. It was observed that the filter had the interpretation of being an oblique projection operator. The existence and stability of the filter were proved to be properties inherited from the passivity of the network elements. Posing the decoupled system in a constrained complex Gaussian framework, a MLE estimation process was derived for the network parameters using a combination of analytic and numeric techniques. A series of numerical experiments were performed using this method coupled with the evolutionary optimiser particle swarm optimisation (PSO). The experiments were performed on an 11-pipe network using turbulent-steady-friction (TSF) and turbulent-unsteady-friction (TUF) pipes, resulting in parameter estimation problems of 33 and 55 dimensions, respectively. The results demonstrated the success of the method in yielding accurate parameter estimates, where the parameters associated with the pipeline delays (such as wavespeeds and lengths) were consistently estimated with a high accuracy and a greater variability was observed in the estimates for the parameters associated with inertial and resistive effects (such as impedance coefficients and pipeline roughnesses). This research has been financially supported by the The proof of A computationally efficient expression of the decoupled measured system The representation  Given the presence of the identities in the first and third block rows of The parameter estimation problem outlined in the corollary can be cast as the complex Gaussian, constrained MLE problem from An implicit assumption is that the passivity of each component