Introduction
                  Complex and extensive lower limb defects remain difficult reconstructive problems. Conventional flaps may not be large enough or lack the versatility that allows precise tissue positioning to optimally cover the wound. The anterolateral thigh–vastus lateralis conjoint flap provides a superior reconstructive solution for these difficult wounds.
               
                  Methods and materials
                  From Jan 2010 to June 2011, seven patients were reconstructed with the anterolateral thigh–vastus lateralis conjoint flap. Three cases were traumatic degloving injury of the lower limb, three were open fractures of the tibia with extensive soft-tissue loss and one was a large soft-tissue defect as a result of necrotising fasciitis. The skin island and muscle component were raised with independent pedicles to allow complete freedom in the inset of each flap based on a common pedicle. The descending and oblique branches of the lateral circumflex femoral artery were used as the pedicle of the conjoint flap in four and three cases, respectively.
               
                  Results
                  The mean size of the skin flap was 355 cm2 (range: 312–420 cm2) and the volume of the muscle flap was 210 cm3 (range: 42–360 cm3). All flaps survived completely and no infective complications were noted in our patients. The skin and muscle component were widely separated to expand the area of coverage. In cases where specific areas of the wound were severely traumatised with significant tissue loss, the muscle component can be precisely positioned to obliterate the dead space and to optimise soft-tissue coverage of the wound.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The anterolateral thigh–vastus lateralis conjoint flap is superior to conventional flaps available for coverage of extensive defects of the lower limb. It can cover far greater area as well as providing the versatility needed to optimise soft-tissue coverage.Extensive lower limb defects are challenging reconstructive problems. The anterolateral thigh flap, with is versatility and low donor-site morbidity, is increasingly becoming the flap of choice for coverage of a variety of lower limb defects. The design of an anterolateral thigh–vastus lateralis conjoint (ALT-VL(c)) flap is able to provide both skin and muscle components independently based on different vascular branches from the same pedicle source vessel. It helps increase the surface area available for coverage of defects of greater dimensions. The relative independence of the skin paddle and vastus lateralis also allows more precise positioning of both two components to optimise their use for coverage defect, soft-tissue volume replacement as well as for dead space obliteration. From January 2010 to June 2011, seven patients with complex lower limb defects were reconstructed with the ALT-VL(c) flap. Three cases were traumatic degloving injury of the lower limb, three were open fractures of the tibia with extensive soft-tissue loss and one was a large soft-tissue defect as a result of necrotising fasciitis. The anterolateral thigh flap was raised as previously described All flaps survived completely. The mean size of the skin flap was 355 cm The following cases illustrate the versatility of the ALT-VL(c) flap in covering extensive defects by widely separating the skin and muscle components (case 1) and its ability to optimise soft-tissue coverage in complex three-dimensional defects (case 2). In case 2, the entire ALT-VL(c) flap was harvested based on the oblique branch of the lateral circumflex femoral artery alone (leaving the descending branch A 42-year-old man presented with a degloving defect over his left leg and foot. His Achilles tendon, the entire calcaneum as well as the distal tibia were exposed ( A 34-year-old man presented with Gustillo type III B open fracture. In addition to the large circumferential soft-tissue defect involving the entire leg, the tissue loss was particularly severe over the distal third of the leg with significant bone loss ( In selected complex lower limb wounds, the ALT-VL(c) flap is superior to the anterolateral thigh skin flap, its myocutaneous counterpart or any available ‘conventional’ muscle or skin flaps. We prefer to place the skin component over areas that potentially need to be re-elevated for secondary procedures, such as for later exchange plating. Furthermore, it is preferred over areas of high stresses as skin is able to withstand the sheering forces better. Muscle is preferentially placed where obliteration of dead space is a major consideration as it conforms better than that of the skin flap into tight and narrow spaces. Implications of the vascular anatomy of the anterolateral thigh flap to the harvest of the conjoint flap, in particular the relevance of the recently described ‘oblique branch of the lateral circumflex femoral artery’, should be discussed. The oblique branch is a variably present vessel in the anterolateral thigh. It is present in about 35% of patients, and when present, it takes over the supply of the proximal anterolateral thigh skin. Not required. None declared. None declared.