Since NiMH and NiCd batteries are still used in the electronic devices market, a treatment and recycling plant has many advantages both from the environmental and the economic points of view. Unfortunately, there is no relationship between shape, size and chemical composition of spent batteries, consequently the characterization and the leaching method of the starting material becomes an important step of the overall treatment process in choosing the best conditions for the selective separation of the metals by hydrometallurgy. Leaching at 20°C with H2SO4 2M for about 2h seems to be a good solution in terms of cost and efficiency for both battery types. The hydroxide compounds can be readily leached while Ni present as metallic form requires more aggressive conditions due to kinetic constraints.
                  In this paper, the characterization of NiMH and NiCd spent batteries and the results of leaching tests in different conditions are reported.The environmental risk associated with uncontrolled disposal of exhausted batteries, which are produced worldwide at a monthly rate of several millions, is increasing. As a consequence, directions for issuing legislation on disposing and recycling spent batteries have been made by industrialized countries. From the sustainable development viewpoint, a battery must be considered as recyclable material due to its high metal content; it cannot be dumped directly in landfills both for environmental and economic reasons, because natural resources will be lost and therefore new material must be imported. The recycling of spent Ni–Cd and NiMH batteries is now mainly carried out by pyrometallurgical processes or by use as raw material in steel production, but processing a mixture of different NiMH batteries would give etherogeneous material which producers could not use in large quantity ( Hydrometallurgy is a well-established process for the separation and recovery of metal ions, with such benefit as: complete recovery of metals with high purity, low energy requirements, minimization of wastewater and avoidance of air emissions. Recently, some hydrometallurgical processes for the treatment of spent batteries have been developed ( The development of an efficient separation process first of all requires the characterization of the starting material, which primarily comes from the municipal collection system, because each producer uses his own material and there is no relationship in the chemical composition. The present program is directed towards seeking a basic route for the dissolution process as the first step of the hydrometallurgical process development. The relationship between leaching efficiency and electrode material composition is analysed by using sulphuric acid as an inexpensive and unoxidant leaching agent. Sulfuric acid has been chosen, after preliminary comparison with other leaching agents, mainly to prevent iron dissolution, an important competing ion during the selective separation of Ni, Co, Cd and Zn performed by ion exchange and solvent extraction. The technology of batteries is in continuous evolution in order to meet the requests of the market for small electronic devices in terms of high discharge capacity, low internal resistance and long life (1000–2000 charge/discharge cycles), in particular for computers and mobile phones. In the last few decades, the battery market has been characterized by the presence of new rechargable nickel-metal hydrides (NiMH) and, recently, of lithium-ion. At present, considering the environmental and human health effects of Cadmium with the consequent restrictions (Directives 91/157/CEE and 91/338/CEE on the utilization of this metal) and the high energy density of the Li-ion batteries, these are substituting NiCd and NiMH ones, in particular for the mobile phone market. However, it is expected that for many years, due mainly to the high cost of the Li-ion battery, the others types of batteries will remain more attractive for consumers and therefore will still be present in the market. In 2003, European Battery Recycling Association companies recycled 4300 tonnes of spent NiCd (portable and industrial) accumulators, a 10% increase over 2002 ( The active metal of the positive electrodes of NiMH and NiCd batteries, in the charged state, is nickel oxyhydroxide. The positive electrode is a highly porous sintered material, or a felt nickel substrate into which the nickel compounds are impregnated or pasted and converted into active material by electrodeposition. The paste contains nickel hydroxide, other metal oxide additives and conducting agents, such as graphite or nickel powder. In Ni–Cd batteries the negative active materials are mainly constituted by Cd in combination with Ni and Fe to stabilize cadmium and to increase conductibility while, in the charged state of the NiMH type, the negative active material is hydrogen in the form of a metal hydride. In particular, in NiMH the metal alloy can undergo a reversible hydrogen absorbing–desorbing reaction as the battery is charged and discharged. The negative electrode is a highly porous structure using a perforated nickel foil or grid onto which the plastic-bonded active hydrogen storage alloy is coated ( Another main component is represented by a synthetic membrane, which serves as an insulator between the two electrodes and as a medium for absorbing the electrolyte, which is constituted by a minimum amount of potassium hydroxide solution (30% KOH). We have used cylindrical and prismatic cells of NiMH (AB We have characterized both positive and negative electrodes from eight NiCd and seven NiMH spent batteries to compare the metal composition. In particular, considering the difference between the hydrogen absorbing alloys, for the NiMH type we have analyzed four cylindrical cells AB The components of the active material on the positive and negative electrodes were determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF), a solid pellet spectrometer TX 2000 (Ital Structures) instrument has been used for the determination. The components of the grids were determined by SEM-EDX (SEM Philips 500 and EDX Philips PW 9100). Leaching tests were made separately on anodes and cathodes, leaving the steel support, from NiMH, AB The leach solution and insoluble residue obtained were separated by filtration (0.2 The electrodes and residues from leaching tests were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD Philips BW 1800). The characterization of the material coming from the municipal waste collection system is very important to determine and optimize the separation yield of the whole treatment process. From the experimental results, we have seen that it is difficult to obtain the exact metal content of the different batteries put on the market because the hydride alloy chemistry and substrate materials may differ among manufacturers and will certainly change as product improvements are introduced. We have characterized many cells to obtain, first of all their metal content and then their leaching parameters to get a reproducible solution useful in recovering metals using the hydrometallurgical process; they are only examples of the cell types and sizes now available from the municipal waste collection system. Metal components and plastics represent 19.7–36.0% and 5.9–8.1% of the total weight of a NiMH battery and a NiCd battery, respectively. Electrodes represent 51.0–66.8% of the battery and, in particular, the average values of the cathode are 29.9%, 22.0%, 30.9% and 30.0%, respectively for NiMH-AB5 (cylindrical and prismatic), AB2 and Ni–Cd batteries, while for the anodes the average values are 36.9%, 31.0%, 32.9% and 24.0%, respectively for AB In Considering that a simple mechanical pre-treatment could consist of dismantling and grinding, it is supposed that a large quantity of steel (support) will be present in the resulting raw material. In From the leaching tests, it is possible to determine the best conditions for electrode dissolution; therefore, the effects of four variables such as H The leaching of electrode materials can be simplified by the equations: The results of the experimental tests are illustrated in The chemical-structural analysis, performed by XRD, of residues and electrodes give us the identification of the material phases in the NiMH type. The results for the cathode show that the original material is characterized by a crystal grating mainly made up of Ni, Co and Zn compounds (oxide and hydroxides). On the residues obtained after leaching, it was seen that the original crystal grating was mainly lost and a small quantity of ZnSO The same behaviour was observed with the NiCd electrodes ( The leaching yield was also carried out for the AB Starting from the previous results, a leaching test was carried out with the spent batteries ratio NiCd/NiMH(AB The characterization and the leaching tests performed with spent NiMH and NiCd batteries show that 2 Actually the recovery of exhausted batteries by municipalities, retailers or recycling organizations, poses some problems still unsolved: NiMH batteries are manufactured with the same shape and dimensions of the NiCd and Li-ion ones; therefore, automatic separation carried out on the basis of the shape and density is difficult. A band would improve the recycling efficiency. Separate collection is still poor and more involvement by manufacturers, public administrations and consumers should be invoked in order to prevent landfilling.