Among various compounds used in research and clinic for degenerative bone diseases, low level laser therapy (LLLT), comprising low level lasers (LLL) and light emitting diodes (LEDs), has been investigated regarding its effects on bone metabolism. They have specific wavelengths but in general act as a cellular biomodulator, and as a therapeutic agent, rebalancing and normalizing their activity. However, they are not standardized yet, since their parameters of use are relevant for the effects and mechanisms of action. Therefore, the aim of this study was to compare the influence of two spectrums of LLL and LED phototherapy, at the same energy densities (10 and 50J/cm2), on human osteoblasts proliferation and differentiation. The involvement of ERK signaling on proliferation was also investigated by evaluating its activation during proliferation under different phototherapies by western blotting and CFSE-based osteoblast proliferation was measured in a presence or absence of the ERK-specific inhibitor. Osteogenic differentiation was evaluated through in vitro mineralization and gene expression of type I collagen (COL1A1) and osteonectin (SPARC) by Real Time- PCR. Increases in viable cells and proliferation were obtained after irradiation, regardless of LLLT type. However, only red at 10J/cm2 and infrared at both doses, but not LED, induced ERK1/2 activation. In the presence of ERK inhibitor, the LLL-induced proliferation was prevented. In addition, while COL1A1 gene expression was upregulated by red laser, SPARC does so by infrared stimulation. However, LED, at both doses, increased both COL1A1 and SPARC expression. All LLLT increased mineralization, dependent on the dose and time. Thus, LLL and LED differently modulated the metabolism of human osteoblasts, increasing proliferation by mechanism dependent or not of ERK signaling activation and osteogenic differentiation markers.Low level laser therapy (LLLT) is a treatment based on red and infrared lasers or light-emitting diodes (LEDs) that promotes changes at cellular levels through photobiomodulation. The therapeutic use of low-level laser (LLL) has become widespread in biology, dentistry and medicine. Several benefits have been accompanied by its use such as pain relief, stimulation of mitochondrial activity In this context, several cellular and molecular mechanisms have been proposed to the LLL-induced biological responses. Data from our laboratory has determined that two different LLL, red and infrared lasers, both at a potency of 20 However, there still no data about the influence of light exposition on human primary osteoblast at late periods under osteogenic stimulus. Neither the impact of LLL-induced mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/ extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK) activation on cellular proliferation and gene transcription codifying extracellular matrix formation markers and mineralization. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of two doses of red, infrared and LED on proliferation and differentiation of primary human osteoblast for driving bone regeneration. Cells were collected from bone explants during orthopedic surgeries. The procedure was approved by the local Ethics Committee, Fluminense Federal University (protocol # 232/08) and the Ethics Committee of the Bauru Dental School-University of Sao Paulo (protocol # 95/2011). Explants were treated with 0.25% collagenase for 2 Low intensity laser irradiations were done by using the Twin Flex Evolution diode laser (MM Optics-São Carlos, SP, Brazil). Red laser at a wavelength of 660 The cell viability was assessed after 1, 2 and 3 For MTT assay, the cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) followed by the addition of solution containing 0.5 Cells were plated in 24-well plates at a density of 4 Cell proliferation was performed by labeling cells with carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE) (Molecular Probes) followed by flow cytometry analysis. Osteoblasts at a density of 3 5 The mineralization was assessed by Alizarin Red S Staining (Sigma) in 12-well plated cells at a density of 4 The results were statistically analyzed using GraphPad Prism 4 Software (La Jolla, CA, USA). Groups were subjected to parametric ANOVA One-way or Two-way, followed by Tukey's test. The significance was given when P To evaluate effectiveness of differential LLLT protocols, both single and double applications of each were used. When assessed by MTT, an increase in the cellular viability after stimulation with different phototherapies in specific time points and doses was observed. Cells singly irradiated with red laser and infrared both at 50 When assessed by crystal violet, we showed that single application of infrared at 50 Thus, we next evaluated the CFSE-labeled osteoblast proliferation in irradiated and non-irradiated cells on day 3. Compared to control, red laser at 10 Since LLLTs were efficient to increase viability and/or proliferation, we next evaluated the signaling mechanism by which they act. The results showed that red at 10 To evaluate the effect of different LLLT on osteogenic differentiation, we measured expression of Col1A1 and SPARC genes. On day 7, Col1A1 mRNA increased after red laser at 10 Regarding SPARC gene, infrared and LED groups, both at 50 Since all LLLT, at specific type, dose and time, had an impact on bone matrix formation, we analyzed if they also affect its mineralization, as follows. Calcium deposition was quantitatively measured through colorimetric analysis. On the 7th day, we showed that infrared, at 10 In the present study, we demonstrated that different LLLTs, at the same parameters, affect proliferation and differentiation of primary human osteoblasts. Although several studies have focused on this topic, the strategies for their application systems are not completely established because the parameters of use have not been standardized yet. In addition, few studies employed it on primary human osteoblasts. Accumulating evidences show that laser at low-level intensity increases proliferation of osteogenic lineage cells, including mesenchymal stem cells, preosteoblast and osteoblast This work revealed that all LLLTs, at tested settings, increased human osteoblast viability and proliferation, whereas only infrared and red spectrums do so by a mechanism dependent on ERK activation, since the enhancement of LLLT-induced cells was impaired by the pretreatment with the compound PD98059, a specific ERK inhibitor. These responses were dependent on the density energy and time of evaluation. The MAP kinases ERK1 and ERK2 are 44- and 42-kDa serine/threonine kinases respectively, are related to receptor tyrosine kinases that signals through Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK signal transduction cascade. During growth factor stimulation, ERK phosphorylation cascade is involved in processes such as cellular proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis Our data not only corroborate these findings but also give a comparative analysis of infrared, red laser and LED on bone cells. In this context, our data showed that LED at 10 and 50 Besides proliferation, LLLT potentially enhanced the osteogenic differentiation, regardless of the spectrum. This was confirmed by the upregulated mRNA expression for osteogenic markers such as type 1 collagen (Col1A) and SPARC (osteonectin) genes in irradiated cells. While type I collagen is produced in the onset of osteogenic differentiation and constitutes the primary protein deposited into the bone matrix, osteonectin is a cysteine-rich acidic matrix-associated protein, that is tissue-specific and links the bone mineral and collagen phases, initiating active mineralization in normal skeletal tissue In turn, even though different mechanisms, LLLTs promotes bone matrix mineralization by dose and time-dependent manner. To better explore this hypothetical mechanism, future studies will be conduct using overexpression genes and pharmacological inhibitors. In summary, LLLTs, at these conditions, modulate the metabolism of human osteoblasts increasing their proliferation and differentiation. Although we speculated the differential role of ERK in inducing type I collagen and osteonectin expression for each spectrum, the mechanisms by which LLLTs increase in vitro mineralization remains to be determined. The authors have declared no conflict of interest. Prof. Dr. José Mauro Granjeiro, who kindly donated the primary human osteoblasts for this research and Profa. Dra. Ana Paula Campanelli for acquiring cells in the flow cytometry experiments. This work was supported by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at