In this study, the extended finite element method was used for modeling dynamic fracture in Kirchhoff plate and shell problems. A new set of tip functions was extracted from analytical solutions of Kirchhoff plates. The semi-discrete method was used to simulate the dynamic behavior. An unconditionally stable implicit Newmark scheme was used for temporal discretization. The performance of the code in simulation of dynamic behaviors was proved by solving several benchmark problems and comparing the obtained results with other numerical and analytical solutions. Also, the problem of cracked thin tubes under gaseous detonation loading was simulated by the dynamic XFEM code. The results were compared with analytical and other numerical solutions and the obtained results showed that the method has good capability for simulation of these problems.DOFs. related to body force density ( DOFs. related to Tip functions in plane discretization (m) damping matrix (Ns/m) material matrix DOFs. related to Young’s modulus ( unit outward normal to the crack DOFs. related to Tip functions in out-of-plane discretization (m) global external force vector (N) crack tip bending enrichment functions Heaviside discontinuous function interaction integral (N/m)  invariant stiffness matrix (N/m) symmetric (bending) stress intensity factor ( anti-symmetric (twisting) stress intensity factor ( plane stress intensity factor (mode I) ( plane stress intensity factor (mode II) ( mass matrix ( fictitious moment resultant about moment resultant components (Nm/m) shape functions for plane problem shape functions for plate problem lateral load intensity ( pre-detonation pressure (Pa) maximum-detonation pressure (Pa) post-shock pressure (Pa) shear force resultant components (N/m) weighting function radial distance from crack tip (m) exponential decay factor (s) external traction vector components ( discretized form of plane displacement (m) nodal plane displacement (m) velocity (m/s) acceleration ( Chapman–Jouguet speed (m/s) strain energy density ( normal displacement in discretized form of normal displacement (m) 1st Newmark parameter 2nd Newmark parameter strain tensor crack tip plane enrichment functions Poisson’s ratio angular position in the crack tip coordinate system rotation about rotation about fictitious rotation about mass density ( Cauchy stress tensor ( stress tensor ( In general, the current numerical crack modeling methods can be classified into two broad categories of geometrical and non-geometrical presentations. In the first category, the presence of a crack in the model is explicit and the geometry and mesh are changed during the crack growth. This category includes various numerical methodologies, such as; the Finite Difference Method (FDM), the Finite Element Method (FEM), the Boundary Element Method (BEM) and the meshless (meshfree) method. Recently, several meshless methods have been developed and some of them are widely used in fracture mechanics problems, such as Smooth Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH), the Element-Free Galerkin method (EFG) and the Reproducing Kernel Particle Method (RKPM) The XFEM, in contrast to standard numerical methods, enables the approximation of non-smooth solutions with optimal accuracy. Also, when using standard numerical methods (e.g. FEM or FVM) for the approximation of non-smooth solutions, special care is required for the mesh construction. For example, the element edges must align with a discontinuity and a mesh refinement is needed near singularities. In contrast, the XFEM is able to achieve optimal convergence rates on structured meshes where arbitrary discontinuities and singularities are present in element interiors. This issue is very important when we encounter moving discontinuity, such as a crack growth problem. In these cases, there is no need for troublesome and time-consuming re-meshing procedures. This method, which was established based on the Partition of Unity Method (PUM) and applied to fracture mechanics problems by Belytschko and Black Application of the XFEM to After verification of the dynamic XFEM code, the problem of thin tubes under gaseous detonation loading is investigated. The first analytical model of flawless tubes under detonation loading was introduced by Tang In FEM cases, if a shell is discretized by flat elements, the elements can be subjected both to bending and “in-plane” loading, and these loadings cause independent deformations. The “in-plane” loading can be simulated easily by considering a plane stress element and related formulations. In fracture mechanics problems, using the XFEM formulation, the discretized “in-plane” displacements are introduced as In order to simulate the bending loadings in shells, the plate theories must be adopted. The Kirchhoff plate and shell theory, which is the simplest approach to thin plate and shell problems, gives accurate results for these structures without the complications due to shear locking In dealing with cracked plates, we use the near crack tip stress and displacement fields for a crack in an infinite Kirchhoff plate under bending provided by Williams, and the stress intensity factor definitions of Sih et al. for the deflection field to write In this study, we used 4-node rectangular elements for which each node has six degrees of freedom. The nodal displacement vector for each node is: In general, the elastodynamic behavior of structures is defined by the following hyperbolic differential equation: Different values can be considered for In this study, the SIFs for the XFEM simulations were calculated using the The obtained SIFs are compared with other existing analytical solutions. The SIFs for an infinite-width plate with a central crack under remote tensile stress, In this section, some typical benchmark problems are solved by the developed dynamic XFEM code and the obtained result are compared with the existing analytic solutions. Then, the problem of thin tubes under gaseous detonation loading is solved by the code, and the accuracy of the method is proved by comparing the obtained results with analytical and other numerical solutions.   The SIFs are computed based on the integrals obtained for circular domains with different radii (ranging from a quarter length of crack to half length of crack) and the average values are listed in According to  Considering constant loads during time, the problem is solved dynamically. In order to detect some cycles in obtained results, the computational time is considered 1 and 100 s for plane and bending analyses, respectively. In both cases, the computational time is divided in 100 time steps. For constant loading problems, the dynamic parameters must oscillate between 0 to twice the static values. This issue is seen in In this section, the problem of cylindrical thin tubes with a longitudinal through crack under gaseous detonation loading is simulated by the dynamic XFEM code. The crack is assumed stationary and the loading is moving internal pressure. The pressure history for gaseous detonation can be represented by an exponential approximation to the Taylor–Zeldovich model by writing the following expression for variation of pressure at a fixed point in space A 6061-T6 aluminum tube is considered in this example, and the experimental and numerical results for the flawless tube are reported in First, the flawless tube under detonation loading is simulated by the code, and the obtained hoop stress at point Then, this problem is simulated numerically by ANSYS-LS DYNA software. As depicted in The distance between point In this section, the previous tube with a central longitudinal through-thickness crack is simulated by the dynamic XFEM code. The crack length is considered 400 mm, the geometry and location of which are shown in Since the detonation starts from the left end of the tube at  Accordingly, it can be concluded that the obtained dynamic XFEM code results are in good agreement with the ANSYS-LS DYNA results, and the performance of the presented code in the simulation of a cracked thin tube under detonation loading is proved. In this study, the XFEM was used for modeling fracture in Kirchhoff plate and shell problems. A new set of tip functions were extracted from analytical solutions of Kirchhoff plates. The obtained static results for both in-plane and out-of-plane loadings were in a good agreement with the existing analytical solutions. In order to deal with the dynamic simulation of problems the semi-discrete approach was adapted and the Newmark scheme was used for temporal discretization. A rectangular plate with a central through crack under uniform tension and pure bending was simulated by the dynamic XFEM code. The obtained results for both in-plane and out-of-plane loading were accurate. Though the dynamic response of in-plane loading was completely compatible with the analytical concepts, the out-of-plane loading analysis was slightly sensitive to the time step size, and some undesirable fluctuations were created by decreasing the time step size. We also studied the XFEM simulating of thin tubes under gaseous detonation loading using the dynamic XFEM code. First, a flawless tube was simulated by the code, and the XEFM results were compared with existing analytical and other numerical solutions, and the capability of the code in simulation of these problems was proved. Then, a longitudinal through crack is considered in the tube and it was shown that the obtained results are in a good agreement with the ANSYS-LS DYNA results. The In mixed mode conditions, Eqs. Similarly, for plate bending problems, the