Mineralogical controls on waste-rock weathering rates are important for mine water quality predictions, as the reactivity of minerals is impacted not only by its chemical composition, but also by its texture, arrangement, and association. In this study, seven-year on-site field barrel kinetic tests were conducted with different types of waste rock from the Antamina mine, Peru. Quantitative automated mineralogy was applied to characterize mineral texture, liberation, and association during weathering and used to examine mobilization and attenuation mechanisms. The weathering of reactive intrusive waste rock with low neutralization potential led to mobilization of Cu, Fe, and Zn, and was associated with >75% liberated Fe-, Cu-, or Zn-bearing sulfide minerals and galvanic coupling of pyrite with chalcopyrite and sphalerite. In contrast, the mobilization of Cu, Fe, and Zn was less effective in skarn waste rock types with high neutralization potential, where <70% Cu-, Fe-, and Zn-bearing sulfide minerals were liberated and passivation of pyrite surfaces occurred. Finally, waste rock weathering and drainage quality trends were simulated using a reactive transport model, and calibration of sulfide dissolution rates quantitatively affirmed the observed changes in mineralogical waste rock associations and liberation. This study thus demonstrates that accounting for mineralogical parameters using automated mineralogy may improve practical predictive models for mine waste water management.In mining operations, large quantities of non-profitable waste rock are produced and placed in heterogeneous waste-rock piles. This exposed waste rock is subject to weathering which may lead to acid rock drainage (ARD) and enhanced metal mobilization ( In addition to the processes above, the overall reactivity of waste rock is also affected by mineralogical parameters such as mineral composition, abundance, texture, arrangement, and exposed surface area ( Modern instrumentation provides a means to characterize the mineralogical properties that affect bulk waste rock reactivity: quantitative automated mineralogy uses a combination of back-scattered electron microscopy with energy dispersive X-Ray spectroscopy to associate specific image patterns with mineral phases ( To this end, we used quantitative automated mineralogy method to i) quantify changes in the bulk mineralogical parameters (i.e. degree of liberation and mineral associations) during weathering of waste rock of various lithological classes in on-site field experiments at the Antamina mine, Peru, ii) identify discrete elemental mobilization and attenuation mechanisms, and iii) relate these mineralogical controls to the evolution of long-term drainage quality. Finally, we use a numerical model constrained by quantified bulk mineralogical parameters to corroborate the controls of mineralogical parameters on the long-term drainage compositions. A total of 17 field barrels were used for on-site kinetic testing at the Antamina mine in Peru. Field barrels were constructed from 55 gallon open-top polyethylene drums and filled with ~300 kg of waste rock of a single lithological class (i.e. skarn, intrusive, or marble). Waste rock drainage was funneled into 20 L HDPE containers and sampled periodically. The field barrels were subjected to local weathering conditions by allowing for atmospheric gas exchange and infiltration of precipitation through the open top of the barrels. The climate on site is characterized by average daily temperatures between 5.4 °C and 8.5 °C, but also by strong fluctuations in precipitation that falls in distinct wet (i.e. between September to April) and dry seasons (i.e. between May to August; Unweathered composite waste-rock samples were systematically sampled immediately after their excavation and homogenized using the coning-and-quartering method to assure representativeness of the chemical analysis ( Waste rock drainage samples were collected over a period of 7 years with at least a monthly frequency. The accumulated composite drainage samples were filtered (0.45 μm) and acidified with HNO Preferential mobilization or retention of the metals Fe, Cu, and Zn was identified by comparing the elemental ratios between concentrations in the waste rock and drainage for each of the 17 field barrels. The average drainage composition of the first year was divided by the composition of the reference waste rock to assess the initial reactivity. Similarly, the yearly-average drainage composition after 7 years of weathering was divided by the waste rock composition after 7 years of weathering to assess changes in mineral reactivity. For both, the median elemental ratios among all field barrels and the corresponding double median absolute deviation (2MAD) ( In addition to the composite samples previously described, grab samples (~1 kg) of weathered (pre-homogenized) waste rock from the top (1B) and bottom (1A, 2A, and 2B) of four selected field barrels ( Evaluation of the mineralogical data was focused on the major primary sulfides encountered at Antamina such as pyrite, chalcopyrite and sphalerite. A select number of other (non-sulfide) primary minerals, their oxidation products prior weathering, as well as secondary and tertiary minerals due to weathering of waste rocks were also evaluated ( The collected MLA data were further used to calculate: i) mineral liberation when >70% of the mineral surface was not encapsulated by another soluble or insoluble phase, ii) Mineral Reactivity (MR, equation Equation where Equation The effect of mineral reactivity on dissolution rates and drainage chemistry was further investigated using reactive-transport modeling: a quantitative comparison between calibrated model rate constants and experimentally recorded mineralogical liberations and associations provide additional assessment of the role of mineralogical parameters on mineral reactivity. In brief, the recorded temporal evolution of drainage chemistry from field barrels was simulated using a reactive-transport model developed in PHREEQC (version 3.33) ( This section focuses on four field barrels with intrusive- (field barrels 1A and 1B) or skarn-type (field barrels 2A and 2B) waste rock, because compared to each other, these field barrels had noticeably different NPR ( The temporal evolution of the drainage chemistry from all field barrels shows distinct annual oscillations as well as long-term trends ( The long-term evolution of drainage chemistry was different for the intrusive and skarn waste rock field barrels: drainage from field barrels 1A and 1B became acidic after a few years of weathering, whereas the pH from field barrels 2A and 2B remained circumneutral for 7 years ( The ratios of elemental concentrations in the waste rock over those in the drainage spanned several orders of magnitude for Cu, Fe, and Zn ( From all calculated metal concentration ratios, 12 anomalies fall outside the MAD thresholds ( Thus, overall metal attenuation and mobilization appear to be largely related to waste rock composition and neutralization capacity, as pH strongly affects mineral solubility and metal sorption. However, a comparison of the elemental ratios in waste-rock with similar lithologies also suggests that drainage chemistries are not only controlled by the waste-rock metal content and abundance of acid/base releasing minerals, but also by mineral surface liberation or associations, which affect mineral reactivity. To investigate the temporal evolution of waste-rock liberation and reactivity, the distribution of Fe, Cu, and Zn minerals in the reference unweathered waste rocks ( Intrusive waste rock in both field barrels 1A and 1B was relatively reactive with high sulfide and low carbonate content ( Iron was the most abundant of the investigated metals and 85% of total liberated Fe bearing primary minerals in the unweathered waste rock were composed of Fe-sulfides (e.g. pyrite and chalcopyrite), Fe-oxides and Fe-silicates ( The Cu content of intrusive waste rock was roughly an order of magnitude lower than the Fe content. In secondary oxidation products, the amount of Cu present was <6% of the total Cu content, which is less than the analogue fraction of Fe present in oxidation products (i.e. 30% of the total Fe content). Yet, Cu-bearing liberated primary minerals were very abundant (>95% of total sulfides) in both the weathered- and unweathered waste rock of each field barrel ( Although Zn concentrations were relatively low in the intrusive material, liberated sulfide minerals were similarly dominant in the mineralogy associated with Zn and contributed up to 90% of the total Zn content ( In line with the mineralogical observations discussed above, the intrusive waste rock exhibited high reactivity indices for Fe-, Cu-, and Zn-sulfides, in line with the presence of up to 50% pyrite, 90% chalcopyrite and 50% sphalerite ( In summary, the drainage chemistries and concentration ratios from the intrusive field barrels ( Compared to the more reactive intrusive waste rock, the skarn waste rock of field barrels 2A and 2B had lower sulfide- and higher carbonate content ( The distribution of Cu- and Zn-bearing primary minerals was quite dissimilar between the two skarn waste rocks: liberated primary minerals in field barrel 2A mainly consisted of silicates such as dioptase, rhodonite, and willemite with impurities of Cu and Zn (62% of the total Cu and 85% of Zn were associated with aforementioned silicates) and Cu- or Zn-bearing sulfides such as chalcopyrite, covellite, or sphalerite (with 37% of Cu and 10% of Zn present in these sulfides). In contrast, field barrel 2B contained significantly higher fractions of liberated >90% sulfides relative to <10% silicates, both also bearing Cu and Zn. The distribution of Fe-bearing primary minerals was relatively comparable between the two skarn waste rocks before and after weathering, and was composed of, an average, >68% Fe-bearing silicates such as epidote, dioptase, and rhodonite. The elemental distribution of oxidation products in the weathered skarn waste rock was similar to that of the reference waste rock, except for decreasing fractions of Fe-oxides and slightly larger fractions of Cu- and Zn-(hydroxy)sulfates in field barrel 2B ( In accordance with the lower sulfide content liberated in field barrel 2A ( Summarized, the lower geochemical reactivities observed for certain skarn- and intrusive waste rocks ( The mineralogical parameters of liberation and associations providing information on mineral reactivity support calibrated mineral rate constant obtained from reactive transport model simulations. The measured and simulated drainage chemistries for field barrels 1A, 1B, 2A and 2B are compared in The calibrated effective rate coefficients of the sulfide oxidation/dissolution reactions are compared with the reactivity indices of pyrite, chalcopyrite and sphalerite (referred to as: Fe-Pyrite, Cu-chalcopyrite, and Zn-sphalerite reactivity, respectively) in Mineral reactivity accounts for liberation (Equation In addition to controls of drainage pH on metal mobility, associations between sulfidic minerals, including partial or full encapsulation, may also be linked to preferential mobilization and elevated drainage concentrations. Such galvanic interactions between sulfides in contact with each other have previously been shown to cause preferential mobilizations in kinetic tests ( Secondary-mineral precipitation can cause selective retention of metals and lead to passivation of reactive mineral surfaces, and also provide effective sorption sites for metals (i.e. In this study, effective rates were calibrated to best fit the drainage pH data with a focus on the comparison of differences between four field barrels (i.e. 2 intrusive and 2 skarn) with specific lithology and reactivity. The differences between those field barrels were then quantitatively explained using the mineral reactivity and association indices. The results presented in Multi-year kinetic field barrel experiments under field conditions provided insights into the mineralogical weathering mechanisms and long-term drainage development of different types of waste rock. The presented data show that micro-scale mineralogical processes such as mineral surface passivation and galvanic interactions, in addition to drainage pH and bulk geochemical properties of the waste rock (e.g. acid-neutralization potential or particle size), affect waste rock weathering rates and the resulting drainage quality. In this study, these mineralogical processes were examined through quantification of the modal mineralogical compositions, as well as of the liberations and associations of primary and secondary Fe, Cu and Zn minerals in variably weathered waste rock using quantitative automated mineralogy. Reactive transport simulations provided insights into the potential role of aforementioned mineralogical controls in the context of waste rock weathering, as mineral oxidation/dissolution rates quantitatively supported mineralogical texture and arrangement observations. Mineralogical assessments further explained the distinct reactivities amongst field barrels of comparable composition. In summary, this study shows that quantitative automated mineralogy may complement conventional bulk geochemical assessment of waste rock reactivity to account for mineralogical processes in improved drainage quality prediction models. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. We would like to acknowledge Daniel Bay, Celedonio Aranda, and the technical and logistical support of the Antamina mine technicians and professionals during the construction, monitoring, and sampling of the field barrels. We also thank Stephane Brienne, Randy Blaskovich, and the staff from Teck Metals Limited's Applied Research and Technology Group from Trail, BC for allowing access to the Mineral Liberation Analyzer and providing time and technical support to perform the data analysis. Financial support was provided by Compañia Minera Antamina S.A., the The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at