Four different types of parageneses of the minerals calcite, dolomite, diopside, forsterite, spinel, amphibole (pargasite), (Ti–)clinohumite and phlogopite were observed in calcite–dolomite marbles collected in the Kimi-Complex of the Rhodope Metamorphic Province (RMP). The presence of former aragonite can be inferred from carbonate inclusions, which, in combination with an analysis of phase relations in the simplified system CaO–MgO–Al2O3–SiO2–CO2 (CMAS–CO2) show that the mineral assemblages preserved in these marbles most likely equilibrated at the aragonite–calcite transition, slightly below the coesite stability field, at ca. 720 °C, 25 kbar and a
                     CO2
                     
                     ~0.01. The thermodynamic model predicts that no matter what activity of CO2, garnet has to be present in aluminous calcite–dolomite-marble at UHP conditions.The study of dolomitic marbles from ultrahigh-pressure (UHP) metamorphic terranes provides a possibility to assess In the Rhodope metamorphic province diamond inclusions in garnet porphyroblasts from migmatitic metapelites of the Kimi complex indicate that these rocks were metamorphosed within the diamond stability field ( The RMP belongs to the northern part of an Alpine nappe stack that extends over northeastern Greece and southern Bulgaria and formed during the protracted convergence of Africa and Europe since the Middle Jurassic (e.g. The Kimi Complex ( The constituent minerals in the marbles were analysed by electron microprobe analysis (EMPA) using a scanning electron microscope, type JEOL JSM 6310 with EDS system and one attached WDS spectrometer (for analysis of Na, F) at the Institute of Earth Sciences of the University of Graz (Austria). Analytical conditions are as follows: accelerating voltage of 15 kV, probe current of 5 nA, beam diameter of 1–4 μm. Counting time was 100 s. Standards used were calcite (Ca), magnesite (Mg), siderite (Fe) and rhodochrosite (Mn) for carbonates, and garnet (Mg, Fe), corundum (Al), quartz (Si), adular (K), titanite (Ca, Ti) and rhodonite (Mn), jadeite (Na), F-phlogopite (F) for silicates and oxides. Na and F were measured with WDS (peak and background with a counting time of 20 s each). The beam-scanning technique was used for analyzing bulk chemical composition of calcite–dolomite intergrowths in domains of former Mg-rich calcite consisting of Mg-poor calcite Twenty-five samples of dolomitic marbles from four outcrops of the Kimi–Organi area ( Phg Ol ( Ol Ol Assemblages (I)–(IV) are representative of localities 1–4 respectively, only assemblage (II) was found in both localities 2 and 3. Diopside and Ti–clinohumite in assemblages (II) and (III) are present with < At locality 1 ( The assemblages (II)–(IV) represent a higher metamorphic grade and differ not so much because of differences in The textures reflect, in general, equilibrium growth or recrystallisation, only diopside occurs in 2 generations and indicates a more complex reaction history. The exsolution and zoning textures of the carbonate phases, as described extensively in    An inclusion of high Mg–calcite in spinel with  Diopside-1 contains inclusions of Mg–calcite and phlogopite, and – in samples from assemblage (IV) – (rare) amphibole inclusions as oriented lamellae, suggesting that they formed by replacement of the host diopside. The amphibole lamellae commonly occur in the central part of the diopside (together with tiny rutile grains), while the outer zone of the diopside grain is free of amphibole inclusions. This textural relation can be explained by the prior compositional zoning of diopside-1, where the cores are richer in titanium and Tschermak component (Al Inclusions of calcite in diopside-1 show a wide range in composition with      Diamondiferous migmatitic pelitic gneisses in the Kimi–Organi area of the UHP metamorphic Kimi complex indicate that lithologies of this area underwent UHP metamorphism with peak These marbles occur as lenticular intercalations in migmatitic and locally microdiamond-bearing paragneisses, thus raising the question whether their common tectonometamorphic history includes the UHP stage, or not. There is some ambiguous evidence for UHP conditions in the marbles ( The grid is drawn for calcite Calcite inclusions within silicate and oxide phases of a marble may provide valuable information on the temperatures of formation of these phases as their compositions (Mg-content) are less prone to resetting compared to matrix calcite (  In such a scenario the wide range of the No single grains of pure calcite or aragonite inclusions are found in spinel and olivine. The analysed carbonate inclusions in spinel comprise single grains of dolomite or Mg–calcite and composite grains consisting of Mg–calcite The carbonate inclusions in olivine comprise single grains of dolomite, exsolved and unexsolved Mg–calcite ( The sequence of mineral growth in the Rhodope marbles as derived from textures and compositions can be summarized as follows: Slightly tschermakitic diopside and phlogopite are the oldest preserved silicate phase. Garnet could have been present, but despite of scrutinous search, no trace of it was found. Spinel, olivine and amphibole start to grow more or less at the same time, (Ti–)clinohumite slightly later, followed by a short, incomplete back-reaction of olivine, pargasite and clinohumite to diopside-2. Retrogression continues with formation of geikielite from rutile and chlorite from spinel and phlogopite. Finally olivine is serpentinised. In detail, the sequence of reactions (see Phlogopite may have formed in a similar way as that proposed by We have no hint as to what particular reaction was responsible for the formation of diopside-1, but with the help of the grid, the possibilities for olivine-growth can be narrowed down: If one follows the country-rock However, we have no indication of olivine as an early phase, or of coexisting garnet, and fluid-absent reactions like (3) may be kinetically inhibited. Hence it is more likely that olivine, in the presence of calcite, dolomite and diopside, grew by a reaction well known from siliceous dolomites (in CMS–CO This reaction re-occurs in the alumina-enriched system as two reactions emanating from invariant point [g,cor] in We consider reactions At conditions of A likely reaction to produce pargasitic amphibole was proposed by In our samples, growth of pargasite and olivine is contemporaneous at least in assemblage (IV). As quartz is incompatible with forsterite, it could not have been part of the precursor assemblage. Hence pargasite growth was effected rather by an influx of external fluid/melt that not only supplied H Clinohumite can grow by a reaction very similar to (4), i.e. from diopside As in rare instances it can be seen to replace olivine or pargasite, it is later than these two phases. Growth from olivine can be formulated as: But replacement of pargasite with no other, e.g. sodic phase forming and the high amount of fluorine in clinohumite again suggest that an external fluid or melt has played an important role in its formation. Similar to olivine, clinohumite back-reacts to diopside by reverse reaction As for the source of fluid metasomatizing and resetting the marbles, high-pressure metapelites generally tend to dehydrate during exhumation (e.g. The grt–ky-gneisses enveloping the Rhodope marbles show minor partial melting and generally re-equilibrated between 21 kbar, 830 °C and 8 kbar, 700 °C. But minor dehydration may have occurred before that and the actual process opening the marbles to external fluid is considered to be the aragonite–calcite transition that caused considerable volume change, most likely produced by a high-porosity recrystallization process. An influx of hydrous fluid can explain why: a) hydrous phases (pargasite, clinohumite) form more or less coeval with olivine and spinel, and b) well-preserved diopside-1 can still be found as inclusions within dolomite, so temperatures sufficient for diopside decomposition in a pure CO We believe that the entire crystallization event was short. When the supply of external H Ogasawara and co-workers have shown that infiltration of hydrous fluid into marbles from Kokchetav at UHP-conditions produced garnet- and diamond-bearing assemblages that survived decompression to the Earth's surface ( There is no textural evidence for the mechanism of spinel formation. Possible precursors include corundum, chlorite, anorthite and garnet. Corundum is known from metamorphosed bauxite deposits, i.e. strongly SiO  Regarding the general structure of the grid, it must be definitely considered unrealistic towards lower temperatures as hydrous phases will be stable and require a different representation. Reaction An inspection of invariant points shows that corundum and olivine are incompatible. Reactions emanating from the corundum-absent invariant points are most relevant for calcite–dolomite marbles with Si The silicate and oxide phases of the marbles do not contain evidence of an UHP-stage. If we adopt the idea that the Organi and Pandrosos marbles were subjected to coeval UHP metamorphism together with the neighboring diamond bearing metapelites, the mineral assemblages and mineral compositions in the marbles constrain the exhumation path at pressures below the diamond-graphite transformation (presence of well developed graphite flakes in marbles with the assemblage (I)) and below the garnet There is little chance to constrain pressure in siliceous dolomites in the stability field of quartz (sub-UHP). Alumina content results in a considerable increase in the number of reactions, of which the fluid-absent reactions are most valuable as they are not influenced by varying activities of H This work was made possible through financial support by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF), project P16194-N06. E. M. and I. B. were financially supported by the National Technical University of Athens for the Special Research Project “Protagoras”. We want to thank R. Powell (Univ. Melbourne) for tips on handling aspects of THEMOCALC and particularly T.J.B. Holland for data and guidance on the use of adequate solid solution models. Any remaining errors are ours. The manuscript did benefit significantly from reviews by M. Satish-Kumar and one anonymous reviewer. Coding parameters for non-ideal solid solution phases used for calculation of Garnet (pyrope–grossular: Mg Activities: random mixing of Ca and Mg on the 3 M1 sites, with non-ideality given by a regular solution, using Clinopyroxene (diopside–cats–enstatite: CaMgSi Activities: random mixing of Ca and Mg on M2 and Al and Mg on M1 sites; coupled substitution between octahedral and tetrahedral sites is assumed, such that tetrahedral site entropy contributions are taken as zero. Non-ideal mixing is taken via a regular solution between the three macroscopic end-members with interaction energies: Olivine (forsterite–monticellite: Mg Activities: random mixing of Ca and Mg on the M2 site, with non-ideality given by a regular solution interaction energy Carbonate (Calcite–dolomite: Ca Activities: random mixing of Ca and Mg on one M site, with non-ideality given by an asymmetric van Laar solution model. This model, simplified from the full order-disorder treatment of The full THERMOCALC coding can be obtained upon request from the corresponding author. Units: temperatures in K, pressures in kbar, and energies in kJ.