The aim of this study was to compare the work efficiency of three types of knives mounted successively on a knife roll of a cutter by evaluating the quality and structure of produced finely comminuted batters as well as power consumption and electric energy consumption during chopping. Experimental material comprised finely comminuted meat batters produced under commercial scale production conditions using smooth knives, knives with riffles and knives with holes. Parameters measured in batter included temperature, water, fat, free water, apparent viscosity, thermal drip and batter structure using computer image analysis.
                  Computer image analysis showed that the best comminution and dispersion of fat globules in the protein matrix together with very good comminution of collagen fibres were observed at the application of knives with holes. Among the three types of knives used in the production of finely comminuted meat batters the best batter in terms of its quality and structure was produced using knives with holes.Many sausage types are produced using comminuting, mixing and emulsifying processes. All these processes occur in a cutter in the chopping process, which is the most important procedure in the production of finely comminuted meat products. In the chopping process raw material is considerably comminuted, proteins are rehydrated with added water, fats are emulsified and as a result of mixing and homogenization spatial dispersion of all components is unified. As a result of these operations a multi-component and multi-phase physical system called batter is formed, with the considerably altered initial physical structure of all chopped raw materials. This pertains first of all to changes in properties of proteins in meat and fat material ( Phenomena occurring during chopping from the technological point of view may be considered desirable or disadvantageous. A desirable phenomenon is connected with an increase in the raw material comminution rate, resulting in an increased batter area, which in turn influences the amount of absorbed water. Moreover, with an increase in comminution rate the amount of chopped and highly disintegrated muscle fibres increases and thus — also the amount of myofibrillar proteins released from them, which swell when binding added water and are transformed to the sol form, creating a lattice structure surrounding fat, and thus contribute to an enhanced batter stability ( Chopping should thus provide an optimal degree of comminution of the muscle tissue, the connective tissue and the adipose tissue as well as the uniform dispersion of fat in the dispersing phase. This should be completed at the time, at which equilibrium is found between desirable and undesirable phenomena, i.e. at the optimum chopping time ( The technological effect of the chopping process is influenced by many factors. Generally they may be divided into three groups, i.e. factors connected with the raw material, factors related with the technology of batter production, and factors connected with technical parameters of equipment used in batter production ( A significant effect on the quality of batter and processed meat products is found due to the rotational velocity of knives ( Raw material in the cutter is comminuted by the action of a wedge. Knives with a very high velocity cut the raw material being initially at standstill. This process is caused by inertia of the raw material mass. A high difference in velocity is observed here between knives and the raw material, thanks to which the effect of cutting is very big. However, with comminution time the raw material begins to revolve with an increasing velocity and this motion approaches the rotational velocity of knives. Thanks to this the difference in velocity between knives and the raw material decreases, which results in a deterioration of cutting efficiency ( Efficiency of comminution decreases when particles of the raw material become increasingly small and light, thanks to which their inertia decreases. Knives, thanks to their side surfaces, accelerate the motion of the raw material at its passage from the knife head to the area of a knife chamber. As a result the comminution work decreases. The rapidly translocated raw material is additionally stopped on the walls of the knife chamber and heats up ( During chopping of meat in the production of scalded meat products we may distinguish two phases: I. the chopping process of meat comminuted in the cutter, in which 90% work is used for comminution, while 10% for transport and translocation of the batter mass, II. the production process of finely comminuted batter with an addition of ice/water, fat and spices, in which phenomena occurring in the knife chamber are described as translocation by a set of knives. According to The first phase of chopping, in which a specific degree of comminution of the raw material is obtained, is completed after approx. 45–60 After a specific comminution rate is obtained in the raw material, the shear work decreases in a continuous manner, as after that time ice/water, fat, different additives and spices are added. During comminution of the raw material in the cutter knives become blunt, which deteriorates shear quality. This also causes an increased batter velocity and an increase in its temperature ( During chopping the circulation of batter in the knife chamber should be the lowest possible. This may be provided by applying knives with holes in the cutter. They cause crosswise swirl of the batter flow. Holes prevent rapid escape of batter outside. They keep the raw material within the low internal circulation, in the area of the cutting edges of knives, thus improving the cutting action of knives, and a significantly smaller proportion of batter is elevated to the knife chamber wall ( Advances in the chopping technique have been lately limited to a search for new shapes of knives, a reduction of the lateral surface of knives in order to limit friction on batter and the design of knives with many cutting edges, the so-called block knives ( The aim of this study was to compare the work effectiveness of three types of knives mounted successively on the knife roller of a Typhoon KN-125 high-rotation cutter by Metalbud Nowicki by assessment of quality and structure of the produced finely comminuted batters, as well as power consumption and electric energy consumption during chopping. The experimental material comprised finely comminuted meat batters produced under commercial scale production conditions using smooth knives, knives with riffles (cutter knives provided with grooves and undulations in their lateral surfaces), as well as smooth knives with holes ( The chopping process was performed according to the technology adopted at the plant. Meat was cured for 24 In the course of the chopping process batter temperature was taken and energy consumption was measured using a 3-phase meter accurate to 1 impulse After 3-minute chopping and after its completion samples for further analyses were collected from each batter type. In batters total water content ( Apparent viscosity of batter was determined using a rotation rotovisco meter rheotest type 2 RV. Determinations were performer at shear velocity of 1.0 s From batter samples collected after 3-minute chopping and after its completion cubes of 10 Samples of batter collected after 3-minute chopping were denoted using the following symbols: produced using smooth knives, produced using knives with riffles, produced using knives with holes. Samples of batter collected after the completion of the chopping process were denoted as follows: produced using smooth knives, produced using knives with riffles, produced using knives with holes. Prepared histological slides were subjected to computer image analysis. The analyses were performed at the computer image analysis station found at the Department of Engineering and Production Process Design at the Institute of Meat Technology, the Poznań University of Life Sciences. The image coming from an Axiolab microscope through a CCD camera was fed to a computer. Next it was analysed using MultiScan v.13.01 software. For all preparations a uniform procedure of object identification and analysis was developed. The structure of the preparations was examined at a constant microscope magnification (× The procedure of image analysis to quantitatively determine parameters of collagen fibres in the plane of sections consisted of the following steps: (1) a grey level was determined automatically as threshold, to produce a binary image in which background was coloured black and collagen fibres were coloured white; (2) the best fitting oval was calculated for each numbered white object and the shortest — B (width) and longest —A (length) diameters of the oval were determined ( The numerical material obtained in the course of the study was subjected to statistical analysis using STATISTICA 6.0 PL software. For each investigated attribute the analysis of variance was performed, followed by the Fisher test. All analyses were conducted at the significance level p Analysis of the course of changes in temperature during chopping ( In a study by Generation of heat, being an indicator of the course of material change and simultaneously leading to the “destruction” of the processed raw material, is a very important problem associated with the chopping process. The final temperature of chopping influences stability and rheological properties of batter. The final chopping temperature has an effect on water and fat binding capacity, which directly influences stability of the structure of produced batter. According to In the course of chopping using knives with holes in the lateral surfaces a rapid opening of meat structure to the protein form was observed. Thanks to this fact a shorter comminution time was obtained. Electric work of the main power drive engine during the chopping process was highest when knives with riffles were used (0.70 The adoption of this type of knives is also justified by the fact that batter produced using knives with holes was characterised by the lowest free water content after the completion of the chopping process ( Apparent viscosity in batters produced using three types of knives did not differ statistically significantly ( It may be concluded from the conducted experiments that a shortening of chopping time with a simultaneously obtained high comminution rate may also be reached thanks to the application of knives with holes in the chopping process. When comparing mean results of microstructure analyses of batters produced with the application of smooth knives, knives with riffles and those with holes it was found that knives with holes mounted in the cutter made it possible to provide the best comminution rate in comparison to the other batter samples collected after identical chopping times ( From the technological point of view the objective of the chopping process is to create such a spatial system of all batter components so that the sufficiently comminuted fat could be optimally dispersed spatially and surrounded with a protein layer and so that the system could be stable, i.e. insensitive to destructive stimuli of different character in the course of further processing stages ( The connective tissue is the component of chopped batters, which is least susceptible to the comminution process. In view of the above results we may divide the chopping process into three periods. In the first period of chopping a rapid comminution of the raw material mass is found along with the still poor binding of added water. The dimensions of elements other than the connective tissue are particularly reduced rapidly. In the second period desired rheological properties of chopped batters are established. The connective tissue is comminuted only to a limited degree. In turn, muscle fibrils mostly form a shapeless swollen mass and very few of them retain their natural histological structure. In this shapeless mass we may find globules of emulsified fat and a proportion of the less comminuted raw material. Added water is fully bound. Only in the third period we may observe a considerable comminution of connective tissue elements. However, it needs to be remembered that in that time the destruction of the formed batter structure and the release of previously bound water are initiated. The analysis of variance showed that a very highly statistically significant effect on the analysed dimensions of collagen fibres is recorded for the experimental variant, i.e. the type of knives mounted on the knife roll in the cutter ( Collagen is the major protein constituent of endomysial and perimysial connective tissue and contributes to meat tenderness through both total collagen content and the degree of development of heat-stable cross-links ( Ander a light microscope collagen fibres appear as wavy lines of variable width and indeterminate length. During comminution the muscle cells are broken down and the proteins are extracted (  The final quality of finely comminuted meat batter and the resulting final product depends on many factors. Chopping conditions have a decisive effect on the stability of produced emulsion and thus the quality of the product obtained from the batter. Insight into the dependencies of meat batter properties on parameters of the technological process makes it possible to control the structure and quality of products through the optimal selection of the technological process. Presented results showed that the type of knives mounted in cutters has a decisive effect on rheological properties and quality of batters, and thus also the high stability of structure of the produced batter. Among the three types of knives used in the production of finely comminuted meat batters the best results were recorded for knives with holes in the lateral surfaces. It was found that the effects of whirls obtained thanks to holes in knives and the inhibition of batter acceleration have a positive effect on the formation of high quality protein–fat emulsion, which was confirmed by the results of the lowest free water content, the highest apparent viscosity analysed in the third minute of the chopping process as well as the shortest chopping time. Additionally, computer image analysis showed that at the application of knives with holes the best comminution and dispersion of fat globules were observed in the protein matrix together with very good comminution of collagen fibres. The use of smooth knives in comparison to knives with riffles resulted in a considerable variation in the area of fat particles in the produced batters. It may clearly be stated that knives with holes constitute a considerable advance in terms of comminution. They make it possible to obtain the optimal comminution rate at the shortest chopping time and to obtain the assumed final batter temperature within a short time.