Background
                  Terrible triad of elbow is a complex lesion with a high rate of complications. Our goal is to analyse both clinical results and complications after performing protocolised surgery.
               
                  Material and methods
                  We performed a prospective longitudinal study using our hospital database. We obtained a total of 62 triads. The initial approach was lateral and when necessary we added a medial approach. We treated 3 main pillars, the radial head, the coronoid process, and the lateral collateral ligament. If needed, we repaired the medial collateral ligament or we performed an external fixator.
               
                  Results
                  In our series, the radial head was synthesised in 14 (22.5%), an arthroplasty was performed in 45 (72.5%), and other actions in 3 (5%). The coronoid could be synthesised in 12 (19.3%). In 41 (66.2%) a transosseous suture or an anchor were performed, and in 9 (14.5%) no treatment was given. The LCL was repaired in 100% of cases, in 9 (14%) the MCL had to be repaired, and 22% of the patients required Ex-Fix.
                  There were 17 (27%) complications. Three (17.5%) cases of infections, 4 (23.5%) neurological lesions, 3 (17.5%) cases of stiffness, 1 (6%) ulnar impaction syndrome, and 1 (6%) case with an intraarticular fragment postoperatively. Four (23.5%) heterotopic ossification, and 1 (6%) osteolysis of radial prosthesis were observed.
                  Regarding functional results, range of mobility (ROM) of 120°/−20° flexo-extension, and 98°/85° of prono-supination were obtained.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Elbow triads are complex lesions where protocolised surgery is necessary, nevertheless the complication rate was 27% in our series.Terrible triad of elbow is the combination of elbow dislocation, radial head fracture and coronoid process fracture Although much has been reported in the literature on this subject many points of controversy remain regarding different approaches, whether or not to synthesise fractures of coronoid process which only affect the tip, and whether the medial collateral ligament (MCL) should be systematically repaired or not. The objective of our study was to apply protocolised surgical treatment for these injuries and analyse the clinical results and complications obtained. A retrospective study using the database of our hospital, between the years 2005 and 2015. A total of 62 triads was obtained, collecting patients’ demographic data, fracture data (Mason and O’Driscoll classification), surgical data (approach, radial head treatment), coronoid process, lateral collateral ligament [LCL] and MCL) and associated complications, both intraoperative and during follow-up. Functional results were collected using the Mayo Elbow Performance Store (MEPS). Surgery performed in all cases followed a protocolised surgical technique which is detailed below. In all cases antibiotic perioperative prophylaxis with 2 The patient was positioned in supine position with a side table and ischaemia cuff at axillary level. Initial approach was always the Kaplan lateral approach ( The 3 essential pillars of treatment of these lesions are coronoid process, radial head and LCL. If lateral access allows for coronoid approach (especially in cases where the radial head is prosthesis) we repair it from this approach. In O’Driscoll types Once the lateral approach has been used, this access route enables us to assess the possibility of synthesising the radial head. In cases where this was possible it was synthesised either with cannulated screws or with plates ( The LCL was repaired using harpoon sutures in all cases, anchored at humeral level, since the majority of extractions occur in its proximal insertion. Once the 3 essential pillars have been repaired we may assess the stability of the elbow with intraoperative scope (appropriate ulnar humeral reduction) and clinical control (elbow stability during a flexion extension arc of 20–130° In those cases where we had already used the coronoid process approach with a medial approach, we would proceed to repair the MCL using harpoon suture. In those cases where only a lateral approach had been made, we would insert an external fixator. Lastly, if we had repaired the radial head, the coronoid process, the LCL and the MCL, and the elbow remained unstable, we would also proceed with an external fixator ( Mean age was 49 years, with a range between 17 and 78 years. Mean follow-up time was 18 months (with a minimum follow-up of 12 months and a maximum of 36 months). Out of the total patients, 27 (44%) were women and 35 (56%) were men. The most common lesional mechanisms was falling from the individual's own height, although in up to 28% of cases high energy trauma (traffic accidents, hastiness, bicycle accidents, etc.) was the cause. In all cases an X-ray was performed (anteroposterior and lateral projection) with additional computerised axial tomography (CAT) always being performed postreduction ( In all cases a lateral Kaplan approach was performed, with the addition of a medial approach in 9 (14%) of cases. In our series, the radial head was synthesised in 14 (22.5%) of cases, arthroplasty was performed in 45 (72.5%) with a pyrocarbon modular prosthesis (AscensionOrthopedics In 100% of cases the LCL was repaired and in 9 (14%) the MCL had to be repaired as well due to insufficient stability. Furthermore, 22.5% of the patients required an EF due to instability, following all previously described procedures. As we can see, the lesional spectrum is extremely wide, despite the fact that the injuries are encompassed within the terminology “terrible triad of elbow”, and there is a great variety of surgical techniques. We therefore consider that protocolised treatment should serve as a guide for taking one route or another, depending on the characteristics of each case. In the immediate postoperative period the arm was kept immobile with a brachial antebrachial splinter at 100° extension and with the wrist in a neutral position for 3 weeks. After this, active assisted exercises of flexion and extension were allowed, avoiding the last 30° of extension. At week four the patient was referred for physiotherapy so as to progress with their range of movement. It should be taken into account that the post-surgical protocol was variable depending on the degree of stability obtained during surgery, to the extent that those who presented with high intraoperative stability were kept immobilised one or 2 weeks more. Regarding functional results, a range of movement between 120°/−20° of flexoextension and 98°/85° of pronosupination and clinical assessment using the MEPS scale, obtained mean values of 92, being higher than or equal to 90 points in 54 (87.1%) of cases, between 75 and 89 points in 6 (9.7%) cases, between 60 and 74 points in 2 cases (3.2%) and below 60 points in no cases. With regards to complications we obtained a total of 17 (27%) complications of different types. In 3 (17.5%) of cases infections were observed, 4 (23.5%) neurological lesions which consisted of 2 ulnar nerve entrapments and 2 radial nerve entrapments. There were 3 (17.5%) cases of stiffness, one (6%) ulnar impaction syndrome and one (6%) case where it was post-surgically observed that an intra-articular fragment had remained. From a radiologic viewpoint, 4 (23.5%) heterotopic ossifications were observed and one (6%) case of osteolysis of the radial prosthesis. In total, 6 further operations were performed, bringing the rate of reintervention to 9.6%. Two of these interventions were arthrolysis (arthroscopies or open surgery), 3 extractions of matter and one case of ulnar shortening after ulnar impaction syndrome. In order to understand the approach to this lesion, we have to understand its physiopathology. Two types of stabilisers have been described: Although several studies describe conservative treatment in selected cases, Although there is some consensus regarding the establishment of steps during terrible triad of elbow surgery, many controversial points remain, such as the approach route, whether the coronoid process should be repaired, or in which cases it would be necessary to repair the MCL. The 2 most commonly used approaches are the Kaplan and Kocher approaches, which both allow for the radial head to be reached and synthesised, although repair of the LCL is easier from a Kocher approach since with the Kaplan approach difficulties may arise in repairing this ligament on having to liberate the residual part of the extensor digitorum communis of the epicondyl. Both approaches pose a risk to the posterior interosseous nerve, although we may reduce the risk, pronating the forearm to its maximum. On occasions, surgery should be complemented with a medial approach, either because we do not succeed in gaining access to the coronoid process through lateral approach, or because we wish to repair the MCL for greater elbow stability. If the fragment of the coronoid process is very large, it is usually necessary to raise the flexor carpi ulnaris, including the proximal flexor pronator mass. With regard to the radial head, the most frequent location of fractures is its anterior lateral quadrant. However, in general clinical practice, arthroplasty is reserved for fractures which may not be reconstructed, either because there are 3 or more fragments, because they are highly comminuted or because the joint surface has been greatly compromsed. Another key discussion relates to the treatment of coronoid process fractures. Traditionally, they were classified according to the Regan and Morregy Type I fractures (those affecting the coronoid process tip) are often difficult to synthesise but according to some authors should be repaired since they are lesions which also affect the anterior capsule and may lead to instability in the anterior posterior plane. In our opinion O’Driscoll type I coronoid process should always be repaired when possible (e.g. if we resect the radial head for implantation of a prosthesis) and always in cases of instability after the radial head and LCL have been repaired. LCL is a primary elbow stabiliser in the lateral area and we therefore always repair it. The most common lesion is a proximal avulsion at humeral level which occurs in 52% of cases. Avulsions of the humeral epicondyl (8%), intrasubstance ruptures (29%), avulsion in the distal ulnar (5%), avulsion in the proximal ulnar (2%) or a combination of them (5%) Lastly, there is no consensus as to whether the MCL should be systematically repaired. Several authors have found higher rates of heterotopic calcifications and lower ranges of movement in patients in which this ligament has not been repaired and they therefore recommend a “prophylactic” repair to improve postoperative results and to avoid the complications derived from ulnar neuropathy. When we have performed all these operations and if appropriate stability has not yet been obtained, some consensus exists for the use of an external fixator. Usage percentages vary between 8% and 26% according to the references, In our series we observed that the higher the classification by Mason or O’Driscoll ( The most common complication was that relating to heterotopical calcifications (12–43% depending on the series), but there were no related factors from a demographic viewpoint or surgical viewpoint or from time of surgery, Notwithstanding, the clinical results which were assessed using the MEPS scale are satisfactory. This is so partly because the complications were temporary (neurapraxias) and because although complete mobility was not obtained, a useful range of movement for the patient's daily activities was. Terrible triad of elbow are complex bony and lagmentous lesions where it is necessary to perform protocolised surgery but where there is still a complication rate ranging between 0% and 54%, depending on the study, Treatment should be sequential and its objective is to maintain a reduced, stable joint. The radial head must be synthesised and should this not be possible, prosthesis introduced. The coronoid process fracture should be synthesised when possible and the larger its size the more so. The lateral ligamenous complex must always be repaired and when there is residual instability the use of an external fixator should be assessed. Level of evidence No type of financing was received for the undertaking of this article. The authors have no conflict of interests to declare.  