The rare earth elements neodymium and dysprosium were separated and recovered from NdFeB permanent magnet swarf by hydrometallurgical route. The magnet swarf was leached with HCl after crushing and grinding, and from the leach liquor, Nd and Dy were separated by solvent extraction using NaCyanex 302. The separation factor (β) of Dy/Nd with NaCyanex 302 was high at low equilibrium pH. So Dy was first separated from the leach liquor at pH0.5 (equilibrium pH1.2). After separation of Dy, the separation of Nd was also carried out with the same extractant. The effect of equilibrium pH and extractant concentration on the extraction of Nd and Dy with NaCyanex 302 was studied. The McCabe-Thiele plots for extraction of both Dy and Nd with NaCyanex 302 were constructed and the number of stages for quantitative extraction was determined. The stripping of loaded organic was carried out with three different mineral acids and it was observed that the stripping efficiency followed the order HCl<HNO3
                     <H2SO4. The McCabe-Thiele plots for stripping of loaded organic were also constructed. The reaction mechanism of both Nd and Dy was determined from the slope analysis method and the extracted species was found to be MA3.5HA.Neodymium-Iron-Boron magnets are the strongest permanent magnets known, and its application in modern technology, especially in electronic devices increased many folds in last few years. It is used in computer hard disk, wind turbine, hybrid electric vehicles, hydroelectric turbine generators, missiles, tanks, warplanes and submarines ( A significant amount of rare earth element is wasted as magnet swarf during the manufacturing process of Nd-based magnets. Hence, researchers have been working on the recycling process of RE from magnet swarf. Several ways of potential recycling process have been described in the literature, but none of them has been developed commercially due to low productivity and high cost ( Different extractants such as D2EHPA ( Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA), 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethyl hexyl ester (EHEHPA) were used for the separation of Nd(III), Dy(III) and Y(III) from hydrochloric acid solution (  Cyanex 302 (bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)monothiophosphinic acid) had been used for the selective separation of many rare earth metals like scandium(III) and yttrium(III) ( The commercial extractant Cyanex 302 which is bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) monothiophosphinic acid was received from Cytec Inc. USA and was used as such without any purification. Distilled kerosene (b.p. 180–240 The extractant (Cyanex 302) was neutralized up to 70% by adding the stoichiometric amount of concentrated NaOH followed by vigorous shaking until the two phases were completely miscible. The NaCyanex 302 thus obtained was used as the extractant and 5 The distribution ratio D was calculated as the ratio of metal concentration in the organic phase to that of the aqueous phase as given in Eq. The distribution ratio was used to calculate the separation factor (β) of two metal ions under identical condition. If A (major extracting species) and B (minor extracting species) represents the solutes present in a solution, then the separation factor (β) is related to individual distribution ratios as follows: A typical NdFeB magnet swarf containing 31% Nd, 1.1% Dy, 65% Fe and 0.71% B was used for the study. The NdFeB swarf was subjected to leaching with 0.5 The equilibrium pH of the solution has the major influence on the extraction of metal ions. Hence, the effect of equilibrium pH on the extraction of neodymium and dysprosium was studied by varying the initial pH of the solution from 0.5 to 3. A comparative study was carried out, to observe the effect of both acidic and neutral form of extractant (Cyanex 302 and NaCyanex 302) on the extraction of Nd and Dy. The concentration of extractants and aqueous to organic phase ratio were kept constant at 0.2 The separation factor (β) value more than one indicates that the two metals can be separated. Higher the value of β, the lesser is the number of stages (and vice versa) required to achieve given metal ratio in the loaded organic. Some authors have determined the separation factor for Nd and Dy with various extractants. With the mixture of extractants, sec-octylphenoxyacetic acid and 8-hydroxyquinoline, the β In this experiment β value of Nd and Dy was determined with NaCyanex 302. The separation factor of Dy/Nd at different equilibrium pH was given in To optimise the parameters for Dy extraction and to minimise the co-extraction of Nd, the concentration of the NaCyanex 302 was varied from 0.05 to 0.15 At equilibrium pH The extraction of neodymium with 0.2 The stripping study of neodymium loaded organic phase was carried out with different mineral acids (H The experiments were carried out to construct a McCabe-Thiele diagram for neodymium stripping with 1 As the stripping efficiency of H The plot of logD In For extraction of Nd and Dy, 70% of Cyanex 302 was converted to NaCyanex 302 with the addition of stoichiometric amount NaOH. The neutralisation reaction can be written as Eq. As 70% of Cyanex 302 was neutralized, both the forms of Cyanex 302 took part in extraction and the extraction mechanism of both Nd and Dy can be expressed as follows: Where M represents for RE element (Nd or Dy). The equilibrium constant can be written as given in Eq. Taking logarithm of Eq. The slope values of plots of log D vs. Equilibrium pH ( The separation of neodymium and dysprosium from leached liquor of NdFeB magnet was achieved by solvent extraction using NaCyanex 302 as the extractant. Maximum separation factor (D The authors wish to thank Dr. I. N. Bhattacharya, HOD, Hydro & Electrometallurgy Department and Prof. B. K. Mishra, Director, Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar for their kind permission to publish this paper.