The effect of the change of an operating parameter on the washing performance is conventionally evaluated through a direct comparison of the average clean coal yields obtained under normal and trial conditions. Sometimes, in an apparent refinement to the analysis, the clean coal yields are normalized for their ash levels before such a comparison is carried out. This paper illustrates how such simplistic analytical methods can often be misleading and lead to erroneous conclusions.
                  Another method of analysis involves the comparison of two data sets on the basis of their separation efficiencies. The method is not effective in plant conditions, where the fluctuation of several process variables leads to generation of noisy data.
                  An alternative, statistically robust method has been proposed, where a simple linear relationships is established between the response variable and the independent variable during a normal and a trial conditions. These two regression lines are then tested for their equality of slopes using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). The separation between the regression lines, as measured by the difference of their intercepts, quantifies the change in the process performance.
                  Unlike other methods, this method is the least affected by variables that are not of intrinsic interest and hence is more reliable. This method can be used in a two-stage two-product system and also in a multi-stage multi-product system.
                  Although the recommended method of analysis is not as efficient as one involving a formal design of experiments using analysis of variance (ANOVA), it is nevertheless of significant practical merit for analysis of plant data or where the design of experiments would be too time consuming or difficult.In mineral processing plants, process optimisation for an improvement in the concentrate yield is a constant endeavor. In general, process improvement is widely practiced through change in the operating parameters, alteration of design parameters or the replacement of an old technology by a new one. Recommendations for process change, however, require a detailed study in the laboratory/pilot plant involving a design of experiments. Since these laboratory tests are usually carried out under controlled conditions, they provide a fair idea about a change in yield consequent to a change in the process condition. Ideally, a systematic plant trial should also involve a design of experiment to capture the impact of the alteration of operating parameters. However, practical considerations often prevent the implementation of a formal design of experiment during a plant trial. Such situations arise, for example, when a planned test is interrupted due to the failure of equipment or, where there is a major fluctuation in the operating parameters. Sometimes the apprehension that a trial may adversely affect regular production schedule is a deterrent to the completion of the entire range of experiments. Additionally, the trial data are often noisy and do not lend itself to easy interpretation. In such a situation, 1.0% improvement in yield, though economically significant, is difficult to detect specially when a yield variation of 1–5% on a day-to-day basis is quite common. The paper discusses a method of assessing the plant data, which can be applied to all cases where the conventional approach to the analysis of plant data would give erroneous results. It exploits the observation that the yield, a common performance criterion, often correlates with the feed grade and, sometimes, with the concentrate grade. This correlation can usually be represented by a simple linear relationship and the objective of the analysis is to determine whether the relationship obtained in the trial condition is significantly different from that established during normal conditions. The proposed method should be carried out in three steps. In the first step, the two data sets are tested to confirm that they belong to the same population and hence, any comparison between these two data sets is statistically acceptable. Then the method assumes that the line(s) defining yield and ash for the normal and the trial conditions are parallel. The assumption of the equality of the slopes is then tested using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). In the third step, the separation between the regression lines is calculated from the difference of the intercepts of the two regression lines and becomes a measure of the change in the process performance in trial condition. The advantages of the suggested method are that this approach does not require special test design to be used, can be applied retrospectively to historical data, and does not restrict the analysis to sequential data. In fact, the data could well be accumulated over various time intervals. Moreover, this method of analysis is not much affected by the process variables other than that of intrinsic interest and due to this advantage, this method is useful and reliable for the analysis of plant data. However, the method suffers from the disadvantage that it requires larger number of observations compared to the number required in a formal experimentation. This is due to a lack of a rigorous design of the experiments. The number of observations required, however, lessens as the correlation coefficient of the yield–ash relation increases. Traditionally, the performances of unit operations at different process conditions are compared on the basis of their separation efficiency. Researchers have explained separation efficiency in different ways and only a few of them fulfil all the necessary criteria for evaluation of separation process as mentioned by The separation efficiency can be used to evaluate and compare unit processes at controlled conditions. In an operating plant, process variables, normally, cannot be kept at the desired levels. The feed grade often fluctuates due to a change in the feed blend composition. In a coal washery, any change in the feed blend composition such as change in percentage oversize, feed ash, oxidized coal and slimes in flotation feed would affect the ideal flotation response. Similarly, the coarse coal washibility characteristics would change for a change in the feed blend. In such cases as well, the separation efficiency could compare process performance if we consider a single-stage two-product system as a multi-component two-product system and compare any two processes on the basis of recovery of different components in the products. However, the separation efficiency fails to compare process performance if some of the operating variables not of intrinsic interest also change. To compare process performance of two frothers, tests can be carried out in the flotation plant. The separation efficiency would then compare the performance of two frothers, even if the feed grade fluctuates during the tests period. However, the separation efficiency would give erroneous result if there are fluctuations in some of the operating variables not of intrinsic interest, for example, airflow rate, pulp density during the testing period. In such cases, the common practice is to compare the process performance on the basis of the average separation efficiency (SE) or clean coal yields. The data sets required for such a calculation are ash in the feed, clean coal and tailings/reject at the normal and trial conditions. The clean coal yield is calculated on the basis of ash balance. Since the method of comparison is similar for SE and clean coal yield, the following section illustrates the method using a comparison of mean yield. A typical analysis of a washery performance involves calculation of a mean clean coal yield during the trial period and its comparison with the mean clean coal yield during a normal period of operation. It will be shown by means of a schematic graph of clean coal yield versus feed ash that, except for a very specific and unlikely condition where the feed coal ash is identical during trial and normal operations, such comparison of mean yield leads to erroneous conclusions.  The above discussion, apart from illustrating the pitfalls of a simplified approach to data analysis, also points to the merit of using a regression approach for comparison. This is the most widely practiced comparison method. Very often the yield–ash trend in coal washery follows a simple linear relation with a significant correlation coefficient. Generally, the yield is plotted along the The method includes establishment of equations of regression lines for the feed ash and the clean coal yield representing the normal and the trial conditions and the estimation of the separation of regression line. The second step may involve the extrapolation of the regression line obtained for the trial condition if the feed ash during the trial is different from the feed ash during normal operation. The separation between the regression lines indicates actual change in the process performance provided the gradients of both the regression lines (normal and trial conditions) are the same as illustrated in The preceding section has revealed how the simple and conventional method of data analysis can lead to an erroneous conclusion. As apprehended earlier, such a situation arises mainly on account of the simplistic approach of data analysis. However, among the various analysis methods discussed, comparison of regression line holds the maximum promise. To make full use of the potential of this method, modifications to the methodology as explained in this section, need to be made. Data collected from design of experiments are analyzed using analysis of variance (ANOVA) or ANCOVA. These analysis methods are used for comparing the effect of different independent variable on the response variable. The comparisons are usually relative in nature without any absolute quantification. The ANOVA and the ANCOVA can also be used for data generated through randomized design. In such cases, it is assumed that the effects of independent variables are linearly related to the response variable. The ANOVA test is carried out for such cases where the effect of each independent variable on the response variable is discrete in nature. One-, two- or three-way ANOVA is usually carried out to reduce the effect of other variables on the response variable thereby accentuating the impact of the variable of prime interest. The ANCOVA test is carried out where the effect of one or more independent variables on the response variable is continuous in nature and such types of independent variables are called covariates. The present case is a one-way ANCOVA where the effect of the covariate, that is, feed ash is minimized and then the effect of the other important variable, that is, frother type is measured by a change in the clean coal yield, a response variable. Three important steps are involved in the suggested improved method. Establishment of a simple linear relationship between the response variable and the independent variable for each data set and then statistically testing that these two data sets belong to the same population. In the second step, the regression lines are initially assumed to be parallel and then are tested for the equality of their slopes using the ANCOVA. In the third step, the separation between the regression lines are calculated from the difference of their intercepts, indicating the differences in the performance of the processes. The correlation coefficients are calculated for the different simple linear relationships that exist between the performance indicator and the process variables. In the case of washeries, this would include the relationship between the clean coal yield and the feed ash as well as that between the clean coal yield and the clean coal ash. On the basis of the Pearson correlation coefficient ( As discussed earlier, the data points from the operating plants are often noisy and scattered. This is due to the many influences at work viz., sampling error, assaying and mass balancing, fluctuation in process variables, etc. The data points with abnormal values need to be rejected to obtain a representative relationship. The abnormal values are discarded on the basis of their separation efficiency. The separation efficiency is calculated for each data point of the data sets normal condition (NC) and trial condition (TC) following the equation proposed by For the data sets The correlation coefficients for the regression lines with the data sets A significant correlation coefficient value obtained for the data sets In a regression model, the total variation of the response variable is explained through ANOVA as: The pooled gradient is considered as the common gradient for both the regression lines. Fitting of the regression lines involves calculation of a pooled/mean gradient and then this pooled gradient is used to redefine the regression lines for data sets Having met various statistical criteria as discussed, separation between the regression lines can be calculated from the difference of intercept The significance of the mean separation ( A significant Laboratory flotation studies were conducted on the flotation feed received from West-Bokaro washery III, Tata Steel, India. As many as five different frothers were tested using a design of experiments The plant data on the ash percentage in the flotation feed, the froth and the tailing were collected from the flotation plant of West-Bokaro washery III. The data set of the normal condition (NC) contained the data for the months April, May and July 2000 when the frother The simple linear relationship of the clean coal yield and the clean coal ash as well as the clean coal yield and the feed ash for the data set NC are shown in The The significance of the correlation coefficient was tested for both the data sets The clean coal yield in a flotation circuit is a function of the ash percentage, the size distribution, the particles shape and the surface properties, that is, the oxidation state of the feed coal and also of the operating parameters viz., pulp density, air flow rate, etc. In the present study, a simple linear relationship was established between the independent variable feed ash with the response variable clean coal yield. The data collected during a period when the process is under the influence of variables not of prime interest would show abnormal clean coal yield values in the scatter plot of yield–feed ash relationship. In the plant, the influences of the other independent variables are common and hence the clean coal yield fluctuates within a designed range. The data points showing abnormal deviations of clean coal yield were rejected using the outlier analysis leading to an improved value of the correlation coefficient. Regression lines of the filtered data sets of NC and TC were compared to find out the change in the process performance during the trial condition over the normal condition. The error variance of the data sets Ideally, the yield differences between the normal and the trial conditions should be the same all along the regression line; this being possible only when the gradients for both the regression lines are the same. In the present example, the gradients of the both the regression lines are different, since the linear relationship of the trial condition is not well defined due to the paucity of data. Therefore, fitting of regression lines is essential for attempting a better comparison. The During the trial, the drop in clean coal yield was 3.9%, hence the frother A similar study can be made for any other unit operation, which separates clean coal from a feed stream. In most of the Indian washeries, coarse coal is treated in a dense media (DM) cyclone either through a single-stage or a two-stage operation. A single-stage and a two-stage DM cyclone operation are considered as a two-component two-product system and a two-component three-product system, respectively. The method discussed here can easily be applied to any single-stage operation or a two-stage operation and if required can also be applied to each single-stage of the two-stage operations. This method was used to compare the performance of two sets of DM cyclones operated at two different conditions. The data analysis was carried out for the Jamadoba washery of Tata Steel. At Jamadoba washery of Tata steel, the coarse clean coal is washed through a single-stage DM cyclone operation. There are two streams in the coarse circuit and each stream contains two numbers of DM cyclones. The fine circuit having surplus capacity, it was decided to increase the washery feed rate by 10%. For the coarse circuit, feed rate cannot be increased as such without any process modifications. Out of the few idea generated, the idea of increasing DM cyclone throughput by increasing feed inlet pressure was considered for evaluation. The idea was evaluated through laboratory study and it was implemented in the plant in two stages. Initially, the idea was implemented in stream no. 2. Necessary plant data were collected from DM cyclones of stream nos. 1 and 2. These two data sets were compared using the proposed statistical technique. The statistical analysis results as furnished in (1) Two sets of plant data from a unit operation of a coal washery can be compared on the basis of different statistical techniques. The simplest being a comparison of the mean yield followed by a comparison of the mean yield after feed ash normalization. The limitations of these methods have been discussed in detail. (2) Comparison of data sets on the basis of separation efficiency is widely practiced. This method is being used for a two-component two-product system and also for a multi-component multi-product system. This method could also lead to erroneous conclusions when the variables not considered for the study have an effect on the response variable. (3) The proposed method is a one-way ANCOVA based on data collected through randomized design. The response variable is linearly related to a covariate and a dependent variable of prime interest. Through the use of ANCOVA, the effect of the covariate on the response variable is minimized thereby permitting an accurate estimate of the impact of the relevant variable. For a statistical analysis of coal washery data, clean coal yield and feed ash can be considered as response variable and covariate, respectively. The process parameter under study should be the variable of interest, for example, frother type in flotation unit and feed rate to the DM cyclone are the variable of interest. (4) The proposed method is useful because it can be applied to the data collected randomly from the plant. The method is robust and hence would not lead to wrong conclusion. Mean of data set Mean of data set Standard deviation of data set Standard deviation of data set Number of observation for data set Number of observation for data set Correlation coefficient Number of Sum of Sum of ∑ ∑ ∑ Residual mean square Mean of Mean of Data set for normal condition Data set for trial condition Subsets of data set NC having SE values within and below the designed range Subsets of data set TC having SE values within and below the designed range Pooled/mean gradient Reduced model Full model Residual sum of squares with ( Percentage combustible in feed (expressed as decimals) Percentage incombustible in feed (expressed as decimals) Percentage combustible in clean coal (expressed as decimals) Percentage combustible in tailing/rejects (expressed as decimals) Ordinate value of any point in the scatter plot Mean ordinate value of the data set Ordinate value of a point as predicted by the regression line Formula to calculate Pearson correlation coefficient value. The authors express their sincere thanks to Dr. O.N. Mohanty, Chief Research and Development and Scientific Services Division, Mr. J.P. Bapat, DGM West-Bokaro and Mr. P.V.T. Rao, Unit Head Raw Materials Research Group (R&D) for their keen interest and constant encouragement during the course of the work. Authors are also thankful to Geological Services of West-Bokaro washery III for providing necessary data to carry out this study. Authors are also thankful to Dr. A.I.A. Salama of CANMET for providing useful information on methods of calculation of separation efficiency.