This study presents a mathematical optimization model for resource conservation network (RCN) synthesis that includes interception units within the structure of the network. RCNs are the one of the most efficient designs for minimizing fresh water consumption, wastewater generation, and operation cost. Interception units (single pass and partitioning units) are widely accepted industrial application techniques used to reduce network complexity and flow rate targets in RCN. Cost equations relating to the piping and operating costs are added when interception units are designed in an RCN. Then, the problem is formulated as a two-stage optimization model whose objective functions are to minimize freshwater consumption and total annualized cost (TAC). The applicability of the developed model is demonstrated with two case studies. Single pass interception units with a fixed outlet concentration (C
                     
                        Rout
                     ) reduced freshwater consumption by 23.16% and 46.3%, while partitioning units reduced consumption by 21.69% and 29% respectively, when compared to base systems.{ { flow rate of a single pass interception inlet stream regenerated (purified) flow rate of single pass interception total freshwater flow rate required fresh water flow rate for sink regenerated (purified) flow rate required by sink reuse/recycle flow rate from source regenerated flow rate from source wastewater flow rate from source inlet flow rate of partitioning interception unit purified stream flow rate of partitioning interception unit reject flow rate of partitioning interception unit inlet stream concentration of partitioning interception unit purified stream concentration of partitioning interception unit reject stream concentration of partitioning interception unit reject flow rate of partitioning interception unit from sinks total annual cost operating cost piping cost binary variable indicating the existence of connection between sinks and sources limiting flow rate of source limiting concentration of source limiting flow rate of sink limiting concentration of sink maximum admissible concentration of sink minimum admissible concentration of sink outlet concentration of regenerated stream liquid recovery factor removal ratio annual working time unit cost of waste water unit cost of freshwater unit cost of regenerated water upper bound of reuse/recycle flow rate for both the interception units individual distance between sinks and sources stream flow rate velocity water density annualizing factor fractional interest rate number of years Water has become a major source of supply in many process industries; for example paper and pulp and chemical industries rely completely on freshwater. Optimization of freshwater consumption is one of the most important objectives of modern process industries. Increases in resource prices and operating costs lead process industries to optimize freshwater consumption while maintaining profitability. As result of improvements in material conservation and recycling/reuse, mass/heat exchange network-based process integration has seen major efficiency gains over the past decades. Process integration technique has emerged as an effective tool in identifying various retrofit alternatives and is defined as a holistic approach to design, modernize, and unify processes ( Compared to an end-of-pipe wastewater treatment system, process integration approaches involving RCNs are well suited to address various resource conservation alternatives. In most cases, fresh material consumption and waste generation are reduced simultaneously through resource conservation activities (  When the detailed synthesis of an RCN is achieved, process sources are partially treated by interception units or regeneration processes in order to further reduce target flowrates after the potential for water recovery through direct reuse/recycling is exhausted ( Several reports have studied the incorporation of interception units in RCNs ( This study focuses on RCN synthesis that incorporates interception units with fixed outlet quality and RR-based superstructure which embeds all possible process elements. The RCN is the modification of the superstructure given by ( In process integration, some special cases focus on material recovery. As a result, resource conservation networks (RCNs) are an alternative for the design of process industries, which address various process elements such as freshwater, recycle/reuse streams, interception units, and wastewater. The synthesized RCN design is identified by heuristics and optimization techniques. Furthermore, optimization of RCNs is characterized by the existence of process units and their interconnections. Implementation of reuse/recycle/interception units can further reduce the RCN. Therefore, the problem statement for the synthesis of RCNs involving recycle/reuse units is as follows.  In this study, we synthesized interception units with a fixed outlet quality and RR-based RCN. As the result, the RCN problem is formulated as an optimization model whose objectives are to minimize freshwater consumption and total annual cost (TAC). Hence, we developed a two-stage optimization model that minimizes feed water consumption and TAC while keeping all process constraints which are equality constraints such as flow rate balance for process sinks and sources, and flow rate balance for interception units and inequality constraints such as impurity constraint for process sinks, and flow rate constraint in piping connections. A superstructure approach is used to synthesize the RCN while embedding all process elements. The problem is defined as a two-stage optimization approach, so the overall RCN is comprised of two parts. Interception units are classified into two types: a superstructural mathematical model for single pass interception units and partitioning units is presented separately in the following sections. In the first stage, interception units are integrated in a sink–source arrangement to minimize freshwater consumption. The freshwater is considered as a source because sinks are probable units which accept the source. The first stage is formulated as superstructure model consisting of a flow rate balance of sinks, sources, and constraints with all feasible connections between sinks, sources, and interception units. The single pass interception unit is designed as a process unit that consists of single input and single output streams, as illustrated in To synthesize the RCN for a single pass interception unit, we first constructed a superstructural representation incorporating interception unit with sinks and sources. The structure and the information flow rate targets are also significant to the model. Due to the compatibility of the superstructural approach with many possible connections between sinks and sources, a connectivity matrix model-based RCN ( For a single pass interception unit, each inlet stream has a ( Next the optimization model is formulated for single pass interception unit. The optimization objective is set to minimize freshwater consumption which is given in Eq. The mathematical model for a single pass interception unit is as follows: The following constraints describe the flow rate and impurity balances for sinks and sources: The constraint in Eq. Eq. For a single pass interception unit, the flow rate balance is given as The flow rate balance for the process source is given as follows: All variables in the connectivity matrix of On inspection, constraints To illustrate the applicability of the single pass unit model, we considered two case studies with sources and sinks. To further reduce network complexity, we considered a single pass interception unit of fixed outlet quality (  The overall desired product recovery is given by the recovery factor The component balance of partitioning unit is given as:  A simplified model formulation approach takes the form of a connectivity matrix model based RCN, with the revised form shown in We have formulated the optimization model for the partitioning unit. The optimization objective is to minimize freshwater consumption while assuring all possible process constraints. The mathematical model for the partitioning interception unit is as follows: The total freshwater flowrate is the sum of individual flow rate. This is represented in The following constraints describe the flowrate and impurity balances for sinks and sources: Eq. The liquid recovery factor The flow rate balance for the process source is given as follows: The removal ratio (RR) is optimized using the concentration balance. RR is defined as the proportion of feed water stream entering the interception unit that exists in the reject stream. All variables in the connectivity matrix of Constraints We solved two case studies to illustrate the proposed partitioning interception unit approach. As has been previously mentioned, when detailed design of RCN is achieved, process sources are interloped with partitioning interception unit to further reduce the flow rate targets. In this study, partitioning interception optimizes Stage 1 dealt with the synthesis of RCN configurations for freshwater minimization. The task of stage 2 is to determine the total annual cost for the interception units. However, the second stage is solved in combination with first stage to minimize the TAC. The result of second stage determines the optimal flow rate targets of RCN, number of piping connections between sinks and sources, TAC, operating cost, piping cost, etc. The constraints specified in the second stage consists of freshwater, regenerated water, recycle/reuse flow rates, etc. Therefore, we synthesized an alternative RCN which encompasses all possible elements. In contrast, an alternative RCN is also obtained if the optimization models can also preclude any specified forbidden or compulsory connections between sinks and sources. In other words, additional constraints can be added to impose the connections between sinks and sources as active or not. It is worth noting that the reasons for considering forbidden connections include prohibition of low quality water for reuse/recycle, a large distance between process sources and sinks, etc. On the other hand, the reasons for imposing compulsory connection is to fulfill the sink requirement, and for safety considerations, etc. In this regard, an alternative RCN design is obtained when additional constraints are added to impose the forbidden or compulsory connections between sinks and sources. However, in this study, no additional constrains are added to impose forbidden or compulsory connections. Therefore, to address the RCN of interception units, we have introduced equations relating to the operating cost and capital cost to design variables through the stage 2 formulation. The superstructure for interception units in resource conversion networks (RCNs) is shown in The mathematical model for interception units is formulated and the objective function is presented as follows: The operating cost is given as the cost of freshwater, wastewater, and regenerated water. The particular cost terms are the product of freshwater, wastewater, and regenerated flow rates with their unit costs. Hence, Eq. Here, we consider a material regeneration/recycle/reuse problem where the piping cost is the second term to be minimized in the objective function. The binary variable The capital cost of the RCN is generally contributed by piping cost (PC) in Eq. Eqs. The objective of stage 2 is to synthesize an alternative resource conservation network (RCN). The objective function is set to minimize the total annual cost. We have clearly exhibited equations formulating the optimization model. Two case studies are solved to illustrate the proposed model and are described methodically to effectively illustrate synthesized RCNs. Furthermore, the case studies are meant to distinguish the RCNs of stage 1 and stage 2. Two case studies are discussed to illustrate the proposed method for the synthesis of a resource conservation network (RCN) involving interception units within the network. The first case study depicts paper production, where freshwater is highly used in paper mills. The second describes eco-industrial parks (EIPs), which are essential to establish a water exchange network between the plants installed within them. We will illustrate a typical paper mill that processes old newspapers and magazines to produce paper ( From the main stock printing ink is removed via DIP section, freshwater of 751.32 On the other hand, prior the discharge of wastewater with flowrate of 1680.3 Water use can be intercepted with interception units to increase water recovery in the RCN. In the paper mill case study, a dissolved air flotation (DAF) tank is frequently used as a water purification technique to reduce TSS from process streams. The minimum achievable outlet concentration The first type of RCN scheme is illustrated with single pass interception. The paper mill case study is revisited to illustrate the application of the superstructural approach in placing a single pass interception unit with fixed outlet quality Process sources are interloped with interception units to reduce freshwater and wastewater flow rates. In this example, single pass single pass interception units with a fixed outlet quality of Solving Eq. Having dealt with RCN flow rates determined in the stage 1 (FW and WW) as parameters, we solved the stage 2 model to determine the total annual cost of the RCN for single pass interception units. The following assumptions are made for the paper mill case study. (1) The concentration of freshwater is zero. (2) An equal Manhattan distance of The second type of RCN scheme addressed in this work is a separation process which uses a partitioning interception unit in the network. Water sources are fed to the partitioning interception unit, which then discharges a lower concentration product stream and a higher concentration reject stream. The lower concentration feed stream is used for recycling/reuse to satisfy process demands. The higher concentration reject stream is discharged as effluent or for further possible recycle/reuse within the network. To precisely design a partitioning interception unit, we introduced the liquid recovery factor We revisited the paper mill case study to illustrate the application of the partitioning interception unit. The objective function in Eq. It is significant to note that when the liquid recovery factor increases, there is a decrease in freshwater consumption, waste generation, and regenerator capacity. Based on the partitioning interception unit results, maximum liquid recovery Next, the MIQP model is optimized by minimizing the total annual cost using Eq. Analyzing the optimal solutions shown in Results from earlier work using the water cascade analysis (WCA; Furthermore, another representation for ease of RCN design takes the form of schematic diagram. The RCN which is represented in This case study is adopted from ( We illustrated the first scenario RCN scheme with a single pass interception unit. The EIP case study is revisited to illustrate the application involving single pass interception units with a fixed outlet quality The objective function in Eq. Analyzing the optimal solutions in Stage 1 minimizes freshwater and wastewater generation, while stage 2 calculates the TAC of an RCN involving a single pass interception unit. The following assumptions are made for the EIP case study. (1) The concentration of freshwater is zero. (2) An equal Manhattan distance of Next, the MILP model is optimized by minimizing total annual cost using Eq. Using the same case study as above, a partitioning interception unit is considered as a utility hub. We used a partitioning interception unit with a liquid recovery ratio of As shown in Next, the MIQP model is also solved using the objective function in Eq. Inspecting optimal solutions in Furthermore, an alternative representation of RCN is appears as schematic representation. In this regard, the RCNs obtained for case study 2 considering both single pass and partitioning interception unit shown in We designed a water network involving interception units with sinks and sources. In this study two literature examples are solved to illustrate the proposed approach. The resulting MILP and MIQP optimization models are solved using the branch and solver in the commercial optimization LINGO, extended version of 14.0, developed by We present two interception unit schemes in this paper. In the single pass interception unit, inlet and outlet stream have same flow rates with negligible flow rate loss. The partitioning interception unit produces two streams, a purified stream and reject stream, and both streams can be reused/recycled within the network. The implementation of interception units in RCN improves the flow rate targets of overall water network. We present a two-stage optimization model for synthesis of RCNs involving interception units, and developed a mathematical model for both stages. In the first stage, interception units are integrated in source–sink superstructure and synthesized to minimize freshwater consumption. Subsequently, freshwater is included as a new constraint in the second stage to minimize the TAC. Two literature case studies were solved to illustrate the proposed approach. Results showed that a significant improvement in flow rate targets can be achieved by incorporating interception units. We propose a superstructural representation of a single pass interception unit and a partitioning interception unit in this study. Through appropriate integration of these two interception units into the two base systems, flow rate targets of the single pass unit and can be decreased by nearly 23% and 46%, respectively than the partitioning unit. This work was supported by the Korea Research Foundation Grant funded by the