Benzofuran moiety is an important pharmacophore showing positive effects on bone health. In the present study, sixteen benzofuran-pyran hybrids were synthesized and were evaluated for their osteogenic effects on primary osteoblast cells isolated from calvaria. Compounds 22 and 24 were found potent in stimulating osteoblast differentiation as assessed by the alkaline phosphatase activity. These compounds were also found to be nontoxic to osteoblast cells as compared to the control cells in MTT assay. Further, Alizarin Red-S staining for visualization of calcium nodules demonstrated compounds 22 and 34 as active in enhancing mineralization in osteoblast cells. Additionally, transcriptional analysis of these compounds on osteoblast cells revealed that compound 22 up-regulated the expression of osteogenic genes RUNX2, BMP-2, COL-1, thus substantiating that compound 22 having two geminal methyl groups in its R3 position is a potent osteogenic agent. Additionally, compound 22 enhanced the ability of bone marrow stromal cells to differentiate towards osteoblast lineage and therefore can be further studied in vivo in bone loss model.Bone remodeling is a continuous process in an adult life, in which the active units are osteoblast and osteoclast. While going through this discovery pathway we worked upon benzofuran moiety, a very important pharmacophore showing positive effects on bone health. Li et al. have very recently reported 2-substituted benzofuran derivatives (A) as a potential bone anabolic agent targeting BMP-2. These derivatives enhanced the UpR values in both RNA and protein levels higher than 80%. Duff formylation on The synthesized compounds were screened for alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity in primary rat calvarial osteoblasts, which is an important marker of osteoblast differentiation. Cells were treated with compounds to evaluate ALP activity at concentrations ranging from 1 pM to 100 μM and optical density was determined at 405 nm. Compounds The compounds showing comparable and significantly high ALP activity were assessed for cell toxicity study by MTT assay. Compound treated cells were incubated with MTT for 4 h. After incubation period the crystal formed were dissolved in DMSO and OD was proportional to viable cells in each well. All the compounds were observed to be well tolerated at all concentration as is evident from O.D. Compound Compounds showing ALP activity were further evaluated for mineralization of calvarial osteoblast. Osteoblast seeded in 12 well plates were allowed to differentiate and treated with active concentration of the screened compounds for 21 days. After 21 days the cells were fixed and stained with alizarin red S stain, to visualize calcium nodules in culture plates. The compounds however showed deposition of calcium nodules similar to control untreated cells. The Alizarin Red S stained cultures were extracted and quantified and O.D was taken at 405 nm. Quantification of data suggests that compound Further the compounds were examined for their effect on osteogenic genes (Runx-2, BMP-2 and COL-1) in calvarial osteoblasts by quantitative PCR (qPCR). Glyceraldehydes 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) a house keeping gene was used as the internal control. Runx-2, a key transcription factor associated with osteoblast differentiation and its stimulation leads to osteoblast formation. BMP-2 is a marker of osteoblast differentiation is known to stimulate bone formation. COL-1 is well known to be involved in the matrix maturation and mineralization process. The transcript levels of Runx-2, BMP-2 and COL-1 were assessed by qPCR after treatment with compounds and results were expressed as fold change over untreated cells. The expression of Runx-2, BMP2 and COL-1 was increased by 2.4, 2.2 and 1.8-fold, respectively after treatment with compound Further, compound From the chemical structure of target compounds and available biological activities, a preliminary structure activity relationship (SAR) was established. Out of sixteen synthesized compounds, six compounds were found active. In all these six compounds the presence of geminal methyl group in cyclohexanone ring (at R In anticipation of osteogenic activity, a series of benzofuran-pyran hybrid were synthesized and evaluated for osteogenic activity using osteoblast differentiation assay. Among, the whole series of compounds, six compounds were found to be active in which compound The authors acknowledge CSIR-CDRI, Govt. of India, for financial and infrastructural support. Instrumentation facilities from SAIF, CDRI, are gratefully acknowledged. We acknowledge Dr. S. P. Singh (Technical Officer), CSIR-CDRI, for technical assistance. SG, RKM, DC are thankful to Supplementary data (details for characterization of all compounds together with protocols for biological materials and methods) associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 