This study intends to take a new look at the application of NPs as a nanocomposite form for the first time to gain the most from the effects of them for EOR purposes. For this, TiO2/SiO2 and Fe3O4/SiO2 nanocomposites were first synthesized and investigated for EOR purposes by different experiments, including contact angle, interfacial tension (IFT), injected fluid viscosity, NPs retention in porous medium and carbonate sand pack floodings. The results showed that each NP and nanocomposite presents a distinctive behavior depending on the pressure of the porous medium, with all bringing higher oil production compared to that of seawater (SW) injection. At the ambient pressure, the dominant mechanism during TiO2 and TiO2/SiO2 nanofluid injection was found to be the IFT reduction along with wettability alteration. Whereas, at the intermediate pressure (1500 psi), the wettability alteration by TiO2 NPs and TiO2/SiO2 nanofluids was regarded to be the dominant EOR mechanism and recorded a recovery factor of 60 and 72%, respectively. At the high pressure (3500 psi), the dominant mechanism was observed to be asphaltene adsorption by Fe3O4 NPs and Fe3O4/SiO2 nanocomposites leading to the ultimate recovery factor of 56 and 69%, respectively. The highest incremental recovery for NPs was observed for tertiary injection of SiO2 nanofluid at 1500 psi, which increased the oil recovery by 14%. Whereas, Fe3O4/SiO2 and TiO2/SiO2 nanofluids increased the oil recovery by 24 and 23% at the pressures of 3500 and 1500 psi, respectively. This confirms the efficient role of the synthesized nanocomposites for improved oil recovery. Finally, the results of absorbance measurements of the inlet and outlet of the sand pack during Fe3O4/SiO2 nanofluid injection indicated a 32.4% NPs retention in the porous medium.Brunauer–Emmett–Teller Distilled Water Enhanced Oil Recovery Interfacial Tension Nanofluid Injection Nanoparticles Pore Volume Scanning Electron Microscopy Seawater Injection Tetraethyl Orthosilicate X-ray Diffraction On the average, about one-third of the initial oil in place (IOIP) can be recovered through the primary and secondary methods. The rest is the oil trapped in the pore throats due to the surface and interfacial forces. This trapped oil can be drawn into production through the reduction of capillary forces, which prevent the oil movement in the porous medium [ The concentration of NPs in the base fluid has a double-faced impact on the injection of the nanofluids. According to the previous EOR studies, it has been reported that an optimum concentration exists for NPs depending on the porous medium and the crude oil [ The size and surface charge of the NPs can influence the disjoining pressure available in the system. The electrostatic repulsive forces between particles reduce with the decrease in the size of NPs, which leads to the increased disjoining pressure. However, the NPs aggregation gets a rise when there are very small particles in the system. The salinity of the base fluid is another critical feature affecting the nanofluid injection. In general, the stability of the NPs in the base fluid falls down in high salinities. Temperature is a key parameter in the stability of nanofluids. In fact, there is a direct relationship between temperature elevation and base fluid salinity with NPs agglomeration. Thermal stability is related to the base fluid salinity and formation rock lithology. An increase in the temperature results in the instability of NPs in the base fluid. However, based on the previous results, the efficiency of nanofluid for EOR purposes increases at higher temperatures, which results from IFT reduction at higher temperatures owing to the reduced liquid-liquid intermolecular forces. The other reason is the increase in Brownian motion with temperature elevation, which is accompanied by the oil viscosity reduction and is capable of bringing the required energy for oil displacement and production. Temperature rise also improves the catalytic behavior of metal oxide NPs, which further decrease the IFT and oil viscosity [ The surface wetting condition of the NPs is governed by the surface coating materials. To be detailed, the surface wetting condition regularizes the deployment of the NPs at the oil/water interface [ The specific surface area (SSA) of the porous medium depends on the reservoir grain size, in a way that the increase in the grain size reduces the reservoir’s SSA and mitigate the NPs deposition on the rock surface. The increase in injection velocity is the final critical issue centered on the efficiency of nanofluids, which can expand the movement of the smaller water molecules through the pore throats, compared to the suspended NPs. For the last decade, there has been a rapid rise in the investigation of NPs for the EOR methods. In this respect, Hendraningrat et al. investigated the application of hydrophilic polysilicon suspensions for EOR purposes. They pointed out that the addition of NPs provides a reduction in oil/water IFT and a more water-wet condition of the solid surface. They also observed an additional 5% improved oil recovery in their floodings [ Our research group was pioneered in the investigation of different nanocomposites for EOR purposes. Based on the results obtained from our previous study, Fe Fe TiO Wettability alteration, decrease in oil viscosity, and IFT reduction have all been reported as the most important EOR mechanisms during nanofluid injection into the oil reservoirs. However, pressure maintenance scenarios, including water and gas-based methods potentially introduce asphaltene precipitation problem, especially in heavy oil reservoirs. Therefore, the nanofluid injection can help with the improvement of EOR mechanisms if it leads to the reduction of asphaltene precipitation. Accordingly, this paper outlines and compares the role of pressure in the dynamic investigations during Fe The dead crude oil used in this research was obtained from one of the Iranian oil reservoirs, with a gravity and a density of 21.5°API and 0.94 gr/cm3, respectively. The results of SARA analysis indicated an 8% asphaltene, 2% resin, 41% saturate, and 49% aromatic in the crude oil. The results of analytical analyses carried out on the reservoir formation water (FW) and the seawater (SW) samples are tabulated in All of NPs used in this research were purchased from US Research Nanomaterials Inc. The detailed properties of them are shown in The carbonate slabs and sands used in this research were obtained from the outcrop of the reservoir formation. The mineralogical analysis performed on the rock is presented in Tetraethyl Orthosilicate (TEOS:Si(OC The sol-gel method was adopted for the synthesis of all nanocomposites with a core: shell ratio of 1:1. The synthesis process has been separately explained for each nanocomposite as follows: The process was based on the method performed by Kumar et al. and Waseen et al. [ The synthesis of this nanocomposite was the same as performed by Du et al. and Jitianu et al. [ In this research, diffraction patterns of the synthesized nanocomposites were determined at ambient temperature by PW1840 Philips X-ray diffractometer, with a Ni-filter, Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.542 ̊A) at 40 kV, and 30 mA potential, and scanning speed of 0.02°/s. In addition, the morphology and particle size of the synthesized nanocomposites were analyzed by Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FESEM) and Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). To assure the stability of nanofluids during flooding, zeta potential measurements of different 0.05 wt. % nanofluids were conducted. The apparatus used was the Microtrac Zeta Check apparatus (US), with a supporting range of –200 mV to +200 mV and an accuracy of ±1 mV. The sessile drop technique was used for contact angle measurement of nanofluid/oil/carbonate surface systems, as described elsewhere [ The pendant drop method was used for IFT measurements between crude oil and 0.05 wt. % TiO The first step of the preparation process was washing the carbonate sands with DW several times to remove the surface dust on the sands and to provide a complete grained porous medium, without matrix, which was followed by compacting them in a cylinder as a second step. The carbonate sand pack was first saturated by FW at a certain pressure. To simulate the secondary migration of oil from source rock into the reservoir, a low injection rate of 0.2 ml/min was adopted when injecting oil into the FW-saturated sand pack. The oil injection was continued until a constant and stable pressure difference between the inlet and outlet of the sand pack was reached, which led to the calculated irreducible water saturation (S The experimental plan was organized in two sequential steps: injection of SW as a secondary method into the oil-saturated sand pack followed by the injection of different 0.05 wt.% nanofluids (TiO To investigate the retention of synthesized nanocomposites in the porous medium during sand pack flooding, the absorbance spectrum of the inlet and outlet of the sand pack was analyzed by Dynamica DB-20S UV/Visible Double Beam Spectrophotometer with a full spectral scan from 190 to 1100 nm and a wavelength accuracy of 0.3 nm. Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) and Ultra Visible (UV–vis) spectroscopy are the most common methods for evaluation of the asphaltene adsorption by NPs. In this study, the UV–vis technique was utilized to evaluate the effect of NPs and nanocomposites on the prevention of asphaltene precipitation. Therefore, different batch adsorption experiments were carried out based on the procedure performed by previous authors [ The arrangement of atoms of a material dictates its properties. X-ray diffraction (XRD) is a non-destructive method by which the crystal structure of the material is determined. The results of XRD analysis performed on the two synthesized nanocomposites are presented in  The results of XRD analysis on TiO  In order to assure the stability of nanofluids, zeta potential measurements of SW and different nanofluids were performed ( IFT reduction is a key parameter for improvement of oil production. Based on the results obtained, IFT has not been reduced to ultra-low values, but when it comes to comparison of oil/SW and oil/nanofluids IFT, one can observe that the addition of nanocomposite to the SW has reduced the IFT from 39 to 13 mN/m (∼67% reduction in IFT). Although this reduction does not have much effect on the capillary forces, it can facilitate the crude oil movement in the pore throats and improve the mobility ratio. However, as noted before, IFT reduction is of less importance in the nanofluid injections, compared to the other EOR mechanisms. According to the previous results, the IFT between oil and water increases linearly with pressure [  As shown in According to Regarding the results obtained from previous studies, the prevailing EOR mechanisms with nanofluid injection into carbonate reservoirs are summarized as follows [ Rock wettability alteration due to the change in surface charges The formation of the stable emulsions at the oil/water interface Reduced asphaltene precipitation by the adsorption of asphaltene particles onto the high surface to volume ratio NPs The relative decrease in IFT between oil and water Thermal cracking of large asphaltene molecules at elevated temperatures due to the thermal conductivity of some NPs. Since the static experiments in this research were performed at the ambient temperature of 22 °C, the investigation of the first four mechanisms is only possible. It is valuable to mention that the formation and stabilization of the emulsions during flooding experiments are assumed to be nearly low owing to the adopted low injection flow rate (0.2 ml/min). In order to investigate the effect of NPs concentration on the injected phase viscosity and their possible impact on the mobility ratio, the injected fluid viscosity was measured in the presence of different 0.05 wt.% NPs and nanocomposites, as shown in The crude oil viscosity at ambient condition was measured as 160 cp, which is high as compared to the injected water viscosity. Further, injected fluid viscosity does not change considerably with the increase in NPs concentration (<1 wt.%). Therefore, it is logical to mention that alteration of injected fluid viscosity would have no ostensible effect on the mobility ratio. The ultimate recovery factors of different nanofluids at various pressures are shown in In the following, the most effective EOR mechanism on the oil recovery during flooding at each pressure has been determined. The method adopted is the ambient investigation of the static parameters affecting the oil recovery and then finding out their relevance to the pressure. These parameters include oil/water IFT, rock wettability, and asphaltene adsorption. The dynamic results have been then discussed in terms of static ones. At ambient pressure, 0.05 wt. % TiO During fluid injection in the porous medium, any phenomenon including deposition of asphaltene and scales is potential. These phenomena can alter the initial permeability of the porous medium. Generally, permeability alteration could appear in pressure drop in the sand pack, which results in the pressure difference. Therefore, it is true to mention that pressure variations are a function of permeability alteration, which affects the oil recovery. As indicated in  Asphaltene deposition has a negative effect on the oil production since it is capable of blocking the pore throats and hence increasing the pressure difference of the system during flooding. This phenomenon varies with the pressure changing and presents distinctive behaviors for each of the dead or live crude oil. That is, for live oil, the pressure intensifies the asphaltene deposition below bubble point pressure, in which a maximum amount of asphaltene deposition occurs at the bubble point. However, beyond that, a reducing trend for asphaltene deposition is observed with pressure. For dead oil, pressure increase diminishes the asphaltene deposition, which further decreases with temperature elevation [ It is worth to mention that rock wettability alteration is mainly dependent on temperature, rock minerals, oil composition, pressure, and type of nanofluid. All these parameters are fixed in this study except for the last two (i.e. pressure and type of nanofluid). For a given nanofluid, the pressure variations are the key factor governing the wettability of the system. As noted earlier, with an increase in pressure, a lower amount of asphaltene is precipitated and deposited in the dead crude oil; therefore, the wettability alteration toward the water-wet condition is better performed by nanofluids at higher pressures. As a consequence, the ambient contact angle measurements performed in this research are considered to be improved at higher pressures. As discussed before, the possibility of asphaltene deposition in dead crude oil reduces with pressure. In this situation, the role of NPs in the adsorption of asphaltene particles for preventing precipitation is important. As indicated in  To investigate the retention of Fe Based on previous and obtained results in this research, Fe To prove the hypothesis of asphaltene adsorption by Fe Where Q  The main BET Isotherm was first developed in 1938 for modeling gas phase adsorption, as follows (Eq. Applying BET Isotherm for modeling liquid phase adsorption, one can substitute liquid phase concentration (C) for the partial pressure of adsorbate (P). Both C and P are indicative of a physical concentration concept in the gas and liquid phase, respectively. Therefore, in Eq.  As indicated in In this research, different SiO Tertiary injection of all NPs (SiO The pressure differences between the inlet and outlet of the sand pack is a function of asphaltene precipitation, rock wettability, oil/water IFT, NPs deposition (due to the instability), and the formation and stability of the emulsions formed in the porous medium. According to the results obtained in this research, the pressure difference between the inlet and outlet of the ambient sand pack floodings was up to 6 psi, whereas it was up to 17 and 29 psi for pressure systems of 1500 and 3500 psi, respectively. The asphaltic dead crude oil used in this research dictated the increase in IFT values at higher pressures (1500 and 3500 psi). High pressures also can compact NPs at the interface and reduce NPs efficiency in the IFT reduction. Therefore, IFT reduction in the presence of NPs at ambient pressure was more sensible than that of higher pressures. In this regard, TiO Wettability alteration of carbonate rocks toward the water-wet condition was regarded as the dominant oil production mechanism at the intermediate pressure (1500 psi). Since the pressure increase reduces the asphaltene deposition, the wettability alterations by NPs observed at the ambient pressures are assumed to be improved at higher pressures. According to the results, among NPs, TiO Asphaltene deposition is capable of blocking the pore throats and increasing the pressure differences which may result in a decrease in oil production. Compared to the other NPs, Fe The results of Fe Batch adsorption analysis indicated an improved asphaltene adsorption for the synthesized Fe The authors would like to appreciate the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) for providing the crude oil and related informative analyses and also Miss Sanaz Shojaei for her collaboration in this work.