The Ta/TaN multilayer structure with repeated layers of a poly-crystalline Ta layer of high ductility and a TaN layer of high hardness is expected to exhibit toughness. This paper reports the results on the hardnesses and the adhesion strengths of the Ta/TaN multilayer and the compositionally gradient Ta/TaN layer deposited on the high speed steel substrate by reactive sputtering as a function of annealing temperature. The TaN film deposited with the N2/Ar ratio of 0.4 in the reactive sputtering process exhibits the highest crystallinity leading to the highest hardness and adhesion strength of the Ta/TaN multilayer. The hardness and adhesion strength of the Ta/TaN multilayer becomes deteriorated with increasing the annealing temperature in the heat treatment conducted right after the deposition of the layer. Therefore, the post-annealing treatment is not desirable in the case of the Ta/TaN multilayer from the standpoint of mechanical properties. Also the hardness of the Ta/TaN multilayer increases with decreasing the compositional modulation wavelength, but the adhesion property of the layers is nearly independent of the wavelength. On the other hand, the compositionally gradient Ta/TaN film exhibits the highest hardness and adhesion strength for the post-annealing temperatures of 200 and 400°C, respectively. This result for the compositionally gradient Ta/TaN film differs from that of the Ta/TaN multilayer.Hard coatings are very effectively used in industry for improving tool lifetime and performance. One of the most widely used and studied coatings to date is TiN, which offers excellent properties including high hardness, low friction and chemical inertness Since TaN and Ta are hard and ductile, respectively, it is expected that the multilayered Ta/TaN coatings have higher toughness than TaN coatings. In this study, dependences of mechanical properties such as hardness and ductility on the processing conditions and compositional modulation wavelength, was investigated for Ta/TaN multilayer coatings deposited by reactive sputtering. A high speed tool steel, SKH 9 was used as the substrate material for Ta/TaN multilayer coatings, and was cut into small samples with the size of 20×20×2 mm Multiple layers of Ta/TaN were deposited by using a reactive sputtering method in an Ar atmosphere with a Ta target. First, a Ta layer was deposited in an Ar atmosphere, followed by supplying N Compositionally gradient Ta/TaN layers were deposited by reactive sputtering, too. First, a Ta film was deposited on the substrate in an Ar atmosphere and then, the ratio of the N The crystallographic, as well as the mechanical, properties of the coated layers were investigated by using XRD (X-ray diffraction) analysis, micro-vickers hardness tests and scratch tests. The variation in the chemical composition of the coated layer was analyzed by AES (Auger Electron Spectroscopy) depth profiling. The thicknesses of the films were measured both with atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). On the other hand, the compositional modulation period was evaluated by Auger depth profiling. Prior to the real specimen preparation of the deposition rate of each film with different compositions was roughly determined through repeated depositions. The compositional modulation periods determined by Auger depth profiling were more or less the same as the ones estimated from the deposition rate determined by the test depositions. The thickness of the films used for the hardness and adhesion strength measurements throughout this study was about 1 μm. Microhardnesses of the Ta/TaN multilayered coatings on high speed steel substrates are shown in  Another thing to note is the change in the depth profile of N composition. AES depth profiles in A long compositional modulation wavelength seems to decrease the hardness of the coated layers as shown in The adhesion strength of the coated layers to the substrates was measured by a scratch test. During the test, a stylus with a 0.2 mm diamond tip moved across the sample surface with increasing force normal to the surface, starting from 0 N and finishing at 60 N. The critical normal load is defined as the load corresponding to de-cohesion of the coating, which is determined by optical microscopy. The critical load as a function of various coating parameters is shown in   However, there is a strong tendency that the hardness decreases as the annealing temperature increases further. Also it is noted that the hardness of the coatings is particularly low at 800°C. This may be because the decrease in hardness due to oxidation is larger than the increase in hardness due to the nitridation of the Ta layer by the diffusion of N atoms into the Ta layer. As mentioned earlier, the formation of Ta In this study Ta/TaN multilayer coatings and compositionally gradient Ta/TaN coatings deposited at a fixed total sputtering gas pressure (5 mTorr) and a fixed substrate temperature (room temperature) by reactive sputtering on the high speed tool steel were investigated, and the following conclusions were obtained: The optimum N The hardness and the adhesion strength of the Ta/TaN multilayer coatings decreases as the annealing temperature increases, which suggests that the post-annealing treatment is not desirable for the Ta/TaN multilayer coatings. As the compositional modulation wavelength decreases, the hardness of the Ta/TaN multilayer increases, whereas the adhesion strength is nearly independent of the wavelength. The post-annealing at 200 and 400°C offers the highest hardness and adhesion strength for the compositionally gradient Ta/TaN coatings, respectively. These results differ from those for the Ta/TaN multilayer coatings. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support made by the Korea Research Foundation made in the Program Year 1997.