Platinum group metals (PGMs) are used widely in various applications, including as environmental catalysts. Since PGMs are rare and expensive, they are recycled after being recovered. Currently, PGMs are recovered, after a pyrometallurgical step that upgrades the concentration, by dissolving in strong acids containing toxic oxidizing agents like aqua regia. To avoid the use of such toxic agents, we have proposed a new route to dissolve PGMs in hydrochloric acid (HCl) using complex oxides. In the present study, we used this new process to dissolve Pt in supported metal catalysts. Complex oxides of Pt were prepared by calcining mixtures of Pt/Al2O3 and alkali metal salts at 600–800°C in air. These were then dissolved in 12M HCl. The results showed that the Pt in the calcined samples dissolved readily in HCl and that the Pt solubility was nearly 100% under the appropriate preparation and dissolution conditions. We also confirmed that the new process is suitable for leaching PGMs from spent automotive catalysts.Platinum group metals (PGMs), which include Pt, Pd, Rh, Rh, Ir, Ru, and Os, play important roles in various industrial applications, especially as catalysts. Pt, Pd, and Rh are indispensable as catalysts for motor vehicles, because these PGMs exhibit excellent performance in the purification of exhaust gas. In fact, the primary use of PGMs is as emission-control catalysts in automobiles; in 2012, the worldwide demand of Pt, Pd, and Rh reached 40%, 67% and 81%, respectively ( Currently, PGMs are recovered, after a pyrometallurgical step that upgrades the concentration, by dissolving in strong acids containing toxic oxidizing agents like aqua regia. The acid dissolution of PGMs is unavoidable ( To be able to dissolve PGM in acids without having to use toxic oxidizers, we had proposed a dissolution process that involves using the complex oxides of PGMs and alkali metals ( As mentioned above, we had previously found that Li and Na salts react with Pt powder to produce platinates; however, K-Pt complex oxides are not produced during this reaction ( The mixture of the Pt catalyst and Li To characterize the dissolution behaviors of alkali metal platinates in HCl, dissolution tests were performed under various conditions. A typical dissolution treatment under atmospheric conditions was as follows: a sample of the obtained powder (50 In order to dissolve the platinates completely, we also dissolved samples using a pressure decomposition system ( The leaching of PGMs from a spent automotive catalyst was investigated using the spent automotive catalyst NIST SRM2557 (powder form <74 The crystalline phases and crystallite sizes of the samples and residues were characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses performed using a diffractometer (Rigaku RINT 2000) equipped with a Cu Kα radiation source. The diffraction profiles were acquired over 2 The concentrations of PGMs, the alkali metals, and Al in the solution samples after the dissolution treatment were determined using inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES, IRIS Advantage, Thermo Jarrell Ash Co.). The total metal contents of the samples were measured after complete dissolution using a pressure decomposition system. Complete dissolution was achieved as follows: either the calcined sample (1/2 of the total weight) or the solid residue, was suspended in 12 The spent automotive catalyst did not dissolve completely even when subjected to the dissolution process described above. Thus, the solubilities of Pt, Pd, and Rh were calculated based on the certified values determined by NIST. These values were determined using isotope dilution mass spectrometry (Pt and Pd) and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (Rh). We examined various preparation conditions, including the choice of the alkali metal salts and the calcination conditions, for converting Pt into platinates. The effects of an ageing treatment on Pt reactivity were also investigated. The obtained samples were subjected to XRD analyses in order to identify their crystalline phases. The sample preparation conditions and the identified phases are listed in From a thermodynamic point of view, the formation reaction of platinates involves both O After being calcined with the alkali metal salts, the alumina (γ-Al These results suggested that the platinate formation process should be applicable in the case of catalyst materials as well. In catalytic materials, the catalyst support is usually covered with fine catalyst particles. The catalyst support is a porous material and hence exhibits a high surface area. Nevertheless, the aggregation and sintering of the catalyst occurs gradually at high temperatures. Since platinate formation (Eq. After being aged at 750 Further, we investigated the structural changes induced in the Pt catalyst after the ageing treatment. The XRD profiles of the unaged and aged Pt catalysts are displayed in We had previously reported that Pt can react completely with Li salts at 600 To estimate the conversion of Pt, samples M and N were dissolved in HCl using a pressure decomposition system. For comparison, samples A and B were also dissolved in HCl; sample A contained Li To investigate the dissolution behavior of platinates under mild conditions, the obtained platinates were dissolved under atmospheric pressure in 12 The dissolution behavior of platinates probably depends on their crystallite size. In particular, the calcination conditions of Li The leaching of metals other than Pt, especially alkali metals and Al, can induce structural changes in the sample being dissolved. To investigate the structural changes induced upon dissolution, the crystal structures and chemical compositions of the residues were characterized. The XRD profiles of the sample residues remaining after dissolution in HCl at 80 The obtained platinates, M The compositions of actual catalysts are far more complex than that of the model Pt catalyst used in this study. For example, automotive catalysts usually consist of a large number of ingredients such as Al, Si, Mg, and Ce, in addition to PGMs. We further studied the feasibility of the proposed method using a scrap material. In this experiment, we used the new process to leach PGMs from a spent automotive catalyst, which was the catalyst NIST SRM2557 in powdered form. Mixtures of SRM2557 and the Li and Na salts were calcined at 800 The obtained results demonstrate that the proposed process can be used in the case of spent automotive catalysts. The preparation/dissolution conditions that would result in the complete leaching of PGMs could not be determined. However, further optimization of the preparation/dissolution conditions should improve the solubility of PGMs. A method for recovering PGMs that involves the dissolution of Pt through the use of Pt complex oxides was employed in the case of a catalytic material. The Pt in the catalyst could be converted into platinates after calcination with alkali metal salts in air. The obtained platinates dissolved readily in HCl, with the Pt solubility being nearly 100% under the proper preparation and dissolution conditions. The proposed process was also applicable for leaching PGMs from a spent automotive catalyst. Thus, it can be concluded that dissolving PGM using complex oxides is a highly safe process and should find wide use in the recovery of PGMs. This study was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for