Due to the enormous quantities arising in the milling industry and its specific properties, wheat bran can be considered as a feedstock for future biorefineries. In the present work, a detailed investigation was carried out on the hydrothermal (140–200°C) and enzymatic treatment of wheat bran. After hydrothermal pretreatment and a subsequent enzymatic hydrolysis a glucose yield of 65% and 90% was achieved, respectively. Interestingly, the hemicelluloses could be disintegrated to monomers only to approx. 50%. About 70% of the proteins were dissolved, however, practically no free amino acids were obtained under given conditions. Severe treatment conditions induce elevated losses of some amino acids. Minerals could be extracted almost completely. To disintegrate fat into glycerol and fatty acids severe process conditions were necessary. The formation of undesired by-products such as furfural or hydroxymethylfurfural starts at approx. 180°C.Facing the impending depletion of fossil resources, the development of biorefinery systems is an essential contribution to ensure the continuous supply of food, feed, chemicals, materials, goods, fuels and energy in the future. In this context, different systems like the lignocellulosic feedstock biorefinery, the whole crop biorefinery, the green biorefinery as well as the so-called two-platform concept are in the focus of research and development ( Generally, pretreatment is essential in order to fractionate a feedstock, and in addition, attention to all substances has to be paid from the beginning on. The type of the applied pretreatment system depends on the chosen biorefinery concept and the kind of biomass. Usually, wood is a common raw material, however, many biomass-streams originating from other areas can also serve as feedstocks in biorefineries. For example, as a major by-product of the milling process for the production of white wheat flour, wheat bran accrues in enormous quantities. In the year 2010, approx. 650 million tons of wheat have been produced worldwide, thereof 135 million tons in the European Union ( Comparing the typical lignocellulosic biomass compositions of hard- and softwoods as well as those of agricultural residues like straw and corn stover ( Wheat bran was provided by the VonWiller mill (Schwechat, Austria) and directly used without further comminution. The hydrothermal pretreatment was performed in a 2 The pretreated slurries were treated with amylolytic, cellulolytic and hemicellulolytic enzymes. No acid was added to the pretreated slurries, which showed pH-values between 3.9 and 6.3, before enzymatic hydrolysis. The enzymes were applied in excess to ensure a high degree of carbohydrate hydrolysis. Since emphasis was paid on hydrothermal pretreatment, the enzymatic process was not investigated in detail. Cellulase (0.017 The slurries were centrifuged for 2 The sugar composition of the bran itself, free and total sugar concentrations (glucose, xylose, arabinose and galactose) as well as the levels of degradation products (furfural, hydroxymethylfurfural, glycerol, acetic and levulinic acid) in solution were measured according to the Standard Laboratory Analytical Procedures (LAP) for biomass analysis provided by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory ( The amino acids were analyzed via HPLC using pre-column derivatization with ortho-phthalaldehyde (OPA) and 9-fluorenylmethyl chloroformate (FMOC) and fluorescence detection ( The mobile phases were prepared as follows: mobile phase A: 1.4 The following reagents were used for the derivatization procedure: 0.1 The pre-column derivatization was performed directly in the autosampler and accomplished by the programmable injector unit: 2.5 For the measurement of the total amino acids, a protein hydrolysis step was performed according to the community methods of analysis for the determination of amino acids in feedingstuffs The determination of cations was executed as follows: 25 Before anion determination, protein precipitation using Carrez reagents was performed ( The composition of the untreated wheat bran is given in In the following sections, the results are presented in accordance to the main bran fractions (glucose from starch and cellulose, hemicellulose, protein, minerals and fat). The results regarding the formation of by-products (furfural, hydroxymethylfurfural, glycerol and levulinic acid) are shown separately. As already shown by other authors ( Regarding glucose, the hydrothermal pretreatments led to the following results ( As already known, after a hydrothermal pretreatment, an additional processing step is necessary in order to increase the yield and to obtain the glucose in its monomeric form. A glucose yield of approx. 90% could be achieved after hydrothermal treatment (180 Hemicellulose is a heteropolymer, thus its degradation leads to different sugar monomers. Although the hemicellulose is mainly composed of xylose, arabinose, galactose and mannose, also other sugar species can be found in trace amounts. In addition, through hydrothermal treatment, the cleavage of the acetylated saccharide-chains can lead to the release of acetic acid. Usually, the disintegration of hemicelluloses into oligomers should be easily accomplished by applying a hydrothermal process ( After enzymatic treatment of the slurries ( At more severe conditions than approx. 180 In a biorefinery, usually the carbohydrate fraction is in the focus of interest. However, considering the proportion of protein in bran (13.2% of the dry mass), its utilization is also of great relevance. Regarding the behaviour of proteins during disintegration of wheat bran, some hints were given by   Finally it can be noted, that the proteins are practically not disintegrated into free amino acids under the hydrothermal process conditions applied. Wheat bran contains about 7% ash on dry mass basis, which represents another non-negligible mass stream within a bran biorefinery. With a crude fat content of 4.3% (dry mass basis) in wheat bran, the lipid fraction has also to be taken into account. Using fat samples from other resources than wheat bran, the fat hydrolysis into glycerol and fatty acids under hydrothermal conditions was studied earlier (e.g., by Degradation products are of great relevance not only in terms of their possible inhibitory effects on fermentations, but also because of the fact that their formation means reduced yields of sugars and other valuable substances. The decomposition of C5-sugars results in the formation of furfural and further of formic acid, while C6-sugars may be converted to hydroxymethylfurfural and further to formic- and levulinic acid. The cleavage of the acetylated hemicelluloses leads to the release of acetic acid and therefore to a pH-drop, thus also catalyzing disintegration reactions during the hydrothermal pretreatment process. Not much is known about the degradation of lignin yet, and highly sophisticated analytical methods are necessary to follow the reaction products. Therefore this branch of degradation products is often not quantified and quoted only qualitatively in literature (  The level of acetic acid remains rather constant until 180 Based on its composition, wheat bran could be regarded as a feedstock with extra value in context of a biorefinery. However, the technological requirements increase simultaneously. For example, due to the high content of minerals, their separation and utilization, for instance as fertilizer, is strongly recommended or even unavoidable. The results also indicate that fractionation of proteins and fat before a hydrothermal treatment may be advantageous. Particularly in the case of the proteins, corresponding processes need to be investigated and developed. The present results and further necessary investigations may allow drawing a realistic techno-economic scenario of a possible bran biorefinery. This work was supported by