The penetration time of hydrophilic micron particles during the submergence process is experimentally studied by using a high-speed camera. The effects of impact velocity (0.5 m/s ≤ u
                     p0 ≤ 1.48 m/s), surface tension (44.3 mN/m ≤ γ ≤ 73.9 mN/m) and dynamic viscosity (1.31 mPa·s ≤ μ ≤ 2.13 mPa·s) on the penetration time have been investigated. The penetration time for different fluids can be expressed as two different functions with the increase of impact velocity, which are in a good accordance with the experimental results. The results show that the penetration time exhibits a power function with particle size at lower impact velocity (u
                     p0 ≤ 0.5 m/s), which increases with the surface tension decreasing and dynamic viscosity increasing. As the impact velocity increases, the penetration time can be expressed as a linear function of particle size. When the impact velocity exceeds the transition velocity (u
                     p0 ≈ 0.74 m/s), the penetration time decreases at first and then increases with the decreasing surface tension, while changing little with the increase of dynamic viscosity. The confinement effect of cavity induced by the Marangoni stress and viscous stress has been analyzed in the different surface tension and dynamic viscosity solutions, respectively. The competitive motion of the three-phase contact line (TPCL) width and interfacial deformation width is the key factor that controls the capillary force, further influencing the penetration time.the maximum cross-sectional area of the particle submerged part [μm correction factor [dimensionless] initial correction factor at lower velocity [dimensionless] deviation coefficient [dimensionless] correction factor [dimensionless] initial correction factor at higher velocity [dimensionless] deviation coefficient [dimensionless] additional mass coefficient [dimensionless] drag coefficient [dimensionless] the concentration of ethanol solutions [wt%] the concentration of glycerol solutions [wt%] distance interval of three-phase contact line [μm] additional mass force [mN] buoyancy force [mN] drag force [mN] gravity force [mN] surface tension force [mN] gravitational acceleration cavitation depth [μm] penetration depth [μm] maximum immersion depth [μm] characteristic length [μm] particle radius [μm] radius of three-phase contact line [μm] penetration time [ms] time interval [ms] particle velocity [m/s] particle impact velocity [m/s] transition impact velocity [m/s] Weber number [dimensionless] width of interfacial deformation [μm] distance interval of interfacial deformation width [μm] surface tension [mN/m] surface tension of ultrapure water [mN/m] dynamic contact angle [°] static contact angle [°] dynamic viscosity [mPa·s] dynamic viscosity of ultrapure water [mPa·s] liquid density [kg/m particle density [kg/m penetration angle [°] Particulate matter (PM) is one of the major sources of pollutant emissions, which has caused irreversible environmental pollution and serious impacts on human health ( Great progress has been made in understanding the transport mechanisms ( Compared with the particles of micron scale, the concave bubble surface can be approximated as an unconfined planar interface. The micron particle impaction process can be considered as the interaction between micron particles and an unconfined planar gas-liquid interface. To date, researches on the interaction process of micron particles are in an early stage, which mainly focus on the critical conditions of hydrophobic micron particles and temporal evolution of the interface ( As the foundational researches of cavity dynamics, the centimeter or millimeter scale of spheres or cylinders are used as analogs ( The interaction of particles with a gas-liquid interface in the mineral flotation is similar to that of bubble scrubbing system, while the particles are dispersed in the liquid phase. So the particles are already wetted when they collide with the gas-liquid interface. The selective attachment of hydrophobic particles is realized from the outer surface of the bubble. Under such background, the studies that flotation is applied to airborne particles impacting a liquid free surface are referred to this work. In present industry, the prewetting methods (i.e. spraying and heterogeneous condensation) are widely adopted to improve the particle wettability and strengthen the collection efficiency. Thus, hydrophilic micron particles are used as solid phase in this study. A series of experiments were conducted to investigate the penetration time As the bubble rises, the micron particles impact on the bubble interface and penetrate the interface under the effect of bubble internal circulation. The competitive relationship between the particle penetration time and bubble residence time will cause the difference in separation efficiency.   It is worth mentioning that the expression of surface tension force is derived by the Gibbs free energy analysis. However, such expression leads to a linear relationship between the force and particle displacement and the maximum force value occurring at the initial contact point ( Due to the small size of micron particles, the magnitudes of gravity and buoyancy force are three orders smaller than that of the other forces. These two forces are negligible. When the impact velocity just exceeds the critical one, the particles can penetrate the interface. It is considered that the penetration process is dominated by surface tension force. According to Newton’s second law, the equation of particle motion can be expressed as The scaling law is accepted ( As shown in Substituting Eq. The maximum capillary force ( The static contact angle of micron particles with small pore structure was measured according to the Lucas-Washburn equation ( Combing Eqs. In order to confirm whether the non-ideal effects exist, With the increase of impact velocity, the drag force and additional mass force become obvious. According to the scaling law, the drag force is expressed as The additional mass force is expressed as The particle motion equation Eq. Substituting Eqs. With Eq. Also, The experimental setup is shown schematically in The container was made of perspex, 5 mm in width and 250 mm in length. Two optical glasses (15 mm × 200 mm) were embedded into the two sides of perspex. In order to avoid the effect of wall surface contact angle on the penetration process ( The high-speed camera (Fastcam APX-RS, Photron) equipped with an optical zoom lens (12X Zoom, Navitar) was used to record the particle interaction process. In order to obtain the interaction process with high time resolution, the camera was operated at 20,000 fps with 1/25,000 s exposure time. The resolution was 512 × 256 pixels. The LED cold light source (KW-V50-HW, Kaiwei Optical Company) was served as a backlight source. As shown in The size distributions of spherical glass beads were measured by laser particle analyzer (Mastersizer 2000, Malvern) as shown in Several experiments were carried out under the same impact velocity in order to select as many focused particles as possible. And for this reason, the number and diameter of micron particles in each picture are inconsistent. Except for a few cases, ten effective measured particle size and penetration time can be ensured under the same impact velocity, which confirms the reliability of the results. In addition, some micron particles were rotating during the penetration process. This phenomenon lies in the fact that the particles impact the interface with a certain angle. When we measured the particle size and impact velocity, these particles were ignored. For most particles which are falling vertically onto the free surface, the rotational component of the impacting particle is invisible and can be negligible. When micron particles impact on the interface with different particle size and velocity, two kinds of interaction behavior can be observed in The penetration process can be divided into two stages: slamming and cavity development stage. Most of the particle surface is wet in the slamming stage and the TPCL is the same as the horizontal interface. This phenomenon is different with the hydrophobic micron particle simulation result ( The present study does not discuss the differences between the two interaction behaviors and cavity dynamics. The focus of this article is on the penetration time which is the time from the particle contacting the interface to the particle completely submerging below the interface. Although many studies have obtained the interaction process with a high-speed camera, there is no systematic research on the penetration time. The relative magnitude of penetration time and bubble residence time will directly affect the particle collection efficiency in the scrubbing system.  The interaction process of micron particles dispersed in the gas phase impacting the gas-liquid interface is the reverse process of bubble-particle interaction in flotation ( When the impact velocity reaches 0.74 m/s, the penetration time has a good linear relationship with In this section, different concentrations of ethanol solution serve as the liquid phase. The surface tension of ethanol solution rapidly decreases and the dynamic viscosity increases slightly with the increase of ethanol concentration. It can be approximately considered to be the effect of surface tension on the penetration time. It is worth noticing that the micron particles, whose volume average diameters are 204.8 μm and 140.4 μm, are floating on the interface when the impact velocity is 0.5 m/s and surface tension is 44.3 mN/m. The penetration time of these micron particles is missing in  As measured in When the impact velocity is 0.5 m/s and surface tension is 51.3 mN/m, the interfacial deformation width will gradually decrease at the later time of cavity development stage, as shown in On the other hand, the decrease of surface tension may improve the wetting rate of liquid on the particle surface. The capillary force, which is one of the main forces that control the penetration process, would be influenced by the relative movement of interfacial deformation width and TPCL width ( When the particle impact velocity is 0.5 m/s, the retraction rate of TPCL width in two solutions remains similar during the cavity development stage. While the momentum of cavity expansion is gradually dissipated and the stress caused by the Marangoni effect become obvious in the ethanol solution ( With the increase of impact velocity, the momentum of cavity expansion is quite enough to conquer the Marangoni stress, while the interfacial deformation width is still confined. As shown in The confined interface induced by the Marangoni effect is the main cause of influencing the penetration time. Targeted regulation of surface tension in the droplets and bubbles will contribute to separate the micron particles in the atmosphere and industrial process ( In this section, different concentrations of glycerol solution are applied as the liquid phase. Contrary to the above section, the surface tension of glycerol solution is approximately constant, while the dynamic viscosity gradually increases with the increase of glycerol concentration. Thus, it can be seen as the effect of dynamic viscosity on the penetration time. When the particle impact velocity is 0.5 m/s, the penetration time increases with the increase of dynamic viscosity (as shown in  When the particle impact velocity is 0.5 m/s, the momentum of cavity expansion cannot overcome the viscous stress during the cavity development stage. As shown in Similar to the previous section, With the increase of impact velocity, the particle momentum is large enough to conquer the drag force. The cavity depth gradually increases as time goes, while the interfacial deformation is just slight widened due to the confinement effect of viscous stress, as shown in The correction factors On the basis of fitted data in Based on Eqs. At higher impact velocity ( On the basis of fitted data in Based on Eqs. The comparison of calculated values and fitted values of The penetration time of hydrophilic micron particles impacting into an unconfined planar gas-liquid interface is experimentally studied. The effects of impact velocity, surface tension, and dynamic viscosity are investigated. The major conclusions have been developed as follow: For the interface constructed by air and different fluid, the penetration time of different particle size all has two kinds of expression: At lower impact velocity ( With the increase of impact velocity, the penetration process is dominated by the combination of surface tension force, drag force, and additional mass force, which lead to the linear functional relationship between The deviation coefficients When the liquid phase is ethanol solution with different concentrations, the existence of surface tension gradient (Marangoni effect) will induce the cavity to be confined or even retracted. The relative motion of the TPCL width and interfacial deformation width is the key factor that controls the capillary force, further influencing the penetration time. The penetration time increases as the decrease of surface tension at lower impact velocity ( When the liquid phase is glycerol solution with different concentrations, the viscous stress becomes obvious with the increase of dynamic viscosity. For viscous fluid, the viscous stress will also confine the cavity, subsequently affecting the capillary force and penetration time. With the increase of viscosity, both increased drag force and capillary force will cause the extension of penetration time at lower impact velocity. With the combination of increased drag force, increased capillary force and increased hydrostatic pressure will cause the penetration time to change little with the increase of dynamic viscosity at higher impact velocity. To obtain the desired particle collection efficiency in the industrial scale, the suitable range of gas-liquid two-phase flow parameters can be referred with the help of penetration time. In further research, detailed fluid field during the submergence process with different liquid properties will be investigated by CFD simulation. This work was supported by the