Hip fractures occur in over 70,000 people each year in the United Kingdom (UK), a figure predicted to rise to over 100,000 by 2020. Fragility fractures are defined as “fracture caused by forces equivalent to a fall from standing height or less”. Osteoporosis is a disease where low bone mass and a deterioration of the structure of the bone itself leads to an increase in fragility of bone and therefore a further increase in susceptibility to fracture. Diagnosis of osteoporosis is made on the basis of bone mineral density in comparison to the mean BMD of young adults at their peak bone mass. Hip fractures are classified into being either extracapsular or intracapsular, depending on whether the fracture occurs within or distal to the hip capsule. Intracapsular and extracapsular hip fractures have also been associated with different levels of bone mineral density. The role of vitamin D in neck of femur fractures was therefore investigated, and how this was related to levels of deprivation, bone mineral density and fracture type, in order to identify potential predictive factors. All patients who had been admitted with a neck of femur fracture, at a level 1 trauma centre, over the course of one year were retrospectively reviewed. Vitamin D levels from admission blood tests were recorded and patients were assigned as being either of adequate, insufficient or deficient vitamin D status. Patients who underwent dual energy absorptiometry (DEXA) scans were assigned a BMD status of normal, osteopenia, osteoporosis based on their T scores. Using the postcodes from the recorded address of patients, their lower layer super output area (LSOA) code was generated. Statistical analysis was performed using Pearson's correlation coefficient to assess continuous variables and Chi-Square for categorical variables. In total 360 patients were admitted over the study period with a neck of femur fracture. Of these patients, 305 had vitamin D levels recorded during their admission, and of these 298 patients had radiographs available to review. In total 76 patients had DEXA scans performed following their fracture. Of these patients 65 had scans performed of the hip but only 60 of these patients had vitamin D levels recorded. Of the 305 patients with recorded vitamin D levels, 206 (67.5%) had decreased vitamin D levels with 80 (26.2%) being classed as vitamin D insufficient and 126 (41.3%) being vitamin D deficient. Of these patients 298 had recorded postcodes to determine deprivation levels. There were 112 patients classed as ‘affluent’, 7 ‘intermediate’, and 179 ‘deprived’. When the vitamin D levels were compared to levels of deprivation, a significant correlation was found between low vitamin D levels and decreasing levels of social deprivation (R = 0.1181, p = 0.04). Of the affluent patients, 27 (24.1%) were reported as never going outside, or being bed- or wheelchair-bound. In the ‘intermediate’ group, only 1 patient was reported as never going outdoors (14.3%). In the ‘deprived’ group, 46 patients (25.7%), were in this reduced mobility group. There was no significant association found between deprivation and mobility status. The mean age of patients in the study was 83.5 years. Age compared to vitamin D score and age compared to deprivation score were both calculated. There was no significant correlation found between age and vitamin D status or age and deprivation level. Of the 60 patients who had DEXA and vitamin D levels analysed, 57 patients (95%) had reduced BMD on DEXA scans with 31 patients (51.7%) being classed as osteopenic and 26 (43.3%) being osteoporotic. Statistical analysis, however, showed no significant difference in vitamin D status with patients with low bone mineral density or normal BMD. Similarly, there was no significant correlation score found between DEXA scores and vitamin D levels ( Type of fracture (extracapsular or intracapsular) and vitamin D status were also compared. In total there were 120 patients with extracapsular fractures and 177 patients with intracapsular fractures. There was no significant association found between fracture type and vitamin D status ( Hip fractures are an increasing burden in modern health care. In this study, deprivation and vitamin D status was found to have a significant relationship, with patients from a more affluent area more likely to be vitamin D deficient. This was surprising, as studies by Knox et al., Hayden, Sandle and Berry; and Grimes all showed the opposite, with more deprived patients having lower vitamin D levels. Possible confounding factors, which we accounted for in our study included patient age, as this is recognised as a risk factor for fragility fracture. There was, however, no significant relationship between age and vitamin D status or age and deprivation score. Age may have contributed to fragility fractures through patients being unsteady and confused but did not appear to have a direct effect on vitamin D levels. Another possible confounding factor is mobility levels. It is known that exercise strengthens bones, and that being bed-bound or wheelchair bound causes bone to weaken and become more likely to fracture. In this study we were unable to identify a significant correlation between BMD and vitamin D levels. Napoli et al. and Heckman et al. have however demonstrated a link between these two factors. There are also other potential confounding factors that could have contributed to the results of this study. Ethnicity and smoking status are known to have effects on vitamin D levels and BMD but were not accounted for in our data. This study demonstrated a significant correlation between decreased vitamin D levels and decreased levels of social deprivation. No relationship was, however, identified between fracture pattern or bone mineral density and vitamin D levels. The effect of vitamin D on fragility fractures is complex, with multiple confounding factors, potentially resulting in bias of results. Further research is required to examine this relationship, in order to establish which cohort of patients may benefit most from prophylactic vitamin D treatment. Emma Formoy, Ekemini Ekpo, Timothy Thomas, Cezary Kocialkowski and Anand Pillai confirm that they have no conflict of interest. No outside grants or funding were received for this study.  