We report on the production of theophylline nanoparticles by rapid expansion of supercritical solutions with a solid cosolvent (RESS-SC) using CO2 with l-menthol or vanillin. The effects of particle collection conditions such as collection temperatures and spray distances on the theophylline nanoparticles produced were investigated in order to elucidate crystal growth mechanism of the present RESS-SC process. A liquid phase appeared at a pre-expansion section in the case of using l-menthol, and this suggests that it is unsuitable for a solid cosolvent in the present conditions. In the case of using vanillin, nano-sized particles of around 85nm, which are about one-third as large as those produced by the conventional RESS technique, were obtained. Particle collection conditions have negligible effects on the particle sizes. This result suggests that crystal growth of theophylline particles crystallized in a collection vessel are blocked by crystallized vanillin particles those surrounds theophylline particles.Nanoparticles exhibit unique size-dependent properties compared to bulk counterparts and would enhance a variety of technologies including pharmaceutical, coating, environmental, chemical processing, electronic, and sensing applications This work aims to elucidate the applicability of RESS-SC technique to the production of nanoparticles of a drug by RESS-SC using supercritical CO Theophylline (supplied by Wako Pure Chem. Ind. Ltd.; its purity is greater than 99%) was used as a solute. The apparatus was basically a flow-type arrangement consisting of a section for preparing a supercritical solution saturated with a solute (i.e., preparation section), the production section of solid particles, and the collection section of particles produced. The apparatus is shown schematically in The morphology of unprocessed and produced particles was characterized using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Keyence Co., VE-9800). The SEM samples were prepared by the covering with a thin layer of Pt/Pd using a sputter coater. Particle sizes and the size distribution were determined by an image analysis of photomicrographs that is the counting at least 800 particles from the photomicrographs. The particle size was determined by the diameter based on the Ferret diameter. The crystallinity of the particles produced was analyzed using powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Rigaku Co., Miniflex II) with a CuKα radiation source. The diffraction patterns were measured with a voltage of 30 In the case of using  First we measured the solid–liquid equilibrium of theophylline The experimental results are shown in We showed that