We used the fabrics of two granite plutons and U/Pb (SHRIMP) zircon ages to constrain the tectonic evolution of the E-trending Patos shear zone (Borborema Province, NE Brazil). The pre-tectonic Teixeira batholith consists of an amphibole leucogranite locally with aegirine-augite. Zircons from a syenogranite yielded crystallization ages of 591±5Ma. The batholith fabrics were determined by anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility (AMS) and mineral shape preferred orientation. The fabrics support pre-transcurrent batholith emplacement, as evidenced by: (i) magmatic/magnetic fabrics in low susceptibility (<0.35mSI) leucogranites highly discordant to the regional host rock structure, and (ii) concordant magnetic fabrics restricted to high susceptibility (>1mSI) corridors connected to shear zones branching off from Patos. One of these satellite shear zones controlled the syntectonic emplacement of the Serra Redonda pluton, which yields a crystallization age of 576±3Ma. This late shearing event marks the peak regional deformation that, south of Patos, was coupled to crustal shortening nearly perpendicular to the shear belt. The chronology of the deformational events indicates that the major shear zones of the eastern Borborema are late structures active after the crustal blocks amalgamated.The Patos and Pernambuco shear zones are major Neoproterozoic structures that played a fundamental role in deforming various crustal domains of the Borborema Province, northeastern Brazil ( The central and eastern segments of the Patos shear zone delimit two crustal blocks with different Neoproterozoic magmatic and kinematic histories. In the Seridó belt, located in the Seridó–Jaguaribe domain north of the Patos shear zone ( This paper focuses on the plutons of Teixeira and Serra Redonda, located just south of the Patos shear zone. It combines U/Pb SHRIMP zircon geochronology and AMS to constrain the timing of emplacement and its relation to the regional strain field. Magmatic and host rock fabrics allow us to postulate that the Patos and its satellite shear zones are late deformational structures that combined crustal-scale shearing and bulk regional shortening at a high angle to major faults. The central and eastern Patos and São José dos Cordeiros shear zones enclose an ENE-trending corridor of Early Neoproterozoic rocks regionally called the Alto Pajeú belt ( The shear zones that crosscut the Alto Pajeú Belt form a conjugate set, particularly well-developed around the plutons of Campina Grande ( The ENE-trending elongate Teixeira batholith, 80 Finally, the Pedra D'Água domain consists of a set of elliptical to elongate biotite-amphibole granite sheets located between the Itapetim and Taperoá shear zones ( The batholith occupies the contact zone between Early Neoproterozoic metasediments and orthogneisses, but its eastern termination (Pedra D'Água domain) is surrounded by orthogneiss. Further north, the metasediments are juxtaposed with Neoproterozoic metapelites by a sheared contact. The batholith pinches against retrogressed greenschist mylonites of the Patos shear zone. In the metapelite, the fabric is similar to that found along the Patos mylonites. It consists of a steeply dipping fanlike axial-plane foliation (S The Serra Redonda pluton is an elongate intrusive body approximately 45 Host rock fabrics in the Campina Grande and Serra Redonda plutons vary in metamorphic degree and orientation. The foliation, generally parallel to gneissic banding of the Paleoproterozoic basement, dips moderately to the southeast in the eastern domain ( The Paleoproterozoic basement and the Alto Pajeú belt are juxtaposed by the Galante shear zone, which, together with the Matinhas shear zone, forms the regional NE-trending sinistral branch of conjugate shear structures ( We obtained U/Pb SHRIMP ages for two samples, a hornblende leucogranite from the Jabre domain (Teixeira batholith) and a porphyritic granite (Serra Redonda pluton). Samples were processed using a jaw crusher, wifley table, heavy liquids (bromoform and methylene iodide) and a Frantz isodynamic separator at the Geochronology Research Center, University of São Paulo. Representative zircon grains were hand picked under a binocular microscope, mounted in epoxy resin and polished to approximately half their thickness to expose internal morphological features. Zircon standards were included in the mounts and analyzed sequentially with the unknowns. Transmitted and reflected light microscopy and cathodoluminescence imaging were taken for the selected zircon grains to determine internal complexities before analysis. The study focused on igneous growth sectors to obtain zircon crystallization ages. Analyses were performed on a SHRIMP II at the Research School of Earth Sciences (RSES) at the Australian National University, Canberra. The analytical procedure is detailed in Zircons extracted from sample JAB1 (Teixeira batholith) are prismatic, from 150 to 250 Zircons extracted from the Serra Redonda pluton (sample SR1) are prismatic and euhedral, between 200 to 300 AMS was applied only in the Teixeira batholith as its massive, equigranular microstructure made it extremely difficult to determine its magmatic fabric using standard field measurements. The technique consists of measuring the magnetic susceptibility (  The magnetic susceptibility ( The magnetic mineralogy of the Teixeira batholith is detailed in When we examine the magnetic lineations and foliations, two contrasting fabric styles become apparent. Foliations dip moderately to steeply (>45°; shaded area in The transition of the magnetic fabric, especially the lineation, occurs from west to east along the batholith ( The relation between magnetic and mineral fabric directions in two cross-sections where they are highly discordant to the batholith elongation were studied by image analysis. 3-D mineral shape preferred orientation (SPO) was determined by combining fabric data from three mutually orthogonal 2-D rock sections ( The study of the preferred orientation of mafic minerals concerned five sites along the Jabre and four along Teixeira cross-sections ( The binary images consist of mafic minerals in a blank background, and were analyzed using the Intercept Method ( The SPO parameters of the 3-D distribution of the mafic phase for the Jabre and Teixeira cross-sections are summarized in In the Jabre cross-section, the shape foliation (normal to the short axis, C) is subhorizontal (#70, #60), although approaching the southern granite contact, it dips moderately to northwest (#50, #40). At one site the foliation dips steeply to the west (#80). Along the cross-section, the shape lineation (parallel to long axis A) remains transversal or highly oblique to the pluton elongation. In the Teixeira cross-section, the foliation varies while the lineation maintains a consistent orientation approximately at a high angle to the pluton elongation. This study shows that AMS and mafic mineral fabrics have similar orientations in both cross-sections. Dominant prolate or oblate ellipsoids are found in the Teixeira and Jabre cross-sections, respectively. In the former, the prolate mafic fabric is attributed to amphibole prisms that describe the mineral preferred orientation. An inversion of B and C principal axes occurs at one site (PG) with a moderate prolate shape (T Image analysis to compare magnetic and mineral fabrics supports the use of AMS to describe the orientation of the magmatic fabric of the Teixeira batholith. The orientation varies from highly discordant in its central and western domains to concordant when the fabric becomes gneissic and magnetite is crystallized. We postulate that the discordant magmatic fabric corresponds to emplacement structures formed before the strike-slip shearing related to the Patos–Itapetim–Taperoá shear zone system. Thus, the Teixeira would be a pre-transcurrent batholith. The Serra Redonda pluton, on the other hand, shows fabric orientations consistent with the host regional strain field, and is considered syntectonic. Internal discordant or concordant fabrics in the Teixeira batholith are related to the external wall-rock structure. There are steeply dipping foliations parallel to the batholith margins with subhorizontal (D A magmatic fabric predating shear zone deformation occurs in the inner parts of the Teixeira batholith. AMS is characterized by gently dipping foliations locally forming basin (Jabre) and dome (Teixeira) structures, and by lineations trending N- or NW ( The Serra Redonda pluton, on the other hand, shows magmatic fabrics coupled with the host rock strain. It includes thrusts and a conjugate strike-slip shear zone set consistent with bulk NNW-shortening, which also stretched the pluton parallel to the contact between the Paleoproterozoic basement and the Early Neoproterozoic rocks. Evidence for syntectonic emplacement also comes from diorite dikes that crosscut the thrust hanging-wall, and were deformed by the regional strain. Several processes could account for the observed patterns of strain variation within plutons emplaced in a contractional setting, such as local dilation created by syn-melting shear zone movement ( Tectonic fabrics in the Alto Pajeú belt record a bulk transpressive strain field: there are strongly foliated rocks, anastomosing less deformed km-scale lenses, conjugate shear zones and belt-parallel subhorizontal stretching. Conjugate sets of shear bands indicating that the principal compressive stress is oriented at a high angle to the rocks flanking the shear zone have been described in several fault systems (Jones and Tanner, 1994; Magmatic fabric of the Teixeira batholith and the Serra Redonda pluton indicate they are, respectively, pre- and syn-kinematic regarding the Patos and its satellite shear zones. Evidence for the emplacement of the Teixeira batholith preceding the transcurrent deformation comes from AMS and structural data. Magnetic/magmatic fabrics transversal to the batholith elongation are found in granites with mean susceptibility values ≤0.25 The deformation of the Early Neoproterozoic Alto Pajeú belt country rocks, partitioned between sets of conjugated strike-slip shear zones and belt-perpendicular shortening, is attributed to the collisional tectonics related to the convergence of Paleoproterozoic cratons. The onset of the collision-related structures, focused on this study on the Patos and its satellite shear zones, must be younger than 591 This work was supported by Fundação de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (grants 03/13023-7 and 04/08614-9), Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq) and Pró-Reitoria de Pesquisa of São Paulo University. Elson Oliveira and Alain Vauchez through the pertinence of their reviews helped us to improve the paper.