A novel process for precipitated calcium carbonate production and carbon dioxide mineralization is studied. The process consists of two steps; firstly calcium is selectively extracted from steelmaking slags with an ammonium salt solution, secondly the dissolved calcium is allowed to react with carbon dioxide and is thus precipitated as calcium carbonate. Temperatures between 20 and 70°C and atmospheric pressure are used. To gain information of the effects of different process parameters on the reaction rates in both process steps a kinetic modeling study is performed and validated with experimental results. Calcium extraction rate is found to mainly depend on the particle size and chemical properties of the slag. Concentration of the ammonium salt solvent has an effect as well, while the extraction temperature hardly affects the kinetics. Rate of carbonate precipitation depends mainly on carbon dioxide flow through the reactor, mixing of the solution, size of gas bubbles and also strongly on the concentration of ammonia in the solution. Since the steelmaking slag is a heterogeneous feedstock and it will require continuous adjustments on the process, the kinetic model is used to preliminary predict the reaction rates in extraction and carbonation steps in continuously working reactors. It is found that depending on the slag properties residence times starting from 1h can be used in extraction. For carbonation, the model does not include changes in particle morphology, but regarding the overall calcium conversion 30min would be a long enough residence time in the studied cases. Dividing the extraction in two or more stages would also shorten the total processing time.Carbon dioxide emissions are widely recognized as one of the main sources for global warming. Of the various options available to decrease these emissions, mineral carbonation offers not only a leakage-free alternative to CO In the current work, carbonation of calcium-containing steel converter slag is studied. More specifically, the focus is on a two-step pH swing process, where the formed product can be separated as marketable precipitated calcium carbonate (PCC) The most widely used conventional PCC production method involves three steps; calcination of limestone, hydration of the formed calcium oxide and carbonation of the calcium hydroxide. Even if the CO The two-step pH swing process consists of two separate reactors between which an ammonium salt solution is circulated ( Steel converter slag (size fraction 125–250 Based on the chemical analysis of the process liquids and residual slag from the previous experiments, it has been proposed that the reactive compounds in the process are lime and larnite, while the other slag components remain unreacted and act as inert substances The release of calcium from larnite is written as R2. This reaction produces, apart from dissolved ions, also a calcium-poor solid residue, which for simplification is expressed as wollastonite (CaSiO The overall reactions for the carbonation step can be summarized as R3 and R4: Based on the stoichiometry of the reactions, the ammonium salt solvent spent in calcium extraction step is regenerated in the carbonation step and is thus recovered for reuse. This implies that unless the solution gets contaminated by other species extracted from the slag, and if the vaporization losses of ammonia To understand the process properties better, a detailed reaction scheme was developed on basis of reactions R1–R4 and optimized to fit the experimentally measured pH curves. For this purpose ModEst 6.1 software using Simplex (Nelder-Mead) and Levenberg–Marquardt algorithms, and a Markov Chain Monte Carlo toolbox for Matlab using Metropolis–Hastings algorithm Dissolution of calcium: Protonation balances of solvent components: Precipitation of calcium: Reactions of carbon dioxide: Because steel converter slag contains calcium oxide both as lime and larnite, it could have been motivated to include a separate dissolution reaction for both compounds also in the scheme of elementary reactions. However, during the extraction experiments the origin of dissolved calcium could not be distinguished. Thus, all calcium was treated as calcium oxide in the modeling work, assuming that larnite yields one dissolved calcium ion per molecule, too, according to reaction R2. Moreover, as reported by De Windt et al. For the present work, the concentration of reactive solid calcium (mol/L) was calculated with Eq. Since the equilibrium constant for the dissolution reaction R5 is very high ( Comparing the orders of magnitude of equilibrium constants for carbonate precipitation reactions R9 and R10, it becomes clear that the carbonation will mainly occur directly through a reaction between calcium and carbonate ions, and that bicarbonate ions only play a role in providing more carbonate ions via equilibrium R13. Also, an assessment regarding the previously Including the reactions R5–R14 and describing the changes in concentrations of all the components as a function of reaction time, the process was defined by Eqs. Parameter For the physical CO Various series of experiments were used for estimation and validation of the kinetic model parameters. Some of the experiments have been reported previously in the literature The experiments were made with two batches of steel converter (BOF) slag obtained from Rautaruukki Raahe Works, the used batch, named according to the production year as “2007” and “2008”, being mentioned in For extracting the calcium, 10–75 When the slurry had been separated, the filtrate was transferred into a 1 After allowing the solution to react with the gas flow for 30–94 During both reaction steps, the extent of reaction was monitored continuously with a pH meter (Precisa pH900 and NICO 2000 ELIT 9808). The slag residues and produced carbonates were dried overnight at 105 The kinetic parameters obtained after the described optimization procedure are listed in In The theoretical starting concentrations of solid, reactive calcium oxide in extraction were calculated from the fractions of free lime and larnite as discussed in Section For the relation between activity factor However, it must be noted that besides the direct effect of the particle size on the calcium extraction efficiency, different size fractions of the slag may have had different compositions. Thus, if calcium has enriched in smaller particles as suggested Currently, based on the exponent of 2.4 in the equation, it can be said that the extraction reaction seems to be occurring on the outer surface of the particles as well as on pore surface inside the particles. This conclusion is based on the fact that if the reaction rate would be directly proportional to particle size squared (i.e. area), the reaction would be occurring on outer surface only. Correspondingly, a power of three would indicate direct proportionality to particle volume (i.e. pore surface).  The effect of slag-to-liquid ratio was studied by increasing the slag amount from 100 Regarding extraction kinetics, the reaction temperature had hardly any influence. With 1.0 As mentioned above, a few samples of processed slag, i.e. the solid extraction residue were analyzed with XRF and XRD to determine which compounds had reacted during extraction. An example of these results (from experiment 2) is shown in The increase in CaCO For the carbonation step, an example of XRD pattern of the produced precipitate (from experiment 2) is shown in the Supplementary material ( In general, it has to be noted that the fractions of  As also reported earlier, with lower carbon dioxide flow rates the carbonation reaction time, i.e. the time after which the pH in the carbonation reactor remained stable, became longer as well. The power law approximation for this dependency (time The graphical results from modeling work for 0.2 and 2.0 In general, it can be concluded that experiments without mixing and with smaller carbon dioxide flow rate need a longer time to reach equilibrium. With 1.84 Regarding the rate of carbonation, the two solvents discussed, ammonium nitrate and ammonium chloride, seem to behave in an equal manner, an example shown in The effect of reaction temperature on carbonation was studied by conducting two experiments at 70 Another clear change seen from the modeling results is that at 70 The concentration of the ammonium salt was not directly observed to affect the carbonation kinetics. However, in experiments with rather high (>1.5 This two-step reaction behavior could not be explained readily with the model used for the other experiments. Instead, a combination model was constructed, in which the set of kinetic parameters was altered ( Already at an NH It must be noted that in practice the change between these kinetic schemes is not a sudden incidence, but instead a gradual change, which also justifies the differences between modeled and experimental pH values between 10 and 30 As mentioned in the introduction, the aim of the current work is to design a continuous process for steel converter slag carbonation. To predict the effects of residence times on the obtained concentrations in a continuous process, a model based on ideally working, theoretical CSTR units for both extraction and carbonation steps was built. The model is constructed from the ODE model presented in Section Most essential examples of modeling results for extraction step with the CSTR model are shown in  On the other hand, the model enables also the estimation of extraction efficiency with each extraction step performed in two CSTR vessels connected in series. The result of this calculation is shown in These percentages can also be represented as the fraction of extracted calcium of the total calcium present in steel converter slag. As discussed in Section In future work, the results of this kinetic modeling study of continuous operation will be tested both experimentally and with Aspen Plus thermodynamic modeling software. The presented batch models have been validated mainly on the basis of the experimental pH measurements. However, the system contains several reactions that affect the pH of the solution, which increases the inaccuracy of some parameters in the model. Also, the high pH dependency resulted in a very stiff ODE system, where some coefficients were of completely another order of magnitude than the others, making the parameter optimization rather challenging. Yet another uncertainty regarding the accuracy of the results arises from the only approximately evaluated experimental concentrations of certain species such as dissolved ammonia. Also, the model excludes completely the various morphologies of calcium carbonate. The changes between calcite, vaterite and aragonite are dependent on e.g. temperature, mixing properties and concentrations of different substances, but also on reaction time A chemical kinetics model was constructed, and it was used to quantitatively evaluate the effects of various process parameters on the rates of reaction for the two-step pH swing process for precipitated calcium carbonate production from steelmaking slags. The proposed chemistry was successfully used as a basis for the modeling work. The size and freshness of the slag particles together with the solid-to-liquid ratio were found to be the main factors affecting the speed of calcium extraction. Also the solvent concentration had a clear effect, while reaction temperature hardly influenced the extraction kinetics. For carbonation, the ratio of NH Some predictions regarding process operation in a continuous system were made as well, and it was observed that even though the recycling of the solvent decreases the net efficiency of the process, the concentration levels stabilize only after a few extraction/carbonation cycles. Also, dividing the extraction step in at least two steps would increase the calcium extraction efficiency compared to a single step operation. In future work these predictions for continuous operation will be tested. Also the quality of the product regarding purity and morphology of the carbonates will be studied more closely. The authors want to acknowledge Cleen Ltd. and Tekes (the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation) for their financial support for the research via the Cleen CCSP project (2011-2015). H.-P. Mattila also acknowledges the Graduate School in Chemical Engineering for support for his work. The experiments used in modeling work have been performed by Sanni Eloneva (experiments 25–30), Pekka Mannisto (31–34) and Arshe Said (16–24 partially) of Aalto University and by Martin Fält (13–15) of ÅAU. Other experiments were performed by the authors. The XRD/XRF analyses were performed by Ruukki Metals Oy, ICP-OES by Sten Lindholm at Analytical Chemistry/ÅAU and Hannu Revitzer at Aalto University. Also, Prof Johan Wärnå (Laboratory of Industrial Chemistry/ÅAU) provided valuable help with the kinetic modeling work. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 