Purpose
                  The aim of this study is to evaluate the functional results of open reduction using the Newcastle approach and internal fixation for complex intra-articular distal humeral fractures in children through the report of cases.
               
                  Material and methods
                  A retrospective case series of patients who underwent open reduction and internal fixation surgery because of a complex intra-articular distal humeral fracture using the Newcastle approach were reviewed. Minimum follow-up was 2years. Demographic, clinical, and radiological data were analyzed. Also, Mayo Elbow Performance Score and four-point Likert scale were evaluated.
               
                  Results
                  2 children were included in the final analysis. In both fractures, the approach was sufficient for accurate reduction and the functional outcome on both elbows was satisfactory. The Mayo elbow score was 95 points (excellent results) and the five-point Likert scale, both patients were very satisfied with the outcomes. In the radiographic study, no necrosis or secondary deformities were observed.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Our study provides evidence that the Newcastle approach is an alternative to perform open reduction in those children supra-intercondylar fractures that cannot be reduced using a close reduction. To our knowledge, there is not previous paper that has reported the used of this approach in the treatment in this kind of fractures.Supracondylar fractures of the distal humerus are the second most common traumatic injury of the upper limb in the pediatric age. However, T-type distal humerus fractures (intercondylar) are an uncommon occurrence, representing <2% of all observed pediatric elbow fractures [ In children, the distal humerus, largely composed of cartilage, is very elastic and displacement occurs mainly in the supracondylar bone area, being most elbow injuries in this age group, caused by hyperextension. For that reason, T-type distal humerus fractures in children are rare and there is usually the effect of direct forces applied to an elbow above 90° flexion [ Due to the low incidence of these fractures, treatment recommendations are based on publications of case reports or small case series or else adhere to the treatment principles of similar fractures of adult patients [ A retrospective revision of our children patients who had undergone open reduction and internal fixation surgery because of a complex intra-articular distal humeral fracture using the Newcastle approach between 2011 and 2016 were performed. Among 76 children with supracondylar humeral fracture, only 2 patients met our inclusion and were available for analysis. A single team of trauma surgery specialists (JS, PC) performed all surgeries. Under general anesthesia and, with the patient in a lateral decubitus position the surgery was performed. The incision starts 6–7 The raphe is opened longitudinally at the proximal level and with a cut of 2 A 7-year old girl came to the emergency department referring pain and functional impairment in the right elbow after a casual fall from her stand height. She had a painful right elbow held in 80° of flexion, inability to move actively without any Neurovascular deficit. The radiological study (antero-posterior and lateral elbow view) revealed a displaced supra-intercondylar humeral fracture ( An 8-year-old girl, came to the emergency department reporting severe pain and functional impairment of her left elbow after a horse fall. On examination, the patient presented significant swelling and bruising in the left elbow, without a neurovascular deficit of the limb. In the radiological study (antero-posterior X-ray) a supracondylar fracture was diagnosed ( In both patients, the same immobilization and the same rehabilitation protocol were done. Three weeks after surgery, the K-wires were removed under sedation and active flexion-extension of the elbow was initiated without restrictions. At 2 T-type distal humerus fractures represent an unusual fracture pattern in the pediatric patient [ Currently, based on literature evidence, we believe that there are two main difficulties when treating a supraintercondylar humeral pediatric fracture: a) their prompt diagnosis, b) the use of an effective classification system because the most used classification (Gartland) do not include this type of fracture. Only Toniolo and Wilkins, and Vivas y Moreno considered this fracture pattern, and c) the choice of the most appropriate surgical approach in order to attain an accurate reduction and subsequently stable osteosynthesis [ Non-displaced pediatric T-type distal humerus fracture can be treated conservatively, but when displacement or rotation of fracture fragments are evident, they should be treated surgically [ Different surgical approaches have been described to treat this type of fractures, such as Campbell, Bryan-Morrey and Müller, which, according to the literature are the most used [ To obtain good outcomes in this type of fracture, it is important to choose an approach that allows performing direct reduction and fracture fixation. Furthermore, avoiding any damage to the physes and their blood supply, which are still present is of paramount importance. For this reason, the Newcastle approach is presented as an alternative to perform open reduction in those supracondylar fractures that cannot be reduced using a close reduction, as well as for a supra-intercondylar fracture. It is an anatomical approach, does not require an olecranon osteotomy and offers enough joint surface visualization to control the joint fragments and their reduction and subsequent stabilization. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. Patient's informed consent to publish this report is included in the Ethical Standards statement. Jordi Salvador, Jorge H. Nuñez, Margarita Veloso, Pablo Castillón, Francesc Angles declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship and/or publication of this article. The author has no competing interest to declare.