The structure and chemistry of the orthorhombic O′ phase after quenching of a Ti-23 at.%Nb-2 at.%O was measured using aberration-corrected transmission electron microscopy and atom probe tomography. The nanosized O′ phase, formed in the vicinity of ω, is enriched with oxygen and slightly depleted in Nb. Upon annealing, ω dissolves and the O′ phase develops in β up to 350 °C, above which temperature it transforms to colonies of fine α phase. Another needle-like form of α with lower Nb content is thought to nucleate from Nb-lean regions related to spinodal decomposition of β.β‑titanium alloys are widely adopted in biomedical and aerospace applications due to their superior mechanical properties including high specific strength, exceptional corrosion resistance and excellent biocompatibility [ Among the metastable phases, stress-induced orthorhombic α″ martensite can give rise to shape-memory and superelastic behaviour in certain β-Ti alloys [ A binary near-β Ti alloy, Ti  Atom probe tomography was employed to analyse the composition of O′, In our previous study [ Furthermore, similar concentration modulation by continuous phase separation of Nb was observed in Ti-2448 [ To investigate the thermal stability of O′ during ageing, To analyse the chemistry of α after ageing at 400 °C for 5 h, atom probe samples were prepared from a triangle-shaped bar (18 μm × 2 μm) mounted on the MEMS chip and exposed to identical heating during The Nb chemical modulation, triggered by spinodal decomposition ( In summary, the novel findings of this study are: The phase transformation is After quenching, the O′ phase forms close to ω. O′ is rich in oxygen and slightly depleted in Nb. Upon annealing, ω gradually dissolves and the O′ phase forms in β below 350 °C. Above 350 °C the nanosized O′ directly transforms to fine colony-like α. Needle-like α precipitates with lower Nb content are thought to nucleate from the Nb-lean regions arising from spinodal decomposition of β. No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors. The authors would like to thank technical support from Zentrum für Grenzflächendominierte Höchstleistungswerkstoffe (ZGH) at Ruhr University Bochum. The authors acknowledge Dr. Yunhui Chen and Dr. Ali Dehghan-Manshadi for assistance in preparing the alloy starting material employed in this study. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at