In this work, controlled reduction of red mud with H2 was used to produce active systems for two different environmental applications, i.e. the heterogeneous Fenton reaction and the reduction of Cr(VI). Mössbauer, powder X-ray diffraction, thermal analyses and scanning electron microscopy analyses showed that at different temperatures, i.e. 300, 400, 500 and 600°C, H2 reduces red mud to different phases, mainly Fe3O4, Fe0/Fe3O4 and Fe0. These Fe phases are dispersed on Al, Si and Ti oxides present in the red mud and show high reactivity towards two environmental applications, i.e. the heterogeneous Fenton reaction and the reduction of Cr(VI). Reduction with H2 at 400°C showed the best results for the oxidation of the model dye methylene blue with H2O2 at neutral pH due to the presence of the composite Fe0/Fe3O4. The reduced red mud at 500–600°C produced Fe0 highly active for the reduction of Cr(VI) in aqueous medium. Another feature of these red mud based system is that after deactivation due to extensive use they can be completely regenerated by simple treatment with H2.Red mud (RM) is a solid waste composed mainly of Fe In this work, a new approach is used to convert the RM waste into a versatile material with different environmental applications, i.e. controlled reduction with H The classical Fenton reagent (a mixture of Fe The development of active heterogeneous system to promote the Fenton-chemistry is of considerable interest since it could offer some advantages over the classical homogeneous Fenton such as no sludge formation, operation at near neutral pH and the possibility to recycle the iron promoter. In previous works, we have demonstrated that the combination of Fe These iron reduced phases, Fe In the present study we have investigated Fe The innocuous oxides present in the RM waste, Al The RM (ALCAN, Brazil) was grounded and extensively washed with distillated water until rinsing water reached neutral pH. The washed RM was dried at 60 The temperature programmed reduction (TPR) analyses were performed in a Quantachrome CHEM BET 3000 TPR using H Magnetization measurements were carried out in a portable magnetometer with magnetic field of 0.3 T calibrated with Ni metal ( Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analyses were carried out in a Jeol JKA 8900RL. The surface area was determined by the BET method using 22 cycles N Cr(VI) reduction was performed using 5 Chemical analyses of the RM waste obtained from ALCAN showed 20 wt.% of Fe (as Fe TPR analysis of the RM ( The first reduction process centered at 470 At temperatures higher than 520 Based on the TPR results reduction temperatures of 300, 400, 500, and 600  RM and RM200 showed very similar Mössbauer spectra with the presence of two sextets related to hematite ( XRD patterns of the RM before and after the reductions ( Magnetization measurements showed values of 0.4 Nitrogen adsorption analyses showed a slight decrease on the BET surface area from 24 m The composites with different concentrations of Fe The hydrogen peroxide decomposition is a versatile probe reaction to investigate the activity of heterogeneous systems towards the Fenton chemistry. The obtained results for the peroxide decomposition in the presence of the materials produced by the RM reduction with H It can be observed a linear behavior of the H On the other hand, if the reduction temperature increased to 500 The oxidation reactions were carried out with the dye MB and H The oxidation of the dye MB was monitored by the discoloration which is related to the first oxidation steps to produce non-colored intermediates. TOC (total organic carbon) measurements were also carried out to obtain information on the mineralization process. The discoloration activities of the composites obtained by reduction of the RM with H It can be observed in A kinetic treatment using ln The effect of the catalyst concentration on the MB discoloration rate was also investigated. Kinetic investigation showed an almost linear dependence of the discoloration rate with the catalyst concentration (see  It can be observed that the three parameters, i.e. The effect of H The stability of RM400 sample during the oxidation of MB with H After the 1st use, the RM400 slowly deactivates reaching only ca 10% discoloration after the 4th use. This deactivation is related to the gradual oxidation of Fe The H The non reduced RM did not show any activity for Cr(VI) reduction, likely due to the presence of solely Fe The results obtained in this work showed that very high active heterogeneous Fenton systems based on composites Fe In conclusion, the proposed process produces active systems for environmental applications using different iron containing precursors. These results open completely new perspectives for the production of active systems for environmental applications using iron rich wastes. Although the use of hydrogen as reducing agent entails some cost to the process, this cost should not be prohibitive and the reaction product, i.e. H The authors are grateful to CAPES, CNPq and FAPEMIG. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 