In the pediatric population supracondylar humerus fracture (SHF) is one of the most common injuries. Diagnosis is based on inspection and conventional radiography. SHFs should be classified according to the modified Gartland classification, which guides treatment. Non-displaced or minimally displaced fractures (Gartland type-I) should be treated non-operatively, completely displaced type III fractures require closed reduction and K-wire fixation. In type-II fractures, important landmarks, such as the anterior humeral line (Roger´s line), the shaft-physeal angle (Baumann´s angle) and the shaft condylar angle should be considered to guide treatment. Special attention has to be paid for potential rotational dislocation, which is indicated by a ventral spur. In such cases surgery is necessary. The degree of acceptable extension malpositioning depends on patient´s age. In 10-year-old children fractures with a shaft condylar angle of more than 15° are still suitable for non-operative therapy. Timing for surgery is controversially discussed. Postponing surgery to the next day seems reasonable if absence of pain, intact soft tissue and normal neurovascular status are present. Neurovascular complications are not uncommon, especially in Gartland type-III fractures and in cases with additional forearm injuries. A white hand without palpable pulse needs emergency surgery, the management of the pulseless pink hand is still controversially discussed. Different operative techniques exist for surgical treatment. The golden standard is closed reduction and percutaneous K-wire pinning. Crossed pinning seems to achieve best biomechanical stability. Since ulnar nerve injuries are reported to occur in 6% after medially inserting K-wires, lateral divergent insertion of two K-wires has been compared to crossed pinning fixation in several randomized controlled trials. Meta-analyses demonstrated a higher risk for ulnar nerve injury for the crossed pinning technique while risk for loss of fixation was higher in lateral only pinning. In both cases, K-wires should be removed 3–6 weeks after surgery with consolidation of the fracture. Clinical and radiological follow-up should be carried out at 3 weeks post fracture fixation to rule out loss of reduction. If this should occur, early revision surgery has been demonstrated beneficial.Supracondylar humerus fracture (SHF) is the most common fracture of the elbow in the pediatric population. While distal humeral fractures account for about 16% of all fractures in long bones during skeletal development [ In these injuries, successful therapy depends on depicting a growth prognosis. Spontaneous correction but also growth disorders are both possible if the remaining growth period is long enough. Thus, fracture characteristics have to be considered together with age, sex and development status for estimation of remaining growth potential. For the elbow and thus for SHF, both the distal humeral growth plates and the proximal forearm growth plates are only responsible for 20% of longitudinal growth in their segment [ The Gartland three staged classification system of SHF has been widely used in pediatric trauma care [ Correct assessment of radiographs is the cornerstone of successful therapy. Knowledge of anatomical landmarks of both lateral and anterior-posterior projections is a basic prerequisite. Trauma surgeons should be aware of the appearance of secondary ossification centers to evaluate the pediatric elbow on X-rays. CRITOE (capitellum, radial head, internal [medial] epicondyle, trochlea, olecranon, external [lateral] epicondyle) has been established as mnemonic. The ossification center of the capitellum appears at the age of one. Afterwards, each ossification center appears about 2 years after another ( Type-I SHFs are undisplaced or only minimally displaced (<2 mm). For those fractures non operative treatment is ideal. Injuries which are classified as type-III fractures have to be treated surgically. The posterior cortex has lost its integrity in such fractures. Malpositioning in extension in the sagittal and rotation in the transverse plane needs surgical correction ( If surgery is indicated, the question raises, when it is the best time. Higher complication rates for surgeries at nighttime are controversially discussed in orthopedic trauma care as well as in other surgical fields [ Vascular and neurological complications most frequently occur in type-III fractures. Neurological injuries can be found in 10%–20% [ Closed reduction and percutaneous pinning are the golden standard of any displaced SHF in children. However, techniques of percutaneous pinning are controversially discussed. On the one hand primary stability has to be achieved to avoid loss of reduction. On the other hand, iatrogenic damage with associated long-term impairment has to be minimized. Crossed pinning provides the biomechanically most stable construct using to K-wires ( For high metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction fractures, elastic stable intramedullary nail (ESIN) insertion is an elegant way of treatment. ESINs provide the best biomechanical stiffness in an experimental setup and allow cast free aftercare in the clinical setting. In more distal SHF, Kamara et al. could demonstrate that three crossed pinning (one medial and two lateral pins) could achieve best biomechanical stability ( K-wires are removed 3–6 weeks after surgery with consolidation of the fracture. Immobilization of the elbow is necessary for this period. If K-wires are not buried, daily pin site care should be avoided. It is associated with higher infection rates, especially during summer months [ SHFs are common fractures and surgeons have to deal with best treatment strategies. Clinical and radiological assessment are the mainstay of non-operative and surgical treatment. Indication for surgery in SHF type-II should be based on radiological characteristics, especially rotational displacement must not be overlooked. Percutaneous pinning is possible in many different ways. Ulnar nerve injury is a major risk in traditional crossed pinning technique. A mini-open approach is an established way to avoid ulnar nerve injury. Lateral entry pin fixation needs divergent pin placement. Additional pinning, either lateral or medial, improves biomechanical stability. External fixators, ESINs and open reduction are further treatment possibilities in rare but challenging cases. The paper is part of a supplement based on the 2017 workshop on “External Fixation and Percutaneous Pinning.” Support for the publication of this supplement was provided by the Osteosynthesis and Trauma Care Foundation (OTCF) sponsored by a research grant from Stryker.