This study is part of our investigation into the frother structure-property relationship, here focusing on aliphatic alcohols. The structure variation is the length of the alkyl chain (C4 to C7), and position of the methyl branch (CH3) and hydroxyl (OH) group in five- and six-carbon alcohols. The property was bubble rise velocity. Single bubble velocity profiles were determined in a 350cm water column. Velocity at 300cm as a function of concentration is determined and the concentration to reach minimum velocity at 300cm (CMV) estimated. The most significant effect is the chain length which decreases CMV by about one order of magnitude for each additional carbon. The next strongest effect is the methyl branch position which decreases CMV as it is moved away from the hydroxyl group. The least effect is the position of OH which nevertheless systematically decreases CMV as it is moved from position C-3 to C-1 (i.e., from the center to the terminus of the molecule). An argument based on surfactant molecule packing on the bubble surface is proposed to account for the effect on CMV. From the results the structure of the most effective aliphatic alcohol frother is suggested.Flotation technology, developed at the end of 19th century to recover minerals, has seen expanding use to other areas, e.g., enhanced oil recovery ( Aliphatic alcohol frothers are typically 5–8 carbon atoms with the alkyl chain in either linear or branched form. The general formula is R The mechanism by which frothers act in flotation systems is not clearly established ( The setup to determine the local rise velocity as a function of distance, or velocity profile, is shown in A glass capillary with nominal internal diameter 51 As a single velocity metric, the velocity at 300 Before any test the system was flushed repeatedly with tap water till the known velocity profile in tap water was obtained, which could require up to 20 times the column volume. This precaution, plus the reproducible water column height and use of minimum gas rate to just release a bubble, gave the replication needed for the study (   Rather than using the full profile to compare structures, we reduce to a single metric, the velocity at 300    The CMV data are summarized in Predicting frother functions (properties) based on structure is of interest to flotation chemical suppliers, modelers and plant operators alike. The property selected was bubble rise velocity. Previous work had established that the single bubble velocity profile was a reliable measure, sensitive to surfactant type and concentration over the range of interest in flotation, and could be represented by the concentration to reach minimum velocity at 300 The surfactant family selected, the aliphatic alcohols, is one of the two important frother families. The study determined the effect of hydrocarbon chain length, and the position of the methyl branch and of the hydroxyl group on the CMV. The findings revealed a major effect of chain length and minor, but consistent, effects of the methyl and OH group position, summarized in At the moment a bubble is released, the initially clean surface is progressively ‘contaminated’ with surfactant as the bubble rises. Fluid shear over the bubble surface transports surfactant to the downstream side (the ‘rear’) of the bubble. This increase in surfactant packing density towards the rear gives a gradient in surface tension that increases in the opposite direction (i.e., towards the front of the bubble) and is credited with increasing drag and slowing bubble rise ( The structure of the molecule controls both the extent of surface tension depression per mole (i.e., surface activity) and the packing density, which will determine the magnitude of the surface tension gradient and thus extent to which the bubble slows, measured here by the CMV. The length of the hydrocarbon chain has a strong influence on surface tension depression of water (or surface pressure); for example, at equivalent molar concentration the 6-carbon alcohol gives at least twice the surface pressure as the 5-carbon alcohol ( The position of the For the OH group, the effect of position was that CMV decreased as the OH moved towards the terminus (C-1 position) of the molecule. Alcohol molecules with OH at the C-1 position align more perpendicular to the interface compared to having OH at a center C-3 position ( The OH group of the alcohol will H-bond with water molecules ( In practice, 1-hexanol is used as a frother, 1-pentanol rarely and the chain lengths of the other 1-alcohols tested here, as far as we can ascertain, not at all. We can further generalize to observe that 6-C aliphatic alcohol frothers dominate over 5-C ones, and their more efficient slowing of the bubble, that is, low CMV is one reason. As for the position of the The effect of aliphatic alcohol structure, namely the number of carbons (n The work was conducted under the Chair in Mineral Processing funded through an