The objective of this study was to explore the degree of improvement in the resistance of biodegradable polylactide (PLA) structure against atmospheric weathering (outdoor) conditions when reinforced with only 15wt% E-glass fibers (GF). For this purpose, both neat PLA and PLA/GF composite specimens were exposed to accelerated weathering conditions of both UV-irradiation and moisture cycles in accordance with ISO 4892-3 standards for various periods until 400h. Many characterization techniques used revealed that the alterations in the structure and properties of the specimens were due to the drastic decrease in the molecular weight of the PLA matrices via chain scission reactions. It was observed that reductions in the mechanical properties (strength-modulus-toughness) of the neat PLA were much more critical compared to the reductions in the PLA/GF composite. For instance, the reduction in the tensile strength of the neat PLA specimen was as much as 92%; while that reduction for the PLA/GF specimen was only 34%. Because, inorganic strong glass structure of the GF reinforcements having almost no chemical degradation during weathering periods kept their actions in the composite strengthening-stiffening-toughening mechanisms.Poly(L-lactic acid), simply known as polylactide (PLA) is recently becoming one of the most important thermoplastic biopolymer having aliphatic polyester structure that could be polymerized fully from renewable resources. It has already found large application areas in the field of textile, food packaging, and biomedical sectors. Today it is being considered to replace traditional petroleum-based engineering thermoplastics in the structural applications such as in automotive industry. In these applications, the performance of PLA based materials including its blends and composites should be thoroughly determined not only for standard conditions but also under degradative weathering conditions. In the literature, there are several studies investigating the effects of either natural weathering conditions or accelerated weathering conditions for neat PLA These studies generally revealed that prolonged weathering conditions could be very deteriorative in the properties of PLA based materials. They indicated that reductions in the many properties of the specimens were due to the degradation mechanisms of UV radiation in the form of photolysis via Norrish II type photo-cleavage or photodegradation reactions; and also, due to the hydrolysis reaction of moisture, all leading to significant levels of main chain scissions in PLA matrix. It is known that for structural engineering applications traditional thermoplastics are normally reinforced with E-glass type fiber (GF) reinforcements; therefore, PLA should be also reinforced with these fibers in order to gain sufficient strength-modulus-toughness values to be used in these structural applications. In the literature, there are certain number of studies PLA matrix material used was L-lactic acid type polylactide (NaturePlast, PLE 001). As it is indicated in its technical data sheet, it melts between 145°–155 PLA/GF composites were produced by two industrially compatible steps; i.e. “twin-screw extrusion melt-compounding” and “injection molding melt-shaping” with laboratory size equipment. First, PLA powders were pre-dried for 15 In our former unpublished manuscript under review, investigating the effects of various GF contents on the performance of PLA, it was revealed that use of 15 Outdoor performance of neat PLA and PLA/GF composite specimens were measured by using Q-LAB QUV/se model accelerated weathering test system. Accelerated weathering cycles used were chosen according to the standards of ISO 4892-3, ASTM G154-05 and SAE J2020. Cycle-C of these standards are composed of 8 Specimens attached to the test panels were exposed to these consecutive UV irradiation and moisture cycles without any interruption. Weathering degradation first started at exposed surface of the specimens, then propagated through their interior structure. Deteriorative effects of these accelerated weathering cycles on the mechanical performance of the neat PLA and PLA/GF composite specimens were investigated for six different periods of 50, 100, 150, 200, 300 and 400 After each accelerated weathering period, not only visual but also quantitative inspection of changes in the color of the specimens were carried out. Visual inspection was made by comparing the color of the unweathered specimen with those of weathered specimens in their photographic images. In order to observe changes in the color of the specimens quantitatively (in accordance with CIE 1976 standards); CIELAB color space parameters (L*, a*, b*) of the unweathered and weathered specimens were determined by diffused reflectance analysis (DRA) (Agilent Cary 60 UV–vis spectrophotometer DRA). In this respect first, Static Light Scattering (SLS) (Malvern CGS-3) technique was used to determine the reductions in the molecular weight of the PLA matrix of the specimens after 50, 100, 150, 200, 300 and 400 Morphological analysis on the fracture surface of the fracture toughness test specimens were conducted by scanning electron microscope (SEM) (FEI Nova Nano 430) to investigate the alterations in the morphology of the weathered specimens. Alterations in the strength and modulus values of the weathered specimens were determined both with tension tests according to ISO 527-2 standard, and also with flexural tests in terms of three-point bending according to ISO 178 standard. For the alterations in the toughness of the weathered specimens; fracture toughness tests with single-edge-notched-bending specimens according to ISO 13586 standard were conducted. All these mechanical tests were performed with a 5 Weathering degradation first started at exposed surface of the specimens, then propagated through their interior structure. In the following sections, performance of the weathered neat PLA and PLA/GF composite specimens were discussed in terms of the alterations in the color, chemical structure and mechanical properties. One of the main problem in the outdoor applications of polymeric components is their color change with sunlight exposure. Therefore, in this study, alterations in the color of the weathered specimens were evaluated first visually by the photographic images ( It is seen in By the addition of 15 It is known that the UV-irradiation and moisture cycles during the accelerated weathering leads to deterioration in the chemical structure of PLA matrix especially in the form of molecular weight (MW) decrease via chain scission reactions. For the determination of these MW reductions, static light scattering (SLS) technique of the size exclusion chromatography (SEC) was conducted. SLS/SEC results in Then, alterations in the chemical bond structure of the weathered specimens were observed by conducting ATR-FTIR analyses. Those spectra for the neat PLA specimens after each accelerated weathering are given in It has been discussed It has been stated Apart from UV-irradiation steps, during accelerated weathering tests, there were also moisture (condensation) steps leading to not only swelling and plasticizing of PLA matrix, but also significant level of chemical degradation called as “hydrolysis”. During hydrolyses, it was stated that In the IR spectra of the PLA/GF composite specimens after each weathering period, very broad unclear peaks were obtained. This could be due to the very high amount of inorganic glass structure (15 In order to observe alterations in the fracture surface morphology of the specimens, their fracture toughness test specimens were investigated under SEM after each accelerated weathering period. In For the neat PLA/GF composite specimen, Alterations in the mechanical properties of the weathered neat PLA and PLA/GF composite specimens were first evaluated by tension tests and 3-point bending tests. The resultant “tensile stress- strain” and “flexural stress- strain” curves are given in It is seen in Reductions in the elastic modulus values of the neat PLA specimens after 400  It was observed that, after 400 Alterations in the ductility, i.e. ability of deforming plastically before fracture, were determined from the tension test stress-strain curves of the specimens ( Alteration in the fracture toughness, i.e. ability of hindering crack initiation and growth before fracture, of the specimens were determined in terms of “Critical Stress Intensity Factor ( Again, reductions in the fracture toughness values of the neat PLA were more critical compared to the reductions in the PLA/GF composite. For instance, reductions in the In order to explore the degree of improvement in the resistance of PLA against atmospheric weathering (outdoor) conditions when reinforced with only 15  It should be also pointed out that benefits of PLA/GF composite specimen were not only due to the very effective stiffening, strengthening, toughening actions of the GF reinforcements discussed above, it should be also due to the “barrier” actions of the high aspect ratio short glass fibers decreasing the very detrimental effects of the photolysis and hydrolysis reactions on the PLA matrix.  Visual photographic images and quantitative color space parameters via diffused reflectance analyses (DRA) indicated that before weathering neat PLA looks transparent because of its highly amorphous structure, while after weathering it becomes white because of increased crystallinity amount. These analyses also indicated that yellowish grey color of the PLA/GF composite specimens fade away by the weathering degradation. Static light scattering (SLS) spectrometry revealed that weathering periods resulted in structural deterioration of the PLA matrix especially in the form of drastic decrease in molecular weight from 3.7 ATR-FTIR analyses showed that the main degradation mechanism of UV-irradiation cycles was “photolysis” in terms of “Norrish II type photo-cleavage reaction” and “photo-oxidation reaction”; while the main degradation mechanism of moisture (condensation) cycles was “hydrolysis”. Fracture surface morphology observations via SEM analysis indicated that weathering degradation mechanisms resulted in so many numbers of cracks, cleavages and voids. Mechanical tests revealed that although there were slight increases in some mechanical properties of the specimens during the initial weathering periods of 50 It was observed that decreases in the mechanical performance (strength-modulus-toughness) of the neat PLA were much more critical compared to the reductions in the PLA/GF composite. For instance, the reduction in the tensile strength of the neat PLA specimen was as much as 92%; while that reduction for the PLA/GF specimen was only 34%. Benefits in the mechanical properties of the PLA/GF composite specimen were due to the inorganic strong glass structure of the GF reinforcements having almost no chemical degradation during weathering periods. Therefore, even after 400 Authors gratefully acknowledge the