The implementation of Fiber Reinforced Polymer (FRP) anchors in Externally Bonded Fiber Reinforced Polymer (EBR-FRP) systems is an effective method to increase the bond strength and/or ensure the continuity of the load path between FRP materials and the concrete substrate when EBR-FRP systems are used to strengthen and/or repair existing structures. Multiple design examples of EBR-FRP systems exist in the literature, and design guidelines have been compiled in several countries. However, currently these design guidelines do not specifically include guidance on the design of FRP anchors. This lack of design guidance is one of the main impediments to widespread implementation of FRP anchors in the civil engineering industry. The present study reports an experimental program consisting of 32 bent FRP anchor specimens of different sizes and widths that was undertaken to characterize the behavior of bent FRP anchors when the fiber rupture failure mode is exhibited. A design methodology for the mean value and for the lower bound characteristic values (95 and 99.87 percentile equations) is proposed and the reliability of the methodology is assessed.The use of Externally Bonded Fiber Reinforced Polymer (EBR-FRP) systems for the structural improvement of existing (RC) structures is a widely documented system. FRP EBR systems were previously shown to be more effective for strengthening and/or repairing RC structures compared to conventional methods such as the use of metallic reinforcements or section enlargements The earliest attempts to increase the FRP-to-concrete bond beyond the provision of effective bond length involved the use of additional FRP material to expand the FRP bonding area (typically referred to as FRP U-jackets or FRP patches) The advantage of using FRP anchors instead of other methods to enhance the FRP-to-concrete bond strength is mainly related to the superior material properties of FRP composites compared to more conventional materials such as steel or concrete. In addition, the strength-to-weight ratio is higher and the installation time is shorter for FRP anchors than for other more traditional anchoring methods, typically due to less invasive processes that result in lower labor costs (Diaconu et al., 2009). Furthermore, FRP anchors can be used for a wide range of applications such as slabs (Smith et al., 2011), columns (del Rey Castillo et al., 2018) or shear walls (Qazi et al., 2013), in contrast to systems that are limited by the physical configuration of a structure. Early FRP anchors were made of rolled fiber sheets, but manufacturers are now developing special products that are typically called FRP bundles or FRP ropes. The bundle is soaked into epoxy resin as an adhesive before one end is introduced into a pre-drilled hole in the structure. The fibers at the other end are fanned out and bonded onto the FRP sheet. Two general categories of FRP anchors exist, being either straight anchors or bent anchors, depending on the orientation of the dowel when the anchor is introduced into a structure. Three components constitute an FRP anchor: the anchor dowel, the anchor fan, and the key portion, see FRP anchors are widely used by practicing engineers despite the absence of an established design method and only limited experimental validation by the research community. This lack of design guidance is the main impediment to the implementation of accurate and efficient designs for FRP anchors that are used by engineers in EBR-FRP systems by Kalfat et al. The text matrix and related parameters, the testing set-up and the materials used in the study are described herein. The test matrix reported in In The set-up was specifically designed for the testing program and was based on two objectives: (i) to replicate an actual installation as closely as possible with minimal testing iteration; and (ii) to prevent any shear, torsional, or moment action on the anchor. Considering these factors, the experimental set-up was prepared to emulate the anchor configuration from the real application illustrated in The FRP anchor was the only connection between the RC H-beam and the RC block, which was used to transfer the tensile load through the bent FRP anchors. Pseudo-static monotonic loading was applied using a hydraulic hollow jack and a hand pump. A threaded rod passing through the hollow jack was connected to the RC block to allow the force to be applied to the FRP anchor. The load was recorded using a load cell. As previously observed by del Rey Castillo et al. The manufacturer-specified material properties for the carbon FRP products used in this research are outlined in The data in The material properties of the resin, as given by the manufacturer, are reported in The two parameters that varied throughout the research are anchor size and fanning angle The specimen name (including number of bundles and the target fanning angle), the actual measured fanning angle The average ( Two main conclusions can be extracted from The second conclusion that can be drawn from the results is that the ultimate load at which the anchor failed decreased as angle The shape of the marker in The force transfer mechanism from the FRP sheet to concrete substrate through the FRP anchor and the effect of insertion angle on anchor capacity and anchor behavior were investigated by Zhang and Smith A comparison between the experimental results and the results predicted by EQ Lower bound characteristic values (aka percentile values) are commonly used in engineering design instead of an average value, with the 95th and the 99.87th percentile equations being obtained. The data generated in the reported research consist of eight data sets, one for each anchor size and fanning angle combination, with each data set featuring different average, standard deviation, and coefficient of variation values as reported in A comparison between the sample data (normalized data from Once the normality of the data was confirmed the 95th percentile can be obtained by subtracting 1.645 times the standard deviation from the average. Similarly the 99.87th percentile can be obtained by subtracting three times the standard deviation from the average, also in accordance with the ACI 440 A total of 32 bent anchors of varying size and fanning angle were tested, all of them featuring the fiber rupture failure mode, with the ultimate load and the relationship between ultimate load, anchor size and fanning angle having been discussed. A previously developed model based on vector and transform mechanics defining the force transfer mechanism between anchor fan and dowel was calibrated using an insertion angle coefficient. A statistical study was carried out to verify that the data is normally distributed and the average, 95th percentile, and 99.87th percentile design equations are reported. Future research should expand the range of anchors studied and investigate the influence of insertion angles other than 90°, with the objective of confirming that the model remains valid with different angles, or alternatively further refining the model if necessary. Experimental verification of the validity of the proposed model when implementing FRP anchors in actual FRP-EBR systems is paramount, especially when designing seismic strengthening for existing buildings that involves cyclic and dynamic loads. An additional important topic that merits further research attention is the strain patterns that develop on anchors during the loading process. Future research should focus on identifying how the concentration of stresses in the anchor key portion affects anchor behavior. The authors acknowledge the support of the technical staff of the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University of Auckland. The materials used in this project were supplied by Contech Limited and Sika (NZ), and their contribution to the success of this project is gratefully acknowledged. Funding support provided by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 