Background
                  Conching is the processing step in which chocolate is subjected to long-term heat treatment, mechanical forces and addition of fat and emulsifiers. There is an important relationship between the chocolate flavour and the type of conching process. However, it is a costly processing step due to long duration of high temperature application.
               
                  Scope and approach
                  In order to increase the level of chocolate quality and microbiological safety, the raw materials used as well as the process methods and parameters are of importance. In particular, the knowledge of how conching process affects the main quality parameters of chocolate can lead to better quality product in a more cost-effective way. Therefore, the objective of this study is to provide a general overview on the relation between the type of conching processes and chocolate main quality parameters (safety, aroma, color, texture and flow behavior), and also on the innovative conching applications.
                  Key findings and conclusions. With the conching process, significant changes occur in physical, physico-chemical and sensory properties of chocolate. Therefore, in addition to tempering and refining steps, conching process should also be considered to produce high quality products at a more cost-effective way. As a result of innovative modifications to be made in the conching process, it is possible to obtain a safe product with higher consumer acceptability. However, these targets should be reached with shorter conching application time to increase production efficiency.The quality of chocolate is influenced by the quality of the cocoa used ( Each of the process levels of mixing, pre-refining, refining and conching which are performed prior to the final stages of chocolate production (tempering, molding and cooling), result in severe changes on the quality of the final product ( In this study, the relationship between the quality and some food safety parameters was investigated with respect to chocolate conching process. The aim of the study is to provide information for process development studies and to develop new perspectives in chocolate science and technology. Different opinions were claimed by different researchers about how many phases in the conching process exist. Some researchers ( There are also opinions that this process has three phases ( The initial phase, dry phase, is of great importance for the reduction of moisture and the modification of flow behaviors and flavour, and the phase in which lecithin and additional cocoa butter are added is less important in terms of quality ( Conching time, which is a disadvantage in terms of production efficiency, is significantly affected by temperature and mixing speed ( The reduction in particle radius due to the mechanical effect experienced during conching results in an increase in the number of particles. In this case, the contact points between the particles and the types and intensities of chemical and mechanical interactions between them increase ( Triglycerides, glycolipids and other minor components are added to the chocolate mass at the end of the conching ( Aroma is an important factor in chocolate in terms of consumer perception and attitude. In the perception of aroma, not only volatile and non-volatile flavouring components, but also the effects of the oil phase on the release of aroma components in the oral cavity are also factors to be considered ( For instance, in the dark chocolate, the moldy and woody/smooky off-flavour elements and fruity aromas are reduced during conching ( One of the objectives of the conching process is the removal of some undesirable volatile compounds, as well as forming conditions for the development of certain desirable flavouring agents. Cocoa butter has nutty, bitter and acidic notes before roasting. Acidic notes are reduced due to decrease in volatile acid concentration during roasting, but non-volatile acids such as lactic, succinic, tartaric, citric and oxalic acid are not affected by this process, while the concentration of total pyrazine may increase with the prolongation of roasting time ( Maillard reactions occurred during roasting are effective and essential in the formation and levels of aldehydes and pyrazines which have a major influence on the enrichment of chocolate flavour ( 2-Methylproponal, 3-methylbutanal and 2-methylbutanol as Strecker aldehydes are responsible for the aromatic properties of bitter chocolate and they are strong chocolate notes which are derived from valine, leucine, isoleucine and phenylalanine. By using GC-MS and GC-oflactometry techniques, effects of conching process on volatile compounds of dark chocolate samples were investigated by Consequently, the conching process is of great importance for chocolate aroma. At this stage, it should be ensured that undesirable volatiles are removed, and characteristic and desired flavouring compounds are optimally protected or produced at the same time. In this case, the working principle, temperature, duration and applied shear effect are the factors to be considered and these factors should be arranged according to chocolate type. It is generally accepted that long conching time is a disadvantage for volatile aromatics due to evaporation effect ( Chocolate flow behavior properties are important for both product quality and process. The rheological properties of chocolate have an important effect on the quality and stability of the final product due to its effect on parameters such as viscosity, consistency and mouth feel ( In general, the rheological properties of chocolate and its products are affected by two main factors; (i) Formulation: fat concentration, fat type, emulsifier concentration, (ii) Process: Refining, conching and tempering ( The function of the conching is primarily associated with particle size and homogeneous distribution ( As a result of fat and lecithin addition in the conching process, the coating level of sugar and cocoa particles increases. This increase reduces inter-particle interaction and decreases the viscosity ( The duration and intensity of conching has a significant effect on the viscosity of chocolate ( The presence of large gaps between solid aggregates may cause immobilization of some cocoa butter. The increase in the amount of immobilized cocoa butter has significant effects on the rheological properties of chocolate ( The lecithin and the remaining cocoa butter added in the final part of the conching cause the lubricating effect. In this case, the mobility of the particles increases, the interaction between them decreases and the viscosity decreases. In addition, Especially in cases where water does not evaporate sufficiently in the early stages of conching, it is important to use PGPR in order to keep the limited amount of water in the mixture under control and not affect the rheological properties negatively ( When the outputs of each chocolate production steps were examined, it was reported that the lowest storage (G′) and loss (G”) modulus values were determined as a result of the conching and tempering processes. This was the result of lubricating and emulsifying effect of fat and lecithin, and it can be considered as one of the indicators of the effects of emulsifiers on sugar particles and their networks ( Hardness is one of the main chocolate textural quality parameters. The hardness of the chocolate samples was determined to be correlated with the type and amount of fat used, sugar type, particle size distribution, tempering conditions, as well as the temperature of conching ( Textural properties of chocolate are found to be related to flavour perception. The flavour of chocolates may be masked as a result of unacceptable textural and meting properties of chocolates ( Conching is the only stage of the chocolate processing in which relatively high temperature is used. At this stage, all possible microbial contamination from raw material should be eliminated and food safety should be ensured. Due to its low moisture content (<1.5%) and water activity (0.25–0.50), chocolate can be defined as a microbiologically stable product. However,  Another food safety problem may also be encountered depending on the conditions of the conching process (especially the time) and the equipment. When conching was performed by using a ball-mill, particular attention should be paid to the possibility of heavy metal migration from the metal balls. This risk may occur as a result of friction between metal balls. For example, Fe migration to chocolate may occur due to long term conching ( Conching is one of the most important process steps for the behavior of chocolate in the oral cavity and its perception ( Phenolic substances, especially flavonols, are the most important bioactive components for chocolate and its derivative products. These components are the motivation element in chocolate choices by some consumer groups. The content of phenolic substances in cocoa based products is affected by raw material variety, origin, processing techniques and technologies as well as process methods and parameters ( There are limited numbers of studies related to the change in the composition and levels of phenolic compounds during and after conching. To determine the effects of conching conditions on polyphenol concentration and profile, further studies should be carried out taking into account the changes in each type of chocolate and composition. Particularly, the presence of milk-derived polypeptides must be taken into account due to their effects on polyphenols and chocolate quality. Furthermore, depending on the composition, the bioavailability and bioactivity properties of the polyphenols may also vary. Therefore, these interactions should be investigated with the advanced studies and the declarations for the consumers should be arranged according to bioavailability results. Conching can be defined as a high cost process due to high temperatures and long processing times ( Conching machines come in a various styles, and provide low maintenance, optimal heat-transfer and high-stress seals to ensure a cost-effective means of production ( Another factor in the selection of conching for chocolate manufacturers is equipment capacity and heat transfer. The equipment capacity should be selected considering the investment cost and the lengths of filling and discharging periods after each batch production and the production capacity targets of the enterprise ( Since the concentration of the fat phase of the chocolate mass will directly affect the flow properties of the product, modification of the mechanical processes may be required. In addition, if the source of the change in this concentration is the cocoa mass, changes in the conching time are required depending on the moisture to be removed and the change in the level of unwanted volatile components. Fats such as cocoa butter equivalents (CBE), non-lauric cocoa butter replacer (CBR) and cocoa butter substitute (CBS), which are rich in lauric fatty acids, are used in low cost chocolate derivatives, such as compound chocolate and coatings. They are generally used for melting resistance. For compound chocolate and coatings, conching is applied, but the conching time is shorter ( As noted in the previous sections, it is also possible to modify the flow properties of the chocolate mass by the conching process. When using fats other than cocoa butter, the process should be carried out by taking into account the flow characteristics of the new product. For instance, conventional conching as well as ball-mill or universal systems can be applied for coatings produced using CBR. However, the flow characteristics need to be modified considering the processes to be applied after conching (e.g. depositing, enrobing) ( In the production of compound (>5% CBE) or super compound (substitution of cocoa butter with 100% CBE) chocolate including CBE, the conditions of conching should be determined based on the use of cocoa mass or cocoa powder ( Microstructural changes during conching are important for controlling flow characteristics of molten chocolate. If particles are too small, more cocoa butter is needed ( Due to the high energy and time requirement of the conching, various studies have been performed to solve the high cost problem required. These studies may be grouped as (i) developing alternative process systems, and (ii) optimizing process conditions. For example, Low-cost and short-term conching process development studies have been carried out to especially by-pass the dry conching phase in milk chocolate production. By applying changes and innovations in the conditions of the conching process, One of the issues to be taken into consideration in short-time conching is the water absorbed from the air by the main components of chocolate. During the refining, it comes from the milk powder and cocoa liquor to the amorphous surfaces of the disintegrated sugar particles, where it forms a solvate layer of sugar dissolved in water which can cause the particles to stick together ( In the field of chocolate science and technology, the studies about conching have focused on the effects of this process on the aromatic properties and the development of alternative methods in recent years. For example, in the recent study A complementary series of studies were carried out for an alternative conching process in milk chocolate production. Another remarkable conching approach may be “coarse-conching”. In this technique, using not-refined sugar particles and higher shear effect resulted in relatively short-term conching in ball mill system. Although aroma development was not sufficient for milk chocolates, perceived sweetness interestingly increased by using “coarse-conching”. Cocoa varieties with different genetic and geographic origin have variable fermentation behavior resulting in different chocolate quality characteristics. Cocoa fermentation is indispensable and necessary for the formation of chocolate-specific aroma precursors ( As noted in previous sections, one of the most important results of the conching process is related with the rheological and textural properties. In order to achieve these results, the agglomerates in the mass should be broken down and lecithin should be provided with sufficient and appropriate amount for coating of the sugar particles with cocoa butter ( Chocolate and derivative products are consumed primarily for their sensory properties rather than their nutritional characteristics. For this reason, sensory characteristics should be taken into consideration in product and process development and optimization studies. The texture and flow behaviour characteristics and melting properties together with the unique aromatic properties of chocolate are of great importance for consumers. However, long-term conched chocolates lost their aroma levels ( Conching process is of great importance for improving the quality of chocolate and is the only stage of application which provides bactericidal effect in chocolate production. However, during this process, heat treatment for long time and high shear are disadvantages for production efficiency and cost. Long-term conching is essential for particularly the removal of undesirable volatile compounds and moisture, the formation of some desired volatile compounds, the development of color, texture and flow behavior characteristics, and emulsification. However, with the increase in time and temperature, some composition changes may occur, especially in the bioactive components. Thus, optimization of the process conditions is necessary to achieve the process objectives effectively. However, optimization studies should be based on chocolate varieties. For example, the amount of moisture to be removed varies from raw material in different chocolate types. In addition, in optimization studies, planning of the targets according to each conching phase can provide more effective results. Another method that can be used to improve optimization and develop quality is to provide mechanical and thermal effects during conching with alternative technologies such as ultrasonication.