Growth hormone (GH) promotes longitudinal growth and bone mineralization.
                  In this study, a proteomic approach was used to analyze the association between serum protein expression pattern and height-adjusted bone mineralization in short prepubertal children receiving GH treatment. Patterns of protein expression were compared with those associated with longitudinal bone growth.
                  Specific protein expression patterns associated with changes in height-adjusted bone mineralization in response to GH treatment were identified. Out of the 37 peaks found in significant regression models, 27 were uniquely present in models correlated with changes in bone mineralization and 7 peaks were uniquely present in models correlated with changes in height. The peaks identified corresponded to apolipoproteins, transthyretin, serum amyloid A4 and hemoglobin beta.
                  We conclude that a proteomic approach could be used to identify specific protein expression patterns associated with bone mineralization in response to GH treatment and that height-adjusted bone mineralization and longitudinal bone growth are regulated partly by the same and partly by different mechanisms. Protein isoforms with different post-translational modifications might be of importance in the regulation of these processes. However, further validation is needed to assess the clinical significance of the results.Longitudinal growth in children is a complex process depending on the interplay between environmental, genetic and hormonal factors. The exact mechanisms involved in the regulation of growth are not completely understood Evidence-based models for predicting longitudinal growth of the individual child in response to GH treatment have been developed We hypothesized that GH-mediated effects on height-adjusted bone mineralization are regulated partly by the same mechanism that regulates longitudinal bone growth and partly by different mechanisms. DXA is the most widely used technique for conducting bone measurements as it is relatively cheap, accessible, easy to use, and provides an accurate estimation of BMD. DXA uses X-ray beams with two different energy levels to determine bone mineral mass and soft tissue composition This is the first study to use a pharmaco-proteomic approach in order to identify serum protein biomarkers associated with GH-dependent bone mineralization and bone growth that are independent of height gain. The study asked two main questions: is it possible to identify serum protein biomarkers associated with GH-dependent changes in height-adjusted bone mineralization and height-adjusted bone growth? If so, can this approach be used to identify specific biomarkers for height-adjusted bone mineralization and longitudinal growth? All protein expression patterns were analyzed using SELDI-TOF The protocol was approved by the ethical boards of the Universities of Gothenburg (for patients from Gothenburg and Halmstad), Umeå, Uppsala and Malmö and the Medical Product Agency of Sweden. Written informed consent was obtained from all parents and from children if old enough. The trial was performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and Good Clinical Practice guidelines. This study is based on the same study population as was used to identify protein expression patterns correlated with longitudinal growth in response to GH treatment The maximum peak GH secretion (GH Fasting blood samples were taken at the start of the study and after 1 Analyses of GH levels were performed at the GP-GRC laboratory (SWEDAC accredited no. 1899) at the University of Gothenburg using a polyclonal assay and World Health Organization International Reference Preparation 80/505 The childhood component Whole body DXA scans were obtained using either a Lunar DPX-L scanner (GE Medical, Madison, WI) or a Lunar Prodigy scanner (GE Medical). Only small differences in measurements were detected between Lunar Prodigy and DPX systems Detailed information on serum analyses using SELDI-TOF and on data handling can be found in Time-of-flight spectra were generated using a PBS IIc ProteinChip reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories). To minimize experimental variation, all samples were randomized and analyzed concurrently within 1 Data handling was performed using ProteinChip Data Manager (Bio-Rad Laboratories). All spectra were baseline-subtracted and normalized according to total ion current and then visually inspected. Patients were excluded from further data analysis if profiles clearly differed between the duplicate samples or if the overall quality was low in one or both of the spectra (i.e. high noise, overall low peak intensity or an abnormal normalization factor in combination with visually deviating spectra). This process resulted in the identification of 147 valid peaks for CM10 (n Only patients, for whom there were two high-quality mass spectra for the relevant array and time point, were included in further statistical analysis. This resulted in a study population of 121 children at the start of GH treatment, 124 children after 1 Immunodepletion experiments for protein identification were performed as described The excized gel pieces were destained and dehydrated. After the samples were dissolved, 1 In-gel protein digestion with trypsin was, with some minor modifications, performed as described by Shevchenko et al. Protein identification by nanoflow LC–MS/MS was performed on a hybrid linear ion-trap FT-ICR mass spectrometer (LTQ-FT, Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany). Two-microliter sample injections were made with an HTC-PAL autosampler (CTC Analytics AG, Zwingen, Switzerland) connected to an Agilent 1100 binary pump (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA). The peptides were trapped on a precolumn (45 BMC and BA were strongly correlated with height ( Mean values for BMD, BMC To identify potential biomarkers of interest, samples from children with GH deficiency and ISS and from both groups combined (total population) were analyzed at baseline and after 1 The peak data were analyzed using multidimensional scaling (MDS) to explore the relationships between the peaks and to identify outlying patients. Data from three outlying patients were excluded from further statistical analyses. Stepwise regression was computed to find subsets of peaks that correlated with the delta BMD, BMC The Matlab ‘stepwisefit’ function was adapted to compute the StepwiseForwardP and StepwiseP models. The criteria for adding (or deleting) variables from the models were based on t-statistics for coefficient estimates. The threshold for inclusion within both the StepwiseForwardP and StepwiseP models was set to p To study the robustness of the data analyses, random permutation tests were performed on the complete stepwise regression procedure described above including the selection of subsets of peaks based on the highest R In In The results for At start of treatment, specific protein expression patterns correlated with the change in BMC At start of treatment, specific protein expression patterns correlated with the change in BA At start of treatment, specific protein expression patterns correlated with the change in BMD 0–1 The change in protein expression patterns during the first year of GH treatment correlated with the change in BMD 0–1 The hypothesis that GH-mediated effects on height-adjusted bone mineralization are regulated partly by the same mechanisms involved in longitudinal growth and partly by different mechanisms was tested in the GH-deficient group of patients. All regulated peaks identified at 0–1 Proteins were identified based on the consistency of the peak pattern in the spectra, MS identification and serum depletion experiments. First, the protein patterns where studied and compared with those reported in the literature. Based on the consistency of the peak patterns in the spectra, the 6.4 and 6.6 Serum proteins were separated on 1-D SDS PAGE gels ( To verify the protein identities obtained by MS/MS analysis and literature searches, depletion experiments using specific antibodies were performed ( In the depletion experiment using an HBB antibody, a peak with m/z 15,163 was also depleted. This is thought to represent hemoglobin alpha; however, the depletion may be caused by non-specific antibody binding. The 8920 A summary of the associations between peaks and bone mineralization and growth during the different time periods was prepared based on the results shown in In In In the In this study, a pharmaco-proteomic approach was used to identify correlations between specific protein expression patterns and GH treatment response with respect to height-adjusted bone mineralization and height-adjusted bone growth during the first two years of treatment. Furthermore, our results support the theory that the GH-dependent regulation of height-adjusted bone mineralization is partially governed by mechanisms that are distinct from those responsible for regulating longitudinal bone growth. Today, the response of children to GH treatment is mainly measured in terms of height gain, despite the fact that GH has effects also on metabolism and bone formation. We have previously shown that proteomic data could be used to identify proteomic profiles that correlated with growth in response to GH treatment In growing children, BMC, BMD and BA are closely related to age and bone maturation One way to overcome the influence of the height on pediatric BMD and BMC has been to express these variables as Z-scores (SD-scores) In the present study, we found a reduction in BMC It is interesting to note that different peaks, most likely representing post-translational modified isoforms of monomeric and dimeric Apo A-II, were present at different time periods for both BMC The results of this study support the existence of partly dissociable mechanisms that are involved in bone mineralization and longitudinal growth. In the GH-deficient group we found changes in the intensity of specific peaks to be associated with either bone mineralization or longitudinal growth in response to GH treatment. We used the GH-deficient group because this group is probably more homogeneous than the ISS group and therefore the changes seen in height or bone mineralization are more likely to be direct effects of GH. Results showed that different post-translational modified isoforms of monomeric and dimeric Apo A-II were associated either with mineralization or with longitudinal bone growth. Both the full-length protein and a truncated isoform of Apo C-I were uniquely associated with longitudinal bone growth. All proteins identified in the current study, except for HBB, are part of the HDL In GH-deficient children, Apo A-I levels have been reported to be similar to those in healthy controls, independently of GH treatment BMD is decreased in thalassemic patients who have impaired HBB function In the present study, one specific isoform of TTR was associated with the bone mineralization response to GH treatment. Expression of TTR is under the control of hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 (HNF-6), which is activated by GH We have previously shown an association between Apo A-II and growth in response to GH treatment From this study it is not possible to draw conclusions as to whether the markers identified are actually involved in the regulation of height-adjusted bone mineralization or height-adjusted bone growth, or if they are indirect markers of the effects of GH on HDL levels during treatment. The different levels of the identified proteins may be a consequence of the altered levels of HDL and changes in the homeostasis of the lipoproteins. Proteomic studies are primarily hypothesis generating. Results must be validated and the clinical implications assessed using techniques that are appropriate in a clinical laboratory milieu. To achieve the latter step there is a need for tests with high throughput and low inter- and intra-assay variation. Ideally, the best predictors can be measured before the start of treatment, possibly using multi-assays adapted for GH treatment response. This study suggests that there is potential for using proteomic variables obtained at the start of treatment to predict changes in bone mineralization and volumetric bone growth. In the future, findings obtained using a proteomic approach may be incorporated within models of bone growth to allow the prediction of long-term bone quality. In this study, a lot of effort was put into developing a robust and well-functioning statistical work flow. The inclusion of SPARSElab The MDS In conclusion, we have shown that analyses of serum protein expression patterns can be used to identify markers of both height-adjusted bone mineralization and height-adjusted bone growth response in short prepubertal children on GH treatment. We found different post-translationally modified isoforms of monomeric and dimeric Apo A-II to be associated with either the first or the second year bone mineralization process. Furthermore, our data support the conclusion that the mechanisms responsible for the effects of GH on bone mineralization and longitudinal growth can be partially dissociated. However, to assess the clinical significance of these data, further validation of the results is needed. Kerstin Albertsson-Wikland (KAW) declares that she received an unrestricted research grant from Pharmacia/Pfizer until 2005. Andreas FM Nierop (AFMN) works for Muvara, Multivariate Analysis of Industrial and Research Data Statistical Consultation in The Netherlands. Gunnel Hellgren (GH), Björn Andersson (BA), Ralph Decker (RD) and Ingvar Bosaeus declare that they have no competing interests. BA, RD, AFMN, IB, KAW and GH have all made a substantial contribution to the conception and design of the study and the analysis and interpretation of the data. BA carried out all of the SELDI-TOF investigations and additional experiments. AFMN performed the majority of the statistical analyzes; the remainder were performed by BA. BA, RD, AFMN, IB, KAW and GH have all been involved in drafting the manuscript and have revised it critically for intellectual content. The authors are thankful for fruitful discussions with Peter Iversen and Eva Fernvik at Bio-Rad, and the Sambio Core Facility at Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg about their work on protein identification. We would also like to thank the team responsible for Sparselab for developing the software and for making the source code publicly available. The use of SELDI-TOF within the study was supported by a grant from the The authors thank the investigators of TRN 98-0198-003, Kerstin Albertsson-Wikland, Stefan Aronson, Berit Kriström, Jovanna Dahlgren, Jan Gustafsson, Maria Halldin, Sten A Ivarsson, Nils-Östen Nilsson, Johan Svensson and Torsten Tuvemo for allowing us to use these data.