Background
                  There is ongoing debate regarding the optimal surgical treatment of complex proximal humeral fractures in elderly patients.
               
                  Objectives
                  To evaluate the cost-effectiveness of reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA) compared with hemiarthroplasty (HA) in the management of complex proximal humeral fractures, using a cost-utility analysis.
               
                  Methods
                  On the basis of data from published literature, a cost-utility analysis was conducted using decision tree and Markov modeling. A single-payer perspective, with a willingness-to-pay (WTP) threshold of Can$50,000 (Canadian dollars), and a lifetime time horizon were used. The incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) was used as the study’s primary outcome measure.
               
                  Results
                  In comparison with HA, the incremental cost per quality-adjusted life-year gained for RTSA was Can$13,679. One-way sensitivity analysis revealed the model to be sensitive to the RTSA implant cost and the RTSA procedural cost. The ICER of Can$13,679 is well below the WTP threshold of Can$50,000, and probabilistic sensitivity analysis demonstrated that 92.6% of model simulations favored RTSA.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Our economic analysis found that RTSA for the treatment of complex proximal humeral fractures in the elderly is the preferred economic strategy when compared with HA. The ICER of RTSA is well below standard WTP thresholds, and its estimate of cost-effectiveness is similar to other highly successful orthopedic strategies such as total hip arthroplasty for the treatment of hip arthritis.Fractures of the proximal humerus are common debilitating fractures in the elderly. Because of the impaired bone quality and frailty in this patient population, there is an increased incidence of complex and unstable proximal humeral fractures Successful hemiarthroplasty (HA) can be challenging because anatomic healing of the tuberosities is essential to improve the postoperative functional outcome Recently, several clinical trials and systematic reviews On the basis of data from published literature, we conducted a cost-utility analysis using decision tree and Markov modeling. A single-payer Canadian provincial government perspective (Ontario Ministry of Health) and a lifetime time horizon were used. The incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) was the primary metric of cost-effectiveness. We conducted multiple sensitivity analyses to explore the robustness of our findings. To determine which of the treatments would be the economically preferred intervention, we used a willingness-to-pay (WTP) threshold of Can$50,000 (Canadian dollars) per incremental quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) gained TreeAge Pro 2011 (TreeAge Software, Inc., Williamstown, MA) was used to construct a decision tree for the first 2 years of the model ( The base-case scenario provided the clinical context for the economic analysis. The analysis was performed on the basis of a 72-year-old female patient with a complex proximal humerus fracture and general health suitable for either arthroplasty procedure (American Society of Anesthesiologists Physical Status Classification 1 or 2). The base-case demographic characteristics were chosen to represent the most commonly encountered clinical scenario on the basis of age and sex We conducted a comprehensive search of the published literature to identify 1) systematic reviews that compare RTSA and HA and report complication rates and functional outcomes and 2) clinical studies that evaluate the clinical efficacy of RTSA and HA for the treatment of complex proximal humeral fractures in elderly patients. Our literature search identified 4 systematic reviews Complication rates were then derived from the studies identified in our literature search ( For the late complications within the Markov modeling, estimates for the annual complication rates were based on values reported in several large meta-analyses All patient outcomes were defined by five health states: “excellent function,” “good function,” “poor function/no pain,” “poor function/pain,” and “death.” We estimated that most of the patients who required major revision surgery would have poor functional outcomes Patients with a health state of excellent function, good function, or poor function/no pain who had a late complication were modeled to transition to a health state of poor function/pain. Individuals with a health state of poor function/pain who had a complication were modeled to transition to a sixth temporary health state (“very poor function/pain”) that was added for modeling this specific scenario. Because general health is expected to deteriorate over time, 2% of the individuals in each health state group were modeled to transition to an inferior state per year. The probability of death at any point in the model was estimated on the basis of Canadian Census lifetables and represented age-specific all-cause mortality risk Utility values were derived from patient outcomes in several high-quality studies All costs are reported in 2014 Canadian dollars (Can$), and both costs and health state values were discounted 5% annually, following Canadian guidelines The ICER was calculated as the difference in costs between the two treatments (RTSA and HA) divided by the difference in QALYs between the two treatments. To explore potential uncertainties in model variables, we conducted a one-way sensitivity analysis on RTSA implant costs and a two-way sensitivity analysis on RTSA implant costs as well as the RTSA early complication rate To account for inherent uncertainty in all variable estimates and to further evaluate the robustness of the model, a probabilistic sensitivity analysis (PSA) was performed using a Monte-Carlo simulation of 100,000 runs. In PSA, all model parameters are assigned a probability distribution, and in each run of the model, a random sample from those distributions is drawn. Beta distributions were used for probabilities, and gamma distributions were used for costs and health state values On the basis of our lifetime model, the treatment of a proximal humerus fracture in an elderly population with HA was associated with a cost of $18,348 and 5.76 QALYs gained. Treatment of this fracture with RTSA resulted in a cost of $24,219 and 6.19 QALYs gained ( One-way sensitivity analysis revealed the model to be sensitive to the RTSA implant cost and the RTSA procedural cost. RTSA treatment becomes the more cost-effective treatment, compared with HA, within 2 years of the initial procedure if the implant cost is less than $5,674 or the overall procedural cost for RTSA remains less than $12,733. When costs are held constant in the model, the RTSA early complication rate would have to exceed 38% before HA provided more QALYs. Two-way sensitivity analysis suggested RTSA to be cost-effective compared with HA within the first 2 years of surgery with an early complication rate as high as 25% (if RTSA implant cost was ~$3,000); or conversely, RTSA implant cost could be as high as $8,500 if its early complication rate was 5% ( PSA demonstrated that 92.6% of model simulations favored RTSA at the $50,000 WTP threshold ( The aim of this economic study was to determine the cost-effectiveness of RTSA compared with HA in the treatment of complex proximal humeral fractures in elderly patients. A cost-utility analysis from a single-payer perspective was performed using data from the present literature and decision tree and Markov modeling techniques. The results of this analysis suggest that RTSA is more expensive but also more effective, with an ICER of $13,679 per incremental QALY gained. Therefore, RTSA is likely to be cost-effective compared with HA. To the authors’ knowledge, this is the first study comparing the cost-effectiveness of RTSA and HA in patients with proximal humeral fractures. A cost-effectiveness analysis was performed previously for the treatment of rotator cuff arthropathy, but not for the presently controversial management of proximal humerus fractures The complication rates for elective shoulder arthroplasty differ noticeably from the values known for arthroplasty in the treatment of proximal humerus fractures A major strength of this study is its use of multiple data sources and meta-analysis data. In addition, many cost values were derived from the prospective multicenter Ontario Case Costing Initiative. Furthermore, the model’s conclusions were highly stable across one-way, two-way, and probabilistic sensitivity analyses. Despite the robust nature of the model’s results, the focus on the Canadian system limits the conclusions made to health care systems and populations with similar characteristics. For systems with larger health care costs (such as the United States), the ICER is less likely to be cost-effective because the incremental costs between implants are typically larger; readers can, however, use our model to determine how close the base-case estimates are to their own health care system. Other model characteristics must also be considered. This analysis was conducted from a single-payer perspective and did not account for indirect costs such as absence from work and need for nursing care. Because this type of fracture most commonly affects elderly patients and the subsequent shoulder dysfunction from the injury has a tremendous impact on their general care dependency, it is likely that the patients and their caregivers will also incur considerable indirect costs associated with this type of injury. In an ideal situation, such an analysis would be based on very long-term studies comparing costs and outcomes of patients randomized to the two groups. Nevertheless, such studies are simply not available at present, and yet policy decisions still need to be made. Mathematical models are commonly used to assess and forecast the relative effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of alternative treatment strategies using a synthesis of the best available evidence In any cost-effectiveness analysis, the determinant of what treatment is economically preferred is highly dependent on the societal WTP threshold adopted. This study used a WTP threshold of Can$50,000 per incremental QALY gained, which is less than the commonly cited threshold of US $50,000 In conclusion, when comparing HA and RTSA in the treatment of complex proximal humeral fractures in elderly patients from a single-payer governmental perspective, RTSA approaches the WTP threshold within 2 years, but is overwhelmingly the preferred cost-effective strategy on the basis of the lifetime horizon. Source of financial support: The study did not receive external funding.