This study examined the influence of the technological process of buckwheat groats production on dietary fibre content and its fraction, and sorption of selected bile acids by buckwheat groats and products. Analyses were conducted on samples of the following products: buckwheat grains (BG), buckwheat grains after roasting (BGR), buckwheat hull (BH), buckwheat bran (BB), whole buckwheat groats (WBG), broken buckwheat groats (BBG) and buckwheat waste (BW). The content of neutral detergent dietary fibre (NDF) and its fraction containing cellulose (C), hemicellulose (H) and lignin (L) were assayed using the Van Soest method, while total dietary fibre (TDF) and its soluble (SDF) and insoluble (IDF) fractions were assayed using the Asp method. Ability to absorb cholic acid (CA), deoxycholic acid (DCA) and dehydrocholic acid (DHA) was investigated by colorimetric methods. Differences in the content of dietary fibre and its fraction in examined products were observed. The highest TDF content appeared in BH, while the lowest in BBG. The buckwheat hull contained highest amount of fraction L and C, while the buckwheat waste contained more fraction L. The IDF fraction predominated in all products. Among investigated bile acids DCA was adsorbed the strongest, while CA the weakest. Cholic acid binding was significantly higher with BH, BB and BW than with rest products. For buckwheat hull bile acid binding was significantly higher in comparison with WBG and BBG.Recently we have been observing an increasing interest in buckwheat and its products. The most widely grown buckwheat species include common buckwheat ( The first stage in the synthesis of primary bile acids is 7α-hydroxylation of cholesterol catalysed by 7α-hydroxylase. Further biosynthesis of bile acids leads to the formation of cholic and chenodeoxycholic acids. In combination with glycine or taurine these acids are transported to bile. As a result of respective CoA derivatives being bound with glycine or taurine primary bile acids are formed, such as glycocholic or taurochenodeoxycholic acids. Thanks to the activity of intestinal bacteria the previously attached glycine and taurine are cleaved, as a result of which secondary bile acids are formed, such as deoxycholic acid and lithocholic acid that may have mutagenic properties ( The technological process of buckwheat groats production includes such stages as cleaning and thermal conditioning (roasting) of kernels, sorting in terms of size, hulling, sorting after hulling and sorting of groats combined with the separation of waste and by-products. By-products formed in the course of the technological processes are characterised by a high content of biologically active substances, including dietary fibre ( The samples, i.e. buckwheat grains (BG), buckwheat grains after roasting (BGR), buckwheat hull (BH), buckwheat bran (BB), whole buckwheat groats (WBG), broken buckwheat groats (BBG) and buckwheat waste (BW), were obtained from a milling company “Podlaskie Zakłady Zbożowe” from Białystok (Poland). The technological process applied in the production of buckwheat groats included the following stages: cleaning of buckwheat grains, thermal conditioning (roasting) of buckwheat grains, storage, sorting 1, hulling, sorting of groats, separation of hulls and sorting 2. Hulling was performed in cylinder hulling machines. The sorting process was performed again in order to separate whole buckwheat groats from broken groats. Buckwheat grain was roasted for 1 The contents of neutral dietary fibre (NDF), acid detergent fibre (ADF), lignin and cellulose were determined using the detergent method according to The contents of total dietary fibre (TDF), soluble dietary fibre (SDF) and insoluble dietary fibre (IDF) were determined according to The bile acids binding capacity was determined by colorimetry ( The amount of 5 Results of determinations reported in this study constitute a mean from three replications. For the purpose of objectivity of inference the recorded results were subjected to statistical analysis. For the determination of significance of differences between means a one-way analysis of variance was conducted using the Tukey's test. Dependencies were considered statistically significant at the level of significance P Analysed buckwheat products were characterised by a varied content of dietary fibre and its fractions ( In terms of the content of dietary fibre (TDF) buckwheat products may be ordered as follows: buckwheat hull In cereal products the content of dietary fibre is highly varied and depends on the proportions of individual kernel parts. During cereal grinding, undertaken to produce groats, both the coat germ, and – depending on the degree of processing – also a part of the aleurone layer, are removed (  The study carried out showed differentiated sorption properties of buckwheat products. The biggest sorption capacity in relation to bile acids, irrespective of the type of acid and its concentration, was observed for hulls, while the lowest for broken buckwheat groats ( The bile acid binding on an equal total dietary fibre (TDF) shown in Differential composition of dietary fibre may have wide potential possibility in bile acid binding or health promoting properties. Much higher bile acid binding reported for buckwheat hull, and buckwheat bran than for other of buckwheat products suggested varietal differences in the health promoting potential among buckwheat wastes. Buckwheat hull, buckwheat bran and different wastes from food industry are rich source of bioactive substances and should be evaluated for their bile acid binding and health promoting potential. The highest content of total dietary fibre was recorded in hulls, while the lowest in whole and broken buckwheat groats. Products were characterised by a varied fraction composition of dietary fibre. In buckwheat hulls lignin and cellulose fraction predominated, while the hemicellulose fraction in broken groats was dominated. In all tested products the insoluble fraction predominated, with the highest content of this fraction being found in hulls. Roasting of buckwheat grains resulted in an increase in the content of dietary fibre and the all fractions dietary fibre. Buckwheat products were characterised with differentiated bile acids adsorption ability. Hull and bran bound bile acids in the highest degree; while broken buckwheat groats bound them in the lowest degree. Deoxycholic appeared to be the most susceptible for binding, while cholic acid was the least susceptible. Taking under consideration significant buckwheat products sorption ability of dietary fibre in the range of bile acids, enrichment of everyday diet with these products, especially for people suffering from lipid disorders, is recommended.