We used our database of primary total hip arthroplasties to identify those patients who had acetabular fractures fixed with percutaneous screws under the same anesthesia as for the arthroplasty procedure. There were 19 patients with the average follow-up of 22months. Fourteen patients sustained the fracture secondary to a low-energy trauma, while the remaining patients were involved in a high-energy trauma accident. The mean survival time was calculated to be 2.5±0.6years for the low-energy group and 4±1.4years for the high-energy group. We believe that this unique treatment of acetabular fractures has a role in carefully selected patients and provides the necessary reduction and immediate stability of the fracture needed to ensure adequate fit for the acetabular cup in the subsequent THA.The treatment of acetabular fractures remains an interesting challenge. Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) in the younger population has produced favorable outcomes, but has been found to have inferior outcomes in the elderly Thus various other treatment modalities for acetabular fractures in the elderly have been described, including non-operative management and delayed total hip arthroplasty (THA) Recent studies support the use of fluoroscopic-guided percutaneous screw fixation for acetabular fractures with concomitant column involvement The purposes of this study are to report on the short-term outcomes of a percutaneous column fixation technique in conjunction with a THA for the treatment of acute acetabular fractures in the elderly and to note any apparent risk factors for a compromised early outcome. Institutional review board (IRB) approval was obtained, and database of primary total hip arthroplasties (THA's) at our institution was searched to identify patients who had an acetabular fracture—with one or both columns involved—fixed by percutaneous column screws, through a minimally invasive technique, during the same anesthesia as THA. Isolated acetabular wall fractures and fractures reduced by open methods were excluded. For identified subjects, charts were retrospectively reviewed for demographic data, BMI, type of fracture based on the classification of Letournel et al Kaplan–Meier survivorship curves were constructed using SPSS V. 21 with either death or revision of the hip implant as the end point. Independent Distal femoral traction pins were inserted shortly after admission until the day of surgery. Patients underwent full medical evaluations prior to being scheduled for surgery. The decision to proceed with THA was based on the presence of degenerative joint disease warranting THA in the absence of acetabular fracture or severe joint damage secondary to the fractured acetabulum. All acetabular fracture fixations were done by one trauma fellowship-trained senior author, while all THA procedures were performed by one adult reconstruction trained surgeon. All acetabular reductions and fixations were performed in a supine position. Arthroplasties were undertaken using a posterior approach with the patient in a lateral decubitus position. Under general anesthesia, reduction of the acetabular fracture was attained through manipulation and longitudinal traction. Fracture reduction was judged using fluoroscopy and stabilized by percutaneously placed cannulated screws. One or two 6.5-mm cannulated screws were utilized for fixation of the displaced column fragment to the hemipelvis. In the case of both column fracture, the first screw was utilized to fix the anterior column fracture while a second screw was placed in an anterior to posterior direction through the ilium to fix the posterior column. After completion of the procedure, final fluoroscopic images confirmed accurate placement of screws and adequate reduction of the fracture. Immediately following percutaneous column screw fixation, under the same general anesthesia, patients were turned into the lateral position and prepared for THA. Except for two stems, which were fixed by cement, all other THA components were cementless. Two or three screws were used to stabilize the metal shell in most patients ( Fourteen patients fractured their acetabulum by falling from a standing height (low-energy group) and five were involved in motor vehicle accidents (high-energy group) Average estimated blood loss was 700 Ten patients were described as having osteoarthritis of hip after pathologic examination. Eight patients (42%) suffered from postoperative medical and/or surgical complications related to the index surgery, as detailed in All patients who sustained a high-energy trauma had injuries other than acetabular fracture, while only three patients with a low-energy trauma had associated injuries. In total, eight patients sustained concomitant injuries from the original insult requiring further intervention. Associated injuries are presented in Eleven patients (58%) died within 38 Significant differences existed between the low- and high-energy groups with regard to survivorship, BMI, age and length of hospital stay. Average age at the time of surgery was 80 Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of acetabular fractures has been shown to have satisfactory outcomes in a young population Various other methods for the treatment of acetabular fractures in the elderly have also been described, such as conservative management or delayed THA. Studies have shown that closed treatment of acetabular fractures may be associated with nonunion, bone loss and residual pelvic deformities Currently, a combined ORIF and THA during the same anesthesia period, is gaining popularity for the treatment of acetabular fractures in the elderly Complex acetabular fractures may involve both the articular surface and one or both columns The role of acute THA after acetabular fracture in the elderly has been advocated in osteopenic bone with concomitant femoral head fracture, articular comminution or acetabular impaction involving the weight bearing dome from a relatively minor trauma This study presents the outcome of a unique attempt to combine the benefits of a percutaneous column fixation and THA for the treatment of acetabular fractures in the geriatric population. The surgical goal was to minimize soft tissue-related complications encountered during an ORIF by avoiding extensive surgical approaches, achieving fracture stabilization via the percutaneous column fixation, while also providing pain relief and early mobilization through THA. The average age of our cohort was 77 Although some surgeons promote single approaches, others resort to two surgical procedures, first to openly reduce and internally fix the acetabular fracture through one incision, followed by a second incision to perform the THA Average surgical time in our combined procedure is comparable to the combined ORIF and THA studies. Our average operative time of 3.8 While our cohort of elderly patients had less blood loss when compared to the previously reported literature on combined ORIF and THA, they encountered either more complications or different types of complications. Of the 19 elderly patients with acetabular fractures, 8 (42%) experienced postoperative complications ranging from deep vein thrombosis (DVT) to wound infections to heterotopic ossification (HO). Five of these patients sustained multiple complications as seen in In our study of percutaneous acetabular column fixation and THA, 11 patients (58%) died within 38 A significant discrepancy existed between our low-energy acetabular fracture group and the high-energy group with regard to mortality. Mean survival time postoperatively was calculated to be 2.5 Limitations of this study include a small cohort of patients and a relatively short follow-up period. Additionally, the retrospective nature of our study did not allow for a control group, while the presence of confounding variables such as patients' comorbidities may have influenced our findings. However, extended follow-up with a cohort of advanced-age trauma patients is challenging. This novel technique served as an alternative to the traditional combined ORIF and THA treatment for acetabular fractures in the elderly, mitigating complications associated with extensive surgical approaches such as blood loss and surgical times. However this study showed that elderly patients with lower-energy acetabular fractures and lower BMI may have a higher mortality following combined percutaneous column fixation and THA procedure. There may be a role for this unique treatment of acetabular fractures in younger patients, whereas its use in older patients, injured in falls from a standing height, should be questioned. To the authors' knowledge, this is the first report on a combination of percutaneous column screw fixation and THA for the treatment of complex geriatric acetabular fractures and its associated mortality rate in the American population. Future studies with extended follow-up are needed to more clearly establish the role of combined percutaneous column fixation and THA in acute acetabular fracture in the elderly. Conflict of Interest Statements Hereby we extend our gratitude to Mr. Razhan Toossi who contributed to the statistical analyses and Mr. Shiv Tilwa for his help in the literature search.