Particle size reduction and liberation of materials during the shredding of modern end-of-life products plays an important role in the composition (and quality) of the intermediate recycling streams and the ultimate material recovery and therefore recycling rate. This affects among others the realisation of the EU legislation, which imposes a recycling rate of 95% on the recycling of passenger vehicles to be achieved in 2015.
                  In this paper a model is discussed describing the relationship between product ‘mineralogy’; and particle size reduction and liberation during shredding and recycling of end-of-life vehicles. This is partly based on the modelling techniques applied in traditional minerals processing demonstrating how classical theory can be applied to solve modern problems. The model describes the influence of breakage on mechanical separation efficiency and material recovery in metallurgical processing for the various materials present in the car. The model has been developed in order to optimise material recovery and to minimise waste generation in recycling of end-of-life vehicles. It is illustrated that the modelling of the breakage behaviour for modern consumer products differs fundamentally from traditional minerals processing based on various simulations presented in this paper. Moreover various theoretical simulations will illustrate the effect of changes in product design and hence particle size reduction and liberation on the recycling of end-of-life vehicles.parameters in grade-recovery relationships for a particle size class structural parameters linking unit operation composition matrix, defines for each mineral feed of mineral sum of feed of mineral plants, unit operations, transport, etc., with 1→ organic content of metal fraction elements, metals, compounds originating from the different material streams in the recycling flow sheet of end-of-life vehicles (Al wrought, Al cast, steel, copper, other materials such as other non-ferrous metals, organic materials, glass, etc.) liberation classes with Liberation/particle size matrix, defines for each mineral liberation/particle size matrix, defines for each mineral liberation/particle size matrix, defines for each mineral minerals A (Al wrought based), B (Al cast based), C (Rest based), D (Steel based), E (copper based) particle size classes with recovery for metallurgical processing of element recovery for metallurgical processing of element recovery for metallurgical processing of element shredding matrix for the transformation of the particle size distribution for mineral transformation matrix for mechanical separation processes transformation matrix for mechanical separation processes transformation matrix for mechanical separation processes flow rate of mineral flow rate of mineral flow rate of mineral The design of modern products, such as the car, combines and connects various materials in many complex different ways, making up the complex ‘mineralogy’ of the car and its components ( The closure of the material cycle of modern consumer product requires optimisation of the mutual compatibility of the successive processes of shredding, mechanical recycling and metallurgical operations within the interconnected resource cycle system ( It is known from traditional minerals processing technology that the behaviour of ore dressing equipment depends on the nature of the individual particles processed ( Of critical importance to reach recycling targets set by legislation is the quality control of recycling intermediate products created during shredding and physical separation, which ensures that the feed to metal producing processes permits the economic production of quality metal products ( What is to date not been modelled for recycling systems is the combination of particle size distribution (size classes) and liberation classes in one model to investigate the interrelation between product design and recycling rate. Although the previous models in a simplified manner disconnected particle size and liberation and therefore could give an indication of recycling rate, the mentioned combination gives a truer formulation of reality. This approach also gives a good insight into what the breakage matrix for liberation looks like, revealing that classical minerals processing thinking cannot be applied directly to recycling systems. In summary, this paper illustrates how the knowledge of traditional mineral processing can be applied in the new field of (design for) recycling of complex consumer products. On the longer term, this could become the future of minerals processing technology, since legislation and environmental concern will increase the availability of secondary materials, being the mineral ores of the future. Simplified models for the simulation and optimisation of the recycling of passenger vehicles have been developed by The particle size reduction and the liberation of materials during shredding, which is among others determined by product design, will both affect the recycling of end-of-life products as is indicated by the two different models ( It is discussed by The models for liberation as described by As indicated by A simplified flowsheet ( The mass (kg) of the material flows For each of the particle size classes in a specific material flow Since data on the composition of the various liberation classes is lacking, estimations on this had to be made as can be seen from The output of the metallurgical processes has to comply with constraints on the alloy composition. Since each element is described separately in the composition matrices Since the performance of an unit operation is related to the particle size and degree of liberation of the feed of the processes, the separation can be defined for different ranges of size classes From the recycling flowsheet ( mass balance equations, including structural parameters for each mineral separation efficiency models for each of the unit operations for each mineral liberation distributions of liberation classes the composition of each liberation class The various parameters playing a role in the efficiency of the material cycle (economy, legislation, etc.) can be translated into constraints imposed onto the model, the equations mentioned and an objective function for optimisation. These theoretical equations comprise the basis of the model, giving the constraints imposed on the system. The material flows for the minerals The transition of the particle size as well as of the liberation class distribution within the particle size classes due to the shredding operation can be defined in the model based on shredding transformation matrices. This is similar as defined by Since no data is available on the transition of liberation class distributions during shredding no reliable definition for the shredding matrix for the liberation class transition could be presented here. Moreover, the definition of a liberation class transition matrix would require detailed insight into the relation between the particle size and liberation class transition, which is unknown for complex products such as cars. However the modelling of transition of the liberation class distribution can be described sufficiently based on a mass balance over the shredding operation for the elements A mass balance can be set up over the shredding operation, which describes the transition of the mass flow over the particle size classes The shredding operation will change the definition of the liberation of the various minerals in the different particle size classes The mass balance equations define the flow of the material streams between the different unit operations and the structure of the network of processes. For the two unit operations Although in the model, the mass balance is calculated based on particle size classes, the mass balance over the mechanical separation must also close for the mass flows over both particle size and liberation classes. Since during mechanical separation no transformation of particle size classes as well as liberation classes will take place, the following mass balance equation (Eq. The recovery of a mineral during mechanical separation is determined by both the influence of particle size as well as liberation on the separation efficiency. Therefore it is essential to describe the separation efficiency equation based on both particle size as well on liberation. Eqs. The transformation of the particle size/liberation matrix A mixer is being defined in the model in order to convert multiple input streams, with each their own corresponding particle size/liberation matrix Since no transformation of particle size and liberation classes takes place during mixing, the following equation can also be defined for the mixing operation (Eq. The mass balance as well as the separation efficiency (recovery) of the metallurgical operations can be described in one equation (see Eq. The recovery values The recovery values for metallurgical processing are only defined as being dependent on the particle size class, but not on the liberation class. The influence of liberation on the final metal recovery is taken into consideration by including the influence of the other elements, such as organics (=rest stream). The control and therefore the modelling of the alloy quality (composition) of the produced alloy are of utmost importance for the economic production of high quality metal products and the minimisation of waste production. The output composition of the metallurgical operation can be calculated by adding all elements present in the various material flows. The input to metallurgical processing (see During product design, materials are chosen, and its combinations and connections among them are defined. These decisions will determine the mineralogy of the products and liberation attained by shredding, affecting the quality of intermediate recycling streams, the possibilities of material recovery and therefore the recycling rate of the product. Some connections between materials cannot be broken during shredding due to characteristics such as shape, size and strength of the connections, and ultimately due to the intrinsic randomness of the fracture paths originating from this comminution process ( Data on both liberation and particle size reduction have been collected for parameterisation of the developed model. Since the sample size was very small compared to the input of the shredding operation, no conclusions were drawn from this data, however, it gives an indication that the relation between particle size and liberation is not linear and unlike that found in mineral processing systems for the processing of geological minerals. In addition, these figures illustrate what kind of data should be collected, supported by a good mass balance based on data reconciliation, to calibrate the developed model. It would be clear that these data are essential if the recycling rate of a product is ever to be determined well, as well as apply the results to improve the design of products not only for recycling but also for metal and material recovery. By the use of the developed optimisation model four different case studies are presented. The results of these simulations are discussed showing the relationship between the in- and output of the shredder. These simulations will reveal that the breakage behaviour for modern consumer products differs fundamentally from traditional minerals processing. Moreover the four different simulation scenarios are applied to calculate the effect of changes in product design and hence particle size reduction and liberation on the recycling of end-of-life vehicles. Therefore also the relationship to recycling rate is discussed. The software application used to perform the modelling of the shredder as well as the optimisation of the recycling flowsheet as depicted in Since data on the relation between particle size reduction and liberation during shredding of end-of-life products is lacking, no model for the transformation of the particle size and liberation distributions during shredding could be developed. However, the relation between the in- and output of the shredding operation is investigated by calculating the liberation distribution of the output of a shredding step, therefore estimating the liberation matrix (Eq. Scenarios 1 and 2 illustrate the effect of the liberation distribution of the input. The input distribution of the liberation for scenario 1 is shifted to the lower liberation classes (no or poorly liberated materials in the design of the car), whereas simulation 2 calculates the liberation distribution of the output based on an liberation distribution of the input shifted to the higher liberation classes (more/better liberated materials in the design of the car). The particle size distribution of the input is defined for both simulations in class 1 (largest particle size class). The influence of the particle size distribution of the product design (input) on the shredding operation is illustrated by simulations 3 and 4. The definition of the liberation distribution of the input of simulation 3 is shifted to the lower liberation classes (similar to simulation 1), whereas the input of simulation 4 is shifted to the higher classes (similar to simulation 2) (see The simulation results of the four different scenarios for mineral A are depicted by  Two different conclusions on the liberation behaviour of modern consumer products can be drawn from the simulations performed based on During shredding, the major element composing the defined mineral (e.g. Al wrought for mineral A) will liberate. However, the other elements in this mineral can become less liberated, due to the definition of the composition of liberation classes as discussed above. When the major element of a defined mineral liberates from the other elements, the remaining elements in a particle could be present in a less liberated class (a lower fraction of the major element combined with higher fractions of the others). Moreover, shredding of modern consumer goods not necessarily leads to an increased amount of mass in As can be seen from The influence of product design, shredding, particle size reduction and liberation on the efficiency of mechanical separation, the quality of intermediate recycling streams and final metallurgical recovery is discussed based on the four defined scenarios. The final metal recovery is calculated using the developed optimisation model for recycling end-of-life vehicles, including the processes and material flows as depicted in  The modelling and optimisation of the recycling of end-of-life consumer products such as passenger vehicles is closely related to the modelling and simulation of traditional minerals processing systems. This paper illustrates how the knowledge of mineral processing technology can be applied in the field of (design for) recycling of complex consumer goods. Of critical importance in closing the material cycle of passenger vehicles are the material quality, type and shape at various stages in the recycling chain. Product design and material connections and combinations determine the particle size reduction and the degree of liberation of the product during shredding, which affects the composition of the intermediate recycling streams (composition and amount of the non-liberated particles) and the efficiency of physical separation. A systems engineering tool for optimisation of the recycling of end-of-life vehicles (ELVs) was developed, which includes both the particle size reduction as well as the liberation of the materials as modelling parameters. The modelling and definition of the particle size reduction and liberation is developed based on the knowledge available from the modelling of minerals processing systems. This approach is crucial to lay the link between product design and final metal and material recovery, therefore, recycling rate. Various simulations illustrate the liberation behaviour of consumer products. Moreover, the influence of product design, particle size reduction and liberation on the optimisation of the recycling rate of end-of-life vehicles is discussed using the developed optimisation model. From this the following could be concluded: Modern society minerals are complex, so divers and changing so rapidly making a fundamental description very difficult, since data collection on the relationship between particle size and liberation during shredding has not been considered up till now. The simulations reveal the complexity of modelling the breakage matrix for shredding modern consumer goods. The liberation behaviour of modern consumer products differs fundamentally from that of mineral ores. This implies that what is true for classical grinding i.e. the finer the grind the more liberated particles become is not necessarily true for shredding of end-of-life consumer goods. The modelling of multi-component systems for liberation reveals that during shredding, the major element composing a mineral will liberate. However, the other elements in this mineral could become less liberated. The design of a product and the related particle size reduction and liberation efficiency during shredding are of critical importance in achieving a Optimisation of the resource cycle of passenger vehicles can never be realised without proper understanding of the effect of design, liberation and particle size reduction on the closing of the material cycle, something that is better understood in the processing of mineral ores. In summary it can be stated that the knowledge built up over many years within the field of minerals processing can contribute significantly to improving the transparency, quality and control of recycling systems and design for recycling and metal recovery. Moreover it should be realised that the future of minerals processing technology could lie in the growing field of recycling consumer products, which are becoming the new mineral ores of the next decades.