The aim of the paper is the study of workability of Fe–1.0% C–4% TiC steel composite during hot upsetting. Ductile fracture is the most common failure acting in bulk forming process. The formability during hot upsetting depends on the temperature, strain and strain rate. A complete experimental investigation of the workability behaviour of Fe–1.0% C–4% TiC steel composite was performed under the triaxial stress state condition. Hot upsetting of Fe–1.0% C–4% TiC steel composite preforms was carried out at a temperature of 1120°C and the formability behaviour of the same at triaxial stress state condition was determined. The curves plotted for different preforms were analysed and the relationship between the axial strain and the formability stress index were obtained. A relationship between the relative density and the axial strain was also established. A particular attempt was made to relate the various stress ratio parameters, namely, (σ
                     
                        θ
                     /σ
                     eff), (σ
                     m/σ
                     eff) and (σ
                     
                        z
                     /σ
                     eff) with the relative density.initial diameter of the preform bulged diameter contact diameter contact diameter of the preform (top surface) contact diameter of the preform (bottom surface) initial perform height deformed height of the preform relative density barrel radius correlation coefficient true Hoop strain true axial strain Poisson's ratio initial preform density deformed preform density theoretical preform density effective stress mean or hydrostatic stress true radial stress true axial stress true Hoop stress Workability refers to the relative ease with which a material can be shaped through plastic deformation. Several approaches have been proposed to understand the constitutive response of the materials during forming operations Kuhn and Downey In this paper, a complete investigation on the workability criteria of Fe–1.0% C–4% TiC powder performs was made. Powder metallurgy preforms with various aspect ratios were discussed for studying the behavior for workability during hot upsetting under various triaxial stress state conditions. The mathematical expressions used and proposed for the determination of various upsetting parameters of upsetting for various stress state conditions are discussed below. According to Abdel-Rahman and El-Sheikh According to Narayanasamy and Pandey In the above expression for the average contact diameter of the preform, Further from the above reference According to Narayansamy and Pandey According to Narayanasamy and Pandey As an evidence of experimental investigation implying the importance of the spherical component of the stress state on fracture according to Vujovic and Shabalk This index determines the fracture limit as explained in The stress formability index ( According to Narayansamy and Pandey Rearranging the above Eq. In the above Eq. It is assumed that  Since The Eq. Stress ratio (  The effective stress can be determined from the following expression as explained elsewhere This expression can be written as follows in terms of cylindrical coordinates. Since Eq. The stress formability index ( Different stress ratio parameters, namely, ( The ratios, namely, (  Iron powder (−150 The compacting pressure was controlled so as to obtain a density level of 7.612 After the sintering operation, the preforms were upset-forged at a temperature of 1120   As shown in    The following conclusion can be drawn from the present experimental work: Four different densification mechanisms during hot upsetting of Fe–1.0% C–4% TiC have been observed in the case of smaller aspect ratio. The first stage of densification mechanism has been observed up to a relative density value of 0.92 where the increase in stress ratio ( Second stage of densification has been observed in a wider range of relative density value of 0.92–0.96 in which the stress ratio ( The third stage of densification has been observed in a narrow range of relative density value of 0.96–0.98 with a large of increase in the stress ratio ( The final and fourth stage of densification has been observed in a very narrow range of relative density value of 0.98–0.99 with a very large increase in the stress ratio ( A relationship between the stress ratios, namely, ( The stress formability index (