The leaching of metals from waste printed circuit boards (WPCBs) in cupric chloride solutions (HCl–CuCl2–NaCl) was studied. Effects of initial concentration of cupric (8–157mM Cu2+), chloride (0.7–2.0M NaCl), temperature (20–80°C), solids ratio (1–15w/v) and air/oxygen (1L/min) on the leaching of copper as well as other metals (i.e. Fe, Ni, Ag, Pd and Au) were investigated. The findings have shown that increasing the initial concentration of Cu2+ leads to a significant enhancement in the metal extractions. At Cu2+ concentrations of ≥79mM, high extractions (i.e. ≥98%) for copper, nickel and iron were obtained over 120min. An increase in the concentration of chloride (i.e. from 0.7M to 2M Cl−) decreased the extraction of copper by up to 40% at 60min due to the decrease in the activity of free Cu2+. Rising the temperature from 20°C to 80°C resulted in a 1.38-fold increase in the copper extraction at 120min. The activation energy (Ea) for leaching of copper was calculated to be ≈41kJ/mol, indicative of a chemically controlled leaching reaction. Air/oxygen (1L/min) was supplied for the regeneration of Cu2+, which improved the extraction of all the metals monitored. Increasing the solids ratio (1–15w/v) adversely affected the leaching process with no copper extraction at 15w/v. However, the extraction of metals (Cu, Ni, Ag and Pd) substantially ameliorated in the presence of oxygen. The current study have shown that copper, palladium, nickel and silver can be readily extracted from WPCBs in cupric chloride leaching where the extraction of gold is very limited.Owing to the diminution of ever increasing environmental concerns, recovery of metals from waste materials has gained particular attention in recent years. Treatment of waste electrical and electronic equipments (WEEE) with the continuous rise in their amount (e.g. an increase by ~ In recent years, hydrometallurgical treatment of WEEE has received significant attention as a viable alternative particularly for low-grade waste (i.e. < To date, several chloride leaching processes including CLEAR, INTEC, CYMET and HydroCopper® employing cupric as an oxidant, have been tested at the lab/pilot scale for the treatment of copper concentrates ( In cupric chloride solutions, the dissolution of metallic copper takes place according to Eq. Chloride leaching in highly concentrated solutions offers fast leaching kinetics under atmospheric conditions due to the increased proton activity and the formation of stable metal chloride complexes ( In this study, leaching of copper as well as other metals (Fe, Ni, Ag, Pd and Au) from waste printed circuit boards (WPCBs) in HCl–CuCl WPCBs were collected from end-of-life computers of various brands. Following the manual separation of board components such as capacitors, resistors, transistors and cables, WPCBs were reduced in size within a two-stage crushing operation, first to − In the leaching tests, flat-bottomed and baffled jacketed glass reactors with a nominal capacity of 750 Hydrochloric acid solution (37% HCl), reagent grade copper(II) chloride (CuCl  Relatively higher extractions for iron and nickel than that of copper ( Extractions for precious metals, palladium and silver in particular, which were lower than those of Cu, Fe and Ni were also improved by the increase in the initial concentration of Cu  Iron and nickel were almost completely extracted (i.e. ≥ It should be also noted that precipitation of metal chlorides (e.g. CuCl, AgCl, AuCl  The temperature had a limited influence on the extractions of iron and nickel over 120 In chloride leaching, cupric (Cu It is relevant to note that in the presence of air/oxygen at < Since the above reaction is acid consuming, pH tends to rise. If pH reaches above 1 this leads to the rapid oxidation of ferrous chloride (Eq. At > In cupric chloride system, oxidation of cuprous chloride to cupric chloride is promoted by the increase in acidity resulting from precipitation of goethite precipitation (Eq. The effect of air/oxygen on the extraction of copper was tested in the absence ( Air/oxygen supply also improved the extent of Fe, Ni, Ag, Au and Pd extractions, which were even higher in the presence of initially 8 The effect of solids ratio (1–15% w/v) on the metal extractions is illustrated in In order to improve the metal extractions at 15 In contrast to the other metals, iron extraction in the presence of oxygen was remarkably low with only 1.3% ( It is also pertinent to note that, white precipitates were observed after cooling of the pregnant leach solution obtained at 15% w/v solids. After filtering and drying for 3 Cupric chloride leaching (HCl–CuCl The authors would like to express their sincere thanks and appreciations to