Glycine has recently gained plenty of attention in gold processing as an alternative lixiviant to cyanide due to its non-toxicity, efficiency in metal dissolution as well as selectivity for valuable metals. This paper presents an investigation on the combination of agitated reactor leaching and recovery of gold from mildly refractory ore in cyanide-free alkaline glycine media. Optimal leaching parameters for gold extraction were evaluated using response surface methodology. The investigated parameter range was 0.5–2 M for glycine concentration, pH of 10–12 and temperatures of 23–60 °C, with constant leaching time (24 h) and solid/liquid ratio (100 g/L). Based on the experimental series, a mathematical tool was built to predict gold extraction. It was found that, in the investigated parameter range, glycine concentration did not have a statistically significant effect on gold dissolution. Conversely, both temperature and pH had a substantial role in leaching kinetics. The statistical model suggested that the optimal conditions for gold dissolution were 1.25 M of glycine, pH = 12, and T = 60 °C, corresponding to a predicted 87% gold extraction. The experimental verification showed good reliability of the model with 90% extraction of gold achieved under the predicted optimum conditions. The addition of 15 g/L of activated carbon to the pregnant leach solution (PLS) could provide 100% recovery of gold from solution onto activated carbon, i.e. holistic recovery of 90%. Presence of carbon in leach (CIL) resulted in slightly lower (95%) gold uptake from solution and significantly decreased the holistic gold recovery down to 77%. Additionally, the applicability of direct electrochemical carbon-free recovery method, namely electrodeposition–redox replacement (EDRR), was investigated. In the synthetic solution, a gold recovery as high as 88% was achieved (1247 cycles). However, in the real PLS, only 35% of gold was recovered, which is attributed to different speciation of metals and presence of the other dissolved elements.Currently, cyanide is the predominant lixiviant used to extract gold due to its strong complexation with gold and the technical simplicity of the leaching process ( At the moment, thiosulfate leaching is the one of the most developed and the only implemented in industry alternative method to cyanidation due to the low toxicity and high efficiency in treatment of preg-robbing gold ore ( In aqueous solutions, glycine has three different forms with pK   The use of hydrogen peroxide (H They found that the increase in either glycine concentration, temperature, pH or peroxide concentration improves gold dissolution. Furthermore, the presence of cupric ions showed catalytic effect to significantly enhance dissolution of gold in the glycine solution with the use of hydrogen peroxide ( The next step after leaching in the hydrometallurgical gold processing is the recovery of gold from the solution. In the gold mining industry, activated carbon is the most widely used extractant to recover gold from pregnant cyanide leach solution, known as carbon-in-leach (CIL), carbon-in-pulp (CIP), and carbon-in-columns (CIC) processes ( An alternative to conventional recovery processes for gold (i.e. carbon adsorption, ion exchange, and solvent extraction) has been developed recently, namely the electrodeposition-redox replacement (EDRR) method for selective gold recovery from cupric chloride leaching solutions ( In this study, we investigate the alkaline glycine leaching of gold ore in agitated reactor within typical industrial scale cyanide leaching residence time for evaluation of the process as an alternative to cyanidation. With this aim, a response surface methodology was adopted to investigate the main and interactive effects of glycine concentration, temperature, and pH on gold extraction that can provide support when building hydrometallurgical glycine leaching strategies for the gold ore treatment. Besides the investigation on leaching process, two alternative gold recovery methods were studied: (I) conventional adsorption onto activated carbon, (II) the EDRR approach. The purpose is to demonstrate the potential applicability of the EDRR for recovery of gold from glycine solution as an alternative method to conventional carbon adsorption. If successful, the EDRR could offer a carbon-free method for gold recovery, enabling gold recovery directly into the elemental form. A gold ore sample originated from an epithermal deposit with a composition shown in Mineralogically the ore sample was mainly composed of quartz (ca. 60%) and Al-silicates, micas and feldspars comprise the rest of the sample. The main ore minerals included base metal sulfides and tellurides. Pyrite is the most common sulfide mineral, followed by pyrrhotite and chalcopyrite. The main telluride minerals were tellurobismuthite, altaite, hessite, and frohbergite. Gold occurred mostly as fine-grained particles containing an average of 5% Ag and in tellurides, mainly as calaverite (AuTe All leaching experiments in glycine (C At the beginning and during the experiments, the pH of the leach solution was adjusted with 12 M sodium hydroxide (NaOH, Sigma-Aldrich, analytical grade) and the redox potential of the solution was measured with a Pt electrode vs. Ag/AgCl reference electrode. Several samples (10 mL) were taken at fixed leaching periods from the leaching slurry and filtered with a 0.45 μm pore size filter. The solids were fed back to the reactor, while the solution samples were diluted and analyzed using ICP–MS (Thermo Scientific iCAP Q, USA) for Au and Ag and ICP–OES for the remaining metals. At the end of the leaching experiments, the filtered solid residue was dried at 60 °C, homogenized and then Au and Ag content was analyzed by the Fire Assay method. Other metals were analyzed using ICP–OES after total dissolution. The metal concentrations of the final solution were determined using the same analysis routine as for the leach solution samples. A reference cyanide leaching experiment was carried out in agitated reactor for 24 h with 0.75 g/L sodium cyanide (NaCN, Alfa Aesar, analytical grade) concentration to benchmark the leaching efficiency of glycine. The rest of the leaching conditions for the experiment as follows: pH = 11, room temperature (22 °C), solid/liquid ratio of 500 g/L, 0.5 L/min of air purging. After the leaching experiments, slurry was filtered and concentration of metals in the solution and solid samples were determined by using same analytical method as in glycine leaching. The effects of glycine concentration, temperature, and pH on gold extraction were subjected to statistical data analysis to determine the optimal parameters in the alkaline glycine leaching experiments. The investigated parameters (glycine concentration, pH, and temperature) were chosen according to observations on the initial experiments (E1–E7). In this study, MODDE 12.0 software was used for design of the experimental series and statistical analysis of the results. The face-centered central composite design (CCF) – a type of response surface methodology (RSM) – was used to design the experimental series with three factors and three center points ( The significance of the parameters and their interaction was tested with P-values. When the P-value is more than α = 0.05, it indicates statistically non-significant coefficients at the selected confidence level (95%) and a non-significant P-value always corresponds to a low effect ( One carbon-in-pregnant leach solution (PLS) and two carbon-in-leach (CIL-1 and CIL-2) recovery tests were run in the 1 L glass reactor using 15 g/L of activated carbon (RO 3515, Norit, technical grade) to adsorb gold from the loaded glycine solution. Activated carbon was soaked in distilled water for 24 h and screened with a 600 µm sieve prior to recovery tests. Slurry in the adsorption tests was mixed at a lower rotation speed (ca. 500 rpm instead of 900 rpm) to avoid attrition of activated carbon. CIL-1 and CIL-2 tests were run for 24 and 36 h, respectively, with the chosen optimal leach condition where activated carbon was added into the slurries at the beginning of the tests. At the end of both CIL tests, the slurries were filtered, and the cakes were wet-screened using a 300 µm sieve to separate the activated carbon from the final residue. The final residues and activated carbon were dried in the oven at 60 °C and afterwards chemical analyses were applied for both. In the carbon-in-PLS test, activated carbon was added into the filtered pregnant glycine solution at room temperature after the filtration. After the experiment, activated carbon was separated from the solution, dried at 60 °C and analyzed for Au and Ag. During both the carbon-in-PLS and CIL recovery tests, small (∼10 mL) solution samples were taken at 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 12, 18, 24, and 36 h for evaluation of gold adsorption onto activated carbon. Au and Ag were analyzed by ICP–MS and the remaining metals by ICP–OES from solution. Glycine concentration in the final solution was not measured. Solid samples were analyzed by the same methods as the samples from the leaching experiments. Determination of the amount of gold (mg/kg) on the activated carbon was carried out by first burning the carbon to ash, then dissolving the ash in concentrated aqua regia, and lastly analyzing the solution by ICP–MS. The EDRR experiments were run in a three-electrode cell (50 cm Afterwards, another EDRR cycle follows and Au is enriched on the electrode after a number of cycles ( The initial leaching results showed that the glycine concentration (0.5–2.0 M) has a minor effect on gold dissolution ( In contrast, the effect of temperature was clearly more critical in terms of gold dissolution kinetics. There was only minimal gold dissolution at room temperature, but even at 40 °C gold started to dissolve almost linearly, reaching 0.3 mg/L after 24 h, where In addition, the effect of pH was also found to be substantial. At pH 10, gold dissolution was very slow and did not improve much during the experiment (0.04 mg/L, 24 h). However, in the experiment E7 at pH 11, the amount of dissolved gold increased up to 0.4 mg/L, and even higher gold dissolution was observed at pH 12. It is clear that high alkaline pH conditions have a positive effect on the dissolution of gold, and this is believed to be due to the stability of gold glycinate and hydroxide ions.  Based on initial experiments E1–E7, the experimental series was designed using MODDE 12.0 software and performed in a similar manner to the initial experiments. The effect of each factor and their interactions on the gold extraction is presented in To illustrate the non-significant effect of glycine concentration on Au extraction (%), response surface plots of the model on the dual effect of temperature and pH were constructed, where the glycine concentration as the third variable was kept at a low, medium, and high level. In order to improve the quality of the model, insignificant factors were omitted, and the model was refitted with two factors: temperature and pH. In the refitted model, the coefficient of the multiple determinations (R In the analysis of variance (ANOVA) of the regression model (  One verification experiment (VE) was run for 24 h in leaching conditions of 1 L/min oxygen feed, 100 g/L solid/liquid ratio, and 950 rpm rotational speed to confirm the adequacy of the chosen optimal conditions. The gold extraction in the glycine verification experiment was 90%, which is almost equal to the result (89%) observed in the initial experiment E2. This validates the high replicability of the experiments. To the best of authors knowledge, there is no previous study on glycine leaching that has extracted gold from ores to such value (90%) in absence of any catalysts (Cu In the cyanide leaching experiment, which was run to compare the gold leaching efficiency of cyanide-free glycine media, only 80% of gold could be extracted in the presence of 0.75 g/L NaCN. The low gold extraction can be attributed to the fact that some of the gold in the ore occurs as gold telluride minerals having slow dissolution characteristic in cyanide solutions, which results in less efficient gold extraction (   In the carbon-in-leach test (CIL-1), the observed gold recovery from solution onto activated carbon was 96%, while holistic recovery of gold remained only at 62%. However, in the longer carbon-in-leach test (36 h, CIL-2) holistic gold recovery of 77% was obtained, whereas the gold uptake from the loaded solution was at the same level (i.e. 95%). The reason for lower holistic gold recovery in CIL method compared to carbon-in-PLS could be attributed to a slower gold extraction from the ore to the solution, which in turn reduces holistic recovery. This assumption was supported by observing 72% extraction of gold from ore into the solution in the CIL-1 test, while longer retention time (36 h) enhanced the dissolution of gold to 83% (CIL-2). Possible explanation for the lower gold leaching efficiencies in the CIL experiment can be the reduced agitation speed (ca. 500 rpm) in comparison with the tests without activated carbon. This would indicate that the leaching kinetics is controlled by diffusion. High mixing rate increases the solution flow past the solid particles and reduces the diffusion layer, which in turn enhance the gold dissolution rate ( The possibility of carbon-free recovery of gold from glycine leaching solution by the EDRR method was demonstrated for the first time in glycine media, using both synthetic solution and PLS obtained in optimum leaching conditions. The copper concentration in the final leach solution was relatively low (15 mg/L), and this can negatively influence the EDRR process due to mass transfer limitations. For this reason, the PLS was further doped with approx. 500 mg/L of Cu to alleviate the influence of mass transfer ( The substantial difference in Au concentrations in solution before and after EDRR measurements highlights the capability of the EDRR method, as Au recovery from the synthetic solution reached 88% after 1247 EDRR cycles (ca. 20 h); this is an extremely promising result when taking into account the demonstrative nature of the EDRR part of the study, i.e. no full optimization of EDRR parameters were performed prior to recovery. However, only 35% of Au was recovered from the real leaching solution (PLS, SEM micrographs of the working electrode surface after EDRR measurements are shown in In this work, the alkaline glycine leaching in agitated reactor was investigated as a substitute for conventional cyanidation for recovery of gold from ores of epithermal origin. Statistical analysis of the effects of process parameters on dissolution of gold in glycine media revealed that temperature and pH have significant impact on the amount of gold dissolved from the ore, while the influence of glycine concentration is surprisingly negligible in the range studied (0.5–2 M). By using the response surface methodology, the optimum conditions for maximum gold extraction were identified at glycine concentration of 1.25 M, temperature of 60 °C, and pH = 12. Under these conditions the gold extraction of 90% was achieved after 24 h in totally cyanide-free, aerated glycine media. In addition, it was shown that intensive agitation in presence of oxygen is required for high gold extraction within the industrially acceptable timeframe. With cyanide concentration of 0.75 g/L only 80% gold extraction was achieved, which was attributed to gold telluride minerals in the ore, which lead to categorize the studied gold ore as a mildly refractory. This is actually lower than the gold extraction with cyanide-free glycine leaching (90%). These findings, together with the low price, high recyclability and non-toxicity of glycine, suggest that glycine leaching can be considered as a viable cyanide-free method for recovery of gold from mildly refractory gold ores. In addition, two methods of gold extraction from the leach solutions, namely carbon adsorption and electrodeposition–redox replacement, were compared. Also, the current study presented for the first time application of carbon-in-leach (CIL) process in glycine media for the recovery of gold, and compared the efficiency with carbon-in-PLS. When activated carbon was added to filtered PLS, it took only 4 h to recover all gold from the solution. Similar level (i.e. 95%) of gold uptake from solution onto the activated carbon was observed with carbon-in-leach approach; however, the holistic recovery of gold in presence of activated carbon was ca. 13% lower than carbon-in-PLS. Moreover, this study showed for the first time that EDRR can successfully recover dissolved gold from glycine solutions, with a recovery of 88% achieved after 1247 cycles in synthetic solution mimicking the composition of the PLS. Due to the different metal speciation and presence of impurities in the solution, only 35% of gold was recovered after 1440 cycles of EDRR from the real PLS, and in order to achieve higher efficiency systematic optimization of EDRR parameters is needed also for glycine solutions. Overall these results prove the applicability of the EDRR as a carbon-free method for gold recovery from glycine solutions.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research has received funding from the