Green roofs have been considered as a promising approach for greening cities where green areas are scarce. Apart from aesthetic and ecological values, environmental benefits are well recognized: reducing the urban heat island effect, promoting CO2 sequestration, and increasing urban wildlife habitats. However, there are few studies conducted that assess the CO2 sequestration and the N fixation carried out by these novel ecosystems. In this sense, this work focuses on the study of C and N dynamics in eight different green roofs during 2 years of experimentation. For this purpose, we tested two different substrates: a compost-soil-bricks (1:1:3; v:v:v) and a compost-bricks (1:4; v:v) with two depths (5 and 10cm). Each substrate was disposed in cultivation tables composed by eight independent experimental plots. Silene vulgaris (Moench) Garcke and Lagurus ovatus L. were the tested plant species in monoculture. Physicochemical and biochemical substrate characterizations were conducted both initially (T0: Nov. 2012) and at the end of the experiment (TF: Aug. 2014), along with plant development measurements (plant cover and water use efficiency), in order to find the most appropriate plant-substrate combination in terms of C and N sequestration. These results showed that the soil-containing mixture at a higher depth highly promotes plant growth, especially for S. vulgaris in this susbtrate (CSB10-S), being related to intense biochemical processes and also to the formation of humic substances in this substrate, which all contribute to the great amounts of C and N (1702.19g C and 183.21gNm−2 during 2 years, respectively) achieved by this combination.We thank the INNPACTO project (IPT-2011-1017-310000) for financial support. The authors are also grateful to the Department of “Ingeniería Agromótica y del Mar” of the Polytechnic University of Cartagena (Murcia, Spain) for their assistance with the RSI ENVI 4.0 software to process the images to estimate plant coverage. There are large differences in the ability of landscapes to sequester carbon. These differences are functions of species diversity ( Another important factor for maximizing the C sequestration ability of green roofs is the substrate composition and depth. Deeper substrates are encouraged because of their higher water- and nutrient-holding capacity to ensure plant growth ( Finally, the importance of including microbial and biochemical determinations in green roof feasibility studies has been highlighted in recent publications regarding the suitability of green roofs substrates ( In this context, we have conducted an assay with different combinations of green roofs in relation to the substrate composition and depth and also the plant species selected (i.e., an annual and a perennial) in order to study the influence of these factors in the process of C and N sequestration carried out by each combination during a 2-year period. We postulated that: (i) the substrate composition affects the C and N sequestration of the green roof, (ii) the amount of C and N accumulated in the green roof will be higher at deeper substrates, and (iii) the use of perennial plant species further promote C and N sequestration than annual species. We tested two different substrates at two depths, 5 and 10 The two plant species tested in the above mentioned substrates were Each substrate type was prepared in triplicate for each species and for each substrate depth (5 and 10 The distribution of substrates and plant species in these cultivation tables was done randomly. Below the substrate was placed a drainage layer consisting of a polyethylene alveolar plate (Floradrain FD-25E, Zinco) with a 10 The water-holding capacity (WHC) was measured, in triplicate, in 100 In order to evaluate changes in the substrate composition over time at chemical and biochemical levels, we took samples at the beginning of the experiment (T0) and 2 years from the start of the experiment (TF). Specifically, substrate samples were collected at the beginning of the experiment before the sowing (Oct. 2012), and later after cutting and removing the plant material (Aug. 2014). Therefore we had 24 substrate samples for each sampling time. Then, the samples were sieved to 4 Plant cover was measured by digital image analysis, using a digital camera (Casio Exilim EX-ZS10) and the RSI ENVI 4.0 software to process the images. The photos were taken semimonthly or monthly during 2 years of experimentation, always at the same height with reference to the edge of each experimental unit (0.75 All the results are reported as the means of triplicate analyses ( An initial physicochemical substrate characterization was conducted initially for both substrates. The soil-containing mixture (CSB) presented greater organic matter content and a higher WHC than the soilless one ( Regarding the evolution of biochemical parameters, in general, a greater extracellular hydrolase activity (β-GLA, URA, and APA) was observed under the growth of The URA ( According to the measurements related to the substrate organic matter content, the amount of humic acids was significantly higher in the soil-containing mixtures than in CB substrates at both sampling times ( The plant cover of both plant species was higher above deeper substrates during the whole experiment, being especially greater in the soil-containing mixture (CSB10). During the first year (2012–13), the plant cover was high in CSB10 substrate for both species, remaining around 80% ( The WUE was estimated for each plant species and substrate type in each experimental year ( With regard to the nutrient content in plant tissues ( The total C and N amounts sequestered by each experimental plot was calculated taking into account the C and N amount fixed by the substrate itself during the whole experiment (TF minus T0) and the nutrient assimilation carried out by the total plant production during the whole experiment (T1 and T2). In general, the great enzyme activity observed in substrates below the This situation also influences the chemical and biochemical response of substrates under each plant species, having observed greater hydrolytic enzyme activity in substrates under In consonance the C and N sequestration also suits the latter findings. This makes sense, as for the total C and N estimations, the amounts of C and N fixed in plant tissues were also taken into account. According to Accordingly, the soil-containing mixture at 10 cm-depth is the most appropriate combination with the aim of sequestering C and N, and in combination to Precisely, the oxidative enzymes can mediate both the degradation of detrital organic matter and the creation of the most recalcitrant components of organic matter (humic substances formation), a process closely linked to substrate C sequestration ( The results obtained in this experiment allowed us to conclude that the substrate composition and depth, together with the selected plant species, are factors of paramount importance for the role they play in the C and N sequestration capacity of a green roof. In our experience the selection of a mixture containing the combination compost-soil in addition to an inorganic material, such as crushed bricks, provide an optimum medium to promote plant growth and biochemical process. The substrate water content and its depth are also deciding factors in the sequestration process. In this regard, perennial plant species and deeper substrates are more suitable for this proposal. Taking into account these factors and their connection to the C and N sequestration role, we observed that a green roof prototype, designed with a mixture of compost, soil, and bricks (CSB) as a substrate type with a depth of 10