Six hydroxycinnamic acids were identified and determined quantitatively in methanol and acetone extracts from quince peel and pulp, namely 3-O-caffeoylquinic acid (3-CQA), 4-p-coumaroylquinic acid (HC1), 4-O-caffeoylquinic acid (4-CQA), 5-O-caffeoylquinic acid (5-CQA), derivative of p-coumaroylquinic acid (HC2) and 3,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid (3,5-diCQA). The most abundant hydroxycinnamic acid was 5-CQA (neochlorogenic acid) with 259.12–481.4mg/kgf.w. in peel and 97.33–217.36mg/kg in quince pulp. Six flavonols were determined in the extracts from quince, quercetin-3-galactoside (Q-Ga), quercetin-3-rutinoside (Q-Ru), quercetin-3-glucoside (Q-Glu), kaempferol-3-rutinoside (K-Ru), kaempferol-3-glucoside (K-Glu) and derivative of quercetin produced in the reaction between quercetin-glucoside and p-coumaric acid (Q-Glu-p-CouA). Elemental analysis of quince seeds has not been performed previously. Also, using principal component and cluster analyses, we determined a strong negative relationship between total phenols and flavonoids, and Ni and Pb, specifically higher concentrations of these compounds were associated with lower concentrations of these metals.Quince ( Quince is an important source of compounds with positive impacts on health, due to their antioxidant, anti-microbial and anti-ulcer properties ( There are only few reports on the nutrient and bioactive compound content of quince, and none on quince seeds. The aims of this work were to determine various natural compounds, among them total phenols and total flavonoids, and examine the role of solvents in the yield obtained. Quince fruits (Leskovačka) were selected randomly (10 pieces of different shapes and sizes) from producers from Southeast Serbia who proved the geographical origin of the selected fruits. The following reagents were used: 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl radical (DPPH), 2,2′-azino-bis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS), potassium-persulfate, methanol, ethanol, acetone, ethyl acetate, acetonitrile, formic and acetic acids (J.T. Baker, Deventer, Netherlands). Trolox (6-hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethylchroman-2-carboxylic acid) and 2,4,6-tri (2-pyridinyl)-1,3,5-triazine (TPTZ) were purchased from Acros Organics (Geel, Belgium). Folin-Ciocalteu reagent (FC), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 2,9-dimethyl-1,10-phenanthroline (neocuproine), Na All chemicals and solvents were Samples for analysis were prepared using extraction or mineralization processes, depending whether phenolic or metal ions were to be determined. Fruits were separated into peel, pulp and seeds, packed into plastic bags and stored in the freezer (−20 A precisely measured mass of previously homogenized fruit material using an electrical blender (Gorenje, Slovenia) (ca. 10.0 The following solvents were used: 60% and 80% methanol, and 60% and 80% acetone for quince peel and pulp. Samples (ca. 10 Total phenols in the fruit extracts were determined using Folin-Ciocalteu method ( Based on the absorbance of standard solutions of gallic acid, concentrations (μg/ml) of polyphenolic compounds were determined using the equation A The method is based on the fact flavonoids complex with metal cations (such as Al The reaction mixture was prepared by mixing the sample with 4 Based on absorbances of a standard catechin solution, concentrations (μg/ ml) of flavonoids were determined using the equation A Antioxidant capacity was determined spectrophotometrically using DPPH A previously determined volume of samples was added into 2.5 Based on differences in absorbance, using a standard solution of trolox, total antioxidant activity (μmol/ml) was determined using the equation ΔA ABTS (2,2′-azino-bis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulphonic acid) radical cation test was performed according to Results were presented as TEAC (antioxidant capacity of trolox equivalent), calculated from standard graph for trolox (ΔA FRAP was performed according to Concentration of Fe Reducing power of the extracts and gallic acid, as a standard antioxidant component, was determined according to HPLC with a high resolution UV/Vis and fluorescence detector was applied for the separation and quantification of phenolic compounds in samples. Chromatographic separation was performed on Eclipse XDB-C18 column (4.6 Phenolic components present in samples were identified by comparing their retention times and spectra with those of pure components. The following standards were used: cyanidin-3-glucoside, chlorogenic acid, All analyses were performed in triplicates. ICP-OES was used to determine metal ion content, qualitatively and quantitatively. Solutions and reagents included a multi standard (Ultra scientific analytical solution, N. Kingstown, USA), HCl (1:1) and argon 5.0 (99.999% purity). Parameters of the method were: power of RF generator – 1150 The precise method was optimised for each element. The choice of wavelength was performed based on relative intensity of the signal, as a measure of sensitivity, defects in response to the standards, and the extent of interference in the real sample. To construct calibration graph, which gave the dependence of relative intensity of signal on the concentration of an analyte, blank samples (deionized water) and two concentrations of the standard were recorded. Principal component analysis was used to evaluate the datasets, reducing the number of dimension while conserving most of the statistical information to establish the relationships among variables. The analysis was performed using tools available for Microsoft Excel® (XLSTAT 2016) ( To determine the most suitable solvent, and its concentration, for the extraction of total phenols and flavonoids from quince peel and pulp, extractions were performed with methanol 60%, methanol 80%, acetone 60% and acetone 80%, as shown in Results showed that acetone was the more efficient solvent for extraction of total phenols and flavonoids, Numerous investigations have shown that acetone is the better solvent for extraction of proanthocyanidins, flavonoids and tannins, and methanol for phenolic acids and catechins ( Total phenols in quince pulp were 71.03 Total phenols ranged from 140.12 Results for total flavonoids in acetone (80% Six hydroxycinnamic acids were determined and quantified in methanol and acetone extracts of quince pulp and peel (  Six flavonols were determined in methanol and acetone extracts of quince peel: (1) quercetin-3-galactoside (Q-Ga), (2) quercetin-3-rutinoside (Q-Ru), (3) quercetin-3-glucoside (Q-Glu), (4) kaempferol-3-rutinoside (K-Ru), (5) kaempferol-3-glucoside (K-Glu) and (6) derivative of quercetin, which is the product of the reaction between quercetin-glucoside and Flavonols accumulate in the external layer of the tissue (cuticle) because light stimulates their biosynthesis. Important differences in their concentrations exist between fruits from the same plant, even between different sides of the same fruit, depending on the degree of exposure to sunlight (  Flavonols are found mainly in quince peel (80% acetone, Results for HPLC determination of hydroxycinnamic acids and flavonols in acetone extracts (80%) (except for HC2 and 3,5-diCQA in 80% methanol for the peel) are shown in The most abundant hydroxycinnamic acid in peel and pulp was 5-CQA (neochlorogenic acid), with 259.12–481.4 Antioxidant activities of methanol (60%, 80%) and acetone (60%, 80%) extracts of peel and pulp, from seven different locations, were investigated using DPPH, ABTS, FRAP and RP methods.  80% Acetone extracts of quince pulp and peel had the greatest radical-scavenging abilities towards DPPH compared to other solvents. Also, these extracts showed the strongest scavenging of the reactive ABTS radical. Antioxidant activities of quince extracts of pulp and peel found using the ABTS method were slightly higher than corresponding values obtained using the DPPH method because of the reduced stability of the ABTS cation radical, although both values were calculated as trolox equivalent (TE). FRAP and RP methods are based on reductive ability of investigated extracts to reduce Fe Similar investigations on the influence of solvent type and concentration on antioxidant activity in different fruits have been conducted. With the aim of investigating nutritional value of quince, from the perspective of mineral matter contents, the content of macro and microelements was determined in peel, pulp and seeds of quince (Leskovačka) samples from seven locations. ICP-OES determination parameters for each element are given in The content of macro-elements were in the order K Sodium, ranged from 15.69 to 24.50 Comparing the content of essential elements (Cu, Fe, Ni and Zn), the highest content was detected for Fe with most found in the seeds (13.56 Quantities of other metals were in the order: Cu Nickel content ranged from 0.022 to 1.894 Aluminum content ranged from 1.395 The aim of statistical analysis was to find correlations between the content of total phenols and flavonoids, and minerals and sample species. In the first step of statistical evaluation, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (the significance level α was 0.05) was used to determine the distribution concentration against each class of compound or element. This test revealed the original dataset was normally distributed for all samples, except cobalt, which were ln transformed for further analysis. Before the application of PCA modelling, the data matrix was examined to detect outliers. Grubb’s test detected no outliers in any of groups for compounds (total phenols and total flavonoids) or elements (the critical value for α PCA revealed the presence of six components with characteristic values exceeding 1 (9.109, 3.231, 2.398, 1.747, 1.552, and 1.269), explaining 91.931% of variability. Based on the Kaiser criterion ( To get better insight into the latent structure of the data, the correlation matrix was rotated using Varimax orthogonal rotation with Kaiser optimization. The results after rotation are shown in The first factor explained the largest proportion of variance (44.342%). Representatives of this factor were total phenols, total flavonoids, Ca, Mg, P, B, Cu, Mn, Zn, and Pb (highest loading values); K, and Na with moderate loading and Ba, Co, Cr, Ni, Sr, V, Al and As with relatively low loading values. Apart from Co, Ni, V, Al and Pb, all the species investigated had positive loading values for this factor. The key variables of the second factor were Ni, Sr, V and As. This factor was responsible for 17.782% of the total variance. In the first factor of rotated PCA, Co, Ni, V, Al and Pb and total phenols, total flavonoids, Ca, Mg, P, B, Cu, Mn, and Zn were negatively correlated, which indicates there was a strong relationship between total phenols and flavonoids and Ni and Pb ( HCA of the standardized variables using the Ward method, as an amalgamation rule, and the squared Euclidean distance, as a measure of the proximity between the samples, was performed. The dendrogram obtained, presenting clustering of the quince samples, is shown in The dendrogram shows that all the samples could be grouped into three main clusters. Cluster I was formed by samples M1, S1, N1, Z1, K1 and KC1 (samples of quince peel from six different locations, The statistical analyses performed were shown to be very useful for clustering of samples. Also, this is the first time a relationship between concentrations of Ni and Pb and phenolic profiles for quinces from different locations has been demonstrated. The most efficient extraction system for total phenols and flavonoids from peel and pulp of quinces was 80% acetone. Six hydroxycinnamic acids were identified and quantitatively determined in methanol and acetone quince peel and pulp extracts: 3- There is no conflict of interest. This research was supported by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 