Fractures of the carpus and forearm include a wide range of injuries, but all have their own complexities and nuances. Injuries that are unrecognized, or inappropriately managed can lead to significant pain and disability later on. This article looks at common and less common injuries and the considerations required for each.Distal radius fractures are the most common orthopaedic injury. Fractures tend to occur in two age groups (a bimodal distribution); young patients, where the injury is high energy, and older people, where the injury is low energy. There are multiple eponyms used for distal radius fractures ( Clinically it is important to discuss whether the injury is: isolated – no other more important life- or limb-threatening injuries are present. neurovascularly intact – is there any neurological or vascular deficit? open or closed (avoid ‘compound’ or ‘simple’ as these can be confusing). With regards to the X-ray interpretation consider the following about the fracture: extra- or intra-articular associated ulna injury (styloid, head, neck, distal radio-ulnar joint (DRUJ)) shortening of the bone (relative to its original length) displacement of the distal part (dorsal/volar, radial/ulna) comminution (two pieces or multiple parts).  ‘There is a fracture of the distal radius which is extra-articular. There does not appear to be an ulnar injury, however the DRUJ on the PA view is not congruent. There is dorsal displacement of the distal fragment, with dorsal angulation. There is also some shortening. Though the fracture does seem to be mainly in two parts, there is fragmentation dorsally.' Descriptively, this is much better than just saying it is a Colles' fracture!  Again, this could be described as a volar Barton's, but that does not point out the radiocarpal subluxations explicitly. The person that dealt with this injury also has misunderstood the injury. They have put a plaster backslab on the dorsal surface of the wrist. The whole wrist wants to move volarly; as such the plaster needs to be volar to try and restrict this subluxation. This injury is unstable and requires fixation as conservative treatment will fail. Distal radius fractures can also be very subtle. Consider the radiograph of the left wrist ( Arrow 1 in Extensor pollicis longus (EPL) is the long extensor of the thumb. It has its own compartment (3rd) and has the unique action of thumb retropulsion (place your palm flat on the table and lift your thumb away from the table – retropulsion). It has a risk of spontaneous rupture with distal radius fractures. It is more common in Other complications associated with distal radius fractures include: carpal tunnel syndrome (early or late) radiocarpal arthrosis (2–30%). This may be asymptomatic. If the articular step off is greater than 1–2 mm then 90% of patients will get posttraumatic osteoarthritis (OA) malunion/non-union compartment syndrome complex regional pain syndrome. Indications for intervention are often discussed and much debate remains concerning the most appropriate management. A recent paper (Karanta et al.) randomized volar locking plates with percutaneous K-wire fixation. The paper appeared to show an earlier recovery of the plated patients but at 12 weeks and beyond, no significant difference in function was seen. Numerous factors need to be taken into account regarding fixation. Frank discussion with patients will normally help guide acceptable treatment choices for both surgeon and patient. Patient preference needs to be considered along with hand dominance and occupation. A self-employed manual labourer may manage to keep his customers and business if the fracture is surgically plated, with the seemingly early functional advantage it conveys. Lower demand patients or those whose financial security does not depend on an early return to work may be entirely happy to be in plaster for 6 weeks. Characteristics of the fracture are also important. Initial management of any fracture is splintage (the most effective analgesia), supplemental pain relief and reduction of the fracture (again this improves pain). A significant question that needs addressing prior to instigation of treatment is: ‘If treated conservatively will the fracture maintain its position/is it stable?’ Consider the distal radius fracture shown in What treatment is required for this fracture? Firstly this is a child as the growth plates are still open. This means that as part of the injury, the bone undergoes plastic deformation. Unless a significant force is reapplied (another fall or an orthopaedic surgeon's manipulation) this fracture will stay deformed. The fracture in Consider an entirely different fracture in a young adult ( Although this is only one view we can see that this fracture is multifragmentary, intra-articular, displaced, and involves the DRUJ. In addition, the small avulsion fragments on the radial styloid suggest a significant ligamentous avulsion injury. This fracture is obviously not going to be stable following reduction and splintage/plaster. It will require a stable fixation. The outcomes of various treatment methods are reported. Closed reduction is good first aid and helps swelling and pain even if we know surgery is indicated. If repeated manipulation is required then more than half have poor outcomes, as the fracture is normally unstable and as such will displace. Percutaneous pinning will hold alignment for mainly extra articular fractures if the volar cortex can be brought into contact and alignment. The Kapandji K-wire technique (in which the wires are inserted through the fracture site and bent, buttressing the distal radial fragment) has reported 82–90% good results when used in the correctly indicated case. Indications for open reduction internal fixation are an articular step of more than 2 mm (due to risk of arthrosis). The other indications – Barton's fractures, volar comminution, proximal extension, and associated ulna injuries – are all related to the fact that these fracture patterns are unstable. Volar plating has become extremely popular, especially since the advent of volar locking plates. However volar plating has risks of irritation of flexor and extensor tendons. Screws can be placed intra-articularly. This may be secondary to minor malplacement of the plate or failure to achieve full reduction of the fracture whilst utilising a device that has fixed angle screws. A dorsal plating technique can be extremely useful in cases of displaced intraarticular fractures with dorsal comminution but carries a risk of extensor tendon irritation and potential for rupture.  Scaphoid fractures often cause consternation as they sometimes do not show up on radiographs and are associated with poor healing. Careful examination to pinpoint sites of maximal tenderness can be useful to localise injury. However they continue to be missed and are associated with late complications. The scaphoid is the most commonly fractured carpal bone and accounts for around 15% of acute wrist injuries. Within the scaphoid, two-thirds are waist fractures, one in four is in the proximal third and one in ten is in the distal third. Avascular necrosis (AVN) incidence is higher the more proximal an injury and is due to the retrograde nature of the blood supply of the scaphoid. AVN rates are 33% for the proximal third and 100% for the proximal fifth. The reason the non-union and AVN rates are high in scaphoid fractures is that the bone is 80% covered with articular cartilage making it very good for articulating (with the trapezium, trapezoid, radius and capitate) but poor for nutrient vessel entry. It also means the bone relies on endosteal blood supply for vascularity and healing. The major vessel supplying the scaphoid is the dorsal carpal branch (from the radial artery), which enters on the dorsal surface, and supplies the proximal 80% of the scaphoid in a retrograde fashion. Correct radiographic assessment is vital (and cannot be achieved with the patient in a cast). A scaphoid series comprises of a DP wrist, a lateral wrist, a pronated 45° oblique (alternatively a supinated 45° oblique) and a Zitters view. A Zitters view is designed to make the scaphoid as long as possible and thereby increase the chances of identifying a fracture. It also changes the axis of the scaphoid by taking the radiocarpal joint into maximal ulna deviation, extending the scaphoid).  Due to the high risk of non-union, all proximal pole fractures should be fixed. Waist fractures are a contentious issue. An ongoing randomized trial (SWIFFT) may reveal whether cast immobilization or fixation is the more successful treatment. Significant displacement or humpback deformities are indications for surgical intervention. Scaphoid non-union can cause long-term difficulties by altering wrist biomechanics (both radiocarpal and midcarpal movement. Subsequent, progressive degenerative changes may ultimately result in a scaphoid non-union advanced collapse (SNAC) wrist. Note the sclerotic line at the site of the non-union with only a small remnant of the proximal pole, the radioscaphoid joint space is obliterated, the proximal pole of the capitate is flat and sclerotic and there are cysts in the hamate. Wrist fusion is the only guaranteed option for pain relief for this patient. This is a rare but often missed wrist injury (25% are missed at initial presentation). As the name implies, these injuries suggest dislocations around the lunate bone but are often associated with fractures of the carpal bones. When a fracture is present it is termed a greater arc injury. When it is purely ligamentous, it is termed a lesser arc injury.  One can see on the lateral view the normal alignment of the lunate on the radius, however distally the lunate appears empty with the capitate translocated dorsally along with the rest of the carpus. The hand dislocates from around the lunate and moves dorsally. This is a high-energy injury in younger patients and requires reducing as an emergency to minimize the risk of neurovascular compromise. Following reduction and depending on the arc of injury (greater – bony, lesser – ligamentous) the bones are fixed or the ligaments are repaired. There is a high incidence of stiffness and post-traumatic arthritis in this patient group. A variant of this injury is the lunate dislocation where the carpus remains in situ and the lunate dislocates palmarly into the carpal tunnel with associated symptoms. Although the name would suggest an avulsion-type injury, this may not always be the case. Classically triquetral avulsion fractures are associated with avulsion of the strong ligamentous attachments on the dorsal surface of the triquetrum following injury. However, impaction of the ulna styloid onto the triquetrum results in similar radiographic appearances. Treatment is symptomatic and does not need immobilization other than for comfort. The hamate articulates with the ring and little finger metacarpals at its distal surface. It also has a significant distribution to the midcarpal joint. The ‘hook’ projects palmarly and forms part of Guyon's canal. The hook is also closely related to the deep branch of the ulnar nerve. Hook of hamate fractures (2% of all carpal fractures) are classically described as occurring in golfers who grip the handle of the club (which makes direct contact with the hook) who then hit the ground rather than the golf ball. This transmits the force onto the bony projection and causes a fracture. These are often missed, as routine radiographs do not show them up well. The specific view needed for these injuries are carpal tunnel views ( Conservative management is the mainstay of treatment in these injuries with plaster immobilization. Symptomatic non-unions are treated with excision of the small fragment, as fixation is technically challenging and doesn't guarantee union. Given its close relationship with the deep motor branch of the ulnar nerve (supplying the intrinsic muscles of the hand) the use of a drill and internal fixation has significant risks. Body of hamate fractures are often seen with punching injuries and should be considered on the spectrum of base of little metacarpal fractures. Given the large articular surface distally, fractures of the hamate are frequently associated with subluxation/dislocation of the ring and little CMCJs ( The ring and little metacarpals have subluxed dorsally with the dorsal hamate fragment. This causes them to be flexed compared to the index and middle metacarpals. Though the fractures have been discussed when associated with distal radius injuries, the distal radio-ulna joint can be dislocated. This is an unusual injury and is often missed. There is normally an associated injury to the triangular fibrocartilage complex, which may need further imaging (with use of arthrography to increase sensitivity and specificity of the imaging). Care must be taken on examining the patient. Relatively the radius is more dorsal and the ulna more volar than usual. There is discussion in the literature about whether the ulna dislocates from the radius or vice versa. My point would be that the ulna is a rigid post around which the radius rotates; therefore it is the radius which dislocates dorsally. Extensor carpi ulnaris (ECU) can get trapped between the radius and ulna which blocks closed reduction. Post-reduction (open or closed) DRUJ instability should be assessed. There is usually a need for anaesthetic as the patient will be incredibly apprehensive (and in pain) otherwise. The two most well-described fractures of the forearm are the Galeazzi and Monteggia fracture/dislocations. They are often confused as they are almost inverse of each other. A method of remembering the pathology of each eponymous injury is firstly each injury involves a fracture and a dislocation.   The forearm should be considered a functional unit with the interosseous membrane acting as part of the joint. The ulna is a static post with a simple hinge joint proximally. The radius is bowed to accommodate passing over and around the more or less straight ulna. The radiocapitellar joint and the DRUJ both allow this motion. Any single bone fracture in the forearm should therefore be treated with suspicion. Isolated long bone fractures of the forearm are difficult to achieve– imagine it as trying to break just one side of a polo mint. Despite this, an isolated ulna shaft fracture (nightstick fracture) is possible and is caused by a direct blow, classically with the forearm placed above the head in a defencive position. However this mechanism (usually available from the patient's history) is entirely different to the forearm fractures discussed above which are associated with axial loading. Fractures of the Carpus and Forearm are relatively common. Careful history taking, a high index of suspicion, precise examination (localising pain) and the use of plain radiographs plus other modalities when needed, are required to ensure that injuries are picked up early and treated appropriately. Early detection and prompt treatment will minimise the significant problems associated with delayed and missed diagnoses.