The increasing industrial demand for nanoparticles challenges the application of stirred media mills to grind in the sub-micron size range. It was shown recently [Mende et al., 2003. Mechanical production and stabilization of submicron particles in stirred media mills. Powder Technology 132, 64–73] that the grinding behavior of particles in the sub-micron size range in stirred media mills and the minimum achievable particle size is strongly influenced by the suspension stability and thus the agglomeration behavior of the suspension. Therefore, an appropriate modeling of the process must include a superposition of the two opposing processes in the mill i.e., breakage and agglomeration which can be done by means of population balance models. Modeling must now include the influence of colloidal surface forces and hydrodynamic forces on particle aggregation and breakup. The superposition of the population balance models for agglomeration and grinding with the appropriate kernels leads to a system of partial differential equations, which can be solved in various ways numerically. Here a modified h-p Galerkin algorithm which is implemented in the commercially available software package PARSIVAL developed by CiT (CiT GmbH, Rastede, Germany) and the moment methodology according to [Diemer and Olsen, 2002a. A moment methodology for coagulation and breakage problems: Part I—analytical solution of the steady-state population balance. Chemical Engineering Science 57 (12), 2193–2209; Diemer and Olsen, 2002b. A moment methodology for coagulation and breakage problems: Part II—moment models and distribution reconstruction. Chemical Engineering Science 57 (12), 2211–2288] are used and compared to explicit data on alumina. This includes a comparison of the derived particle size distributions, moments and its accuracy depending on the starting particle size distribution and the used agglomeration and breakage kernels. Finally, the computational effort of both methods in comparison to the prior mentioned parameters is evaluated in terms of practical application.Sub-micron particles are used in many areas of the chemical and pharmaceutical industry as well as in the ceramic and microelectronic industry. Applications for sub-micron particles are, for example, pigments, fillers or ceramic materials. Besides the synthesis of these materials by chemical methods, wet grinding in stirred media mills is a suitable method for the production of these particles. For the manufacturing of fine particles, high energy densities are necessary, which can be achieved in stirred media mills. For particle sizes smaller than The use of population balance equations to model grinding processes was first proposed by Here the modeling of the sub-micron grinding is done by a superposition of the population balance models for agglomeration and grinding with the appropriate kernels. This leads to a system of partial differential equations, which can be solved in various ways numerically. In this contribution a modified h-p Galerkin algorithm which is implemented in the commercially available software package PARSIVAL developed by CiT (CiT GmbH, Rastede, Germany) and the moment methodology according to Diemer ( The population balance equation for agglomeration and breakage written in a continuous form is The terms on the right-hand side of Eq. Rate of birth of particles of volume Rate of death of particles of volume Rate of birth of particles of volume Rate of death of particles of volume Breakage processes are described in population balances by means of a breakage rate kernel and a conditional distribution for the daughter breakage products. Considering that the particles are distributed with respect to the number, the breakage function Eq. The terms three and four on the right-hand side of Eq. With the transformations For solving the complex system of partial differential equations there are generally five methods known from literature that are described by The moment methodology of Diemer ( In the moment method no assumptions of the particle size distribution are required; the moment method does require closure assumptions regarding non integer and higher moments. A reconstruction of the particle size distributions from the calculated moments can follow the simulation, if needed. The calculated moments are often sufficient, because they can be related to meaningful statistical quantities such as important averages of the population (e.g., the number mean size, mass mean size, number mean surface area), standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis. The definitions of these quantities are given in the Appendix. The moment method has the advantage that the computational effort for calculating mean properties is dramatically reduced in comparison to the method mentioned in the next section. The commercial available software package PARSIVAL (particle size evaluation) uses the fully adaptive Galerkin h-p method which was developed for the simulation of molecular weight distributions in polymerization reactions ( The model was validated for an initially monodisperse, dilute ( In the calculations binary The computing time with the moment method for one experiment was found to be approximately 10 The computing time to find the best parameters, where the error between experimental data and the simulation results is minimized, was approximately 25 A comparison between the two simulation methods was done for designed model distributions. The initial distributions were calculated with First of all a parameter study calculated with the moment method was done. The results of this study are shown in The higher the stability factor The parameter  A comparison of the two methods in terms of the arithmetic number mean For the same set of parameters the mean values calculated with the moment method are generally higher. On the other hand the shapes of the distributions show better agreement. This can be seen in In this chapter a comparison of simulation results that are derived with the software package PARSIVAL with experimental data is drawn. In the experiments For the simulation the parameters In summary, it was shown that sub-micron grinding in stirred media mills can be well modeled by a superposition of grinding and agglomeration. Numerically derived results (PARSIVAL) from a population balance model that accounts for agglomeration and breakage are in reasonable agreement with experimental observations that opens the possibility to determine optimal stability conditions necessary to archive a desired particle size. In addition the moment method offers the opportunity for a quick parameter estimation before a simulation of the full PSD can be carried out with PARSIVAL. A parameter study shows that the superposition of grinding and agglomeration leads to a steady state PSD that is mainly influenced by the number of fragments produced in a breakage event and the stability factor. The initial width of the PSD has no influence on the final width of the PSD.  Dr. Bertrum Diemer of DuPont Engineering for many useful discussions and the International Fine Particle Research Institute (IFPRI) for funding. For a particle population with distribution The arithmetic number mean particle size in volume units is defined as