This paper explores a statistical mechanics approach as a means to better understand specific land cover changes on a continental scale. Integrated assessment models are used to calculate the impact of anthropogenic emissions via the coupling of technoeconomic and earth/atmospheric system models and they have often overlooked or oversimplified the evolution of land cover change. Different time scales and the uncertainties inherent in long term projections of land cover make their coupling to integrated assessment models difficult. The mainstream approach to land cover modelling is rule-based methodology and this necessarily implies that decision mechanisms are often removed from the physical geospatial realities, therefore a number of questions remain: How much of the predictive power of land cover change can be linked to the physical situation as opposed to social and policy realities? Can land cover change be understood using a statistical approach that includes only economic drivers and the availability of resources? In this paper, we use an energy transition paradigm as a means to predict this change. A cost function is applied to developed land covers for urban and agricultural areas. The counting of area is addressed using specific examples of a Pólya process involving Maxwell–Boltzmann and Bose–Einstein statistics. We apply an iterative counting method and compare the simulated statistics with fractional land cover data with a multi-national database. An energy level paradigm is used as a basis in a flow model for land cover change. The model is compared with tabulated land cover change in Europe for the period 1990–2000. The model post-predicts changes for each nation. When strong extraneous factors are absent, the model shows promise in reproducing data and can provide a means to test hypothesis for the standard rules-based algorithms.From the 1970s urban planners have attempted to draw connections between urban modelling schemes and mathematical or physical distributions associated with land use planning. Some early approaches have used the concept of entropy as a means to study land cover (LC) change for non-impervious areas; some of the metrics in these studies have included landscape composition, patchiness, and density. The work by Brotchie and Lesse Current LC approaches, including cellular automata (CA), incorporating rules-based strategies. These planning models are generally guided by a complex set of human decision processes and rules concerning development constraints such as zoning laws, land availability, economic viability, supply and demand considerations In this paper, we model LC change according to a simple energy transition paradigm. Intuition has led us to approach the underlying statistics using Maxwell–Boltzmann (MB) statistics The model, given in Section A driving motivation for LC models is the need for reliable projection of emission points by infrastructure and energy technologies; these are used as input to modern integrated assessment (IA) models. The long term projection of LC is required for accurate spatial emissions as input to the IA. The Luxembourg Energy Air Quality model (LEAQ) Land cover transition data have been made available from the Europe Statistical Bureau (EUROSTAT) Pólya Urn Models (PUMs)  A transition model (TM) converts one LC to another using unit area land and development costs as well as actual fractional area. Inflation-adjusted values were obtained from the European Environmental Agency report, ‘Land in Europe: prices, taxes and use patterns’ and International Finance Discussion Papers (European Survey)  The LC transformations in Europe from 1990 to 2000 demonstrates that change can, in part, be reproduced using statistical properties and initial conditions. The study focused on the anthropogenic LC: the urban and agricultural covers. Data from the European data set for LC transition are based on high resolution data (thousands to hundreds of thousands of hectors). The 22 nation data set did represented very poor sampling statistics. Though a high number of simulation trials (10,000) were used, the small number of countries did not permit the distinction between MB and BE statistics. Other studies suggest that Bose–Einstein statistics could be appropriate in some cases Although the TM proved to be a useful tool for mapping out changes for some land cover, the model cannot be considered completely analogous in terms of the application of the Arrhenius equation to the well known particle populations examples in atomic systems. When a collection of atoms are found in an excited state, for example, numbering There is no direct comparison with the methodology to evaluate The model has other limitations: By limiting the statistical information based on development costs and initial conditions, the model will not capture external driving factors behind the change, including technology, policy, demographic and policy factors. Significant failures of the model occurs in countries where a high rate of development has occurred in the time frame 1990–2000 (e.g. Estonia LC12) and to a lesser degree in agricultural areas for developed countries. A helpful strategy might therefore include the further development of filters ( Finally, we conclude that the energy distribution and flow methodology is developed to explore the applicability of the model in addressing large scale LC changes. Validation of the study, using Corine data, shows a partial agreement to the model and therefore shows promise in some forecasting scenarios. The limitations of the study, including the limited time snapshots (two) also is problematic. Tests presented here were designed to determine the relevancy of the energy description and the flow mechanism and their application towards LC change. Another promising point in this exercise is that, in some cases, land cover can be modelled using flow equation and these represent convex functionals, Eqs. The author acknowledges the support from the