In this study, microflotation experiments, as well as inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), localized electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (LEIS), and time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) were used to understand the influence of lead ions on smithsonite flotation during sulfidation processing and determine the lead sulfur species formed on the mineral surface. Lead ions significantly improve smithsonite recovery in microflotation experiments. The depletion of lead ions and the clear reduction in the concentration of sulfur ions in solution indicate that lead ions act as activators that greatly modify the smithsonite surface during sulfidation processing. XPS showed that lead-sulfide complexes and PbCO3 form on the mineral surface. These lead-sulfide complexes exist in the forms of lead monosulfide and lead polysulfide. PbS+, PbS2
                     ﹣, and PbS3
                     ﹣ species were detected on the smithsonite surface by TOF-SMIS, and the increase in the level of CO3
                     – observed by TOF-SMIS further indicates that PbCO3 was formed after lead-ion activation of the smithsonite. The increased impedance observed by LEIS is due to the formation of PbCO3 and lead-sulfide complexes on the smithsonite surface and the formation of large amounts of lead-sulfide complexes promote smithsonite flotation.Zinc ore exists as both oxidized zinc and zinc-sulfide ore. Zinc is extracted primarily from the zinc-sulfide ore because it is easier to process by flotation than oxidized zinc Generally, pyrometallurgy, flotation, and hydrometallurgy are the methods primarily used to process oxidized zinc ore Smithsonite (ZnCO Zinc minerals are commonly associated with other metals in nature, such as lead, copper, and iron. These metal minerals usually dissolve metal ions into solution, and ions in solution greatly influence flotation performance for the recovery of zinc. Zhao et al. In this study, the effect on flotation of lead-sulfur species formed on smithsonite surfaces during lead ions enhanced sulfidation processing was investigated by microflotation experiments, inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), localized electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (LEIS), and time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS). The original smithsonite minerals used in this paper were sourced from Huize County, Yunnan Province, China. The original minerals were received as large blocks approximately 300 g in weight. After the blocks were crushed using a jaw crusher, the crushed product was dry-ground in an agate mortar and pestle. Subsequently, the ground product was sieved to achieve a particle fraction finer than 106 μm using a standard sieve. A ∼50 g sample was further ground to finer than 5 μm for X-ray diffraction (XRD) and XPS studies. The chemical composition of the smithsonite sample is listed in AR-grade lead nitrate (Pb(NO Microflotation experiments were performed using a XFGCII mechanical agitation flotation machine (Jilin Province Ore Exploration Machinery Factory, China) in a 40-mL flotation cell. A 2-g sample of pure smithsonite powder (finer than 106 μm) was added to the flotation cell and filled with 40 mL DI water. A dilute Na Adsorption experiments involving lead and sulfur ions were aided by ICP-AES (ICPS-1000II, Shimadzu, Japan). A 5-g sample of pure smithsonite powder (finer than 106 μm) was added to a beaker filled with 100 mL of DI water. The pulp was magnetically stirred at room temperature. After fresh dilute Na A 0.1-g sample of smithsonite powder (less than5 μm) was added to a beaker filled with 50 mL of DI water. Freshly prepared dilute Na Blocky smithsonite was cut and polished by hand with wet silicon carbide paper. The blocky samples were ultrasonically washed for 3 min, and further washed with ethanol and then DI water. The freshly prepared smithsonite samples were allowed to interact with specific reagents at a pulp-pH of 9, and then dried using a rubber suction bulb. The fresh smithsonite samples were then immediately transferred to the middle of the electron gun in the TOF-SIMS instrument for analysis. The surfaces of sulfurized smithsonite samples with and without Pb After the pure smithsonite had been cut into small blocky samples, a smithsonite sample substrate was prepared by adhesion with epoxy resin. Wet silicon carbide paper (100, 220, 500, 800, 1000, and 1500 grit) was then used to polish the smithsonite substrate by hand to ensure that a fresh, flat smithsonite surface was exposed to the air. After the freshly polished smithsonite substrate was ultrasonically washed for 3 min in DI water, the substrate was further washed in ethanol and then DI water. The cleaned substrate was air-dried, after which it was immediately transferred to a 1-L electrochemical cell for LEIS experiments. LEIS experiments were conducted using a scanning electrochemical workstation (Versa SCAN, AMETEK Inc, USA) with the fresh smithsonite substrate installed at the bottom of the LEIS cell. The substrate surface was adjusted to be horizontal and to ensure that the smithsonite was exposed to the electrolyte solution. Dilute KCl was used as the electrolyte solution in this work. In order to avoid the influence of other ions, smithsonite samples were examined only in 1 mM KCl solution. LEIS maps of smithsonite conditioned with various reagents were acquired across a designated 0.4 × 0.4 mm surface area in the X and Y directions. All experiments in this work were carried out in neutral or alkaline solutions because smithsonite is a carbonate that easily reacts under acidic (low-pH) solutions. The flotation recovery of smithsonite as a function of pulp pH in the NaBX system is shown in Na The flotation behavior of smithsonite as a function of the Na After conditioning with 0.5 mM Na Prior to the addition of lead ions, the sulfur ions interact with the smithsonite to form a metal sulfide film on its surface, which reduces the amount of sulfur ions in solution The new substances form on the smithsonite surface was characterized by XPS, which analyzes the chemical states and elemental compositions of the smithsonite surface following treatment under various conditions. Hence, XPS provides valuable chemical information about the substances on the smithsonite surface. In this work, the chemical states of the sulfurized smithsonite surface in the absence or presence of Pb The full XPS spectrum of pure smithsonite is shown in The Zn 2p, Pb 4f, and S 2p XPS spectra of the sulfurized smithsonite samples in the absence and presence of Pb   TOF-SIMS is a reliable and very sensitive method for surface analysis by secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS). After the surface material is bombarded with an ion beam, the secondary ions that are ejected from the surface are collected and analyzed by SIMS. This process is referred to as “sputtering” through the generation of negative and positive ions along with neutral fragments that are removed from the surface material The normalized peak intensities of the lead and sulfur species on the smithsonite surfaces are shown in Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) techniques have been used in coatings and corrosion research for over forty years LEIS maps of smithsonite surfaces conditioned with various reagents are shown in  In this paper, Pb The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Regions of the