Dentin matrix phosphoprotein 1 (DMP1) is a non-collagenous, acidic extracellular matrix protein expressed chiefly in bone and dentin. We examined the DMP1 ability to engage cell-surface receptors and subsequently activate intracellular signaling pathways. Our data indeed show that the presence of extracellular DMP1 triggers focal adhesion point formation in human mesenchymal stem cells and osteoblast-like cells. We determine that DMP1 acts via interaction with αvβ3 integrin and stimulates phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase. Further biochemical characterization confirms the activation of downstream effectors of the MAPK pathways, namely ERK and JNK, after DMP1 treatment. This activation is specifically inhibitable and can also be blocked by the addition of anti-αvβ3 integrin antibody. Furthermore, we show that extracellular treatment with DMP1 stimulates the translocation of phosphorylated JNK to the nucleus and a concomitant up-regulation of transcriptional activation by phosphorylated c-Jun. The evidence presented here indicates that DMP1 is specifically involved in signaling via extracellular matrix-cell surface interaction. Combined with the published DMP1-null data (Feng, J. Q., Ward, L. M., Liu, S., Lu, Y., Xie, Y., Yuan, B., Yu, X., Rauch, F., Davis, S. I., Zhang, S., Rios, H., Drezner, M. K., Quarles, L. D., Bonewald, L. F., and White, K. E. (2006) Nat. Genet. 38, 1310–1315) it can be hypothesized that DMP1 could be a key effector of ECM-osteocyte signaling.The extracellular matrix (ECM) extracellular matrix small integrin binding ligand dentin matrix phosphoprotein 1 recombinant DMP1 full-length DMP1 C-terminal DMP1 focal adhesion FA kinase human mesenchymal stem cell. Expressed chiefly in the ECM of bone and dentin, DMP1 is unique in its content of a large number of acidic domains ( Integrins are known to associate with proteins present in the ECM ( MC3T3-E1 cells were cultured in α-minimal essential medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Atlanta Biologicals) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) (Tulane University, Center for Gene Therapy) were cultured in α-minimal essential medium (Cambrex) containing 15% fetal bovine serum, 4 mm The full-length (DMP1-F) and C-terminal DMP1 (DMP1-C) cDNAs in a pcDNA3 vector were provided by Dr. Jian Q Feng (Baylor College of Dentistry, Dallas, TX). The PGEX-4T-2-DMP1 was constructed by inserting DMP1 fragments into the EcoRI sites of pcDNA3. PGEX-4T-2-DMP1 plasmids were transformed into the bacterial host BL21, and the recombinant DMP1 C-terminal (rDMP1-C) and DMP1 full-length (rDMP1-F) protein were purified using the Amersham Biosciences GST system (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. The purified rDMP1 was then stored at −80 °C until use. Lab-Tek chamber slides (Nalge NUNC International) were coated first with poly- hMSCs were plated at 70% confluence. Cells were serum-deprived for 16 h before rDMP1-F/C treatment. Cells were treated in triplicate with 250 ng/ml rDMP1-C and rDMP1-F and assessed at different time points (5, 10, 20, and 30 min and 1, 2, and 3 h) for MAPK activation. MAPK inhibitors (10 μ Western blots were then performed, and the gels were blotted onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes and probed with the following antibodies: anti-phosphorylated-ERK (p-ERK), ERK, p-JNK, JNK, p-MEK, p-FAK, FAK, and β-actin (all antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. and used at a 1:1000 dilution). Membranes were then exposed to X-Omat film (Eastman Kodak Co.), and the bands were obtained by chemiluminescent detection (PerkinElmer Life Sciences) of horseradish peroxidase-linked second antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc). Cells were cultured in poly- hMSCs were seeded on 6-well plates and allowed to reach ∼70% confluence in basal medium. Cells were serum-deprived for 16 h then treated with 20 μg/ml anti-αvβ3 antibody or IgG control (Chemicon International, Inc.) for 1.5 h at 37 °C. Cells were then incubated in serum-free medium containing 250 ng/ml rDMP1-C and -F for 10 min, 30 min, and 1 h. Cell lysates were obtained and stored at −80 °C until analysis. For the blocking control experiment, cells were preincubated with either anti-integrin antibody or an IgG1 isotype control then for 30 min in the presence of 250 ng/ml rDMP1-F. Cells were assessed for JNK activation by Western blot. To determine whether DMP1 forms a complex with αvβ3 integrin, MC3T3 cells were cultured in 6-well plates for 24 h and treated with 0.5 μg/ml recombinant DMP1 for 30 min at 37 °C. The cells were then thoroughly washed with PBS and lysed in radioimmune precipitation assay buffer containing a mixture of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche Applied Science) on ice for 30 min, and the lysates were cleared of debris by centrifugation at 7700 × Cells were cultured in serum-free medium for 16 h before treatment with rDMP1C/F for 30 min at 37 °C and 5% CO Cells were seeded in triplicate and allowed to reach 70–80% confluence. They were then transfected with plasmids 5×GAL-Luciferase and as GAL4-c-Jun (a gift from Anning Lin University of Chicago) using Lipofectamine 2000. Plasmid transfections were performed according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 24 h after the cell transfection, the cells were treated with rDMP1 for 24 h and then lysed. Luciferase expression was quantified using an automated luminometer, and results were normalized. The data were analyzed to test for significant mean differences in luciferase activity among the concentration groups using a one way analysis of variance. The post hoc pairwise comparisons were performed using the Tukey Honestly Significant Difference procedure. Significance was considered to be less than To facilitate analysis of the DMP1 signaling potential, we synthesized recombinant DMP1 proteins using both full-length (rDMP1-F) and C-terminal (rDMP1-C) plasmid DNA clones. The recombinant proteins were then analyzed by SDS-PAGE with Stains-All ( Because no osteocyte cell line expressing DMP1 was currently available, Based on the work of others who have shown the significance of MAPKs to bone development ( DMP1 is known to be processed into two fragments: a 37-kDa N-terminal protein and a 57-kDa C-terminal protein (as the role of the free N terminus is not yet clear, for this study we have directed our attention to the full-length and C-terminal species). To determine whether intracellular MAPKs were activated by the presence of extracellular DMP1, hMSC cells were plated on recombinant DMP1 and then analyzed for Western blotting. As shown in To confirm that the observed activation was specific, we tested the effect of the MEK inhibitor, U0126, on the observed response to DMP1. MEK activity is required for the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and subsequent ERK-mediated signal transduction. Indeed, when cells were treated with 10 μ As our data show, exposure of cells to DMP1 induces the formation of focal adhesion clusters, indicating that integrins are involved in DMP1 signaling activity. In addition, Jain It was next of interest to determine whether this signaling might be facilitated through the formation of a complex including DMP1 and αvβ3. When cells were exposed to DMP1 and then subjected to immunoprecipitation with either α-αvβ3 integrin or α-DMP1 antibodies and the precipitates were analyzed by Western blotting, it could be bidirectionally confirmed that these two proteins sustain an interaction, one that is strong enough to be maintained through radioimmune precipitation assay buffer ( JNKs are normally located in the cytoplasm, but upon phosphorylation their translocation to the nucleus is observed ( The nuclear forms of JNK are known to phosphorylate ATF2 and c-Jun, and ERK is known to phosphorylate c- To confirm this result in the other cell types as well as to verify the specificity of the effect, we treated hMSC, MC3T3-E1, and MDPC23 cells with DMP1 and examined the phosphorylation state of its putative nuclear targets. As shown in Finally, we asked whether the DMP1 ability to elicit activation of transcriptional effectors resulted ultimately in an increase in transcriptional activity of a known responsive promoter. MC3T3-E1 cells were first transiently transfected with two plasmids; that is, the GAL4-c-Jun plasmid encoding the GAL4-DNA binding domain fused to the c-Jun activation domain and a reporter plasmid containing a luciferase gene driven by a 5×GAL4-responsive promoter). The activation of transcription of the 5×Gal4-containing reporter plasmid is dependent on c-Jun phosphorylation by JNK family members ( The data were analyzed to test for significant mean differences in luciferase activity among the three DMP1 concentration groups using a one-way analysis of variance between cases ( Taken together our data confirm that DMP1 elicits a signaling effect that can be traced from the extracellular matrix via integrins MAPK proteins (ERK and JNK) and down to the level of transcriptional activation of targets such as c-Jun and ATF2. These transcription factors were shown to be involved in osteoblastic gene expression ( In this study we examine the potential for the SIBLING family member, DMP1, to initiate intracellular signaling. We show that the extracellular presence of DMP1 is sufficient to initiate the formation of focal adhesion-like clusters and subsequent activation of MAPK-ERK signaling via an αvβ3 integrin-dependent mechanism. This MAPK signaling involves JNK and its translocation to the nucleus, where it appears to up-regulate the transcriptional activation of c-Jun. Integrins are heterodimeric transmembrane receptors critical to a variety of processes including cell shape, mobility, growth and differentiation, and regulation of the cell cycle ( To this end we examined the ability of extracellular DMP1 to activate signaling machinery at the intracellular aspect and observed both a formation of focal adhesion-like structures and concomitant activation of FAK in response to rDMP1-F presence. It has been shown that MAPK pathways transduce a wide array of extracellular signals, thereby regulating a host of vital cellular processes ( Our data are consistent with a study wherein bone morphogenetic protein, BMP, was shown to be involved in the differentiation of dental follicle cells to osteoblasts/cementoblasts via MAPK activity ( At this juncture it is not known whether the signaling functions we have identified are specific to DMP1 or whether other SIBLING molecules may have similar functions in this context. As we have previously indicated, another SIBLING protein, phosphophoryn, has also been shown to activate the MAPK and the Smad pathways leading to bone/dentin specific gene activation ( In summary, we show that DMP1 can bind to the integrin receptor αvβ3, thereby transducing a signal to the intracellular aspect via FAK activation. In the cytoplasm, the MAPK pathway mediates DMP1 activity via ERK and JNK phosphorylation and subsequent stimulation of specific transcriptional activators. It appears, as demonstrated in both the mouse and human defects, that DMP1 function in the extracellular space is necessary for the formation of morphologically competent osteocytes. It will be of future interest to determine whether this defect is indeed specifically due to an absence of MAPK signals normally sustained through DMP1-αvβ3 interaction.