We have studied the preparation of a new class of epoxy thermosets from diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A (DGEBA) modified with an amphiphilic star polymer (SP), initiated either by 1-methyl imidazole or ytterbium triflate, anionic and cationic initiators, respectively. The curing process has been characterized by means of DSC, FTIR and rheology. The last technique allowed us to monitor the shrinkage during curing. DMTA provided valuable information about the transitions of the materials, as well as their modulus in the rubbery state. Cationic systems produce monomodal tan
                     δ relaxations, whereas anionics presented a shoulder in this peak. By means of electron microscopy we could observe phase separation in the case of cationically initiated systems while in the anionic initiated materials zones with different electronic densities were appreciated. Finally, Young’s modulus and hardness of the materials were determined by nanoinentation.Epoxy resins are one of the most used polymers in the field of coatings. They are versatile materials that present high chemical resistance and good mechanical and thermal properties Recently, a lot of attention has been paid to the formation of nanostructured epoxy coatings. The final goal of this strategy is the improvement of the toughness of the epoxy thermoset without compromising other properties. In the literature it is possible to find many different approaches. One strategy is the use of linear block copolymers. Lipic et al. More recently, Meng et al. Hyperbranched polymers have also been used as a cheaper alternative to obtain phase separation in epoxy. For example, the use of a hyperbranched polyester with terminal long aliphatic chains showed phase separation in the cationic homopolymerization of DGEBA However, not only the additive used but also the polymerization procedure seems to be important in the induction of micro/nano phase separation. For example, Ratna et al. Thus, in the present article we have studied the thermal crosslinking of DGEBA in the presence of an amphiphilic star polymer that have proved to induce phase separation in the UV cationic photopolymerization of a commercially available cycloaliphatic epoxy resin Diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A (DGEBA) Epitoke Resin 827 was provided by Shell Chemicals with an epoxy equivalent of 182 The star polymer (SP) used was synthesized as previously described The corresponding amount of SP was dissolved in the epoxy resin heating at 80 The specimens for mechanical testing and thermal and mechanical analyses were cured in metal templates coated with silicon oil to prevent the resin stacking to the mold. The samples containing MI were cured at 120 Calorimetric studies were carried out on a Mettler DSC-821e thermal analyzer in covered Al pans under N The kinetic studies were performed at heating rates of 2, 5, 10 and 15 The glass transition temperature for each material ( An FTIR spectrophotometer FTIR-680PLUS from Jasco with a resolution of 4 Rheological measurements were carried out in the parallel plate (geometry of 25 Gel time was taken as the point where tan Dynamic mechanical thermal analysis (DMTA) was performed in a TA DMA 2928 dynamic analyzer operating in three point bending mode at 1 The cryofracture area of the specimens was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The samples were metalized with gold and observed with a Jeol JSM 6400 with 3.5 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed with a Jeol 1011 microscope. Samples were prepared using an ultramicrotome at room temperature and were observed without staining them. Thermogravimetric analyses (TGAs) were carried out in a Mettler TGA/SDTA 851e thermobalance. Cured samples with an approximate mass of 8 Nanoindentation studies were performed with a Berkovich tip with its function area calibrated against fused silica standard, at a strain rate of 0.05 We studied all curing formulations by means of DSC. By performing a second scan at 20 Using Eq. A similar accelerative effect of the OH groups has also been described in cationic systems By working at different heating rates we were able to determine the activation energy of the curing process. The isothermal study of the curing systems was performed by FTIR. Samples were cured at different temperatures and the disappearance of the band at 910   Rheology is a very powerful technique that can provide a lot of information about the starting mixture as well as of the curing process. By means of this technique, we also investigated the gelation process which is very important for the understanding of the curing process. The gel point is defined as the point at which the first thermoset network is formed ( Shrinkage during curing is also a very important parameter in thermosetting coatings. There are many cases in the literature where the addition of dendritic polymers to epoxy resins results in a reduction of the global shrinkage In previous studies, we demonstrated that the presence of OH terminal groups in dendrimeric molecules used as epoxy modifiers led to a reduction of the global shrinkage DMTA can provide us with information about the transitions of the cured material. The tan In the case of using Yb(OTf) The area of the tan By means of DMTA we could also determine the modulus of the materials in the rubbery state. The amphiphilic character of the SP, with an aromatic core (hydrophobic) and branches of polyethylene glycol in the surface (hydrophilic) has proved to yield a phase separated morphology in similar systems, when working in the UV cationic curing of a cycloaliphatic epoxy resin  Thus, it is quite evident that the curing mechanism is very important on the formation of phase separation in epoxy systems. It seems that cationic systems, the one herein studied and the one presented before in UV curing  The addition of SP increases the stability of the resulting thermosets, especially in the case of Yb(OTf) The char yield observed after degradation is higher for the systems cured with ytterbium triflate, but practically no influence on the addition of SP is observed. Nanoindentation is a technique that recently has turn out to be very interesting in the characterization of mechanical properties such as Young’s modulus or hardness The hardness of the final thermoset is slightly affected either by the addition of the SP or by the initiation system used in the curing. In all cases the values are around 0.25 A new type of epoxy thermosets, modified with an amphiphilic star polymer was obtained by two different initiating systems: anionic (1-methyl imidazole) and cationic (ytterbium triflate). While in the anionic system (MI) a slight increase in the curing rate was observed on increasing the amount of SP due to the presence of some hydroxyl groups in its structure, in the cationic Yb(OTf) The more flexible structure of the star in comparison to the epoxy matrix resulted in a decrease in the The gelation was delayed with the addition of the SP for both systems. In the case of MI initiated systems this resulted in an increase on the conversion at the gel point. Ytterbium triflate initiated thermosets presented less shrinkage after gelation than MI initiated ones, but the addition of the SP caused an increase in this value for both systems. By means of SEM we could observe a phase separated morphology for the cationically initiated thermosets containing SP. TEM demonstrated the presence of zones with different degree of crosslinking in anionically cured thermosets, in accordance to the observed by DMTA. The thermal stability of the thermosets mainly depended on the inititator. MI yielded thermosets with higher thermal stability. No influence on the addition of the SP could be observed. The Young’s modulus of the materials was improved with the addition of SP in the case of cationic initiated materials, while the hardness remained practically unaffected in all the studied materials. The authors from the Universitat Rovira i Virgili and from Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya would like to thank