The anchored sheet pile quay wall with a separate pile-supported platform was invented to meet the functional and serviceable requirements of engineering practice, including the higher elevation of retained soils and smaller wall deflection, based on the conventional anchored sheet pile structure. This paper presents the field testing as well as the three-dimensional numerical analysis on the first practical case of the new structure. The performance of the structure and soil is described and discussed, including the lateral deflection, bending moment, axial force, tensile force, and lateral earth pressure. The measured data and computed results show that the lateral deflection of the sheet pile wall can be significantly reduced, and the measured maximum lateral displacement is approximately 0.21% of the wall height in this case. The bending moment and axial force of the supporting piles are generally greater than those of the sheet pile and anchor wall, indicating that the pile-supported platform is efficient for reducing the loads acting on a sheet pile. The effects of the pile-supported platform can be summarized as a combination of blocking effect of the supporting piles to carry the lateral earth pressures as well as a load-relieving effect of the platform to transfer the vertical loads to deeper foundation soils through the pile. Compared to the numerical results, Coulomb's earth pressure theory significantly overestimates the earth pressure loads acting on the sheet pile at higher elevations. Furthermore, the dredging activity has greater effects on the behaviours of the sheet pile wall and front-pile than the superstructure construction.Sheet pile walls are one type of fundamental structures, which are embedded in soils to sustain horizontal earth and water pressures by utilizing the flexural rigidity of walls. They are widely used in civil engineering structures, such as waterfront structures, flood walls, and cofferdams. The materials of sheet pile walls comprise steel, reinforced concrete, plastic, and timber [ Sheet pile walls are normally considered as flexible structures, and the lateral pressures from soils and water are regarded as the main load. The earth pressure distribution along a sheet pile wall significantly differs from that acting on a rigid wall, and a stress concentration occurring at the anchor level and a non-triangular distribution behind and in front of the wall have been discussed [ In order to satisfy the functional and serviceability requirements of engineering practice, including the higher elevation of retained soils (i.e. approximately 20 m) and smaller wall deflection (i.e. less than 0.3% of wall height), a new structure is proposed and is reported in this paper. Based on the conventional anchored sheet pile wall, an additional separate pile-supported platform is installed in close proximity behind the sheet pile wall. This new structure has been initially applied in the construction of a 100 000-ton dock successfully, and a detailed instrumentation of the dock system is set up to monitor the behaviours of the structure. Moreover, a three-dimensional (3D) finite element analysis (FEA) on the first practical case has also been conducted to analyse the effects of different construction steps on the structure behaviour. The computational model is calibrated using the field monitoring data. The site is located at a port in Tangshan City, northern China, around Bohai Sea. There is a 4.5 m thick silty fine sand layer overlying a 7.3 m thick deposit of mud clay; this deposit overlies a fine and medium sand layer of approximately 7.8 m thick. Underneath the sand is a silty clay layer, approximately 3.6 m, followed by a fine sand layer. The ground water level is at a depth of 0.17 m. The anchored sheet pile wall with a separate pile-supported platform was adopted for a 100 000 tons quay. A cross-sectional view of the test anchored sheet pile wall with a separate pile-supported platform is shown in The construction of the anchored sheet pile quay with a separate pile-supported platform includes three stages: (i) construction of the underground structures and backfilling, (ii) dredging of the waterfront area, and (iii) construction of the superstructures. During the underground structure construction, the diaphragm wall panel trench construction technology is used for building the sheet pile wall and anchor wall in three steps as follows: (i) excavating the wall grooves using the required machines, (ii) placing the processed steel reinforcement cage into the grooves, and (iii) pouring concrete into the grooves to form the walls. The construction of the supporting piles is similar to that of the walls. The concrete is cured for at least 28 days. Then, the construction of the platform, breast wall, and guide beams follows. The joints of the tie rods are embedded in the breast wall and guide beams before concrete pouring. After concrete curing, the tie rods are installed between the walls, and a pre-tension force of 50 kN is applied to each tie rod using a pre-tensioner. The succeeding stage is backfilling behind the sheet pile using vibration compacted silty fine sands. Arrays of 50 mm diameter drainage holes are also set up on the sheet pile walls at a spacing of 2.2 m. The period of the underground structure construction stage lasts for approximately 7 months. Dredging is undertaken in front of the sheet pile wall for approximately 3 months. The final stage is the superstructure construction. The crane rails and its bases are constructed, and a 50-cm thick concrete pavement was also built on the top of the vibration compacted sand ground. Furthermore, the auxiliary equipment for the quay is installed, including the rubber fender, portal crane, and open-air yard. The period of superstructure construction stage approximately lasts for 2 months. Overall, the total construction period is approximately one year. In order to verify the design assumptions and monitor the performance of the structures, various instruments are installed during the construction of the walls and piles. The dredging and superstructure constructions are the critical stages for quay structures. Therefore, the main monitoring program starts from the dredging stage and lasts for approximately 12 months after the completion of quay construction. Water level observation pipes. Two galvanized pipes are installed to monitor the water level. The galvanized water level pipes are located behind the sheet pile wall (WLP-1) and back-pile (WLP-2). The bottom of the galvanized pipe is −4.5 m, and the top is 0.6 m above the quay surface. Vertical inclinometers. Four inclinometer casings (I-1, I-2, I-3, and I-4) are installed in the sheet pile wall, front-pile, back-pile, and anchor wall, respectively. The inclinometer casings are initially fixed in steel reinforcement cages, and then placed into the groove with the cage. The bottom elevation of each inclinometer casing was equal to that of the parent structure, and the top was extended to 0.6 m higher than the quay surface. Strain gauges. The strains of the tie rod and steel reinforcement in concrete are measured by strain gauges. Two strain gauges (SGR-1 and SGR-2) are welded on the tie rod. The strain gauges (SGSW, SGFP, and SGBP) in the structure concrete are welded to the main stress bars at a spacing of approximately 3 m during the processing of steel cage. In order to reduce the effect of temperature, the strain gauges are made of steel that has the same coefficient of thermal expansion as the tie rod and steel reinforcement. The measuring range of the strain gauge is 3000 με, and the sensitivity is 0.4 με. Crack gauges. Two crack gauges (CG-1 and CG-2) are placed at the limited space between the sheet pile and platform wall (i.e. 80 mm) to measure the variation in the spacing. The crack gauge has a sensitivity of 0.025% F.S. and a measuring range of 25 mm. All the instruments were installed during the construction of the underground structures and measurement results were monitored before dredging. The dredging activity was not commenced until the measured data were basically stable. The main monitoring process started from the dredging activity, and the stable data before dredging were also recorded as the initial values for monitoring. The crack gauges, inclinometers, and strain gauges were monitored using portable readout boxes. The anchored sheet pile wall with a separate pile-supported platform in The structures including the sheet piles, pile-supported platforms, and anchor walls are modelled as an isotropic elastic material with a Young's modulus of 20 GPa, and a Poisson's ratio of 0.2. The tie rod is also modelled as an isotropic elastic material. Its Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio are 210 GPa and 0.28, respectively. The backfilling sand is modelled using a linear elastic-perfectly plastic model with Mohr–Coulomb failure criterion. The Mohr–Coulomb model requires five parameters: effective cohesion In order to model the hardening effect of soils under the unloading state during dredging stage, the five foundation soils shown in As mentioned above, the main monitoring process in the field started from the dredging. Owing to the continuous construction and the slow deformation of soft clay soils (i.e. mud clay), the mutual effects of dredging and superstructure construction on the accuracy of the measured data are significant. For example, the superstructure construction commenced 12 days after the completion of dredging, while the deformation and force acting on the structures were not stable and kept increasing at that time according to the monitoring data. However, the monitoring data of the structures are almost stable at the end of the monitoring period. Hence, the behaviours of the structures are analysed based on the stable post-construction measured results, and the variations in deformation and force acting on the structures and soils during construction are discussed based on the FEA results.  The FEA results after surface loading are mostly consistent with the stable measured values, and the comparisons prove that this numerical model is suitable and efficient for the analysis of the performance of the new structure. Generally, the computed results are greater than the measured values; this is probably caused by the smaller actual surface surcharge in the field than the designed uniform loads used in the computation (i.e. 80 kPa). Furthermore, the bottoms of the structures are assumed to be fixed in the measured results using the inclinometers, but the FEA results show a slight lateral movement of the structure towards the waterside at the bottom. Based on the FEA results at different construction stages, it is clear that the lateral deflections increase significantly with continuing construction. The lateral structural displacements are small after backfilling, but the values significantly increase after dredging and surface loading. The deflection curves of the sheet pile, front-pile, and back-pile are similar. The curvatures at higher elevations are different from those at lower elevations, and the inflection points usually exist near the dredging surface elevation. The characteristics of the structure deflection curve reflect the supporting effect of embedment foundation soils and the anchoring effect of tie rods or platform. The deflection curve of the anchor wall is entirely different, and the lateral deflection of the anchor wall is always the smallest compared to the results of other structures. The pile-supported platform is separated from the sheet pile wall at a small spacing of 80 mm. The variations in spacing affect not only the relative movement of the sheet pile and platform, but also the interaction between structures.   By comparing the distributions of the bending moments, the FEA results are found to satisfactorily agree with the measured results; thus, the numerical model is effective for the subsequent analysis. The bending moment of the back-pile has also an S-shape distribution, but the values of the anchor wall are almost entirely positive along the wall height owing to the tensile force of the tie rods. It is also clear that the bending moments slightly increase after backfilling and markedly increase after dredging and surface loading. Furthermore, based on the FEA results at different construction steps, the bending moment values of the front-pile are always the largest, the values of the back-pile are greater than those of the sheet pile wall, and the anchor wall has the smallest values.    The lateral effective earth pressures acting on the anchor wall are illustrated in The differential lateral displacement of the sheet pile and front-pile (DDSF) obtained from measured data and FEA result is illustrated in The objective of installing the pile-supported platform behind the sheet pile wall is to reduce the lateral earth pressure acting on the wall. Apart from the blocking effect of the supporting piles mentioned above, the pile-supported platform is also helpful in transferring the vertical loads to the piles directly and reducing the lateral loads acting on the sheet pile wall. The increments in lateral earth pressures along the sheet pile wall height owing to the surface surcharge are illustrated in  Based on the FEA results of structure forces and deformations at different construction steps discussed above, it is evident that the construction steps, particularly dredging and superstructure construction, have varying degree of effects on the behaviours of the structure. The effects of dredging and surface loading on the behaviours of structure, including lateral deflection, bending moment, axial force, and tensile force, are presented in This paper presents the behaviour of an anchored sheet pile quay wall with a separate pile-supported platform by field testing and 3D finite element computation on the first practical application. The structural characteristics, main construction processes, and detailed instrumentation of the dock system are reported as well. The 3D numerical model is constructed and calibrated based on the measured data, and the numerical model has captured the performance of the structures and soils successfully. Based on the results of the long-term field testing and FEA, the following conclusions can be obtained. The lateral deflections of the walls and piles decrease along the structure depth, and the deflection of the anchored sheet pile wall decreases remarkably owing to the additional separate pile-supported platform behind the sheet pile. The measured maximum lateral displacement is approximately 0.21% of the wall height in this case. The spacing between the sheet pile wall and pile-supported platform varies negligibly owing to the construction. The tensile force of the tie rod increases continuously under construction as it transfers the loads from the sheet pile to the anchor wall. Therefore, the sheet pile wall, separate pile-supported platform, and anchor wall can work together in entirety to carry the lateral loads. The bending moments of the sheet pile and supporting piles have an S-shape distribution along the height, and the bending moment values of the front-pile are always the largest. The pile axial force initially increases significantly and then gradually decreases towards the pile tip because of the soil friction forces in different directions. Based on the results of the lateral earth pressures acting on the structures, the supporting piles are effective and efficient for carrying the lateral earth pressures and reducing the loads acting on the sheet pile wall. The load transfer mechanisms of the pile-supported platform can be summarized as a combination of blocking effect of supporting piles to carry lateral earth pressures and load-relieving effect of platform to transfer vertical loads to deeper foundation soils directly through the pile. Compared to the results obtained from FEA, the calculated results using Coulomb's earth pressure theory significantly overestimate the earth pressure acting on the sheet pile wall at higher elevations and underestimate the values at lower elevations. Hence, Coulomb's earth pressure theory is not suitable for calculation of earth pressures acting on sheet pile walls with pile-supported platform. Dredging exerts a much stronger effect on the sheet pile wall response than surface loading. By contrast, surface loading effects dominate the response of the anchor wall. Additionally, the behaviour of the front pile is mainly affected by dredging, while the back pile is mainly affected by surface loading. The authors acknowledge financial support from the