Background
                  Treatment of intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus in the elderly is challenging. In patients with very distal fractures and severe comminution, primary arthroplasty has been advocated. Recently, a few reports have described promising results of hemiarthroplasty. This study describes the medium-term results of using the Kudo humeral implant (Biomet Ltd, Bridgend, U.K.) as replacement of the distal humerus.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Eight women (mean age, 79 years) were treated. Follow-up was conducted at a mean of 4 years after the procedure and consisted of the Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS), radiographic images, and range of motion (ROM).
               
                  Results
                  All patients had a good or excellent outcome according to the MEPS. Mean ROM was 31° to 126°. Radiographic signs of attrition of the ulna were observed in 3 patients but did not correlate with the functional outcome. A periprosthetic fracture occurred in 1 patient 3 years after the index operation, and ROM was unsatisfactory in 1 patient. No other complications were observed.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The use of the Kudo humeral implant as a hemiarthroplasty resulted in a reasonable functional outcome in the medium-term, but the radiographic signs of attrition suggest that the implant is not recommended as a hemiprosthesis.Fractures of the distal humerus in adults are estimated to represent 2% of all fractures and are thus relatively infrequent. Hemiarthroplasty for fractures of the distal humerus has been only briefly mentioned in the literature, Between 2004 and 2007, a consecutive series of 8 women with intra-articular, distal humeral fractures underwent operations at the Department of Orthopaedics, Linköping University Hospital, using the Kudo humeral implant as a hemiarthroplasty. All patients were aged older than 71 years (mean, 79 years) at the time of surgery. Inclusion criteria were radiographic signs of osteopenia and an intra-articular fracture with the joint surface fractured into more than 2 fragments through or distal to the transcondylar plane in which congruence of the joint surface was assessed impossible to restore and stable internal fixation not possible to achieve. Also the collateral ligaments were preoperatively regarded as possible to repair or reattach. Independent living and ability to adhere to the postoperative regimen were necessary prerequisites before informed consent was obtained. No patients with open wounds, impaired skin circulation, other significant soft-tissue injury, central or peripheral nervous system disorder, peripheral circulatory disturbance, arthritic disease or previous surgery in the affected elbow were included. Patient 5 ( In all cases, the preliminary decision to implant a prosthetic replacement was based on preoperative radiographs and a computed tomography scan, and the final decision was made after the fracture had been exposed. In no case, however, was the preoperative plan changed. The individual fracture patterns were classified according to the Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen (AO) system ( Surgery was performed under general anesthesia with the patient in the lateral decubitus position. Without a tourniquet, a posterior skin incision, slightly laterally curved around the olecranon, was used and sharply continued down to the muscle fascia. After elevation of thick skin flaps, the ulnar nerve was identified and followed from the arcade of Struthers and through the cubital tunnel. The flexor carpi ulnaris muscle and fascia were split 2 to 4 cm to allow the nerve to move freely during the procedure. The nerve was not mobilized or transposed in any case, and the muscle split was not sutured. The triceps muscle and tendon was thereafter split in the midline. The muscle fibers were separated and the central portion of the tendon was released from the olecranon with small wafers of bone. The patient who had undergone previous surgery had been operated on with an olecranon osteotomy. In this case, the joint was approached through the osteotomy, which finally was stabilized with an intramedullary screw and osteosutures. The joint was opened, all cartilage-covered parts of the distal humerus were removed, and a subcapitular radial head resection was performed. The collateral ligaments were identified, and in cases where the columns or condyles were fractured, these fragments were spared for later refixation. The medullary canal of the humerus was then prepared and the trial component inserted. The size of the humeral implant was assessed in relation to the removed parts of the humerus and to the joint surface of the ulna, and the component allowing optimal congruence was chosen. After reduction with the trial in place, the collateral ligaments were temporarily reduced and tension was assessed. The permanent implant was then cemented in place, taking care to ensure correct length. The collateral ligaments were sutured back using osteosutures. Condyle fractures with remaining collateral ligaments were reduced, and osteosynthesis was made using pins or cerclage ( The elbow was immobilized 2 to 3 days postoperatively in a plaster splint in 45° to 60° flexion. Thereafter, active exercises were begun with active flexion of 100° and passive extension during the first 2 weeks until wound healing. Gradual increase of flexion and light active extension was then allowed. A physiotherapist ensuring correct performance initially monitored postoperative exercises. The training was then conducted at home 4 to 6 times daily, and in between sessions, the arm rested in a removable plastic splint during the first 4 weeks. Control visits at a physiotherapist were recommended weekly during the first 6 weeks. Use of the arm in activities of daily living was allowed at all times. The aim of training was a functional range of motion (ROM), defined as at least 30° to 120°, and unrestricted weight bearing no later than 8 weeks postoperatively. According to a prospective protocol, follow-up was conducted by one of the authors at 3 to 5 months and at 2.5 years. The patients who were still alive and could cooperate had a final follow-up assessment after 4 to 6 years. At all visits, clinical stability, signs of complications, ROM measured with a goniometer, and results according to the Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) were recorded. At the latest follow-up, x-ray images were taken and examined for signs of loosening or attrition. All patients were active and independent at the time of their injury, and all were able to cooperate fully in their postoperative care. At the latest follow-up, intended at 4 to 6 years after the surgery, 2 patients had died and 1 was unable to attend and cooperate due to vascular dementia. For these patients, the latest recorded results are reported, giving a mean time of 4.5 years (range, 2.5-6 years) to the latest follow-up. Another patient sustained a humeral shaft fracture immediately proximal to the prosthesis after a fall 3 years after the primary operation. The fracture was treated with bilateral plate fixation ( All patients achieved a good or excellent result according to the MEPS ( In 3 patients there were radiographic signs of attrition on the ulna affecting the area around the coronoid process. The first signs of radiographic changes could be seen after 2 years in 2 patients, and was observed 6 years after the index operation in the third patient ( The present study demonstrates that primary hemiarthroplasty is a treatment that produces reliable short-term and medium-term results in elderly, osteoporotic patients in whom an adequate and reliable osteosynthesis is impossible. The patients in this study all sustained very distal intra-articular fractures. Three were of coronal shear type, and these represent a small fraction of all distal humeral fractures in adults. The treatment of coronal shear fractures constitutes a major challenge because of their relative infrequency, the potentially compromised vascularity of the fracture fragments, and the difficulties in surgical approach. Internal fixation of distal humeral fractures should ideally be stable enough to allow early mobilization. However, the postoperative rehabilitation will often require several months, and some limitation of ROM often ensues. It a series of 9 patients treated with an unlinked total arthroplasty presented by Kalogrianitis et al, The time to follow-up varied, but the recorded results a few months after the operation appear stable, and no deterioration was observed over time. It rather appears likely that some improvement in strength could be anticipated with longer time to follow-up, which might affect the MEPS. Strength was not analyzed separately, however, because high demands for muscular strength are uncommon in the examined group of patients. The Kudo implant does not enable a totally congruent humeroulnar joint and does usually not allow the radial head to be retained. It appears likely that the altered load distribution is the reason for the radiologic signs of attrition on the ulna observed in some of the patients. The inherent stability provided by the joint surface geometry and surrounding ligaments will be abnormal after implantation of a noncongruent prosthesis, even if the collateral ligaments are reinserted. The altered biomechanics may have several different implications for cartilage wear and instability problems that may be difficult to foresee. In the event that secondary problems were to occur in the long-term, it appears that a hemiarthroplasty could be revised to a total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) with relative ease as long as an implant is used that could be matched with an ulnar component. No such revisions have been performed, however. An implant with a design that more closely resembles the normal anatomy would allow better joint congruence, and it appears likely that this could reduce the risk of secondary osteoarthritis. Judging from the reports of long-term results after TEA, frequent causes of failure are related to the ulnar implant or the hinge. It is generally believed that a TEA does not tolerate heavy loads, and restrictions on carrying or lifting appear to be commonly advocated. The technique of hemiarthroplasty used in the present study is basically open reduction and internal fixation of the condyles and collateral ligaments using the implant as a spacer to replace the irreparable trochlea. As long as joint stability can be reliably restored, there seems to be no need for load restrictions. This may be important in elderly patients because it can be anticipated that some individuals will need walking aids at some point. It is also seems likely that in patients with impaired balance and tendency for repeated injuries, the hemiarthroplasty would be less vulnerable. The risk of falling and repeated injuries is a major concern in these patients and implies a substantial risk of periprosthetic fractures. This occurred in 1 patient in this series and was managed with conventional osteosynthesis. The healed initial fracture and the retained condyles made plate fixation possible. It appears probable that fracture fixation would be more difficult after a TEA procedure because this frequently results in more bone resection. Although condylar resection has not been shown to be detrimental to forearm muscular strength, no advantage has been shown with this procedure. Despite the obvious incongruence of the ulnohumeral joint after the use of the Kudo implant as a primary hemiarthroplasty, the medium-term results were acceptable in elderly, osteopenic women in whom collateral ligament repair could be achieved. The radiographic signs of attrition on the ulna, however, seem to indicate that the implant may not be ideal when used as a hemiarthroplasty. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.