As an aid to the design and operation of anaerobic digesters treating high sulphate waste waters, a mathematical model describing this treatment process has been developed. Apart from sulphate reduction, the model includes those reactions which occur either prior to sulphate reduction or in competition with it. These include, hydrolysis of solid substrates, acidogenesis, beta oxidation of long chain fatty acids, acetogenesis and methanogenesis. By incorporating terms for these reactions the model is able to simulate sulphate reduction using a wide range of carbon sources. Acid/base equilibrium chemistry is included in order to predict the pH and unionized component concentrations, needed for calculating inhibition. An activity based model is used, with the activity coefficients calculated using Debye–Hückle theory. The mass transfer rates of hydrogen, methane, carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulphide from the liquid to the vapour phase are also included. A number of different reactor types may be simulated, including a dynamic batch, steady state CSTR and dynamic CSTR. By separating the hydraulic and solids residence times, high rate reactors such as UASB and packed bed reactors may also be simulated. The model has been used to successfully predict the dynamic and steady state behaviour of a number of different reactor types, utilizing both simple and complex carbon sources.constant used to calculate specific biomass decay rate, d molar concentration in liquid phase, mmol Henry's law constant, atm concentration of inhibitory compound, mg ionic strength, dimensionless first order hydrolysis rate constant, d product of gas transfer coefficient and specific interfacial area, d acid dissociation constant, mmol inhibition constant, mg Monod half-velocity constant, mg gas mass transfer rate per unit volume, mmol partial pressure of species, atm volumetric flow rate of gas at STP, l rate of substrate utilization per unit volume, mg rate of biomass production per unit volume, mg universal gas constant, atm concentration of dissolved component, mg time, d liquid phase volume of reactor, l vapour phase volume of reactor, l concentration of insoluble component, mg concentration of biomass, mg concentration of biodegradable portion of insoluble species, mg concentration of nondegradable portion of insoluble species, mg biomass yield coefficient (based on overall substrate consumption), mg ionic charge, dimensionless parameter in on/off switching function, dimensionless parameter in pH inhibition function parameter in pH inhibition function activity coefficient, dimensionless specific biomass growth rate, mg maximum specific biomass growth rate, mg factor modifying specific biomass growth rate due to condition hydraulic residence time, d solids residence time, d High sulphate wastewaters originate from a number of industrial activities, including pulp and paper manufacture, minerals processing, the petrochemical industries and mining activity, i.e., acid mine drainage. Of these four points, the formation of acid mine drainage (AMD) is, at least in a South African context, potentially the most significant. Two factors combine to make this so: firstly, South Africa is a semi-arid to arid country and as such its water resources are particularly valuable. In addition South Africa has a large minerals producing industry, and as a consequence has a large number of mines, either still in operation or abandoned. Particular environmental problems associated with AMD are high sulphate content, low pH and high dissolved heavy metal concentrations. A technology for the treatment of AMD and other high sulphate waters which has received increasing attention over the past two decades is the anaerobic biological reduction of sulphate to sulphide (see for example The microbes also require an electron donor and a carbon source for cell growth. In most cases these two roles are filled by one compound (for example ethanol or a short chain fatty acid); however, some species are able to utilize hydrogen as an electron donor and CO While general anaerobic mathematical models, beginning with that of Graef and Andrews The aim of this work is to develop a comprehensive mathematical model describing the anaerobic treatment of high sulphate waste waters. Particular requirements are that the model should be applicable for a number of carbon sources (both simple and complex); should account for pH, sulphide, hydrogen and fatty acid inhibition; and should be valid for a number of popular reactor types. No laboratory experimental work formed part of the project, data for the model's development and calibration being taken from literature. In addition, this work is confined to the anaerobic stage of the treatment process; the further recovery of sulphur from the sulphide stream, by conventional or microbiological means, is not considered. While the primary focus of the model has been to describe the anaerobic treatment of high sulphate waste waters, a conventional low sulphate digester can be regarded as a special case. Within a high sulphate anaerobic system utilizing a complex substrate, such as primary sludge, the following biological processes can be expected to occur: Colonization of the sludge particles by acid fermenting bacteria. The particles are hydrolyzed extracellularly by enzymes secreted by the bacteria. The carbohydrate fraction of the sludge is broken down to sugars, the protein fraction to amino acids, and the lipid portion to long chain fatty acids (LCFAs) and polyols such as glycerol. Acid fermentation (acidogenesis) of the sugars and amino acids to hydrogen, carbon dioxide, and short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) such as acetic, propionic, butyric and lactic acids. Beta oxidation of the LCFAs to yield acetate, propionate and hydrogen. Anaerobic oxidation (acetogenesis) of propionate and higher SCFAs to acetate, hydrogen and carbon dioxide. Methanogenesis using hydrogen and acetate as substrates. Biological sulphate reduction utilizing hydrogen, acetate, propionate, and potentially other intermediate SCFAs as substrates. All of the above microbial processes have been included in the model framework. This gives the model a large range of applicability, covering many possible substrates, from complex primary sludge to the simple case of an H The following components are taken as being representative of those found in an anaerobic high sulphate system:      fermenters (FER) utilizing glucose, amino acids and glycerol; lactate fermenters ( beta oxidizing bacteria (BOB) utilizing LCFAs; butyrate and propionate utilizing acetogens ( hydrogen and acetate utilizing methanogens ( hydrogen, acetate, lactate, propionate and butyrate utilizing sulphate reducers ( The rate of hydrolysis of insoluble proteins, carbohydrates and lipids has been found to be dependent on a number of factors including temperature, pH, particle size and shape. Nevertheless, a first order model has been shown to describe the rate of hydrolysis quite well In contrast, more complex expressions are required to account for the rate of utilization of insoluble substrates. The rate of biomass production is given by The specific biomass growth rate, In the case of sulphate reduction, where both sulphate and an electron donor are used as substrates, a multiple term Monod equation Inhibition (e.g., by unionized fatty acids or sulphide) also needs to be accounted for. Common inhibition models are noncompetitive inhibition: Anaerobic species are typically only active within a narrow pH range. The inhibitory effects of too high or too low a pH can be accounted for by the product of two ‘on/off switching’ functions: From the above, it is apparent that the specific growth rate can be affected by a number of factors. For the purposes of developing a mathematical model it is convenient to express   While in some cases, over the pH ranges expected, the components will only be present in significant quantities in one form (e.g. SO Using the above approach, the biological rate reactions describe the consumption or production of the total amount of each species present. As is discussed below, the exact state of ionization of each species is then determined from the equilibrium solution chemistry. In addition, the consumption or production of water is not shown as it is not included as a model component (the concentration of water being meaningless). Mass transfer of the four gas phase components between the vapour and liquid phases is calculated from the familiar expression In their model of an anaerobic digester Graef and Andrews The acid/base ionization reactions are assumed to be in equilibrium. For the generic reaction The ionic strength, In addition the hydrogen ion concentration is either calculated from a charge balance, or if the pH of the reactor is specified, from the pH itself. The acid/base reactions included in the model are listed in A number of different designs are available for anaerobic reactors. These include UASB, packed beds, the contact process and baffle plate reactors. The primary aim of these designs is to achieve a higher rate by ensuring good biomass retention. In other words the solids residence time is higher than the hydraulic residence time. A simple approach to modelling high rate reactors is to separate the two residence times. The equations describing the dynamic behaviour of the soluble (S) and insoluble components (X) are then  Assuming that the ideal gas law holds, a mass balance over the vapour phase yields By setting the differentials to zero, the model is reduced to the steady state case. Reactor geometries for which the flow is closer to plug flow can be modelled by a number of mixed reactors in series. For example an anaerobic baffled plate reactor (ABR) can be regarded as a number of UASB reactors in series The model was implemented using the high level mathematical modelling language Octave (http://www.octave.org). A number of different modules describing the rate of biological reactions, the equilibrium solution chemistry, the vapour–liquid mass transfer and the reactor geometry, were constructed. Combined, these result in a system of differential algebraic equations (in the case of the dynamic simulation) or a system of nonlinear algebraic equations (in the steady state case). These were then solved using Octave's built-in numerical routines. Apart from Henry's Law constants, for the hydrolysis reactions, the rate constants and fraction of the sludge which is degradable; for the soluble substrate reactions, the four Monod constants if the effects of pH inhibition are to be included, data are required to calculate the constants in The above constants were obtained from a survey of published anaerobic kinetic constants, a summary of which is given by Knobel The model has been successfully used to simulate a number of different reactor configurations and feeds (including primary sludge) under both steady state and dynamic conditions. Three dynamic simulations mimicking experiments described in the literature are presented here. Maree et al. Since the physical reactor had a high recycle rate relative to the feed flow (20 Plots of actual and simulated sulphate and COD concentrations in the effluent are shown in In conjunction with the above experiment, Maree et al. The model was set up as for the above simulation. A plot of the experimental and model predicted sulphate concentrations is shown in van Houten et al. The initial biomass concentrations of  On day 30 the gas feed flow rate was doubled to 6.6 A mathematical model describing the dynamic and steady state behaviour of an anaerobic digester, treating high sulphate waste waters has been developed. The model has been shown to be capable of predicting a number of different scenarios, including the time dependent concentrations of sulphate and COD in molasses fed packed bed and UASB reactors and the dynamic sulphate conversion rate in a gas lift reactor fed hydrogen and carbon dioxide.