Mechanism of the three-phase contact (TPC) formation and phenomena occurring during collisions of the ascending bubble with a solid and flat surface were studied. Three fluorite samples of different origins and surface roughness and smooth mica plates were investigated. It was found that the time-scale and the mode of air bubble/flat fluorite surface bouncing and attachment significantly depended on the surface roughness. For smooth fluorite surfaces the time of the TPC formation and the bubble attachment was over 150 ms while for rough surfaces it was 5 to 45 ms. It was also shown that the TPC formation at fluorite and mica surfaces was determined mainly by the electrical charge of the interacting interfaces. A small amount of cationic surfactant (n-octyltrimethylammonium bromide) was used to reverse the sign of electrical charge of the bubble surface. In n-octyltrimethylammonium bromide presence there was no TPC formation at the fluorite surface due to repulsions between positively charged interfaces, but the bubble attachment to negatively charged mica surface was observed due to attractive electrostatic interactions. It was also determined that there was no TPC formation at pHs when the signs of zeta potentials of the solution/gas and solution/fluorite interfaces were the same.Collisions of bubbles with particles and formation of the bubble–particle aggregates are necessary for separation by flotation. It is rather commonly accepted that the main factors determining the flotation separation are related to hydrophilic–hydrophobic properties of the particle surfaces. However, in flotation cells the formation of bubble–particle aggregates occurs under dynamic conditions. For the aggregate formation a liquid intervening film formed between the colliding bubble and the particle surface needs to be ruptured and the liquid/gas/solid three-phase contact (TPC) must be formed. Thus, the probability of formation of the bubble–particle aggregates is also affected by the stability of the liquid wetting film formed between the bubble and solid surface. Generally, the probability of formation of a stable bubble–particle aggregate can be considered as the product of the probabilities of collision, attachment (formation of the three-phase contact) and detachment ( During the bubble–solid collision process, the liquid film drains and its thickness decreases with time. When the film thickness reaches a distance of the electrostatic interactions, then the electrical charge of the film interfaces can be decisive for the film stability. If the interfaces are similarly charged, the repulsive interactions (positive disjoining pressure) between the surfaces act as the film stabilizing forces. When the surfaces are oppositely charged, the attractive electrostatic forces do not stabilize the liquid film and the film ruptures. In the case of naturally hydrophobic particles the wetting films are generally of low stability and are expected to rupture easily and quickly ( This paper presents dynamic phenomena occurring during collisions of a rising bubble with three different fluorite samples and, for comparison purpose, a freshly cleaved mica surface. The effect of the fluorite surface roughness on kinetics of the TPC formation in distilled water and 5 The experimental set-up used in monitoring the phenomena occurring during collisions of the rising bubble with fluorite surface was described in detail elsewhere ( Three fluorites (calcium fluoride, CaF The surface electrical charge and zeta potential of fluorite and mica were not investigated because such data exist in literature. The acid–base properties and ion exchange reactions on the fluorite surface were determined by   In the case of sample A, i.e. the sample having a similar smooth surface as sample B, the  In the case of a smooth fluorite surface, the bubble bouncing was always completely stopped before the TPC was formed. When the bubble was captured (motionless) beneath the samples A and B there was still some time needed for the TPC formation. This time was interpreted as the time needed for the film drainage to reach the thickness of the electrostatic interaction between the double electrostatic layers formed at the water/fluorite and water/gas interfaces. This time of the film drainage ( It appears that differences in the wetting film stabilities at the mica and fluorite surfaces are a consequence of different signs of the surface electrical charge at the mica and fluorite surfaces. As described above, in distilled water the mica surface is negatively charged while the fluorite surface is positively charged. According to literature data on the water/air interface, the bubble surface is negatively charged in distilled water. The values of zeta potential for the bubble in distilled water reported in the literature were always negative, but varied in absolute magnitude from − Adsorption of ionic surfactants can be used as a way of modifying the surface electrical charge at the water/gas interface. Thus, a small amount of cationic surfactant (OTABr) was used to reverse the sign of electrical charge of the bubble surface. The values of the electrical potential at the bubble surface can be evaluated using the theoretical model of ionic surfactant adsorption at the solution/air interface ( Sample A of fluorite was located 4 mm above the capillary orifice in the 5  In the case of negatively charged solids (mica) immersed in solution of cationic surfactant (OTABr) one should evaluate the possibility and importance of the mica surface hydrophobization due to the surfactant adsorption. To check additionally if OTABr adsorption only at mica surface (without adsorption and recharging the bubble surface) could enable the TPC formation, the following simple experiment was performed. The mica plate was immersed in 1 To confirm further the importance of the electrical surface charge for the TPC formation at fluorite surface the experiments were carried out in electrolyte solutions (1 The results presented above show that at weakly hydrophobic fluorite surfaces the electrostatic interactions play an important role in the three-phase contact formation due to their role in stabilization/destabilization of the liquid film separating the colliding bubble from the solid surface. It was found that when the interacting fluorite/solution and solution/gas interfaces were identically charged (either positively or negatively), the TPC was not formed. The TPC was formed only when the interacting interfaces were oppositely charged. Moreover, even when there was no repulsive electrostatic forces, the time of the film rupture and the three-phase contact formation was significantly longer than in the case of highly hydrophobic solids ( Fluorite is a naturally hydrophobic material with rather low contact angle ranging from 10 to 42°, depending on the method of measurements. Mechanisms and factors determining the three-phase contact (TPC) formation at fluorite surface were determined on the basis of the ascending bubble collisions and attachment to fluorite samples of different origin and surface roughness. It was found that larger roughness and irregularities of the fluorite surface shortened the time of the TPC formation. For smooth fluorite surface the bubble bounced a few times with diminishing amplitude and the TPC was formed within 200 ms (after complete stopping of the bouncing), while for irregular surface the attachment time was much shorter ( Electrostatic interactions between the solid/liquid and liquid/gas bubble surfaces determine the TPC formation. As the bubble surface is negatively charged in distilled water, due to positively charged fluorite surface, there were attractive electrostatic interactions between the interacting interfaces and the TPC was formed. In contrary, there was no TPC formation at the mica surface in distilled water due to repulsive electrostatic interactions between negatively charged mica and bubble surfaces. When a small amount of cationic surfactant OTABr is used to reverse the sign of the electrical charge of the bubble surface, there was no TPC formation at the fluorite surface due to repulsions between positively charged interfaces while there was bubble–mica attachment due to negatively charged mica and positively charged bubble. Also pH influences the TPC formation. No TPC is observed at pH when the signs of zeta potentials of the solution/gas and solution/fluorite interfaces are the same. Financial support from the Ministry of Science and Higher Education (Nr 45/N-COST/2007/0, N204 012 31/0279 and W-6 PWr. zlec. 342-865) is gratefully acknowledged. Authors thank Prof. Dr. P. Warszynski and Dr. E. Jarek for calculations of the bubble surface electric charge in the OTABr solution and Dr. P. Nowak for the fluorite A sample.