The SART (Sulphidization, Acidification, Recycling and Thickening) process is a novel industrial technology used in gold mining to recover cyanide and copper from cyanide solutions. Since the operation of this process involves hydrogen cyanide (HCN) generation, the design of the process must provide full control on gaseous HCN evolution to ensure personnel safety. Even though gas extraction and scrubber systems play a fundamental role in the control and reduction of potentially dangerous HCN levels, currently there are no formal methods to estimate the HCN generation in the SART process in order to afford a robust design for the extraction and scrubber systems. The objective of the present work is to propose a general methodology to predict the generation of HCN gas in the SART process. For this purpose, a mathematical model was developed, supported by the phenomenology of the process and considering the system's operational conditions. This model considers the chemical equilibrium of HCN in solution, the liquid–gas phase equilibrium and the mass transfer phenomena between the liquid and gas phases. The results predicted by the model have indicated very low rates of HCN gas generation (1–12mg/hm2), showing HCN concentrations below 4ppm at the inlet of the scrubbing system under typical operational conditions. In addition, it was found that the generation of HCN gas is controlled by the liquid mass transfer resistance and, due to this reason, that the correct adjustment of operational parameters of the SART process can maximize the liquid mass transfer resistance, avoiding HCN volatilization.In recent years the gold mining industry has been greatly stimulated by a significant increase in gold prices, from 600 US$/Oz, average 2006, up to 1800 US$/Oz, in the second quarter 2011 ( The high gold price has made possible to consider low grade ore reserves and/or ores having high copper content, usually present in the form of secondary sulphides. The presence of cyanide-soluble copper species in the ore produces a gradual increment in the concentration of copper-cyanide complexes in the solution circuit, which increases the cyanide consumption in the process. This fact is detrimental to the gold recovery process by reducing gold extraction in the carbon adsorption stage, increasing the elusion cycle and contaminating the dore metal in some cases ( The SART process for Au–Cu ores is a new technology which has received the industry's increasing interest. The process has first been developed by Lakefield Research in Canada for the Lobo-Marte project in Chile, which at that time was owned by a joint venture between Teck Corporation and Mantos Blancos ( The key objective of the SART process is to recover copper and cyanide from heap leaching solutions. Previous technologies were developed in order to recover cyanide, such as acidification–volatilization–regeneration (AVR) process, Cyanisorb process and Metallgeseltshaft Natural Resources (MNR) process. The AVR and Cyanisorb processes have been mainly implemented to recover cyanide from tailings in the gold mining, whereas the MNR process has been only applied in pilot scale ( The SART process operates at conditions below pH 5.0 and, at this condition, the cyanide content is present as hydrogen cyanide, the most toxic form of cyanide when volatilized ( The design of SART plants is new and little information can be found from literature and bench marking. Still, several engineering challenges must be undertaken in the design in order to ensure the operators' safety and the metallurgical performance ( In this scenario there is a need to predict and quantify the generation of HCN gas during the SART process operation in order to support the design of scrubbing systems, detect the most dangerous unit operations and to design ventilation systems that minimize the risk to personnel. The SART process has been designed to regenerate cyanide and recover copper from cyanide solutions produced by gold leaching operations ( As shown in Eq. The solids formed in the precipitation reactor are removed from the process by sequential stages of thickening and filtration. The reactor discharge feeds a thickener where the concentration of Cu The Cu Similarly to what is done in the Cu The cyanide anion in water forms hydrocyanic acid according to the following dissociation reaction ( The logarithmic exponent of the dissociation constant pK In the SART process, WAD cyanide complexes can be dissociated by decreasing the pH of the cyanide solution. The percentage of dissolved HCN, at any pH value, can be estimated using the WAD cyanide concentration, which is composed by the HCN and CN Combining Eqs. On the other hand, the dissolved HCN content depends on temperature, since the chemical equilibrium of Eq. As mentioned above the SART process includes a gas extraction and scrubbing system connected to the process equipment where drag air flows over the cyanide solution which they contain. This condition generates a liquid–gas interface, where dissolved HCN is volatilized into the air as HCN gas. At the interface the equal chemical potentials between both phases generates a liquid–gas phase equilibrium which can be determined by Henry's law for HCN ( However, estimation of HCN gas generation by thermodynamics phase equilibrium is valid for static systems, where the chemical potentials in both phases are equal. For dynamic systems, like the SART process, the chemical potentials are not equal in the bulk phases, but only at the liquid–gas interface. Thus, HCN transfer from the bulk of the liquid phase to the gas phase is determined by the kinetics of mass transfer. Mass transfer of HCN from cyanide solution into the air is determined by the difference of chemical potentials between liquid phase and gas phase ( The above description of HCN mass transfer represents only local profiles. However, an overall analysis should be made if continuous systems such as the SART process are being studied. The overall HCN transfer rate is specified by the concentration profiles in the volume of each equipment operating in the process. Thus, to quantify the overall HCN transfer rate in the system, it is necessary to solve Eq. In Eq. Here The pseudo-equilibrium concentration used in this analysis is useful to incorporate the overall mass transfer coefficient in the estimation of the transferred solute flow. The overall mass transfer coefficients are widely used to estimate mass transfer of solutes by the incorporation of the mass transfer resistance concept ( The resistances-in-series mass transfer model is useful for industrial processes where the determination of concentrations at the interface is complex. This model has been applied in different separation or volatilization processes such as gas absorption in packed towers ( The estimation of the local mass transfer coefficients is based on the Chilton–Colburn's correlations ( In the above equations, On the other hand, the mass transfer correlations for the liquid phase are strongly dependent on the equipment geometry (e.g. reaction vessels, agitated tanks and thickeners). The In the SART process, HCN mass transfer occurs also in the thickeners. Here the solution flow velocity must be sufficiently low to ensure settling of the solids and in that condition a natural convection model ( The estimation of the local mass transfer coefficients requires determination of the physical properties of the liquid and gas phases. These physical properties can be estimated by empirical and semi-empirical models dependent on the operational conditions of the system. Thus for the air phase the density can be calculated by the ideal gas law ( Finally HCN diffusion coefficient values for different temperature and pressure conditions in the air phase are extrapolated from experimental data, based on the Chapman-Enskog's theory of gaseous diffusion ( Similarly, the HCN diffusion coefficient in water can be estimated from experimental data dependent on water temperature and viscosity, based on the Stokes–Einstein's equation ( The model of gaseous HCN generation constructed in this study is based on the theoretical background described above and on the design criteria of the SART process. Equations were derived in order to determine the HCN transferred from the cyanide solution into the air and the HCN concentration reached in the air. The model proposed is applied only to the equipment connected to the scrubber system in the SART process (see The HCN volatilization in the SART process depends on the site conditions (temperature and pressure), operational parameters (pH and cyanide concentration in the feed solution) and design criteria of SART process (residence time of reactors, rise rate of thickeners, drag air velocity on the liquid surface in each equipment, agitation power in the reactors and mechanical conditions of the equipment). The Cu The volume ( It has been suggested that a residence time of 10 Thickeners are also key equipment in the SART process, providing clarification of the cyanide solution as a main role. Thickener size is determined by the rise rate ( Moreover, precipitate handling in the process is a key factor to guarantee the correct performance of the thickening and filtering processes. Thus, the accurate selection of recirculation pumps and agitation velocity in the reactors and tanks is relevant ( Finally the drag-air velocity in sealed equipment depends on their liquid-free volume. This velocity must be lower than the respective velocity in ducts in order to minimize the local mass transfer coefficient. It is recommended to control the air flow distribution in each equipment, reaching an air velocity of less than 0.05 The summary of the SART process design criteria and parameters for the model of HCN gas generation is shown in In order to apply the simulation model proposed in this study, specific considerations and assumptions were introduced into the theoretical approach. These are the following: The SART process is an isothermal process, operated under steady-state conditions. Copper recovery is assumed as 100% for purposes of HCN generation estimation. Mass transfer correlations for agitated tank systems in the precipitation and neutralization reactors have been defined for the liquid phase. Also mass transfer correlations for natural convection in thickeners have been defined for the liquid phase. In the gas phase mass transfer correlations have considered flat plate geometry. The model assumes that the solution flow and the air flow are conducted in countercurrent configuration. The physical properties of water were used to define the physical properties of the liquid phase. The physical properties of air were used to define the physical properties of the gas phase. The results of the model are reported on air-dry basis. The model of HCN gas generation in the SART process has been developed by a numerical algorithm that estimates the transferred HCN from cyanide solution into the air for each process equipment. The algorithm estimates HCN transfer by comparing the value obtained from the resistances-in-series mass transfer model (Eqs. ( In Eq. The simulation of HCN gas generation in the SART process has permitted to identify the key parameters in the system. In this context, ambient conditions (temperature and atmospheric pressure) and operational parameters (drag-air flow/feed solution ratio, cyanide concentration in the feed solution and pH in the precipitation stage) have been analyzed. Additionally, percentages of the mass transfer resistances in the liquid and gas phases under standard conditions of the SART process ( A simulation of the SART process was carried out by varying the drag air/feed solution volumetric ratio in order to obtain the HCN transferred ratio, mg/hm According to the above results, the drag-air flow/feed solution volumetric ratio induces a minor impact on HCN gas generation. This behavior is determined by the distribution of the local mass transfer resistances, which were estimated as a quotient between the value of the local mass transfer coefficient and the overall mass transfer coefficient. As shown in The overall HCN gas generation in the SART process is the result of the HCN gas generation within each process equipment in conjunction with their drag-air flow distribution. Hence, the overall value of HCN gas generation is determined by the transferred HCN ratio and the drag-air flow distribution in the thickeners. On the other hand the drag-air flow determines the HCN concentration in the gas phase. The effect of the drag-air flow/feed solution volumetric ratio on the HCN concentration per equipment and in the scrubber inlet is shown in The solution pH in the precipitation reactor is one of the most important parameters in the SART process since copper precipitation takes place when pH is lower than pH 5.0. According to Eq. As shown in Many parameters which determine the HCN transferred ratio in the system such as chemical equilibrium of the cyanide dissociation reaction in the solution, Henry's law constant, diffusion coefficients in both phases and viscosities of the solution and air depend on temperature. It is known that Henry's law constant and the diffusion coefficient of HCN in both phases increase with temperature increase. On the contrary a decrease in the system temperature promotes an increase in the viscosity of both phases and in the equilibrium constant for the cyanide dissociation reaction. In order to evaluate the overall effect of system temperature on the HCN transferred ratio, the effect of temperatures ranging from 5 to 30 As it is calculated from the results shown in On the other hand, the HCN transferred ratio in the neutralization reactor was reduced by 170% when the system temperature increased from 5 to 30 Current gold mining operations are located at different geographic altitude levels, ranging from 0 to 5000 The rise of the ambient pressure from 53.3 to 103.3 The WAD cyanide concentration in gold plants is variable, due to either the metal contents in the ore, the cyanide consumption or the free cyanide target concentration in the PLS (Pregnant Leach Solution). Thus, the WAD cyanide concentration in agitated leaching operations could range from 2000 to 4000 The impact of WAD cyanide concentration on the HCN transferred ratio is presented in The most incidental parameter in the gaseous HCN generation is the liquid mass transfer resistance (see A general methodology has been constructed to predict HCN gas generation in the SART process as a function of operational parameters (drag-air flow, pH in the precipitation reactor, system temperature, system pressure, WAD cyanide concentration and power/volume ratio in the reactors). According to the results obtained from the model simulations, the most relevant parameters in HCN gas generation were the system temperature and pressure, the WAD cyanide concentration in the feed solution and the power/volume ratio in the reactors. However although the drag-air flow presented a minor impact on the HCN transferred ratio, it has been demonstrated that this parameter is of utmost importance regarding the HCN concentration in the air flow, by which the drag-air flow regulates the dilution of the HCN volatilized in the system. The results predicted by the model indicate that HCN gas generation is very low, 1–12 From the model simulation results, it can be concluded that HCN gas generation is controlled by the liquid mass transfer resistance which presented values higher than 90% (of the total resistance) due to the four order of magnitude difference in HCN diffusion coefficients in water and in air (10 The model and its conclusions should be tested against the operational values for HCN contents in the gas streams of SART plants currently operating around the world. However, the compilation of accurate HCN concentration measurements in the drag-air flow for the different equipment involved in the process is restricted to the few operating plants and greatly complicated by the absence of sensors in the SART process equipment. This fact does not limit the results obtained in this work because the accuracy of the model is determined by the liquid mass transfer resistance which under most conditions is the phase controlling HCN transfer. Finally, it is believed that the model developed in this study can be applied as a useful tool to predict risk conditions in the SART process and to guide a correct design of their scrubbing and extraction systems, ensuring safety in the process.  Viscosity, kg/ms Density, kg/m Residence time, s Area, m Molar concentration, mol/m Diffusion coefficient, m Flow rate of solution, m Flow rate of air, m Standard enthalpy, J/mol Henry's law constant, kPa/mol fraction Molar flow per transfer unit area, mol/s Local mass transfer coefficient, m/s Equilibrium constant, dimensionless Overall mass transfer coefficient in Eq. Characteristic length, m Partition coefficient, dimensionless Overall transfer rate, mol/s Logarithmic exponent of dissociation constant, dimensionless Pressure, Pa Universal gas constant, J/(mol Reynolds number, dimensionless Schmidt number, dimensionless Sherwood number, dimensionless Temperature, K Velocity, m/s Volume of tanks, m Agitation power-tank volume ratio, W/m Molar fraction in the liquid phase, dimensionless Molar fraction in the gas phase, dimensionless Distance between the bulk solution and the interface, m/s Referred to the end of the module in Eq. Referred to the end of the module in Eq. Referred to thermodynamic equilibrium Referred to the system condition in Eqs. Referred to the air phase Referred to agitated tanks Referred to the system condition in Eqs. Referred to flat plate Referred to the gas phase Referred to HCN Referred to the diffusion of HCN in air Referred to the diffusion of HCN in water Referred to i-specie Referred to the inlet Referred to the liquid phase Referred to the logarithmic mean driving force Referred to the outlet Referred to rise rate Referred to settling Referred to mass transfer Referred to weak acid dissociable species Referred to the pseudo-equilibrium interface Referred to the interface Referred to the gas phase The authors are grateful to Sergio Bustos for his work and vision in the development of the SART process. In addition, H.E. would like to thank Elizabeth Troncoso for valuable discussions and a critical reading of the manuscript.