Analysing tunnelling process in 2D plane strain conditions is widely used method to calculate tunnelling induced settlement profiles as well as soil structure interactions. Possibility of damage to the surface and/or underground structures can be estimated using powerful finite difference method (FDM) and finite element method (FEM) of analysis. However, setting up a realistic model that would be able to achieve this goal is rather difficult. In this paper, 2D FDM analysis has been conducted to assess tunnelling induced settlement, stress redistribution phenomena along with movements around shallow soft ground tunnels excavated in accordance with the New Austrian Tunnelling Method. Measurements recorded during construction of the Heathrow Express Trial Tunnel in London Clay were compared with the predicted values to validate numerical estimations. As a soil model, the Mohr–Coulomb plasticity model has been used in the FDM analysis. Results obtained from 2D FEM are also included in this paper for comparison purposes to evaluate performance of both numerical analysis procedures. Predictions from both FDM and FEM analyses proved to be procedures used within this work can be a tool in practical engineering applications to simulate tunnelling operations.Overpopulation leading to an increase in the number of commuters in urban areas has caused acceleration in constructing underground Metro tunnels to overcome transportation problems. Therefore, all the parameters having influences on the magnitude and the profiles of the surface settlement have to be investigated thoroughly as the major concern in constructing such tunnels in urban areas is to reduce and/or to control settlement. Using numerical analysis can often predict the consequences without using any full scale trial tunnels. There are empirical models developed to estimate surface settlements in both transverse and longitudinal directions to the tunnel axis ( In the preliminary tunnel design stage, not only employing correct soil stiffness properties but also self-weight of structures on the surface to numerical models can predict the probability of damage to surface structures. Therefore, there have been large numbers of numerical analyses in 2D and 3D conducted to assess tunnelling induced damage ( Surface and subsurface transverse settlement troughs, along with horizontal stress distributions measured during the Heathrow Trial Tunnel construction in 1992 have been compared with the predicted results ( Materials encountered at the site consist of Thames gravel, made ground and London Clay. The London Clay is clearly dominant at the site and is found below a depth of 4.2 According to the data derived from different sites in London, Each trial section progressed for at least 30 The shotcrete has been represented by elastic beam elements in the analysis. The elasticity modulus of the beam elements was divided by (1 Cable elements are 1D axial structural elements anchored at a specific point in the grid or grouted so that the cable element develops forces along its length as the grid deforms. Cable elements are used to model rock bolts, cable bolts. Cable element formulation in FLAC considers deformations along entire length of bolts rather than a specific point and thus it is useful modelling such reinforcement systems as rock bolts where grout material may fail in shear in some length of the reinforcement ( As the input parameters for cable elements, grout stiffness ( Consequently, the grout shear stiffness, Sub-surface measuring equipment consists of extensometers, inclinometers and push-in pressure cells and piezometers. Magnetic probe extensometers were used to measure vertical displacement. Horizontal soil stress was measured using spade cells and push-in soil stress cells that were inserted near to the tunnel crown and at axis level. To measure the horizontal total stresses, these cells were incorporated with the pneumatic piezometers to record pore water pressures. Pneumatic piezometers were installed in sand cells within the spade cell boreholes with bentonite plugs above and below. Three extensometers were placed over the axis perpendicular to the Tunnel Type-2 and one on the tunnel centreline. The magnetic rings located at various depths, which were ranged from 3 to 27 As in-tunnel instrumentation, convergence-measuring pins were used to measure horizontal and vertical movements of the shotcrete with time. These were installed on the tunnel periphery when the shotcrete was installed. Mohr–Coulomb plasticity model has been adopted throughout the FLAC analysis to represent stress–strain behaviour of not only London Clay but also Thames gravel and made ground. Mohr–Coulomb criterion has a linear failure surface corresponding to shear failure as described in the following equations: For modelling of the tunnelling process in 2D, an approach has to be adopted to take into account the deformation occurring prior to shotcrete installation and the 3D tunnelling problem. There are different approaches to consider aforementioned deformations such as the convergence confinement method ( The model grid used in the analysis is shown in Establishing the equilibrium condition for the model body by setting up a gravitational stress field and introducing 80 Having reached equilibrium conditions, elements in the left hand heading were removed, followed by activation of the beam elements in this section with a lower elasticity modulus of 0.40 Removing elements in the left hand bench and invert and activating the beam elements for this section with an elasticity modulus of 0.40 The same procedures in stage 2, and stage 3 have been applied to the right hand heading, bench and invert excavations. Removing the inner wall was the final step of the FDM analysis. Results of the analyses have been shown in three main parts as surface settlement profiles, sub-surface settlement profiles and stress redistribution around tunnel. Surface settlement analysis has been carried out in accordance with the field measurements corresponding to the completion of the left sidewall excavation and the enlargement of the tunnel as illustrated in  Maximum surface settlement predicted by the SEM model for sidewall excavation and enlargement are 15.3 and 27.6  The horizontal movements and subsurface settlement predictions from the FLAC are compared with the corresponding inclinometers measurements and magnetic ring measurements, respectively. Thus, these comparisons provide a verification of the predictions obtained from the finite difference analysis.  The locations of the spade cells are illustrated in General trend of stress changes for both FLAC predictions and the field measurements can be explained as follows: When the first heading is excavated, the horizontal stresses are decreasing sharply from the geostatic stress condition to a lower stress level. Then, the application of the shotcrete stabilises the stress distribution around the tunnel until a new section was excavated. This phenomenon continues until the entire tunnel construction is completed and the support ring is closed. Calculated horizontal stresses are in close agreement with the spade cells measurements, SB1, SB2, and ST1, while predictions for the spade cell SB3 is greater than the measured stress. Similar predictions were found for SB3 with the finite element analysis ( In this section, overall comparison of the finite element and finite difference analysis, is made so that the differences between these two powerful modelling tools can be examined. In addition, this comparison will provide an insight into the effects of using different plasticity models for London Clay. For the Finite element analysis, ABAQUS program has been utilized detailed analysis procedure is given elsewhere ( As can be seen from Horizontal displacements towards tunnel and subsurface settlements profiles are illustrated in Subsurface settlement calculated from both models is well matched to the field measurements. Apparently, the contradictions between surface settlement and horizontal movements from both analyses show that anisotropy in the London clay should be considered in the numerical analysis. However, plasticity models especially the Modified Cam-clay model did not take into account anisotropy in ABAQUS program as it was originally developed for isotropic conditions. Stress redistribution around the tunnel predicted by FDM and FEM are in agreement with the field measurements. However, predictions obtained from the finite element analysis are much closer to the field measurement than the finite difference analysis predictions. Both analyses have failed to predict the horizontal stresses for the SB3 spade cell measurement as can be seen from HME approach which is used in both FDM and FEM analysis to account for volume loss during tunnelling operations proved to be a practical tool for numerical modeller. The 0.40 The results of present analyses showed that both methods of analyses using the sequential excavation model could be used for the preliminary design of NATM tunnelling for the conditions used in this research. It was found that the variation of elasticity modulus of London clay with depth is very important for accurate numerical modelling. Thus, FDM analysis predicted much closer surface settlement for the sidewall excavation than the finite element predictions. Contradictions between subsurface settlement and horizontal displacements suggest that considering anisotropic behaviour of London clay could improve predictions in both FEM and FDM analyses. Thus, this problem should be subjected to further analysis to examine their effects on NATM tunnelling. FDM analysis has also shown the importance of cable elements adopted in the numerical analysis. Without considering cable elements in the numerical analysis led to greater settlements. Grateful acknowledgement is given to Inonu University, Turkey for providing financial support during the research undertaken in the Department of Mining and Mineral Engineering at the University of Leeds, UK.