Tectonic pseudotachylytes might be used to constrain earthquake source parameters, such as dynamic shear stress resistance, average dynamic friction and slip-weakening distance. Estimation of dynamic shear stress resistance and dynamic friction from field studies is based on the assumption that the volume of melt produced during coseismic slip is proportional to the frictional work converted to heat on the fault surface. Conditions conducive to a realistic estimate of dynamic shear resistance are: (i) the presence of large outcrop exposures that allow for estimation of the volume of pseudotachylyte; (ii) the presence of structural markers offset by faults in order to relate the displacement accommodated by the fault with the volume of melt produced; (iii) data that provide an estimate of the initial melt temperature; and (iv) determination of host-rock temperature and pressure conditions that may have existed during seismic faulting. An independent indication that steady-state friction in the presence of melts might be achieved during coseismic slip arises from the dependence of the fractal dimension of the fault profile (intersection of the fault surface with the outcrop surface) with displacement. This relation could also indicate the slip-weakening distance (Hirose, T., Shimamoto, T., 2003. Fractal dimension of molten surfaces as a possible parameter to infer the slip-weakening distance of faults from natural pseudotachylytes. Journal of Structural Geology 25, 1569–1574).
                  The above conditions are all satisfied in the case of the Gole Larghe Fault Zone, which consists of hundreds subparallel strike-slip faults that cut tonalites of the Adamello batholith (Italy). The thickness of pseudotachylyte-bearing faults increases with displacement. From displacement/thickness ratios and energy balance calculations, we determined the dynamic shear resistance for several pseudotachylyte-bearing faults. In the same faults, the fractal dimension of the fault profile increases from 1.0 to 1.16 with displacement. This was also observed in experiments where steady-state friction in the presence of melt was achieved (Hirose, T., Shimamoto, T., 2003. Fractal dimension of molten surfaces as a possible parameter to infer the slip-weakening distance of faults from natural pseudotachylytes. Journal of Structural Geology 25, 1569–1574). However, we will show that the estimate of the dynamic shear stress resistance, average dynamic friction and slip-weakening distance in the studied faults is limited by the uncertainties to attribute the measured displacement to a single seismic rupture. Since many pseudotachylytes in the upper seismogenic crust overprint preexisting cataclasites, it is suggested that future field and experimental work should be addressed to determine microstructural indicators (i.e. evolution of cataclastic fabric with displacement) within cataclasites, which might constrain the contribution of the cataclastic, pre-pseudotachylyte displacement to the total displacement accommodated by the fault.In earthquake mechanics, the estimate of the dynamic shear stress Experimental simulation of earthquake conditions is difficult given the high slip rates (i.e. 1–3 m s Pseudotachylytes consist of lithic clasts suspended in a glassy-cryptocrystalline matrix (  In this study, we attempt to use pseudotachylytes present along an exhumed section of a fossil seismogenic fault zone to estimate earthquake source parameters ( According to The heat generated during sliding results in fault rock heating and, eventually, in melting (i.e. The energy input The parameters The average coefficient of friction An estimate of the The mesoscale structure of the GLF ( The GLF is formed by closely spaced (dm-m) subparallel fault horizons, ranging from few millimeters to 1 m in thickness, consisting of an association of cataclasites and pseudotachylytes ( The cataclasites and pseudotachylytes have a similar chemical composition which is richer in K Cataclasites are indurated rocks and induration/alteration occurred before the production of pseudotachylytes by fluid–rock interaction along the faults leading to diffuse precipitation of K-feldspar and epidote and, to a minor extent, of chlorite. The main fluid infiltration predates production of pseudotachylytes as most are perfectly unaltered (except for late discrete epidote veins locally overprinting pseudotachylytes). The pseudotachylytes and cataclasites display a similar orientation of slickenlines and the geometry of pseudotachylyte injection veins indicates the same sense of shear as that inferred for cataclasites. This supports the fact that they developed under the same stress field. The deformation along the GLF occurred during the cooling history of the pluton before any relevant uplift of the intrusive body. This is well constrained by the data set of geochronological ages ( In Eq. The thickness Fault profiles of the pseudotachylyte veins in The modal composition of the Avio tonalite and of cataclasite is reported in Using a melt density Solving the stress tensor (i.e. the determination of the orientation and magnitude of the principal stresses The stress field is Andersonian. Under this condition, the vertical stress The pore pressure is hydrostatic or lower than hydrostatic. This is based on the observation that there is no field evidence of high pore-fluid pressure or fluid hydrofracturing in the fault zone, such as widespread fractures in the host rock filled by minerals deposited from water-rich fluids. We conclude that the pore-fluid factor is Faults were cemented by K-feldspar and epidote before seismic rupture. Therefore, value of The principal stress axis Given these constraints and simplifications, we will follow For In experimentally generated friction-induced melts, the fractal dimension of melt-decorated surfaces increases from 1.0 to 1.1 when, with increasing slip, a continuous film of friction melt covers the sliding surface and a steady-state value for the friction coefficient of 0.6 is achieved ( There is a clear bias in the selection of the pseudotachylyte vein systems used in measurements as pseudotachylytes are not continuous nor have a constant thickness along a single fault. The selected examples represent the largest continuous patches of pseudotachylytes along the different faults, but it must be emphasized that pseudotachylyte-free fault segments can be found along strike of both small-displacement and major large-displacement faults represented in The morphological description of pseudotachylyte profiles indicates that pseudotachylyte veins associated with larger faults are more complex than in the case of small-displacement faults ( Along the GLF, faults consist of precursor cataclasite overprinted by pseudotachylytes, which end the fault activity. In the calculation of The estimate of the actual coseismic slip component of total displacement is a general problem in the study of pseudotachylyte-bearing faults, as the presence of a cataclastic precursor to pseudotachylyte generation has been found in many pseudotachylyte occurrences ( A more difficult task is finding criteria to recognize creep-produced cataclasites from coseismic cataclastic precursors to pseudotachylytes ( In the GLF, the fractal dimension of the south-facing pseudotachylyte-bearing fault profile increases with the total displacement accommodated by the fault until a “steady-state” value of the fractal dimension is achieved ( The relationship between fractal dimension of the pseudotachylyte-bearing fault profiles with the displacement found in the GLF faults ( A major challenge (and incentive) in the study of exhumed seismic faults is the use of pseudotachylytes as gauges for estimating the dynamic shear stress resistance ( The GLF is a sort of natural laboratory of an upper crustal seismogenic source, given the: (i) homogeneous composition of the protolith (tonalites), (ii) exposure on vast glacier-polished outcrops that are ideal for structural analysis, (iii) presence of numerous aplite dikes and xenoliths offset by faults which allow the fault displacement to be determined, and (iv) well-constrained ambient conditions of faulting (9–11 km in depth and 250—300 °C). The seismic character of faults along the GLF is recorded by the production of pseudotachylytes, which follow a precursor cataclastic history. The initial temperature of the friction-induced melt was determined in a previous study (1450 °C, Many pseudotachylyte-bearing faults include a precursor cataclastic history preceding the production of friction-induced melts ( Pseudotachylytes are not continuously present along faults. They are likely produced heterogeneously along the fault during coseismic slip and then redistributed by flow to fill dilational domains within the fault surfaces and the neighboring damaged host rock. Therefore, there is a basic problem in defining a characteristic pseudotachylyte volume for unit length of the fault (and therefore a characteristic We thank David Goldsby, Takehiro Hirose, Jim Rice, Terry Tullis, Sergio Vinciguerra and Joe Walsh for comments and discussions. Giuseppe Cello and Matteo Massironi are thanked for reviewing an early version of the draft. Joe Allen, Darrel Cowan and Mark Swanson are thanked for their reviews and kind suggestions and improvements. Of course we remain responsible for the views expressed in this paper. This work has been funded by a MURST Italian Grant ex 60% year 2003. The Geological Service of the Provincia Autonoma di Trento provided invaluable helicopter facilities and is greatly acknowledge.