Three segments of a core sample collected from the Guxu coalfield (Sichuan Province, China) were evaluated to determine the rare earth element (REE) leachability and mineralogy. Elemental analysis of the three samples showed that the roof and floor strata contained as high as 2087 ppm of total REEs, a value much higher than other coal-based materials reported in the literature. For the floor samples, 47% to 65% of the light REEs (LREEs) were leached within 5 min of contact time using 1 M mineral acid, and prolonged contact, up to 120 min, increased the LREE recovery to as high as 75%. For the roof sample, only 25% of the LREEs were leached at extended contact times. Unlike the LREEs, heavy REE (HREE) recovery from both the roof and floor materials was less than 25%. The relatively high REE content of the feed materials facilitated detailed SEM-EDX and TEM-EDX analyses of the samples. These studies confirmed the presence of several rare earth carbonate minerals, including bastnaesite and parasite, as well as rare earth phosphate minerals such as florencite and apatite. Given the prevalence and rare earth content of the particles analyzed via SEM-EDX, the data suggests that the LREEs present in the floor and roof samples were primarily associated with carbonates and phosphates, respectively. Further SEM-EDX analysis of the leaching residues showed that florencite was the only LREE-bearing species remaining after prolonged acid leaching, indicating that florencite is less soluble relative to the other rare earth minerals. The leaching results corroborate the SEM-EDX and TEM-EDX findings, while providing critical fundamental information on the relationship between REE content, REE mineralogy, and REE leachability in coal refuse materials.Rare earth elements (REEs), which include the lanthanide series and yttrium, are essential raw materials for numerous modern technologies. In recent years, the criticality of REEs has been codified by many international agencies and national governments. For example, in 2010, the Raw Material Supply Group of the European Commission (RMSG) included rare earth elements (REEs) as critical raw materials for the European Union To address the need for alternative REE supply chains, the U.S. Department of Energy initiated research and development efforts in 2014 to evaluate the feasibility of extracting REEs from coal-related materials including coal, coal refuse, coal combustion ash, and acid mine drainage Prior testing has shown that hydrometallurgical methods have been more effective than physical separations in producing high grade REE products from coal refuse at reasonable recoveries While these prior results show what can be achieved in ideal scenarios, the actual leaching characteristics of REEs vary significantly even within the same coal seam. REEs in coal middlings showed a higher leachability relative to the coarse and fine refuse based on the studies performed on several coal seams In many of these prior studies, the leaching tests were not accompanied with direct mineralogical characterization of the REE-bearing species. Most samples used in the leaching tests have a low REE content, often on the order of 300 to 600 ppm, and complimentary geologic studies have shown that the REE mineralization is extremely fine, often less than 5 µm Geological studies have reported that REE content in the No. 25 Coal of the Guxu coalfield located in Sichuan Province, China, is much higher than the average content (68 ppm) of the World coals To address this knowledge gap, standard acid leaching tests were performed on the three segments (SP25-R1, SP25-F1, and SP25-F10) of a core sample collected from the Guxu coalfield. The leaching kinetics of REEs, phosphorous, and select major elements including aluminum, iron, and calcium were measured to assess their leachabilities and provide information on the specific leaching mechanisms. Mineralogy characterizations using XRD and SEM-EDX were also performed to corroborate the leaching test results. The findings of this study will provide critical scientific information on the fundamental relationships between REE mineralogy, REE content, and REE leachability in coal refuse materials. This information, in turn, can be used to guide and direct future prospecting studies seeking to utilize coal refuse as a feedstock for REE products. In this study, three segments (SP25-R2, SP25-F1, and SP25-F10) of a core sample collected from the Guxu coalfield were used as raw materials for the REE extraction tests and the REE mineralogical characterizations. SP25-R2 was recovered from the roof strata of the coal seam, while the other two samples were taken from the floor strata. The total thickness of the three segments sums to 30 cm, only accounting for 8.6% of the overall core thickness and 12% of the non-coal bench thickness. However, data from full seam indicates that all the segments of the non-coal benches are enriched in REEs. The average rare earth content of the non-coal benches was determined to be 986 ppm, which is much higher than the average of world coals (68 ppm). Detailed information regarding the core sample collection and preparation has been reported in a prior study by Dai et al. Acid leaching tests were performed on the three samples to evaluate the leachabilities of the REEs and provide insights regarding the viability of the REE recovery. All the tests were performed under uniform conditions, namely 1 M acid concentration, 75 °C leaching temperature, 100/1 (v/w) liquid/solid ratio, and 500 rpm mixing speed. A prior study performed on the materials of other coal seams showed that different mineral acids of the same concentration provided different leaching performance Leaching recovery ( X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization was performed using a Bruker-AXS D8 DISCOVER diffractometer, which was configured in a parallel beam geometry with Cu-Kα radiation. XRD patterns were recorded over a 2θ range of 5° to 70° with a step size of 0.02°. XRD patterns were analyzed using DIFFRAC, a commercial software developed by Bruker Corporation. A scanning electron microscopy (FEI Quanta 600 FEG) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDX) was used to study the mineralogy of REEs present in both the raw samples and the leaching solid residues. During the SEM-EDX characterization process, particles containing heavy elements (high atomic number) were first found using backscattered electrons (BSE), and then elemental composition of the particles was analyzed using EDX. Furthermore, a transmission electron microscopy (TEM, FEI Talos F200X) equipped with an EDX was used to obtain more information relevant to the rare earth mineralogy. REE-bearing particles were first found from a SEM-EDX specimen under SEM, and then focused ion beam (FIB) was used to cut off the particles and mill them into thin slices with a thickness of several nanometers, which were used for the TEM-EDX characterizations. TEM images of different magnifications, EDX spectrum coming with elemental compositions, and fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns were collected from the characterization. A Java-based software, ImageJ, was used to measure interplanar spacing from the FFT patterns. Crystal structure information recorded in the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database were used as a reference for determining the REE mineralogy based on the TEM-EDX data. Besides crystalline minerals, rare earth elements present in coal-related materials may be associated with well-crystalized (e.g., clays) and/or poorly-crystallized (e.g., basaluminite) phases by ion-adsorption Digestion of the solid samples was performed following a protocol modified from ASTM D6357-11 standard Total REE contents in the three core samples (SP25-R2, SP25-F1, and SP25-F10) were 770 ppm, 2087 ppm, and 1495 ppm, respectively, on a dry whole sample basis. These values are much higher than the average contents in the World coals and ashes (68 ppm and 403 ppm, respectively; Seredin and Dai X-ray diffraction tests were performed to identify the major mineral phases present in the three samples. As shown in Leaching recoveries of REEs as a function of leaching duration are shown in For all the three samples, the leaching recoveries varied slightly between the different acids, indicating that the impacts of acid types were minimal. Yang The leaching kinetics of light REEs (LREEs, including Sc, La, Ce, Pr, Nd, and Sm) and heavy REE (HREEs, including Y, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, and Lu) are shown in Leaching recoveries of individual REEs using 1 M sulfuric acid after 120 min of reaction are shown in Non-REE elemental components released from the dominant minerals may interfere with the leaching of REEs; however, they may also provide information on the mineral phases controlling REE release. To investigate these trends, the leaching kinetics of major elements, including aluminum, iron, and calcium, were also analyzed. In all cases, the leaching recovery of aluminum was less than 5%, and no noticeable variations were observed between the different acids. Therefore, the aluminum leaching data are not presented. Alternatively, iron and calcium did show unique leaching trends. Several prior studies have shown that coal refuse contains a significant prevalence of phosphorous-bearing REE minerals. If these minerals constitute the primary REE mineralization, the leaching characteristics of REEs should roughly correspond to that of phosphorous. As shown in With respect to the two floor samples, SP25-F1 and SP25-F10, approximately 22% and 45% of phosphorous was extracted during the leaching test. Both of these values are significantly lower than that of the roof sample, SP25-R2. As stated above, the phosphorous contents in SP25-F1 and SP25-F10 were also much lower than SP25-R2. However, contrary to phosphorous, both the contents and recoveries of LREEs from SP25-F1 and SP25-F10 were higher than SP25-R2. Therefore, the absolute amount of phosphorous that was extracted from SP25-F1 and SP25-F10 was negligible compared to the LREEs. This result indicates that in the easy-to-leach LREEs present in SP25-F1 and SP25-F10 were less likely associated with phosphates. SEM-EDX analysis was performed to study the mineralogy and physical associations of the REEs present in SP25-F1 and SP25-R2. Particles consisting of heavy elements were first found using a backscattered electron detector, and then EDX analyses were conducted to quantify the REE contents. Twenty-seven particles enriched in LREEs were found from SP25-F1 after a total scanning period of three hours. The elemental compositions of the particles reported by weight percentage and atomic percentage are shown in As shown in For the enriched-phosphate REE-bearing particles except particle P21 and P27, the aluminum content is much higher than the silicon content (see P19–P27 in Given the different leaching characteristics between SP25-R2 and SP25-F1 (see As reported in TEM-EDX analysis was conducted to provide stronger evidence for the prevalent REE mineralogy in the Guxu core samples. As shown in As reported in the sample characterization section, clay minerals including kaolinite and muscovite have been found in the Guxu core samples. Due to the permanent negative charge on the basal planes and the –OH groups at the surface/edge, clays may contain REEs by electrostatic adsorption (physisorption) and/or complexation reactions (chemisorption) The acid leaching test results showed that nearly half of the REEs present in SP25-F1 and SP25-F10 were extracted within the first 5 min of the overall leaching processes, whereas only 25% of REE were leached from SP25-R2. In addition, the leaching recoveries of REEs from SP25-F1 and SP25-F10 were gradually increased to 60% and 75%, respectively, by prolonging the reaction time from 5 min to 120 min. Conversely, no gains in recovery from SP25-R2 were achieved even after long leaching times. Therefore, REEs present in SP25-F1 and SP25-F10 more likely occur in easy-to-leach forms. SEM-EDX analysis indicated that the REEs contained in SP25-F1 primarily existed in non-phosphate forms including bastnaesite, parasite, and rare earth carbonate minerals. Bastnaesite is a semi-soluble minerals and medium acidity is required to dissolve bastnaesite In that prior study, around 90% of the rare earth carbonate (REE For SP25-R2, the 25% recovery that was achieved in the first 5 min of the leaching processes can be explained by the dissolution of the rare earth carbonate components associated with the bastnaesite and parasite minerals. In addition, the SEM-EDX study (see SEM-EDX analyses were also performed on the solid residue obtained by leaching SP25-R2 for a total period of 120 min. Six REE-bearing particles were found from the sample, and all of them were florencite ( As reported in the introduction section, several studies have been performed to evaluate the feasibility of recovering REEs from coal and coal refuse Acid leaching and mineralogy characterization were performed on three segments (SP25-R2, SP25-F1, and SP25-F10) of a core sample collected from the Guxu coalfield. Elemental analysis showed that the samples contained as high as 2087 ppm of REEs on a dry whole sample basis, which is over an order of magnitude higher than the average content of the World coals. Acid leaching tests showed that around 50% and 65% of the LREEs present in SP25-F1 and SP25-F10 were leached within the first 5 min of the leaching processes, and by extending the reaction duration to 120 min, the recoveries were increased to nearly 60% and 75%, respectively. However, for the LREEs present in SP25-R2, only 25% were leached at the beginning and prolonging the reaction duration did not improve the leaching recovery. The leaching results indicated that some easy-to-leach rare earth minerals existed in all the three minerals, whereas the fractions of the total REEs occurring as easy-to-leach forms were different among the samples. A comparison of the leaching recoveries achieved within the first 5 min suggested that the LREEs present in SP25-F1 and SP25-F10 mainly occurred as soluble forms, whereas most of the LREE-bearing minerals existing in SP25-R2 were difficult to be leached. Unlike the LREEs, HREE recovery from the three samples was less than 25%, indicating that the HREEs primarily associated with difficult-to-leach phases. SEM-EDX and TEM-EDX analyses were performed on SP25-F1 and SP25-R2 and several particles enriched in LREEs were also found. Based on the phosphorous content, the rare earth species were classified as non-phosphate and enriched-phosphate rare earth minerals. In sample SP25-F1, non-phosphate REE-bearing minerals including rare earth carbonate minerals, bastnaesite, and parasite were found, while the enriched-phosphate REE-bearing minerals were mainly florencite. In addition, the number of non-phosphates REE-bearing particles found in SP25-F1 was more than the enriched-phosphate REE-bearing particles, indicating that the LREEs present in SP25-F1 primarily occurred as non-phosphate forms. Similar rare earth minerals existed in SP25-R2, whereas more enriched-phosphate REE-bearing particles (mainly florencite) were found. Therefore, contrary to SP25-F1, the REEs present in SP25-R2 mainly occurred as phosphate species. In addition, several apatite particles containing trace amounts of LREEs were also found in SP25-R2. Particles enriched in HREEs were not found in this study, which is likely due to the lower contents relative to LREEs. SEM-EDX analysis of the solid residue obtained after leaching showed that the non-phosphate minerals were dissolved and the only rare earth mineral remaining in the residue is florencite. Therefore, the rare earth carbonate minerals, rare earth carbonate components of the bastnaesite and parasite, and the fluorapatite present in SP25-F1 were dissolved at the beginning of the leaching process. As the leaching reaction continued, the rare earth fluoride components of the bastnaesite and parasite were gradually dissolved. However, the REEs associated with florencite were not leached under the experimental conditions of 1 M acid solution, 75 °C leaching temperature, and 120 min reaction duration. For SP25-R2, the majority of the REEs were non-leachable due to the fact that florencite was the dominant REE-bearing minerals present in the sample. A good correlation between the leaching characteristics and the rare earth mineralogy among the three segments of the Guxu coalfield was achieved from this study. This information provides guidance on the specific mineral species that should be targeted or avoided in future prospecting studies seeking to develop a viable coal-based REE resource.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The samples were provided by Dr. Shifeng Dai from the China University of Mining Science and Technology. The SEM-EDX analysis was performed in the Nanoscale Characterization and Fabrication Laboratory of Virginia Tech with the technical assistance provided by Stephen McCartney. The TEM-EDX analysis were performed in the Electron Microscopy Center of the University of Kentucky with the technical assistance provided by Dr. Nicolas Briot and Dr. Dali Qian. Access to characterization instruments and staff assistance was provided by the Electron Microscopy Center at the University of Kentucky, supported in part by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: