Purpose
                  Although experimental evidence suggests that the rate of shock wave delivery can affect the outcome of shock wave lithotripsy, clinical studies produce conflicting results. We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to define the effect of shock wave rate on the outcome of shock wave lithotripsy.
               
                  Materials and Methods
                  A search of MEDLINE and EMBASE was performed and all randomized controlled trials comparing SWL treatment at 60 shocks per minute to 120 shocks per minute were included in the analysis. Data from 4 trials (589 patients) were pooled. The primary outcome measure was treatment outcome (success, failure), as defined by the authors of the source studies. The difference in the proportion of patients with a successful treatment outcome was compared between the 60 and 120 shocks per minute groups as a risk difference, and risk differences were pooled across the 4 trials with a fixed effects model.
               
                  Results
                  Patients treated at a rate of 60 shocks per minute had a significantly greater likelihood of a successful treatment (risk difference 10.2, 95% CI 3.7–16.8, p = 0.002).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Our meta-analysis suggests that patients treated at a rate of 60 shocks per minute have a significantly greater likelihood of a successful treatment outcome than patients treated at a rate of 120 shocks per minute.The introduction of shock wave lithotripsy radically changed the treatment paradigm for upper urinary tract calculi. Stones that once required an open surgical procedure to effect cure could be treated by SWL in a completely noninvasive manner. Indeed, it is now estimated that approximately 70% of all symptomatic upper urinary tract calculi are treated with SWL. To improve the success rate of SWL, efforts have been devoted to defining what parameters the urologist can control, such as patient selection and treatment protocols, and what manipulations might improve the efficacy of the technology. Systematic searches of the MEDLINE and EMBASE databases (January 1966 to April 2007) were conducted using the terms lithotripsy and rate. The searches were limited to English language literature, and were performed by 2 investigators (MJS and BRM) independently of one another. Disagreements among the investigators were resolved by discussion. Criteria for inclusion were established a priori. Satisfying the criteria necessitated that the study objective was to investigate the effect of the rate of shock wave delivery, patients were randomized to a rate of 60 shocks per minute (1 Hertz) or 120 shocks per minute (2 Hertz) and the study recorded the treatment outcome. It was not necessary for the true stone-free rate to be recorded in the source study, and treatment success (yes vs no) as defined by each source study author was used as the primary outcome variable. Two reviewers (MJS and BRM) independently extracted data from each selected study with a standardized form. As in the study search, disagreements among the investigators were resolved by discussion. The specific definition of a successful outcome was recorded from each of the source studies, as it was expected that the definition of such an outcome measure would vary among studies. For each study the risk difference was defined as the absolute difference in treatment success rates between the 60 and 120 shocks per minute groups. The risk differences were pooled using a Mantel-Haenszel approach. Four studies were ultimately identified for inclusion in the review (see Each study used a different lithotriptor, namely the Stone Litho3pter (PCK, Turkey), Only 2 studies reported a true stone-free rate, with no fragments visible on plain abdominal x-ray. Initial statistical review was performed with a fixed effects model, which demonstrated that patients who were treated at a rate of 60 shocks per minute experienced a 10.2% (95% CI. 3.7, 16.8) increase in the likelihood for a successful treatment outcome. This finding was statistically significant, p = 0.002 ( The initial work addressing the effect of shock wave rate on stone fragmentation was performed by Vallancien et al, who used an in vitro piezoelectric model. The exact mechanism by which a slower shock wave rate may enhance stone comminution is not well understood. Cavitation, the formation and subsequent dynamic behavior of bubbles, may be induced by a lithotriptor generated pressure field. Interestingly the initial clinical evaluation of a slow vs fast shock wave treatment rate was in the form of randomized controlled trials, which are included in the present meta-analysis. There are also several nonrandomized clinical series that have investigated the effect of slow vs fast treatment rate on SWL outcome. Kato et al treated 2 cohorts of patients, 1 at a rate of 60 shocks per minute and the other at a rate of 120 shocks per minute, in a nonrandomized fashion. Several limitations of the source studies and, by extension, the present meta-analysis merit delineation. The number of studies is small, which limits the ability to evaluate the influence of factors that differ within patient subgroups or across studies. For example, the 4 source studies each used a different lithotriptor, and treatment outcomes may vary from lithotriptor to lithotriptor. Lithotripsy protocols, such as the various methods of anesthesia, also differed across the 4 studies. Stone size could not be compared across all 4 studies, due to the 2 methods of stone size measurement used. However, it is of interest that among all studies larger stones appeared to be affected by shock wave rate to a greater extent than smaller stones. Followup also was not constant for all 4 studies. Additionally, the definition of a successful treatment outcome varied among the studies, and the radiographic method of evaluation was not consistent. Nonetheless, analysis of these pooled studies demonstrates no significant heterogeneity, suggesting that a major consistent source of bias is unlikely. Furthermore, a meta-analysis of level I evidence (randomized controlled trial) is likely to minimize bias, as the evidence is evaluated in aggregate, as well as reduce the likelihood of random error, as the sample size is greater than that of any of the constituent trials. SWL performed with a treatment rate of 60 shocks per minute is associated with a significantly higher rate of treatment success than SWL performed at a rate of 120 shocks per minute. Although different lithotriptors and treatment protocols were used in the randomized trials of the present meta-analysis, the effect of treatment rate on outcome is nonetheless significant. Further study should now be devoted to defining the effect of a slower treatment rate on the tissue injury caused by SWL in humans, as well as to determining other parameters that may be altered to improve treatment outcome.