There is a growing need to develop tools that allow for better reductions of difficult to treat fractures in minimally disruptive ways. One such technique has been developed using the inflatable bone tamp and a fast setting calcium phosphate. KYPHON® XPANDER Inflatable Bone Tamp and the KYPHON® Osteo Introducer® System were used to reduce the articular fractures and a fast-setting calcium phosphate was introduced into those voids and metal hardware was applied as deemed necessary. Subjects were skeletally mature patients treated for articular fractures of the calcaneus, tibial plateau, tibial pilon, or distal radius. Post-operative day zero and week 12 radiographs were objectively and subjectively evaluated by three independent orthopaedic surgeons. Their objective scores were then translated into subjective categories based on the Heiney–Redfern scaled scoring (H-R score) system established herein. Overall, the thorough radiographic analysis by independent reviewers indicates that the technique is capable of obtaining and maintaining articular reductions in a good or adequate manner at 12-weeks post-operatively. Introduced is a potential novel evaluation scale scoring system for these articular fractures that evaluates the important anatomic considerations reproducibly in fracture reductions. There are many potential benefits that remain speculative to this type of tool within a procedure, and therefore this tool and technique warrants further research.Calcaneus, tibial plateau, tibial pilon, and distal radius fractures continue to increase in numbers in modern society with a growing economic cost related both to the expense of treatment as well as ongoing disability. In order to reduce fracture non-unions and wound complications, new minimally invasive techniques for fracture management continue to be developed. It has been shown that minimal internal fixation with calcium phosphate cement can result in good outcomes in tibial plateau fractures. The placement of fast-setting calcium phosphate cements into fresh orthopaedic fracture sites has been proven beneficial in filling bone voids, such as those that remain after reduction of impacted articular fractures. Attempts have been made to modify traditional instruments in order to obtain articular reductions in a minimally invasive fashion. The purpose of this study is to determine whether the novel technique, balloon reduction and minimally invasive fixation (BRAMIF), developed by the author, using a Kyphon inflatable bone tamp, results in radiographically satisfactory outcomes in the reduction of calcaneus, tibial pilon, tibial plateau and distal radius fractures. Using a novel scoring system described herein for quantifying radiographic outcomes of fracture treatments, including the rate of successfully and satisfactorily reduced fractures, the quality of the reduction and its maintenance at the 12 week follow-up appointment is evaluated. This retrospective review of patient charts and radiographs was approved by the ProMedica Health System Institutional Review Board prior to the collection of data. All skeletally mature patients, between the ages of 18 and 95 years of age, who were treated for the reduction of calcaneus, tibial plateau, tibial pilon, or distal radius fractures from August 2008 through August 2010 using the BRAMIF technique ( The study reviewed the quality of fracture reduction achieved by first using the KYPHON The author did not deviate from his standard treatment of non-weight bearing for approximately 10 weeks (i.e. begin axial loading on the joint) prior to starting partial weight bearing increasing to full by 16 weeks at all anatomic locations. The authors believe that in the future weight bearing will be able to proceed earlier, as suggested by the results of more recent investigations. Three independent orthopaedic surgeons, all familiar with the procedure, volunteered to independently review blinded radiographs. The reviewers indicated the quality of each radiograph, their choice of three gestalt terms for the overall quality of reduction (i.e. good, adequate, or poor), and then provided specific measurements relevant to each anatomic site. The reviewers were unaware that the authors had pre-determined discrete values of 2, 1, and 0 to coincide with the reviewers’ measurements per the literature. Fracture union, post-traumatic arthritis and structural void filler support were all given three choices as shown in The scale was based upon numerical measurements commonly referenced within the literature for each respective anatomic location ( These measurements were then totaled to give a sum scale, providing a numerical scale to correlate with radiographic measurements that were then given a subjective term. This scale was determined to be 11–14 Importantly, the orthopaedic surgeons were blinded to the scale they were scoring the reductions against in order to internally validate the scale. Also, while they were recording the measurements for each radiograph, but they also scored each reduction on a good/adequate (“fair”)/poor score scale (on data collection forms). This allowed the authors to correlate the reviewer's overall opinion with the overall scaled score to determine the congruency for the H-R scale with the qualitative assessments assigned. Additionally, two experienced outside fellowship trained orthopaedic trauma surgeons unrelated to the study were asked to review the (Heiney–Redfern) scale and assess their level of agreement with the defined variables as laid out within it, such that in total three separate orthopaedic surgeons who frequently perform open reduction and internal fixation procedures of the distal radius, calcaneus, and proximal and distal tibia had approved the use of this scale. The R Project for Statistical Computing (version 2.12.2) was used in data analysis. Kruskal Wallis tests were used to test for differences in the distribution of the H-R scores given by the three reviewers. Spearman rank correlation was used to test the strength of the relationships between ordinal variables. Contingency tables were constructed and Fisher's exact test was used to test for the statistical independence of the cross-tabulated variables. Kruskal Wallis tests results with All patients went on clinically to heal and only one calcaneus case had any complications. This case represented a case that was severe in nature and had a traditional “L” extensile incision and the inflatable bone tamp was used to replace a traditional bone tamp to raise the articular surface “ Three H-R scores were computed for each patient: H-R score post-operatively, partial H-R score 12 weeks, H-R score at 12 weeks. The H-R score post-operatively represented the total score computed based on the radiographic images taken just after the procedure was completed. The partial H-R score 12 weeks was the score computed based on the radiographic image taken 12 weeks after the procedure, but was computed exactly the same as the post-operative score and hence it did not include the union and arthritis evaluation. The H-R score at 12 weeks was the score computed based on the radiographic images taken at 12 weeks and included the scores for union and arthritis. Because the H-R scores computed by the different reviewers were not exact matches, the Kruskal Wallis Test was then used to statistically analyze the apparent lack of congruence ( The post-operative H-R scores were compared with the partial H-R scores at 12 weeks in order to assess whether the reduction obtained post-operatively maintained at 12 weeks. All the data from each surgery was graphed for each reviewer. Kruskal Wallis The objective ratings of the reviewers were interpreted by the H-R scale score then compared to the overall subjective rating that the reviewers gave at those same evaluations. Two separate sets of data were analyzed with the Spearman rank correlation coefficient to see how closely they were correlated. This was done to compare congruence of reviewer's scores post-operatively and the scores they assigned at postoperative week 12. While subjective and objective scores for the postoperative radiographs were weakly correlated with one another (0.267–0.425), H-R scores and objective overall ratings correlated well with one another (0.534–0.893) and Fisher exact tests revealed that these associations were, in fact, significant ( The present study demonstrated overall that the reductions were judged, both subjectively (by the evaluators) and objectively (via the H-R score), to be good/adequate outcomes in nearly all cases post-operatively and at 12 weeks ( This study also confirmed that reductions were maintained from the post-operative radiographs to the 12 week radiographs. The Kruskal Wallis score indicated that the distribution of H-R scores at 12 weeks was statistically similar to that of the post-operative H-R scores ( In addition, the subjective and objective evaluations have a good correlation (e.g. if a reviewer gave numerical values that correlated with a score of good reduction then that reviewer gave a gestalt subjective score of good as well). This was calculated by Spearman rank correlation ( The author has explored and developed a novel technique for reduction of articular extremity fractures using an IBT and a fast-setting calcium phosphate cement. Prior to discussing the outcomes of the procedure, it is important to note that the author believes, which has been confirmed by other orthopaedic surgeons (personal communications), that there is a sufficient learning curve on using this tool and technique, especially for those who do not have prior Kyphoplasty experience. These scores reported in this study included every patient from the surgeon's initial cases, which likely accounts for the few poor radiographic outcomes, as the poor outcomes were early cases in the surgeon's practice. With experience, the learning curve will lead to improved results as it is especially difficult to master the reduction of the distal radius and calcaneus fractures initially. However, through proper training, the inflatable bone tamp can be an irreplaceable tool that allows a surgeon to perform the procedure in a manner that either was not able to be done previously or can now be done in a manner that gives improved reduction, explanation forthcoming. A laboratory study has been conducted, which has yet to be published, using the inflatable bone tamp in place of a traditional bone tamp in reducing tibial plateau fractures percutaneously without direct visualization of the joint. It was discovered that the articular surface was reduced more anatomically, appeared better reduced by surgeons on fluoroscopy, CT and direct visualization with the IBT than the traditional metal bone tamp. Also, the construct performed superior biomechanically to loading and displacement after reduction by IBT over traditional metal tamp. Heiney and Redfern developed their novel scale based on the best literature data available for several reasons. First, it was developed to give the study two overviews of rating the reductions using the novel technique. Second, the score attempts to put discrete numbers on what has traditionally been reported as a gestalt overview without any specific direction. Third, to determine objectively if reductions were maintained per scoring from the post-operative day zero to 12 weeks, the latter a time period when most fractures are traditionally deemed healed. Fourth, the score was developed to determine whether evaluators were consistent between their number scores and their subjective scoring to further strengthen the outcome data. There are numerous potential advantages that this tool and technique offer. First, it acts as a reduction tool in a minimally invasive way. The balloon only needs a small cannula (8 gauge, 4.0 The advantages of the current tool and technique include improved void for the delivery of fast-setting calcium phosphate. This technique also allows placement of fast-setting calcium phosphate cement in a reproducible manner, directly beneath the impacted bone, with less likelihood of intra-articular spillage or leaking out of the wound because of the well defined void. Often, due to the high injection pressures inside the bone, calcium phosphate finds cracks and comes out of the cortical shell. Worse yet, calcium phosphate will also follow cracks through the articular cartilage and diffuse into the joint. The current IBT allows for a well sealed void that compresses up to 400 Common pitfalls to avoid are as follows. It is important to make sure that the fragments do not become entrapped (i.e. the trap door effect, which has been noted in the literature). Each anatomic location has details related to the procedure, and while the authors here suggest that the inflatable bone tamp is a tool which can be used in numerous ways depending on needs of the surgeon and fracture, there are some generalizations that can be made from the first author's experience. Generally, the volume of calcium phosphate (equal to the volume of inflation) per anatomic location ranged as follows: distal radius 1–2 There is a paucity of literature regarding inflatable bone tamps outside the spine and this has left a deficit of experience for a potentially revolutionary technique for fracture treatment. Limitations of the study include the retrospective nature of data collection. This was a radiographic study intended to evaluate whether this technique was capable of obtaining and maintaining reductions radiographically. While we only noted one complication and that all patients went on to union, there was no validated scoring system used. In general the technique can be used anywhere there is a depression of the articular surface because of the previously described benefits (e.g. In summary, this study confirmed that the inflatable bone tamp with a fast-setting calcium phosphate is capable of obtaining and maintaining a reduction radiographically in clinical practice. It is clear that there are several potential advantages associated with the use of this tool as part of a larger technique. These economic and clinical potential advantages need to be studied further. Also, it is clear to the authors that a learning curve is present even for users with inflatable bone tamp experience (e.g. Kyphoplasty). Therefore, the authors recommend prior training to using this tool in practice. As it may at first appear to be intuitive, however there are pitfalls that training will help avoid. This study also demonstrates a reproducible, novel, objective, radiographic evaluation scale score. In conclusion, the authors herein report the extensive use of the FDA-approved application of an inflatable bone tamp with insertion of a fast-setting calcium phosphate in articular fractures of the calcaneus, distal radius, proximal and distal tibia with metal hardware as needed. A thorough radiographic analysis by independent reviewers indicates that the tool is capable of obtaining and maintaining those reductions in a good or adequate manner at 12 weeks post-operatively. Introduced is a potential novel evaluation scale scoring system for these articular fractures that appears to evaluate the important anatomic considerations reproducibly in fracture reductions. There are many potential benefits that remain speculative to this type of tool within a procedure, and therefore this tool and technique warrants further research. Funding was provided in a form of a grant from Medtronic Spine LLC to support the study itself (retrospective review of data). No money was given for equipment, principal investigator surgeon support or surgeries themselves. Money was funded for radiographic chart reviews by outside surgeons. Jake P. Heiney, MD, MS is a paid speaker, trainer and consultant for Medtronic Spine LLC, Sunnyvale, CA. The other authors have nothing to declare. The authors would like to thank Emily Benson, MD, Van Boggus, MD, and Serge Kaska, MD for their assistance with the project.