A diversity of commercial food products can be made from cannabis and hemp extracts, using both crude or winterized ‘oils’, distillates, and isolates, as documented in the literature. The manufacturing of these food-related end products involves processes such as extraction, phase separation, and distillation under vacuum. There is preference for consumer-friendly solvents that are generally regarded as safe (GRAS) such carbon dioxide, ethanol, water, and propane or butane; and triglyceride-based oils. Frequently CO2 is preferred as a solvent because it is environmentally benign, consumer-friendly, and selective as an extraction solvent. Here, we invoke solubility parameter theory (SPT) to explain the solubility/miscibility behavior of the above solvents toward cannabinoid, terpene, and non-polar contaminating solutes that must be removed using the above processes. This approach can also be used in formulating various food products, in which cannabis extracts and distillated are infused into a food matrix. Note is made of the fact that the infused cannabinoids are converted under the influence of heat and over time to other cannabinoids. Considering the difficulty of retaining terpenes during the above processing steps, back-addition of terpenes is frequently practiced. Numerous examples are provided of foods that are infused with defined cannabis/hemp extracts and distillates, and an example of an appropriate analysis and requisite labeling associated with a cannabinoid-infused product provided.  This review comes from a themed issue on Edited by For a complete overview see the Available online 6th May 2019  2214-7993/© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. The medical benefits of cannabis particularly in the management of pain [ The natural consequence is the rise of CBD as a food ingredient which is only just beginning to emerge from the shadow of cannabis prohibition, presenting a legal challenge for those food producers hoping to add it to their products. Infusion of phyto-cannabinoids into liquid fluids such as milks, teas, coffees, citrus-based drinks, and flavored-bottled or oxygenated-bottled waters. US sales of beverages infused with hemp-derived CBD are predicted to reach $600 million in 2019, and approach $1billion in 2020, with water accounting for two thirds of the market. For example, in today’s marketplace, there are a variety of ways that hemp and hemp-derived ingredients are being used in beverages. Two energy drinks—Canna Energy and Rocky Mountain High-label their hemp as ‘hemp seed oil extract’ and ‘hemp seed extract,’ respectively, making no reference to the CBD content. Elev8 Brands, sells a coffee infused with hemp protein, as well as tea that contains hemp seed oil. Soda makers such as Sprig as well as Cannabidiol Creations use CBD isolates in their formulations. As is commonly known, any final product consumed in the USA must not contain more than 0.3% THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) to be legal by US government regulations [ Food developers should thoroughly investigate raw materials and select the right material to provide the desired consumer benefits while working well in the beverage. In general, hemp-derived extracts are created using an extraction process, and different methods of extraction and isolation exist. The most popular involves CO  Back addition of lost terpenes is frequently also done on these ‘distillates’ – and it is these end products that are incorporated into food matrices. The use of such distillates – to some extent – removes any cannabis strain variance dependence in the final product. It should be noted that further purification of the ‘distillate’ is possible to crystalize cannabinoids termed ‘isolates’ and currently chromatographic-based purification is also being applied as shown in Seminal to both processing and product formulation are the solvency of cannabinoids and their entourage terpene components, in both extraction and processing solvents as well as product formulation. Toward that end, we have proposed the use of solubility parameter theory (SPT) [  To better quantify the use of SPT in terms of its uses in cannabis science and technology, we use the equation offered by Giddings, Myers and King [   and the condition for maximum solubility is To provide an additional perspective to the use of the equation, Presenting the relative From the above rationale, it is not uncommon for companies formulated commercial cannabis products to use extracts obtained by the above-described processing methods to produce their final retail products. Using different extraction solvents-methods, such as butane and CO It is possible to extract both hemp seed oil and hemp flower during the same extraction protocol by placing both entities into the same extraction vessel, thereby in the process producing a ‘nutraceutical’-type extract that has both the benefits conferred by the hemp seed oil as well as the cannabinoid-containing extract from the flower. The contribution of cannabinoids to the hemp seed oil is negligible in this case and they are regarded as very minor contaminants [ Many cannabinoid-containing-extracts are formulated by addition of flavoring agents such as chocolate mint, black currant or chai, or berry-derived flavorings. It has been recognized that terpenes from non-cannabis plants are many times identical in nature and effect to the ones found in cannabis; this includes those found in some common foods or as added ingredients. Fusion of CBD into formulations containing Vitamin C, adaptogenic herbs, or melatonin to promote sleep is available. The infusion of CBD into chewing gum and mint formulations is a novel way of sustaining release of the CBD into the body over time and such products are being marketed by several companies. It should be noted that a number of cannabinoids are converted over time into other cannabinoid derivatives as shown in Most cannabinoids and terpenes are not water-soluble as judged by the mismatch of their Similar application can be used to produce nano-size cannabinoid extracts for use in aqueous-based formulations such as beverages (energy drinks, beer, soft drinks, etc.) via ultrasonication-emulsification techniques aided by encapsulation. This aids in producing a product which appears ‘clear’ to the consumer eyes as well promoting a sustained delivery into a body fluid. This can help mediate the conversion of THC to 11-hydroxy-THC during oral ingestion of THC-infused food products. The advantage to infusing nano-sized particles into cannabis-based beverages is binary. First, formulators are for all practical purposes are able to achieve a completely clear beverage while incorporating oil-soluble components. The generation of these small particle sizes has been shown to absorb faster into the cells during digestion—and this leads to faster effects of the active cannabis ingredients [ Developing cannabis-infused products to deliver a certain amount of one active component—such as CBD or THC—will require additional research and knowledge of the raw material. This is made difficult by the use of broad-spectrum extracts whose chemical composition may vary or be dependent on the strain of cannabis or hemp being extracted and hence infused. Factors such as the harvesting time and growing method, aside from the utilizing extraction and down-stream -processing conditions may contribute to batch-to batch variation in using full-spectrum extract. This suggest that a full analytical analysis of non-cannabinoid and non-terpene components will probably be warranted — and identified on the product label [ As has been pointed out previously ( With respect to product packaging of cannabis-infused food products, there are a number of factors to consider apart from the design of the packaging, such as labeling consistent with regulatory requirements at both Federal, State, and local levels. Also, packaging which is child-resistant will be mandated. Examples of packaging media currently being used are: flexible pouches, glass versus plastic containers, etc. [ As emphasized, storage conditions for these cannabis-infused food products are also important from the perspective of maintaining the stated potency during shelf life as well inhibition to degradation of the infused-cannabinoids. The use of preservatives and pasteurization must also be considered with respect to what is stated on the label and/or stated shelf life. In terms of the log kill factor, the effect on cannabis substrates themselves via ultra—high pressure (UHP) processing [ To advance the acceptance and commercialization of cannabis-infused food products can be summarized as follows: Clearly state the processing method/solvent that has been used on the product label. Increase the analytical scrutiny of all components besides cannabinoids and terpenes used in formulating cannabis-infused foods [ Investigate the interaction of cannabis and terpene components with materials used in plastic and glass packaging and closure systems. Increase the physicochemical property data based relevant to improving extraction and processing of cannabis extractives in food formulations. Increase the use of chromatographic methods not just in analysis of cannabis extracts, but also in the processing of naturally derived cannabis and hemp [ Needless to say, increasing the education for both the student and consumer through research and development will accelerate acceptance of cannabis-infused food products, as well as assist regulators in their tasks. This can only occur by removing or reducing the regulatory constraints currently in force that inhibit both academic and industrial research which will be needed to produce these infused-cannabinoid containing food products for both medical as well as recreational use. Nothing declared.