Development of biofuels from renewable resources is critical to the sustainability of the world’s economy and to slow down the global climate change. Currently, a significant amount of bioethanol and biodiesel are produced as biofuels to partially replace gasoline and diesel, respectively, in the transportation sector worldwide. However, these biofuels represent a tiny portion (<4%) of the total fuels consumed. Furthermore, bioethanol is produced predominantly from sugarcane and corn, and biodiesel from crop and plant oils. Production of these raw materials is competing for the limited arable land against food and feed production. It is not feasible to tremendously increase biofuel production using the current technologies. Therefore, it is critical to investigate advanced or 2nd generation biofuel production technologies. This article is trying to summarize the current status of the 2nd generation biofuel technologies including bioethanol from lignocellulosic materials and biodiesel from microalgae. The summary includes the descriptions of the technologies, their advantages and challenges, feedstocks for the 2nd generation biofuels, the key barriers to their commercial applications, and future perspectives of the advanced technologies.Biofuels are generated from renewable resources such as agricultural crops, woody and herbaceous biomass, and waste materials which are renewable annually or in several years. Although the combustion of biofuels releases CO Bioethanol is a major biofuel on the market worldwide. It is used to partially replace gasoline to make gasoline-ethanol mixtures, E15 (15% ethanol and 85% gasoline) and E85 (85% ethanol and 15% gasoline). The current commercial fuel ethanol is produced mainly from sugarcane and corn, depending on the climate conditions of the producers’ locations. The feedstock used for fuel ethanol production is mainly sugarcane in tropical areas such as Brazil and Columbia, while it is dominantly corn in other areas such as the United States, European Union, and China. In 2008, the total fuel bioethanol production worldwide is 17.34 billion gallons Bioethanol can also be produced from lignocellulosic materials, which is commonly called 2nd generation bioethanol. The feedstocks for the second generation bioethanol include agricultural residues, grasses, and forestry and wood residues. There have been tremendous research efforts in developing cost-effective 2nd generation or advanced technologies for fuel ethanol production in the literature. However, there are some challenges for the commercial applications of the advanced technologies. Biodiesel is another major biofuel, which is produced using vegetable oil, plant oil, and animal fat. Obviously, biodiesel is an alternative fuel for diesel and most diesel engines can use 100% biodiesel. The main feedstock currently used for biodiesel production includes soy bean, canola seed or rapeseed, sunflower, and palm oil. There are research activities on using alternative oils such as waste oils from kitchens and restaurants and microalgal oils for biodiesel production. The primary objective of this study is to understand the status of advanced biofuels technologies and key barriers to their commercial application. This study aims to analyze in detail the status of various technologies such as: (i) Lignocellulosic ethanol and microalgal biodiesel, and (ii) feedstock for 2nd generation biofuels (e.g., grasses, agricultural residues, forestry and wood residues, waste materials, and microalgae). Bioethanol can be produced from different natural materials: sugar-, starch-, and lignocellulose-based materials. Currently, bioethanol is produced predominantly from sugarcane and corn. However, production of these raw materials is competing for the limited arable land against food and feed production. It is not feasible to tremendously increase bioethanol production using the current technologies. Lignocellulosic materials are abundant almost all over the world and they can be used for bioethanol production because they have a high content of cellulose and hemicelluloses. However, the conversion of lignocellulosic materials to ethanol is much more difficult than that of sugar-rich or starch-rich materials. The conversion of lignocelluloses to ethanol involves three steps: pretreatment, hydrolysis, and fermentation. Lignocellulose is composed of mainly cellulose, hemicelluloses, and lignin. Cellulose is a long-chain homogenous polysaccharide of Pretreatment is the process to prepare the ligocellulosic materials for the enzymatic hydrolyses of cellulose and hemicelluloses to generate fermentable sugars. The purpose of the pretreatment is to separate the lignin from cellulose and hemicelluloses in the lignocellulose, reduce cellulose crystallinity, and increase the porosity of the material, so the hydrolytic enzymes can access their substrates (cellulose and hemicellulose) in the following enzymatic hydrolysis. Pretreatment technologies have been extensively investigated in the last three decades, including physical, chemical, and biological processes for lignocellulosic materials Physical pretreatment includes mechanical comminution, steam explosion, ammonia fiber explosion, and pyrolysis. mechanical comminution combines chipping, grinding, and milling to break the lignocellulosic materials down to 0.2–2 mm and reduce the crytallinity of the materials. Steam explosion applies high-temperature (160–260 °C) and high-pressure saturated steam to steep the lignocelluloses and swiftly release the pressure to atmospheric, causing explosive decompression which separates lignin from the carbohydrates and degrade the hemicelluloses. Similar to steam explosion, ammonia fiber explosion uses liquid ammonia to soak the lignocellulosic materials at high temperature (around 100 °C) for a period of time and then the materials are swiftly flashed to a low pressure, breaking the chemical bonds between lignin and cellulose and hemicelluloses and substantially increasing the porosity of the materials. In pyrolysis, the lignocellulosic materials are exposed to a high temperature (over 220 °C). At that temperature, the hemicelluloses and some lignin and cellulose will be degraded to gaseous and tarry compounds and the tight structure of the lignocelluloses will be broken. Physical pretreatment can effectively break the structure of the lignocellulosic materials and substantially improve sugar yield in the following enzymatic hydrolysis. However, physical pretreatment usually involves high energy input Commonly used chemical pretreatment technologies include acid and alkaline hydrolyses. Dilute sulfuric acid pretreatment applies high temperature (140–190 °C) to the mixed slurry of the lignocelluloses and the acid. The acid decomposes the hemicelluloses at that temperature, resulting in a breakup of the lignocellulosic structure. Most hemicelluloses are degraded into sugars which stay in the liquid portion, while cellulose remains in the solid portion. The main disadvantage of dilute acid pretreatment is the formation of chemicals such as furfurals during the degradation of hemicelluloses that inhibit the following enzymatic hydrolysis and microbial fermentation. Alkaline hydrolysis is another chemical pretreatment method at high temperature (100–170 °C). During the alkaline pretreatment, there are saponification reactions of intermolecular ester bonds crosslinking hemicellulose and cellulose or lignin in the lignocellulosic materials. Alkaline pretreatment can also disrupt lignin structure, decrease crystallinity of cellulose and degree of sugar polymerization Biological pretreatment processes use microbes such as brown-, white- and soft-rot fungi to degrade lignin and hemicellulose in lignocellulosic materials. Brown rots mainly attack cellulose, while white and soft rots attack both cellulose and lignin. White-rot fungi are the most effective basidiomycetes for biological pretreatment of lignocellulosic materials Enzymatic hydrolysis of pretreated lignocellulosic materials involves enzymatic reactions that convert cellulose into glucose, and hemicellulose into pentoses (xylose and arabionose) and hexoses (glucose, galactose, and mannose). The conversion of cellulose and hemicellulose is catalyzed by cellulase and hemicellulase enzymes, respectively. The enzymes are highly specific Cellulases or β-(1-4) glycoside hydrolases are a mixture of several enzymes and at least three major groups of cellulases are involved in the hydrolysis of cellulose: endoglucanase, exoglucanase, and β-glucosidase. After the pretreatment, most of lignin is removed from the lignocellulosic materials, the crystallinity of the materials is significantly reduced, and the porosity is substantially increased, which allows the enzymes to penetrate into the materials and access the substrates. Endoglucanase randomly attacks regions of low crystallinity in the cellulose fiber and hydrolyze the β-(1, 4) glycosidic bonds of cellulose to produce cello-oligosaccharides with free-chain ends. Exoglucanase can hydrolyze the β-(1, 4) glycosidic bonds from the non-reducing ends of the cello-oligosaccharides to generate cellobiose which is further hydrolyzed by β-glucosidase to glucose. Lignocellulosic materials can be from wood, grasses, agricultural residues, and waste materials. They usually contain quite high cellulose, hemicelluloses, and lignin. The contents of the compounds in common lignocellulosic materials are listed in Woods are divided into softwood and hardwood. Softwood is gymnosperms commonly referred to as evergreens with needle-like leaves. A common example of softwood is pine tree. Softwood is the dominant source of lignocellulosic materials in the northern hemisphere. Hardwood, in contrast, is angiosperms with broad leaves and is referred to as flowering plants. Typical hardwood examples are poplar, willow, and oak. Hardwood is widely distributed in the world. Among the different types of woods, poplar is of particular interest because its rapid growth. The annual yield of hybrid poplar trees in North America can be around 5 dry tons per acre. Hardwood is generally a better material for ethanol production because of its structural advantages over softwood. First, hardwood has significantly less lignin than softwood. In addition, the hemicelluloses of hardwood are mainly composed of hexoses, while the hemicelluloses of softwood are mainly composed of pentoses. Hexoses, e.g. glucose, are much easier to be fermented to ethanol than pentoses, e.g. xylose, using the current technologies. Herbaceous lignocellulosic materials are among the high-yield biomass in the world. The promising candidates for biofuel production include switchgrass, Bermudagrass, and    The main disadvantages of lignocellulosic or 2nd generation ethanol production include, in comparison with sugar-based or starch-based or 1st generation ethanol production, the low accessibility of cellulose and hemicelluloses due to a complex tight structure of the lignocelluloses, low activities of cellulase enzymes, and difficulty to ferment 5-C sugars from the hydrolysis of hemicelluloses to ethanol. Research on lignocellulosic ethanol production has been focused on developing cost-effective pretreatment technologies, improved cellulase enzyme activities, and co-fermentation of 6-C (e.g. glucose) and 5-C (e.g. xylose) sugars to ethanol. Conversion of cellulose to ethanol involves hydrolysis of cellulose and fermentation of the hydrolysates to ethanol. Cellulose fibers are embedded in a covalently joined matrix of pectin, lignin, and hemicellulose. Each cellulose macrofiber is composed of crystalline bundles of individual chains of cellulose Mechanical comminution and steam explosion are favorable pretreatment techniques because they do not generate hazardous wastes. Usually raw lignocellulosic materials are comminuted by a combination of chipping, grinding and milling (ball or roll milling). The size of materials is 1–3 cm for chipping or 0.2–2.0 cm for milling or grinding. Grous et al. There is substantial evidence that white-rot fungi can be used to selectively upgrade lignocellulosic materials to an industrial feedstock containing less lignin and hemicellulose and having an expanded structure. The key feature that makes the lignocelluloses bio-upgrading feasible is the ligninolytic enzyme system of the white-rot fungi. These enzymes, secondary metabolites that are produced under conditions of nutrient deprivation, depolymerize lignin to allow fungal attack of the polysaccharides of the materials. This biological process replaces pretreatment steps such as steam explosion or other energy-intensive pulping methods with a lower-energy consuming compost-like system that reduces energy consumption and waste. In nature, fungi remove lignin using peroxidative delignifying enzymes Increasing the dosage of cellulases in the process, to a certain extent, can enhance the yield and rate of the hydrolysis, but it would significantly increase the cost of the process. Cellulase dosage of 10 FPU/g cellulose is often used in laboratory studies because it provides a hydrolysis profile with high levels of glucose yield in a reasonable time (48–72 h) at a reasonable enzyme cost Use of cellulase mixture from different microorganisms or the mixture of cellulases and other enzymes in the hydrolysis of cellulosic materials has been extensively studied Currently, the cost of fuel ethanol produced from lignocellulosic materials is much higher than gasoline. It is also significantly higher than corn- or sugarcane-based ethanol, mainly because of the more complicated processing associated with the lignocellulosic ethanol production. Compared to the starch-based ethanol production, the main cost advantage of lignocellulose-based ethanol production is the feedstock. Taking account of the huge increase of the corn price in the last couple of years, the current cost of corn stover is much lower than that of corn kernel as a feedstock for ethanol production. However, the costs of capital and supplies for lignocellulose-based ethanol production are significantly higher than the starch-based ethanol production. In a recent study of fuel ethanol production from three different lignocellulosic materials, i.e. spruce (softwood), Salix (hardwood), and corn stover (agricultural residue), Sassner et al. When only 6-C sugars were fermented to ethanol, the total costs of ethanol production from both Salix and corn stover were very close, but significantly higher than that from spruce. However, when both 6- and 5-C sugars were fermented to ethanol, the total costs of ethanol production from both Salix and corn stover were significantly reduced, while the cost was only slightly reduced using spruce as the feedstock. The main reason is that the hemicelluloses of both Salix and corn stover contain a significant amount of 5-C sugar structures, while the hemicellulose of spruce has a small amount of 5-C sugars but mainly 6-C sugars. Thus, ethanol production efficiency using spruce as a feedstock is significantly higher than either Salix or corn stover, if only 6-C sugars are fermented to ethanol. When both 6- and 5-C sugars were fermented to ethanol, using spruce as a feedstock only has a slight economic advantage over Salix and corn stover. A great progress has been achieved in developing lignocellulosic (2nd generation) ethanol production in the last decade. The achievements include more efficient and lower-cost cellulase enzymes production, high-efficient pretreatment, and co-fermentation of glucose and xylose to ethanol. However, the ethanol production costs need to be further reduced for the commercial application of the 2nd generation ethanol technologies. Most pretreatment processes produce an increase in glucose yield from enzymatic hydrolysis, indicating expansion of the matrix and/or varying degrees of removal of hemicellulose and lignin Although pretreatment could significantly increase the yield of glucose and soluble sugars in the enzymatic hydrolysis, the key to successful hydrolysis is the cellulase enzymes. Industrial preparations of the cellulase enzymes are normally obtained from fungal and bacterial origins Another challenge for the commercialization of lignocellulosic ethanol production is to efficiently utilize the lignocellulosic materials. In the sugar- and starch-based ethanol production technologies, almost all the sugars and starch are converted to ethanol. However, the conversion rate of lignocelluloses to ethanol is much lower, in the range of 30–60% depending on the technologies. Among the three major components of lignocelluloses, cellulose has the highest conversion rate to ethanol, 85–90%; hemicelluloses 30–85%; lignin; 0%. The main products of hemicellulose hydrolysis include hexoses and pentoses. The former can be readily fermented to ethanol by yeast or bacteria, but the latter is difficult. To make the lignocellulosic ethanol production economically feasible, it is necessary to utilize the hemicelluloses which is about one third of the biomass. In other words, it is critical to develop cost-effective technologies to ferment both hexose and pentose into ethanol. Lignin is very tough to be converted to ethanol, but it can be used as a fuel in the fractional distillation in ethanol purification. To overcome the barriers of lignocellulosic ethanol production, more research is needed in feedstock, pretreatment, cellulase enzyme production, and new fermentation technologies. The research in developing cost-effective technologies for the 2nd generation ethanol production need to be focused on the following areas:     Biodiesel is a mixture of fatty acid alkyl monoesters derived from vegetable oils and fats. It can be used as a replacement of petrodiesel because of their structural similarity. Biodiesel is produced through chemical transesterification of triglycerides from oils and fats with alcohol. The chemical reactions are shown in The process starts with oils or fats from vegetable or animal origins. Some oil or fats may need a pretreatment for degumming, deacidification, bleaching, and dehydration, depending on the compositions of the materials. Degumming is to remove phosphatides from most feedstocks because phosphatides cause turbidity of oil during storage, promote accumulation of water in oil, and increase catalyst consumption. Deacidification is to remove free fatty acids (FFAs) which form soap with alcohols. The FFAs can also be converted to esters with alcohols with an acid as catalyst. Bleaching removes pigments and trace metals and reduce oxidation products in raw materials. Dehydration removes water from the oils or fats because water is toxic to transesterification and reduces oil to biodiesel conversion efficiency. Alcohol is the other reactant for the transesterification to produce biodiesel. Either ethanol or methanol can be used for the transesterification, but methanol is commonly used mainly because it is cheaper. According to the stoicheometry of the chemical reaction, converting 1 mol of triglyceride requires 3 mol of alcohol. Since the chemical reaction is reversible, alcohol is usually overdosed to improve the biodiesel production efficiency. Transesterification can be catalyzed by alkalines (NaOH), acid (H The main products of transesterification is biodiesel and glycerin which can be separated through settling, filtration, and decantation. Centrifugation can speed up the separation process, especially when significant amount of soap is present in the products. Refining of both biodiesel and glycerin improves the quality of the biodiesel and the glycerin. It also makes it possible to recycle the unreacted alcohol back for reuse to improve the biodiesel production rate and the economics. The main feedstock for biodiesel production worldwide includes oils from soybean, rapeseed, canola, sunflower, corn, palm kernels, animal fats, and recycled oil. Jatropha has also been used for biodiesel production in tropical areas such as India and Africa. Vegetable oils from soybean, rapeseed, canola, sunflower, and corn are considered high-quality materials for biodiesel production because of their high triglyceride content (92–99%) and low FFAs (<2%). Soybean and rapeseed oils are the most commonly used feedstock for biodiesel production in the United States and Europe, respectively. Waste oil is a recycled used oil in restaurants, food industry, and households. It contains substantially more free fatty acids and water and less triglycerides than fresh vegetable oils. A typical fatty acid profile for waste oil from restaurants includes linoleic acid (53%), oleic acid (28%) and palmitic acid (11.73%) The biggest challenge of biodiesel production from vegetable oils is the availability of crop land for oil production to produce enough biodiesel that significantly replaces the current fossil fuel consumption. Chisti Microalgae have a great potential as a future feedstock for biodiesel production because of their high growth rates and high-oil content of some species. Microalgae generally double their biomass within 24 h under normal growing conditions. The doubling time during the exponential growth phase for microalgae can be as short as 3.5 h. The oil content of microalgae ranges from 15 to 75% (dry weight). Other major components of microalgae include carbohydrates and proteins. Some high-oil microalgal species are listed in Commercially growing microalgae for value-added products is usually conducted in open ponds or closed photobioreactors under autotrophic or heterotrophic conditions at relatively warm temperature (20–30 °C). In autotrophic microalgal cultivation, the microalgae need sunlight (energy source), carbon dioxide (carbon source), and nutrients (N, P, and minerals) for their photosynthesis and generate oxygen. The main difference of growing heterotrophic microalgae from autotrophic ones is the carbon source. The former requires organic carbon such as glucose to support its growth. Normally autotrophic microalgae are grown for biodiesel production, mainly because they use carbon dioxide as their carbon source for growth. Therefore, the whole cycle of growing microalgae for biodiesel production and combustion of biodiesel as fuel would generate zero net carbon dioxide emission to the atmosphere. In addition, carbon dioxide emitted from the existing power plants can be used for growing microalgae. However, sometimes heterotrophically grown microalgae can make much more oil than autotrophic ones. Miao and Wu In a photobioreactor microalgal growth system, pure high-oil microalgae are grown in closed plastic or glass tubular bioreactors. Nutrient water is circulated in the bioreactors for the growth of the microalgae and for keeping the microalgae from settling. Natural sun light is usually the energy source for microalgal growth. Although artificial illumination to the photobioreactors is feasible, it is much more expensive than natural illumination. Pure microalgal culture can be maintained in the photobioreactors. Heat exchanger is usually necessary to maintain an adequate temperature in the photobioreactors. A high concentration of microalgal biomass can be achieved in photobioreactors. In that case high dissolved oxygen may inhibit the microalgal growth, so degassing system is usually necessary to release oxygen from the water. In an open pond microalgal growth system, microalgae are usually grown in shallow ponds (0.3–0.5 m) with water containing adequate nutrients. Wastewaters from municipalities and animal operations can also be used for growing microalgae. Water recirculation or stirring is also necessary to keep the microalgae from settling. Microalgal biomass concentration in the ponds is normally low compared to the photobioreactors. Wild algae and/or bacterial contamination is usually challenging in the open ponds. Microalgal biomass from the open ponds or photobioreactors can be harvested through filtration and centrifugation, after which oil is extracted for biodiesel production. The residues can be either used for animal feed production or processed in anaerobic digestion for biogas production. A flow chart of biodiesel production from microalgae is shown in Technically, producing biodiesel from microalgae has been proven feasible. The land area required to produce the same amount of oil from microalgae is only a small portion of that for oil crops. Biodiesel production from microalgal biomass or the 2nd generation of biodiesel technology has a potential for biofuel production to replace fossil fuel without serious competition for arable land against food and feed production. However, the biggest challenge of the 2nd generation biodiesel production is its high cost. The current microalgae production and the separation of the microalgal biomass from the growing media are too expensive. An estimated cost to produce a kilogram of microalgal biomass with an average oil content of 30% is $2.95 and $3.80 for photobioreactors and open pond, respectively, assuming that carbon dioxide is available and free To improve the economics of microalgal biodiesel production, more research and development are necessary to reduce the costs of growing microalgae and the separation of microalgal biomass from the growth media, and to efficiently control culture contamination when grown in open ponds. The research and development efforts probably need to focus on the following areas: Selection and development of high-yield, oil-rich microalgae: Oil-rich microalgal species can be improved through cultivation and genetic engineering to increase the oil content in their biomass without compromising the biomass production rate. Improvement of the tolerance oil-rich microalgae to high and/or low temperatures: Selection and modification of microalgae to enable them grow fast at high temperatures would probably eliminate the heat exchangers and contribute to the cost reduction of microalgal biomass production. Improvement of the tolerance of oil-rich microalgae to the high concentration of oxygen: A combination of high dissolved oxygen with intense sunlight inhibits the growth of the microalgae and damages the microalgal cells. Increasing the tolerance of the microalgae to the high dissolved oxygen concentration in the media could also reduce the cost of microalgal biomass production. Improvement of the competitiveness of oil-rich microalgae against wild algae and bacteria: Improving the competitiveness of the oil-rich microalgae against the wild algae and bacteria and inhibiting the wild algal and bacterial activities in the media for growing the microalgae in open ponds also has a potential to reduce the cost of microalgal biomass production. Enhancement of the engineering of the microalgae growth systems: Both microalgae growing systems currently used for microalgal biomass production, photobioreactors and open ponds have rooms for improvement. Cost-effective materials which prevent the microalgae from attaching the surface in tubular photobioreactors should be explored to maintain a high growth rate of the microalgae. The main disadvantage of growing microalgae in open ponds is contamination. Greenhouse ponds can be an effective system to prevent contamination and to increase the microalgal density in the growth media in open ponds. Development of cost-effective microalgae harvesting systems: Harvesting microalgal biomass contributes substantially to the total costs of the biomass production. Current technologies usually involve coagulation, filtration and centrifugation, which are costly. Innovative cost-effective harvesting systems need to be explored to significantly lower the cost of microalgal biomass harvesting. Application of the biorefinery concept to microalgal biodiesel production system: Microalgal biomass contains lipids (oil), carbohydrates, proteins, and other minor components such as minerals and vitamins. Oil is obviously used for biodiesel production. Other components can also be processed into value-added products. After oil extraction, the residues which are rich in carbohydrates, proteins, and minor nutrients can be utilized to produce animal feed ( Obviously, it is impractical to tremendously increase biofuel production using corn, sugarcane, and plant oils as feedstocks because of climate limitation and huge or impossible arable land requirement for the feedstock production. The 2nd generation biofuel production technologies including lignocellulosic ethanol and microalgal biodiesel have a good potential to replace or substantially replace fossil fuels in the future. All the advanced biofuel technologies have the advantage of producing fuels with almost zero or very little net carbon dioxide emission to the atmosphere, which definitely has a huge positive impact on environmental protection, especially the global climate change. Lignocellulosic materials such as agricultural residues, woods, and grasses are abundant in most land areas of the world and their generation does not have to compete for arable land against food and feed production. Microalgae can produce a huge amount of oil on a small footprint, hundreds or thousands of times higher yield than most oil plants. It is technically possible to produce a high volume of biodiesel that is equivalent or higher than the current petrodiesel consumption using microalgae as a feedstock that are grown on a small portion of land areas (not necessary arable land) in the world, if or when the technology is proven economically feasible. However, these advanced technologies still have serious barriers to overcome for their commercial applications. The main challenge for all the advanced 2nd generation biofuel technologies is their high production costs. The major barriers for the commercialization of lignocellulosic ethanol production are the high costs of pretreatment, enzymes used in hydrolysis, and conversion of 5-C sugars to ethanol. Research is necessary to improve the efficiencies in those areas and explore new technologies to convert lignocelluloses to ethanol. The major challenge for microalgal biodiesel production is the high cost of producing microalgal biomass. The key issues to be solved are cost-effective algae harvesting and protection of the high-oil microalgae from the contamination of wild algae. Another important issue for both lignocellulosic ethanol and microalgal biodiesel processes is byproducts development. Both processes utilize only a portion of the raw materials for biofuel generation: only cellulose and hemicelluloses are used in ethanol production, while lipids are the only materials used for biodiesel production. The residues need to be processed for byproducts through biorefinery to improve the economics of the whole process.