Hydrometallurgical processes offer a great potential for treating chalcopyrite ores and concentrates, and it results in increased metal recoveries and reduced air pollution hazards. In recent years interest for application of various reagents in a hydrometallurgical processing of sulphide concentrates has increased. The objective of this work was to examine the leaching of the chalcopyrite concentrate, from “Rudnik” flotation plant, by sodium nitrate in sulphuric acid media. The probabilities of various chemical reactions occurring was based upon literature data, thermodynamic analysis, and the products formed during the leaching process. The influence of various parameters was studied to optimize the conditions and to determine the kinetics of the reaction. An increase in temperature, sulphuric acid and sodium nitrate concentration, and decrease in stirring speed and particle size, enhanced the leaching rate of copper. The experimental data were best fitted by a mixed control kinetic model. An activation energy of 83 kJ/mol was found. Elemental sulphur was formed as the main leaching product and tended to inhibit the leaching rate. The leaching mechanism was confirmed by characterizing the concentrate and the leach residue using XRD and SEM/EDX analysis.Non-ferrous metals and iron usually appear in a form of sulphide complex ores. Large deposits of complex ores may contain chalcopyrite, sphalerite, galena and pyrite in disseminated form with complex mineralogical composition and fine grained structures. These minerals are generally separated from each other by flotation and treated by conventional pyrometallurgical processes. Sometimes, when it is difficult to prepare flotation concentrates of the individual minerals, then it is easier to prepare bulk concentrates ( Hydrometallurgical processes offer great potential for treating complex sulphide concentrates, especially chalcopyrite concentrate, resulting in increased metal recoveries and reduced air pollution hazards. The main outcomes are the production of elemental sulphur or sulphuric acid and soluble copper sulphate. Ferric and cupric ions, bacteria, oxygen, and other oxidants have been used as leaching agents of chalcopyrite in sulphate and chloride media under atmospheric or pressure leaching conditions ( Much attention has been given to the development of nitric acid based processes for complex concentrates; e.g. Some industrial operations use nitric or nitrous acid added in a small concentration to the sulphuric acid, e.g. in oxygen extended pressure leach processes. At Sunshine Precious Metals, silver and copper were recovered from a complex sulphide concentrate at the temperatures between 145° and 155 °C and at total pressure of 709 kPa ( Following successful operation in the Sunshine Pressure Leach plant, the catalysis under the extended pressure oxidation, using nitrogen-containing species, has been promoted as a nitrogen species catalysed (NSC) technology ( Oxidative dissolution of a sulphide concentrate using nitrate as the leaching agent in an acid medium takes place with formation of elemental sulphur, and it can be represented by one of the following chemical reactions ( Initially the rate of reaction is controlled by a surface chemical reaction and later, becomes diffusion controlled. The dissolution mechanism of chalcopyrite is based on three main kinetic models. These kinetic models are diffusion controlled, surface reaction-controlled and a mixed kinetic model containing diffusion and surface reaction components, which simultaneously take place. This study examines the leaching process of chalcopyrite concentrate from Serbian deposit using sodium nitrate in sulphuric acid as it has not been studied sufficiently either from the theoretical or practical point of view. Based on the literature data for chalcopyrite leaching in an oxidizing, acidic medium and the characterization of the leach liquor and residues obtained, the following chemical reactions were chosen to study the CuFeS The main reactions identified for the chalcopyrite were: The other important reactions in the system include: Thermodynamic analysis included calculation of standard Gibbs energy. In order to clarify the probability and priority of reactions The negative values of the Gibbs energy, Δ The chalcopyrite concentrate enriched during the flotation of a CuFeS X-ray phase analysis of the concentrate reveals that the sample contains mainly chalcopyrite with small amounts of sphalerite, galena and quartz. All leaching experiments were carried out in a glass reactor equipped with a Teflon stirrer, condenser, thermometer, glass funnel for adding the solid sample and a sampling device. This set-up provides stable hermetic conditions and allows heating at constant temperature. The calculated volumes of H Stirring was provided in the range of 100–450 rpm, temperatures of 70 to 90 °C, leaching times of 20 to 240 min, while the particle size fractions leached were + The influence of particle size on the copper leaching rate was examined for four different size fractions (+ The results are shown in The influence of temperature on the copper extraction, under following conditions: stirring speed 300 rpm, 1.5 M H The temperature has a strong influence on the leaching rate. As expected, copper extraction increases with increasing the temperature. At 70 °C, 28% copper was extracted after 120 min, increasing to 70% at 90 °C. The maximum extraction was 75.5% at 90 °C after 240 min. A significant slowing down of the leaching rate in the final stage of leaching was noted. The reason for this was elemental sulphur, formed during the process, precipitated at the particle surfaces. The influence of stirring speed on the dissolution of chalcopyrite was investigated at stirring speeds of 100, 200, 300 and 450 rpm at 80 °C in solutions containing 1.5 M H The results ( The same results were obtained during the leaching of chalcopyrite by hydrogen peroxide in the presence of ethylene glycol by During the chalcopyrite leaching in the H The influence of H The copper leaching increased from 47% to 75% after 240 min, when the concentration of H The influence of NaNO The copper leaching increased from 43% to 75% after 240 min, when the concentration of NaNO According to the stoichiometry presented in Eq. Selection of a kinetic model for the linearization of the experimental results ( It is possible to determine values of the reaction half time and time for different degrees of leaching, for each temperature, for the isotherms in From The variation in − Equation: The values of parameter  Similar values of activation energy (50–95 kJ/mol) were found using diffusion kinetic models for the chalcopyrite leaching by ferric chloride and ferric sulphate (  Characterization of the solid residuals after the leaching process included X-ray and SEM/EDX analyses. The solid residual, obtained at 80 °C under the following conditions: stirring speed 300 rpm, 1.5 M H The phases identified by XRD were elemental sulphur and chalcopyrite ( The SEM images of chalcopyrite concentrate and leach residue are presented in SEM is sustained by EDX analysis, which for marked area in The leaching kinetics of chalcopyrite concentrate from the Rudnik polymetallic ore in Serbia by sulphuric acid and sodium nitrate were studied and discussed. Experimental data, thermodynamic calculations and chemical, XRD and SEM/EDX analyses for the phases present in both the starting concentrate and the residues after the leaching process with H The dissolution of copper increased with increasing sulphuric acid and sodium nitrate concentrations, and with decreasing particle size. The reaction rate decreased with increasing stirring speed and it was the highest at 100 rpm. The temperature influence on the reaction rate is significant: a temperature increase from 70 to 90 °C was accompanied by an increase in leaching degree from 28% to 70% after 120 min. The maximum leaching degree was 75.5% at 90 °C after 240 min. The kinetic data for copper leaching show a good fit to the mixed control model, and the rate is controlled by the surface reaction in the initial stages, but later it becomes controlled of the lixiviant diffusion through the sulphur layer, which is formed as the reaction product during the leaching. The activation energy was calculated to be 83 kJ/mol. The characterization of the leach residue with the help of XRD and SEM/EDX confirmed formation of elemental sulphur, precipitated at the particle surfaces.