The Early Jurassic (ca. 177Ma) Bokan Mountain granitic complex, located on southern Prince of Wales Island, southernmost Alaska, cross-cuts Paleozoic igneous and metasedimentary rocks of the Alexander terrane of the North American Cordillera and was emplaced during a rifting event. The complex is a circular body (~3km in diameter) of peralkaline granitic composition that has a core of arfvedsonite granite surrounded by aegirine granite. All the rock-forming minerals typically record a two-stage growth history and aegirine and arfvedsonite were the last major phases to crystallize from the magma. The Bokan granites and related dikes have SiO2 from 72 to 78wt.%, high iron (FeO (tot) ~3–4.5wt.%) and alkali (8–10wt.%) concentrations with high FeO(tot)/(FeO(tot)
                     +MgO) ratios (typically >0.95) and the molar Al2O3/(Na2O+K2O) ratio <1. The granitic rocks are characterized by elevated contents of rare earth elements (REE), Th, U and high field strength elements (HFSE) and low contents of Ca, Sr, Ba and Eu, typical of peralkaline granites. The granites have high positive εNd values which are indicative of a mantle signature. The parent magma is inferred to be derived from an earlier metasomatized lithospheric mantle by low degrees of partial melting and generated the Bokan granitic melt through extensive fractional crystallization. The Bokan complex hosts significant rare-metal (REE, Y, U, Th, Nb) mineralization that is related to the late-stage crystallization history of the complex which involved the overlap of emplacement of felsic dikes, including pegmatite bodies, and generation of orthomagmatic fluids. The abundances of REE, HFSE, U and Th as well as Pb and Nd isotopic values of the pluton and dikes were modified by orthomagmatic hydrothermal fluids highly enriched in the strongly incompatible trace elements, which also escaped along zones of structural weakness to generate rare-metal mineralization. The latter was deposited in two stages: the first relates to the latest stage of magma emplacement and is associated with felsic dikes that intruded along the faults and shear deformations, whereas the second stage involved ingress of hydrothermal fluids that both remobilized and enriched the initial magmatic mineralization. Mineralization is mostly composed of “new” minerals. Fluorine complexing played a role during the transportation of REE and HFSE in hydrothermal fluids and oxygen isotopes in the granites and quartz veins negate the significant incursion of an external fluid and support a dominantly orthomagmatic hydrothermal system. Many other REE–HFSE deposits hosted by peralkaline felsic rocks (nepheline syenites, peralkaline granites and peralkaline trachytes) were formed by a similar two stage process.Peralkaline granites are somewhat rare rock-types in the Earth's crust, but they attract a disproportionally large amount of attention in the geological literature because of their unusual geochemical characteristics and important economic potential (e.g., The Early Jurassic peralkaline granitic complex of Bokan Mountain ( The Bokan Mountain granitic complex hosts the former Ross–Adams mine, the only uranium producer to date from Alaska ( The purpose of this paper is to present data on the petrography, major- and trace element chemistry, and radiogenic and stable isotopes of the Jurassic Bokan granites. These data are then used to evaluate the origin of the parental magma of the Bokan Mountain complex, the processes that account for the geochemical evolution of the complex, including the origin of extreme trace element enrichment in both this and other similar types of granites, and to comment on the origin of the rare-metal mineralization. The Bokan Mountain granitic complex (BMC), a crudely circular intrusion about 3 There are two main types of rare-metal mineralization related to the Bokan complex. The first type includes felsic, aplitic and pegmatitic dikes and occurs within or adjacent to the BMC, whereas the second type is confined to a shear zone and encompasses the past producing Ross–Adams uranium deposit. In the central part of the BMC, the mineralization of the first type occurs within pegmatite dikes up to 10 The granitic rocks of the BMC are generally leucocratic and typically contain about 2–10 The granites include diverse rock types that range from saccharoidal aplites to prevalent medium- to coarse-grained granites and the dominant textures are primary porphyritic and late protoclastic ( The granitic rocks are composed mainly of quartz (~ Although sodic amphibole (Fe Subhedral sodic amphibole crystals typically record a two-stage growth history. Stage I is characterized by being inclusion-rich with melt, fluid and solid inclusions, whereas stage II represents an inclusion-free overgrowth ( Accessory mineral phases, such as zircon, monazite, xenotime, titanite, fluorite and Fe–Ti oxide, are ubiquitous in the BMC granitic rocks. More than twenty REE-, HFSE- and U–Th-bearing minerals have been identified at the Bokan complex and its dikes (e.g., In mineralized dikes, the REE, yttrium and HFSE mineralization has complex mineral assemblages which frequently consist of intergrowths, pseudomorphs, cavity and fracture fillings and mineral rims (see The granitic rocks of the Bokan complex ( The Bokan rocks are distinctly enriched in REE, Th, U and HFSE, but depleted in Ba, Sr and Eu ( The abundances of Zr (800–3000 The Bokan granites also have high Ga contents (37–47 The REE abundances for the Bokan granites, particularly the heavy REE (HREE), are high and the (La/Yb) On the primitive mantle normalized plots ( Nd isotopic ratios for the rocks of the Bokan complex and related dikes are given in Eleven whole rock samples of granitic and dike rock material from the BMC were analyzed for their Pb isotopic composition and U, Pb and Th contents. The results are reported in A large range in initial (age-corrected) Pb isotopes cannot be readily explained by crustal contamination as it would require significantly variable contributions from contaminants which may be hard to reconcile with such an evolved and homogeneous magma. However, the spread of the age-corrected Pb isotopic values is more easily explained if the rocks were instead modified due to interaction with late-stage fluids which have changed the U/Pb and Th/Pb ratios. The age correction of measured Pb isotopes assumes that measured Parent/Daughter (U/Pb, Th/Pb) ratios are the result of in situ growth of radiogenic Pb from their parent with a proportional change in the original magmatic U/Pb and Th/Pb ratios. However, these ratios have likely been affected by the ingress of late-stage fluids which changed the concentrations of Th and U. Thus, for example, late- to post-magmatic modification of (U, Th)/Pb ratios yields the widely disparate age-corrected The galena sample is considered to be the best approximate of the isotopic composition of lead in the melt and fluids at the time of crystallization of the BMC and formation of related orthomagmatic mineralization. The array defined, which provides a geologically meaningless age of 1034 Seven samples of quartz from granitic material were analyzed for their δ In terms of the granitic samples, it is important to note that δ The quartz data for the pegmatite and vein samples are similar to the quartz values from the granites, hence, it can be inferred that the melt compositions are also the same. The quartz data for the pegmatite and vein samples can also be used to evaluate the isotopic composition of the fluid phase, with which the quartz would be in equilibrium, thereby indirectly assessing its source. The narrow range of δ The Bokan granites display features typical of peralkaline granites. These traits include: (1) the presence of alkali amphibole and alkali pyroxene in the mode, (2) molar Al The compositional characteristics of the peralkaline granitic rocks of the Bokan complex, which include high Fe/Mg ratios, high contents of SiO Negative anomalies of Ba, Sr and Eu on the primitive mantle-normalized spidergram plots for the Bokan rocks ( As the magma was poor in Mg and rich in Fe, the mafic minerals (aegirine and arfvedsonite) were very close to the Fe-end members and as such they were the last rock-forming minerals to crystallize from the magma. These minerals typically enclose accessory HFSE- and REE-bearing minerals (e.g., zircon and fergusonite). Initially, the magma was oxidized, as indicated by near end member aegirine. The late stages of crystallization were more reducing (but accompanied by higher water pressure) leading to the crystallization of arfvedsonite (with high proportion of Fe Peralkaline/alkaline magmas are conventionally considered to be derived by low degrees of partial melting of a mantle source (e.g., Crustal contamination of a nepheline syenitic magma was invoked to explain the origin of quartz syenites of the Ilimaussaq complex of Greenland ( The other two models (melting of lower crust or lithospheric mantle) are plausible. However, quantitative geochemical modeling of these processes is hampered by the fact that some trace elements are prone to mobilization (Rb, Ba, K), whereas others (REE, Y, Th, U and HFSE) in addition to the Pb and Nd isotopes, were probably modified by hydrothermal fluids. Since the BMC granites are compositionally similar to some recent felsic volcanic rocks such as pantellerites (e.g., The genesis of the REE and HFSE mineralization associated with the peralkaline felsic rocks is not well understood and debate remains as to whether the mineralization is magmatic, hydrothermal or a combination of the two (e.g., It has been documented elsewhere (e.g., Fluid saturation of the magma in the late stages of the magma evolution is suggested to have resulted in its rapid degassing and consequent release of highly fractionated, silica-saturated melts, subsequently followed by an escape of related highly evolved fluids. These fluids, which would have been localized to the most evolved parts of the highly fractionated magma, were enriched in F (as also indicated by a widespread occurrence of fluorite) and facilitated the complexing and mobility of REE and HFSE. The escaping fluids would have preferentially traveled along zones of structural weakness, likely corresponding to the present deformation zones, with the precipitation of the U, Th, REE and HFSE mineralization due to fluid-wall rock interaction and related changes in the fluid chemistry. These fluids also in part leached REE and HFSE from the earlier formed, primary magmatic phases, as has been discussed for other similar complexes ( Mineralization of REE, as well as HFSE, U and Th, at the BMC is hosted by a variety of accessory and/or ore minerals. The primary magmatic accessory mineral paragenesis was extensively overprinted by younger hydrothermal event(s) that remobilized and enriched the REE, HFSE, U and Th and produced new mineral assemblages. Most of the REE- and HFSE-bearing minerals are post-magmatic phases which pseudomorphically replaced primary minerals. The proportions of LREE minerals (including bastnäsite and synchysite) and HREE minerals (including zircon, fergusonite and xenotime) are highly variable, particularly in the dikes due to the influence of late-stage orthomagmatic fluids which variably infiltrated and modified the minor and trace element contents of the samples. The significant variations of the REE patterns within the pluton ( Although most of the BMC contains elevated concentrations of REE and HFSE as the results of both magmatic and (orthomagmatic) hydrothermal processes, the mineralization is preferentially associated with structurally-controlled alteration zones where post-magmatic-hydrothermal fluids circulated mainly along cracks and fractures. Fluorite commonly occurs in the mineralized parts of the rocks and forms veinlets in the hornfelses around the contact with the complex. The presence of fluorite indicates an appreciable amount of fluorine in the aqueous fluids, suggesting that HFSE and REE might have been transported in hydrothermal fluids mainly as fluoride complexes. The interaction of such Ca-poor, F-rich fluids with Ca-bearing rocks or fluids would lead to the deposition of REE- and HFSE-bearing minerals, as well as fluorite ( Evolved peralkaline felsic igneous rocks host one of the most economically important resources of HREE and Y. These host rocks include nepheline syenites, peralkaline granites and trachytes and normally occur in continental intraplate settings. Typically, the REE and HFSE mineralization is closely related to the crystallization of magma, particularly to its late stages. The deposits and potential deposits can be grouped into three types. The first is associated with nepheline syenites of layered alkaline intrusions (e.g., Ilimaussaq, Greenland; Lovozero, Russia; Thor Lake/Nechalacho, NWT, Canada; Norra Kärr, Sweden; Pilanesberg, South Africa). The mineralization in these complexes occurs in layers with cumulate textures which indicate that the initial REE mineralization was of magmatic origin. The second type is related to peralkaline granitic rocks and the REE mineralization is hosted in pegmatites (including the NYF type of All these exploitable or potentially exploitable peralkaline rock-hosted deposits have significantly higher content of HREE and Y, but lower LREE than those of carbonatites ( The proposed model for the evolution of the Jurassic Bokan complex invokes a parent mafic magma which was derived from a lithospheric mantle metasomatically enriched in HFSE, REE, Th and U, and probably halogens, thus suggesting that these source rocks were phlogopite and/or amphibole-bearing. These mantle melts (possibly alkali basalt) were modified by fractional crystallization during their ascent and subsequently in a high-level magma chamber where they underwent further differentiation resulting in the generation of extremely fractionated magma. Batches of this highly fractionated magma rose to form either a high-level stock or, alternatively (as The early-formed phases that dominate the evolved felsic magma, mainly alkali feldspar and quartz, do not contain any significant amounts of HFSE, REE, Th and U, thus their crystallization led to the further increase of the concentrations of these elements in the residual melt. At an advanced stage of fractional crystallization, the magma became fluid-saturated and over-pressured which resulted in the escape of both evolved melt and metal-rich fluid and the deposition of the U, Th, HFSE and REE mineralization which occurred preferentially in zones of structural weakness. The fluids were released from the late-stage, deep and hotter central part of the magma chamber and migrated towards the cooler, marginal part of the intrusion ( Melts and fluids also penetrated the country rocks along fractures and fault/shear zones for up to several km from the intrusive center. The occurrence of mineralized aplitic quartz-aegirine lenses within the structurally-controlled dikes suggests that the mineralization process already started during the magmatic stage. The mineralized bodies in these zones initially crystallized as peralkaline granitic pegmatites and aplites, but were extensively overprinted by hydrothermal fluids which also produced a significant metasomatic enrichment and remobilization of rare metals. It was during this fluid–rock interaction that most REE and HFSE minerals were formed. Thus, the deposits are the result of at least two periods of mineralization with both being associated with the late stages of magma evolution. The first period produced primary magmatic mineralization related to crystallization of highly fractionated peralkaline melts, whereas the second period involved the late magmatic to hydrothermal fluids which remobilized and enriched the original mineral assemblage during multiple events. These orthomagmatic fluids escaped during the last stages of the magma evolution. Other REE-HFSE deposits hosted by peralkaline felsic rocks (nepheline syenites, peralkaline granites and trachytes) also record two similar stages of mineralization. We thank Nelson Eby, Erin Todd and two anonymous reviewers for constructive reviews of the manuscript. Support for this research was provided by the Whole-rock major and trace elements in 48 samples ( Ten whole-rock samples were selected for Nd isotopic analyses ( Eleven whole-rock samples were analyzed for Pb isotopes with thermal ionization mass spectrometry ( Galena from a pegmatite dike of the I&L zone was separated from a crushed sample by handpicking mm-size grains using a binocular microscope. The galena was dissolved in 8 Seven samples of granitic material were analyzed for 