It is possible that the flavonoids that are found in many foods might have a protective effect against osteoclastic activity. However, little information is available about the effects of flavonoids on osteoblastogenesis. Therefore, we investigated the effects of quercetin, a flavonoid, on the metabolism of rat calvarial osteoblast-like cells (ROB cells) in culture. The proliferation of cells was markedly inhibited upon exposure of cells to quercetin at 5×10−6 to 1×10−5 M. Quercetin at 1×10−5 M did not induce apoptosis in ROB cells but arrested cells at the G1 phase of the cell cycle. In addition, quercetin stimulated the expression of mRNA for p21waf1/cip1, which inhibits the activity of cyclin-dependent kinases, and inhibited the phosphorylation of histone H1. Furthermore, after cells had ceased to proliferate, quercetin reduced the activity of alkaline phosphatase, the level of expression of mRNA for osteocalcin, the rate of deposition of Ca2+, and the formation of mineralized nodules, all of which are markers of osteoblast differentiation. These findings indicate that quercetin inhibits the proliferation, differentiation, and mineralization of osteoblastic cells.Osteoblasts are bone-forming cells. The formation of bone involves a complex series of events that include the proliferation and differentiation of osteoprogenitor cells and result eventually in the formation of a mineralized extracellular matrix. Numerous cytokines, hormones, and growth factors control the formation of bone by regulating both the proliferation and the differentiation of osteoblasts. Bone metabolic diseases develop when there is an imbalance between the formation and resorption of bone, which, in turn, depend on the interactions between osteoblasts and osteoclasts Quercetin is one of the major flavonoids in certain species of plants (for example, 200–600 mg quercetin/kg onion), in which it is present mainly as glycosides (rutin; Quercetin [2-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-3,5,7-trihydroxy-4 ROB cells were isolated enzymatically from calvariae of newborn Wistar rats as described previously ROB cells were replated in 12-well plates (area of each well, 3.8 cm Cells were plated in 55-cm We detected mRNAs for mouse p21 ROB cells were plated in 55-cm To isolate cyclin-cdk complexes, 10 μl of cell extracts were added to 5 μl Suc1-beads and incubated for 1 h at 4 °C. The complexes were washed five times with 1 ml of kinase buffer (80 mM sodium-β-glycerophosphate, 20 mM EGTA, 15 mM MgCl ROB cells were subcultured in 12-well plates (3.8 cm Total RNA was isolated from ROB cells that had been treated with quercetin or vehicle for indicated times. Then, total RNA (10 μg) was subjected to electrophoresis on a 1% agarose gel that contained 2.2 M formaldehyde and the bands of RNA were transferred to a nylon membrane (Hybond-N+; Amersham Bioscience, Uppsala, Sweden). After the membrane had been baked at 80 °C for 2 h, the RNA on the membrane was allowed to hybridize overnight with cDNAs for rat osteocalcin and GAPDH at 42 °C in PerfectHyb® Hybridization Solution (TOYOBO, Tokyo, Japan). Each cDNA probe was radiolabeled with a Ready-to-Go™ kit (Amersham Bioscience). The membrane was washed twice for 5 min each in 1× sodium chloride/sodium citrate (SSC; 0.15 M NaCl, 15 mM sodium citrate, pH 7.0) that contained 0.1% SDS at room temperature and twice for 1 h each in 1×SSC that contained 0.1% SDS at 55 °C, and then, it was exposed to an imaging plate overnight. The signals on the plate were analyzed with a Bioimage Analyzer. ROB cells were subcultured in α-MEM that contained 10% fetal bovine serum, 5 mM β glycerophosphate, and 50 μg/ml ascorbic acid. After cells had reached confluence (day 3), quercetin was added at various concentrations to the culture medium. The amount of Ca ROB cells that had been cultured with and without 1×10 Numerical data were expressed as means±S.D. of results from three or four cultures, and the significance of differences was analyzed by Student's The exposure of ROB cells to 5×10 We examined the effects of quercetin on progression of the cell cycle and found that incubation of ROB cells with 1×10 We examined the effects of quercetin on the osteoblastic differentiation of ROB cells after they had proliferated by exposing confluent ROB cells to quercetin at various concentrations. The aim of this study was to clarify the effects of quercetin on the metabolism of osteoblasts. Using rat calvarial primary osteoblast-like cells, ROB cells, that had previously been well characterized, we found that quercetin inhibited not only the proliferation but also the differentiation and mineralization of osteoblasts. Our results show that quercetin inhibits the proliferation of ROB cells. Quercetin induces apoptosis in a variety of tumor cells, such as Burkitt's lymphoma and human ovarian cancer cells (MCAS; After ROB cells had reached confluence, quercetin inhibited both differentiation and mineralization, as indicated by markers that are characteristic of the osteoblast phenotype, such as alkaline phosphatase activity, the synthesis of osteocalcin, and the deposition of Ca Quercetin had significant effects on the metabolism of cultured osteoblasts in the present study. The concentrations (1×10 We have screened isoflavones for the ability to regulate the proliferation, differentiation, and function of cultured osteoblasts and osteoclasts. To date, we reported that synthetic flavonoid ipriflavone increased the deposition of Ca The authors thank Dr. K. Ohsumi, Dr. E. Okumura, and Mr. R. Matsuoka for histone H1 kinase assay, and Mrs. R. Arai for her skilled technical support. This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports, and Culture of Japan.