Fine grinding, required to liberate valuable minerals in finely disseminated deposits, creates significant challenges for beneficiation. For these deposits, traditional gravity separation techniques are often ineffective, and centrifugal separators, such as the Knelson Concentrator, are required. The Knelson Concentrator is well established for treating gold ores, and due to its relatively low cost and small environmental impact when compared to other separation techniques, it has become an active area of research for the processing of lower specific gravity (SG) minerals. This work investigates the optimum operating conditions when processing fine (−53 μm) low SG material using a laboratory Knelson Concentrator. A synthetic feed comprised of magnetite (SG 5.2) and quartz (SG 2.65), with grades of 5%, 10% and 15% magnetite, was used to mimic a low-density ore. Central composite design was used to design the experiments and response surface method was used for optimization, with the experimental variables being bowl speed (G), fluidizing water rate (L/min) and solids feed rate (g/min). The results indicate, for 5% and 10% magnetite feeds, that bowl speed impacts concentrate grade negatively and heavy mineral recovery positively, while the fluidizing water rate has an opposite effect on separation. A trade off between grade and recovery must therefore be made when processing this material. When processing the 15% feed, maximum concentrate grade and magnetite recovery were achieved at high bowl speeds and low fluidizing water rates.As mineral deposits are becoming increasingly more finely disseminated, the recovery of valuable minerals is exceedingly more difficult. Fine grinding, required for liberation, creates many challenges when trying to treat these ores, and many separation techniques become ineffective. Gravity separation techniques, used to separate minerals based on differences in specific gravity (SG), traditionally require relatively coarse material to efficiently concentrate valuable minerals. However, the development of centrifugal gravity separators, such as the Knelson Concentrator, has allowed for the processing of much finer material. The Knelson Concentrator is a compact centrifugal separator with an active fluidized bed to concentrate high SG minerals ( In this study central composite design (CCD) was used to design the experiments and response surface method (RSM) was used for optimization. The experimental variables are bowl speed (G), fluidizing water rate (L/min) and solids feed rate (g/min). A synthetic feed comprised of magnetite and quartz was used to mimic a low-density ore. Three different feed samples with varying magnetite grades (5%, 10% and 15%) were investigated to determine how feed grade impacts the optimum operating conditions. The rational behind this study is to determine ideal operating conditions for processing fine (−53 μm) low-density material using a laboratory Knelson Concentrator; and to serve as a reference for the optimization of plant operations. Magnetite used for this work was obtained from Gem and Mineral Miners Inc. (USA) and the quartz used in this study was purchased from U.S. Silica (USA). Magnetite was pulverized using a LM2 laboratory pulverizing mill (Labtechnics, Australia), screened to −53 μm and subsequently purified using a lab-scale WD(20) wet drum permanent magnetic separator (Carpco Inc., USA), equipped with an iron-based permanent magnet (low intensity; 0.03 T at drum surface). The quartz was screened wet at 53 μm to remove any oversize quartz particles. The particle size distributions [determined using a LA-920 particle size analyser (Horiba, Japan)] of magnetite and quartz are shown in A lab scale KC-MD3 Knelson Concentrator (FLSmidth, Canada) was used for this study. For each test, 1 kg of synthetic sample was used. Independent variables [bowl speed (G), fluidizing water rate (L/min) and solids feed rate (g/min)] were set to their desired conditions. The range used for bowl speed and fluidizing water rater were based on the limitations of the equipment (maximum and minimum possible speeds of the unit; maximum fluidizing water rate to prevent washing of all the material from the bowl and minimum to maintain for sufficient fluidization for separation). The range of feed rate was based on the work of Prof. Laplante who suggested feed rates of 300 g/min for 75 μm material when performing gravity recovery gold test work ( RSM was used to investigate the relationship between independent variables and the response; and possible interactions between the independent variables and their effects on the separation performance of a Knelson Concentrator. CCD, a well-suited RSM for fitting a second-order response surface, was used to design the experiments ( The number of tests required for the CCD can be calculated using Eq. With three variables ( For each Knelson test, the bowl speed, fluidizing water rate and solids feed rate were changed successively during the tests with respect to the central composite design. The mathematical relationship between the three independent variables and responses can be approximated by a second order model, such as Eq. Using experimental data (grade and recovery) from each experiment, a second order regression model which describes the concentration process was produced. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was used to determine the regression coefficients and detect the agreement of the model. Statistical importance of each variable on the response was found at a 95% confidence level by using Fischer ( The responses (grade and recovery) for each test run for the 5%, 10% and 15% feed grades are shown in To estimate the significance and accuracy of the developed models, ANOVA was applied ( Once the model was verified, Student’s  Similar results were observed when processing the 10% magnetite feed (  Although the findings from The above findings demonstrate that when processing relatively low grade (≤10%) feed a balance between both bowl speed and fluidizing water rate is required. For high grade feeds (15%), high grade and high recovery is realized at high bowl speeds, low fluidizing water rates and high solid feed rates. Comparing the significant parameters from each data set it can be concluded that with low feed grades, the force balance acting on particles plays a much greater role in optimizing separation; whereas, with high feed grades optimizing the properties of the fluidizing bed becomes more important. For the 5% magnetite feed, product grade is influenced by only bowl speed (negative), fluidizing water rate (positive) and an interaction between bowl speed and fluidizing water rate (negative); whereas, recovery is influenced by only bowl speed (positive) and a quadratic effect of bowl speed (negative). This suggests that high grade is predominantly achieved with low centrifugal force and high drag force to reject as much low SG material as possible and recover only the heaviest material (resulting in low recovery). High recovery is obtained by using high bowl speeds to induce a high centrifugal acceleration on particles and recover as much high SG material as possible. However, this also results in high recovery of low SG material (and therefore low product grades) and after a certain point, further increases in bowl speed result in the process becoming completely unselective and becomes detrimental to recovery. For the 10% magnetite feed, it is similarly suggested that a balance between drag force and centrifugal acceleration is required to achieve ideal separation. However, in this case there is a larger quantity of high SG material to replace the low SG particles which are recovered in the concentrating bed throughout the process. This allows for greater substitution of material and the properties of the fluidizing bed become more important. In this case slightly higher bowl speeds are recommended (bowl speed now has a quadratic influence on both product grade and recovery) and fluidizing water rate becomes an important variable for the recovery of magnetite. The negative influence of fluidizing water rate on recovery suggests a tightly packed fluidized particle bed is beneficial. For the 15% magnetite feed there is now sufficient high SG material to achieve high grade and recovery simultaneously through the optimization of the properties of the fluidizing bed. In this case, the recovery process occurs mainly through the substitution of low SG particles with high SG material in the concentrating bed. There is no need to increase the fluidising water to achieve higher drag force acting on particles to reject low SG material. At this feed grade, elevated bowl speeds are recommended along with low fluidizing water rates to keep a tightly packed concentrating bed. Feed rate is also an important variable with high feed rates desired for optimum separation. There is also a positive interaction between bowl speed and feed rate suggesting higher feed rates are recommended at higher bowl speeds. The influence of feed rate suggests that bringing high SG material into the concentrating bed quicker likely prevents the settling of low SG material allowing for easier substitution. It is important to note that the findings of this study are specific for the processing of 1 kg feed samples. For low-grade feeds (≤ 10%), processing more material is likely to result in an improved concentrate grade, as feeding more material will result in greater substitution of quartz with magnetite in the concentrating bed. This, however, is not likely to have a beneficial effect on recovery and after a certain point (when the bowl is overloaded) will be detrimental to the recovery of magnetite. It is also important to note that the industrial application of a Knelson Concentrator to feeds like those studied here, would require the use of a continuous system, however, work by The findings from this work could also be extended to the processing of a high-grade low-SG deposit where any loss of value may have a significant impact on the profitability of a mineral processing plant. A high grade (15% or 10%) feed could first be processed at its optimum conditions and then the tailings could be reprocessed at more optimal conditions for a low-grade feed (5%). An example of such a flowsheet is shown in This study utilized response surface design experiments to determine the effect of Knelson operating variables (bowl speed, fluidizing water rate and solids feed rate) on grade and recovery of magnetite from a synthetic sample consisting of magnetite and quartz with three different feed grades. The conclusions are as follows: The empirical regression equations as a function of the independent variables were derived by the RSM model for the grade and recovery of magnetite from feeds with 5%, 10% and 15% magnetite. The regression models are considered acceptable and fit well for all three feed grades examined. The regression models for each feed grade have p – values less than 0.05 for magnetite grade and recovery, indicating that the selected models are significant to the responses. Feed grade has a significant effect on the optimal operating conditions for grade and recovery. Bowl speed and fluidizing water rate are significant operating variables for all three feed grades examined. Solids feed rate only had a significant impact when processing the 15% magnetite feed. A trade off between grade and recovery must be made when processing material with low feed grades (≤10%). Grade and recovery can be simultaneously maximized for the 15% magnetite feed. Comparing the significant parameters from each data set it can be concluded that with low feed grades, the force balance acting on particles plays a much greater role in optimizing separation; whereas with high feed grades optimizing the properties of the fluidizing bed becomes more important. Optimum operating conditions were obtained at a bowl speed, fluidizing water rate and solids feed rate of 45 G, 4.8 L/min and 200 g/min, for the 5% feed; 80 G, 2.6 L/min and 200 g/min, for the 10% feed; and 100 G, 1.1 L/min and 275 g/min for the 15% feed. The authors would like to acknowledge the See