To achieve a better understanding of the nutritional value of grazed forages to ruminants, it is necessary to improve our knowledge of the accessibility and nature of nutrients available to micro-organisms in the rumen. The objectives of this experiment were to compare release of cell contents and comminution of particles during ingestive mastication in dairy cows fed four temperate species or varieties of fresh forages, and to analyse the respective effects of chewing behaviour and mechanical properties of plant tissue on release of cell contents. Six Holstein dairy cows were fed indoors with four species/varieties of fresh forages being white clover (WC) (Trifolium repens L., cv Alice), tetraploid perennial ryegrass (tPR) (Lolium perenne L., cv Chéops), diploid perennial ryegrass (dPR) (Lolium perenne L., cv Ohio) and tall fescue (TF) (Festuca arundinacea Schreb., cv Barcel). The design was two 4×4 Latin squares with 4 periods of 1 day each and two replications of two treatments on two cows each period. One Latin square was completed in May and the other in June. Ingestive boli were collected directly at the cardia of the cows during the morning meal after manually emptying the rumen. The intake rate averaged 62.5gDM/min, and chewing behaviour parameters were unaffected by herbage. The average proportions of intracellular constituents (ICs) released during ingestive mastication were 265, 203 and 364g/kg of ICs ingested for neutral detergent soluble (NDS), intracellular N and water-soluble carbohydrates (WSC), respectively. For most ICs considered, the proportions released during mastication were higher for white clover and fescue compared with ryegrasses. The proportions of intracellular N released were higher for tetraploid compared with diploid ryegrass. The median size of the bolus particles was unaffected by the herbage species or variety. In contrast, the median size of the particles in the boli was strongly affected by individual cow (P<0.01), whereas the proportions of ICs released showed no such effect. It appeared that those cows with the lowest reduction in particle sizes by ingestive chewing were those with a smaller molar surface area. None of the parameters measured (i.e., release of ICs, median size of particles in the boli and chewing behaviour) could be related to the shear properties of the herbage. Results illustrate the complexity of the interaction between the structure of the plant tissue and the physical damage of the particles during chewing.To improve our understanding of the nutritional value of grazed forages for ruminants, a better description of the accessibility and nature of nutrients available to the ruminal micro-organisms is required. In grazed forages, most nitrogenous compounds (and all soluble carbohydrates) are intracellular constituents (ICs) ( The release kinetics of ICs among plant species, varieties and maturities has not been well characterized. It has been shown that release kinetics of ICs during ingestive mastication and digestion depends primarily on the individual ICs ( The central focus in this experiment was to characterize variability of the proportions of ICs released during ingestive mastication among four herbages chosen because of their wide range in the mechanical properties of their tissues ( The experiment compared release of ICs during ingestion, chewing behaviour and comminution of particles in four temperate herbages commonly used for grazing in the oceanic climates of Europe ( Ingestive boli were collected from six lactating dairy cows fed indoors with fresh herbage. The experimental design consisted of two 4 Cows were fitted with large ruminal cannulae (i.d., 123 The herbage fed during the 4 days of each Latin square was cut on four 0.1 During the two Latin squares, the cows were fed a new herbage, among the four tested, each day at 10:00 Fifteen consecutive ingestive boli were collected from each of the six cows, during a test meal of a few minutes between 8:30 and 10:00 The proportion of ICs released during ingestive mastication was measured by the method described by For the second Latin square in June, the particle-size distribution of the boli was measured by wet sieving on a Fritsch electromagnetic siever (Analysette 3, Fritsch, Idar-Oberstein, Germany) containing seven sieves. Sieve sizes ( The length and width of the particles retained on the top sieve were analysed by image analysis. Before being filtered on filter paper, the contents of the top sieve was washed and spread onto three large white enamelled trays. A small quantity of water was kept in each tray to cover the particles and prevent dehydration, while particles were manually separated with pliers. To avoid producing shade, the light source was placed perpendicularly to each tray and centred. A standard particle measuring 5 Eating time, number of jaw movements and number of boli were manually recorded during collection of boli. The week following the experiment, the dental formula of the six cows was recorded. Measurements were taken of the length of the incisor breadth, the protrusion of the incisor arcade ( To determine the DM content of the offered herbage, two representative 700 For morphological separation and measurement of the tiller or foliole length, 40 The over all mechanical properties of the herbage cell walls was characterized as the energy required to break up each organ by shearing, which was assumed to be similar to the energy expended during mastication. The shear energies of the herbage samples were measured in June only. Thirty tillers for each grass (tPR, DPR and TF) and 30 petioles for WC were randomly chosen and cut at their base, directly in the pasture, the day before and after each Latin square. To avoid dehydration of plant organs before measurement of shear properties ( Chemical analyses were on freeze-dried samples of offered herbage and rinsed ingestive boli, after grinding through a 0.8 The proportion of IC released from ingested boli was defined as the difference between the quantity of IC ingested in the bolus and the quantity of IC remaining in the bolus after rinsing, divided by the quantity of IC ingested for the bolus. The quantity of IC ingested for the bolus was calculated assuming that the quantity of aNDFom in the bolus was the same as the quantity of aNDFom in the ingested herbage before mastication. The final formula is ( The median size of the particles in the boli and their size dispersion were calculated using a logarithmic normal distribution ( The shear energy of each organ was calculated by integrating the force displacement curve observed while shearing the bundles on the texture analyser. Before the calculation, the mechanical friction due to the device was eliminated by subtracting the force displacement curve observed on the empty device from the force displacement curve observed while shearing the bundles. The friction of the plant material along the blade after the bundles were cut was discarded by integrating only the part of the curve observed at the time of cutting the bundles. The index of shear tenacity (mJ Data were analysed by analysis of variance using the MIXED option of In the first model, the data obtained for the grasses in May and June were analysed together, according to the following model. For the proportions of ICs released, the parameters related to the particle-size distribution and the chewing behaviour parameters, the model sums of squares were separated into effects due to month, herbage and cow, as well as the interaction between month and herbage. The interaction between month and period was also included as a random effect. For parameters related to the offered herbage, the effect due to cow was removed from the model. The effects of fescue In the second model, the second Latin square ( The interaction between month and herbage was barely significant ( In grasses in May and June, the average herbage DM mass of the sward above 5 The interaction between month and grasses was significant for all the parameters of the morphological composition ( In June, the herbage DM mass of the sward above 5 In June, both ryegrasses and WC were in a reproductive stage while TF was in a vegetative stage with no heads ( The average time taken to collect the 16 boli was 254.9 In June, the DM intake per bolus, the DM intake rate and the DM content and dry weight of boli were lower (P<0.05) in WC compared to grasses ( Average proportions of NDS, intracellular N, chlorophyll and WSC released during ingestive mastication were 265, 222, 173 and 377 In June, the average median size of chewed particles was 9.1 An effect of cow on the median size of the chewed particles occurred, with the median particle size of the particles in the boli collected from cows 6249 and 7511 being twice as high as particles collected from the four other cows (13.5 Among the six cows used in the study, one was 8 years old at the beginning of the experiment, three were 6 years old and two were 4 years old. The two youngest cows were lighter than the four others (540 Proportions of NDS, intracellular N, chlorophyll and WSC released during ingestive mastication in this experiment were in the range of the proportions observed by Herbage species or variety affected release of most of the ICs measured, and proportions of NDS and intracellular N released during ingestive mastication were higher for white clover compared with grasses in June. Over all, proportions of NDS, intracellular N and WSC released were higher for fescue The values, and the range, among species in shear energy and shear tenacity in this experiment are consistent with previous studies. In the present study, the energy necessary to cut a leaf of diploid ryegrass perpendicularly to its main axis was estimated as 1.81 As there was no strong effect of herbage on chewing behaviour, most of the observed effect of herbage on the proportion of ICs released may be attributable to the histology of the species or variety used. However, it is possible that the absence of effects of herbages on chewing behaviour came from the large variability of the chewing behaviour among cows and the low number of cows in the study. For instance, the difference of 7.5 jaw movements per minute between WC and the ryegrasses in June could have been significant ( The higher release of NDS and intracellular N from white clover Along with lower mechanical resistance of the tissues, it may also be that membranes of white clover are less stable than in ryegrass. This could be inferred from the higher release of soluble proteins during The shear tenacity index was not a good synthetic criterion to explain variation in the proportions of NDS and WSC released from the grasses used in this study. Indeed, proportions of NDS and WSC released were lower for fescue compared with ryegrasses in both May and June. While this result could be associated with a lower mean shear tenacity index and a lower proportion of stems in fescue compared with ryegrasses in June, this was not the case in May when fescue and ryegrasses were vegetative. Indeed, in our experiment, as observed previously ( The size of the plant cells may be more relevant in explaining the higher release of NDS and WSC from fescue compared with grasses, and tetraploid compared with diploid ryegrass. Fescue can be distinguished from ryegrass, whatever the plant tissue considered, by having a higher cell volume than perennial ryegrass ( It is noteworthy that ‘cow’ had a strong effect on the particle-size distribution in the boli without producing any impact on proportions of ICs released, whatever the IC considered. This implies that, even if compression of plant tissue between the teeth during chewing could rupture plant cells, it may not necessarily lead to shearing and reduction of particle size. Similarly, compression of plant tissue between the teeth could induce shearing of the tissue without rupturing plant cells. It is known from direct observation of the parenchyme of apples and potatoes that cells can be fractured by compression even though the tissue is not sheared ( Many authors have reported a strong effect of animal on the particle-size distribution in the boli among groups of adult ruminants of the same species ( We were unable to link the variability of the particle size in the boli to the age or body weight of the cows, even though some authors have observed a strong positive effect of body size on chewing behaviour ( The species or variety of grazed herbage can affect the proportions of cell contents released during ingestive mastication, even though only a low variation occurred in the chewing behaviour, and the proportion of cell contents released during ingestion is not linked to comminution of particles among different species or variety of herbage. In addition, shear tenacity of the plant tissue may not be a good synthetic parameter to predict the availability of plant cell nutrients ( The authors are very grateful to P. Lamberton and the farm staff for their involvement in cow welfare, feeding and sampling, to L. Finot, N. Huchet, T. Lemouël, M. Texier for chemical analyses and the physical measurements, to R. Delagarde for a review of the text and to M. Carpenter for post-edition of the English style.