Background
                  Although several studies reported good results of open reduction and internal fixation of displaced fracture of the adult distal humerus, few studies have specifically addressed the results of such surgical fixation in osteoporotic bone in the elderly.
               
                  Methods
                  This study focused on AO type C fractures in the elderly by using 2 plates for fixation of the lateral and medial columns to reconstruct a stable triangular frame of the distal humerus. The study comprised 35 patients, and 32 were available for final evaluation at a mean follow-up of 24.5 months (range, 14-60 months).
               
                  Results
                  Mayo Elbow Function Score showed 25 patients (78%) achieved an excellent functional result, and 7 (22%) had a good result. No patients were considered to have a fair or poor result. At the final follow-up, the mean range of flexion to extension of the elbow was 22° (range, 10°-40°) to 125° (range, 100°-140°). All fractures united at average of 3.5 months (range, 2.5-5.3 months).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Open reduction and internal fixation using double-columned plating is a useful and effective technique in the management of displaced, comminuted, intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus in elderly patients.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level 4; Case series, treatment study.Displaced comminuted articular fractures of the distal humerus in adults are difficult problems due to the complex anatomy of the elbow, small fracture fragments, and the limited amount of subchondral bone. Intercondylar fractures of the distal humerus in younger patients are considered to occur after high-energy trauma. In the elderly patient, however, minimal trauma may result in fractures due to osteoporotic bones, especially in elderly women. Palvanen et al Immobilization was the primary mode of treatment of such fractures until the early 20th century, but the results were notoriously poor. Several attempts to treat fractures of the distal humerus surgically also had poor results because of inadequate surgery and prolonged immobilization. Although several studies have reported good results of open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with double plates of displaced fractures of the adult distal humerus with AO/ASIF techniques, This study was designed to focus on displaced comminuted AO type C fractures of the distal humerus in the elderly, with restoration of the anatomy using a triangular construct on the lateral and the medial columns and 2 plates for fixation. From May 2000 to January 2006, 35 consecutive geriatric patients (10 men, 25 women) with acute displaced comminuted fractures of distal humerus were treated with ORIF at our institution. The mean age was 68.7 years (range, 62-79 years). Injury in 8 patients resulted from bicycle crashes, and in 27, from a fall. Eleven fractures involved the left elbow and 24 involved the right. No patient had any preexisting arthritis in the injured elbow, and the injured limbs were capable of normal levels of activity before the injury. According to the AO/ASIF fracture classification system, there were 15 C1, 13 C2, and 7 C3 fractures. All 35 patients underwent operative treatment within 2 weeks of injury. All patients received general anesthesia and were placed in a lateral decubitus position. A posterior approach was used, and a V-shaped olecranon osteotomy was performed. The ulnar nerve was freed from the cubital tunnel and protected by vascular loops. The trochlea was reduced first. Large fragments were fixed with transverse cannulated screws (DePuy ACE, Johnson & Johnson, Le Locle, Switzerland), and small fragments with 1-mm Kirschner wires. Two plates (DePuy ACE) were prepared according to distal humeral anatomy and placed on the medial and lateral posterior surfaces of the distal humerus so that the concave undersurface of the plates could lock the fragments and dramatically improve fixation of the distal fragments. The distal humeral stability of the triangle was rebuilt by fixing the medial and lateral columns with two plates and screws ( After stable fixation was achieved, the ulnar nerve was transposed anterior to the medial epicondyle. Tension band wiring was used for fixation of the olecranon osteotomy. For patients, who had severely comminuted fractures in the distal humerus, we used tricortical bone grafts from the iliac bone to maintain column height and width and obtain stable fixation. All patients were given Celecoxib (Celebrex, Pfizer Pharmaceuticals Ltd, New York, NY) postoperatively (200 mg every 24 hours) for a mean of 6 weeks. All patients with C1 fractures began elbow joint functional exercise aided by a continuous passive motion machine on day 3 after surgery. All C2 fractures were protected for 5 to 7 days, after which range of motion exercise was begun. If the patient had a C3 fracture, a long arm cast was placed with the elbow in 80° of flexion for 3 weeks, after which physiotherapy and motion were started. The 32 patients were followed up for an average of 24.5 months (range, 14-60 months). All the fractures and the olecranon osteotomies united without implant failure or migration. The union time was 3.5 months (range, 2.5-5.3 months). Anatomic reduction was achieved in 19 patients, satisfactory reduction was achieved in 12 patients, and 1 had a poor reduction. The final range of flexion to extension of the elbow averaged 22° (range, 10°-40°) to 125° (range, 100°-140°). The final ranges of pronation and supination were 75° (range, 60°-85°) and 68° (range, 60°-80°; Results as graded by the Cassebaum elbow motion classification Treatment for distal humerus fractures aims to make the elbow stable and painless with satisfactory function. This requires anatomic reconstruction of the articular surface, restitution of the overall geometry of the distal humerus, and stable fixation of the fracture fragments to allow early and full rehabilitation. Although these goals are now widely accepted by the orthopedic community, they may be technically difficult to achieve, especially in the presence of substantial osteoporosis or comminution. Thus, there is a need to use implants and surgical techniques to meet the specific requirements of osteoporotic bone. The best method of exposing the elbow through a posterior approach remains a matter of controversy. Cassebaum ORIF with a double plate is the gold standard for treatment of distal humeral fractures in young patients and yields good and excellent results in 65% to 100% of patients. Two methods are used for bilateral plate location in the distal of humerus. The traditional teaching was to apply bilateral plates in 2 perpendicular planes, 90° to each other. Two principles must be followed in the operation. First, fixation in the distal fragments must be maximized. Second, all fixation in the distal fragments should contribute to stability between the distal fragments and the shaft. In these cases, the fragments often are small, osteoporotic, and lack periosteal attachment. Reconstruction of medial or lateral columns, or both, with tricortical bone blocks may be helpful. Although minimal shortening may be tolerated, It is important for geriatric patients to have good fracture union and function rehabilitation. There is, however, a contradiction between immobility and early functional exercise. In our study, because of stable fixation of the fracture, most of C1 and C2 fracture patients achieved satisfactory elbow function through early exercise. Stable fixation is difficult in C3 distal humeral fractures due to compressed osteoporotic bone and bone defects. Three weeks of plaster immobilization after surgery, even after prolonged exercise rehabilitation, also led to some degree of elbow motion loss. All C3 fractures achieved union at final follow-up, so we think the less favorable results in this series are acceptable.  Open reduction and internal fixation with appropriate surgical technique is effective in the treatment of displaced comminuted osteoporotic fractures of the distal humerus in elderly patients. The transolecranon approach provided a better exposure of distal humerus. Stable internal fixation with 2 plates on the medial and lateral columns and individually appropriate exercise could improve final clinical treatment results.