Extraction of a coal seam which lies not far below a heating goaf can be a major safety challenge. A force auxiliary ventilation system was adopted as a control method in successful extraction and recovery of the panel 30110 of the #3−1 coal seam, which is about 30–40m below the heating goaf of the #2−2
                     seam at Longhua underground coal mine, Shanxi Province, China. Booster fans and ventilation control devices such as doors and regulators were used in the system. The results show that, provided that a force auxiliary ventilation system is properly designed to achieve a pressure balance between a panel and its overlying goaf, the system can be used to extract a coal seam overlain by a heating goaf. This paper describes the design, installation and performance of the ventilation system during the extraction and recovery phases of the panel 30110.When a coal seam lying not far below a heating goaf is extracted, the fractures both naturally occurred and mining-induced in the interburden between the seam and the goaf may provide migration passages for gases in goaf. And carbon monoxide (CO) and carbon dioxide (CO Ideally, the goaf heating should be controlled or extinguished prior to the extraction of the coal seam below the goaf. However, sometimes the goaf heating can be quite extensive and difficult to be detected, located and controlled, and the cost of controlling the heating cannot be justified economically Some fundamental studies have been undertaken in the extraction of coal below a heating goaf. Numerical modelling and statistical analyses were used to study fracture evolution in the floor strata of a heating goaf at Shigejie coal mine. It was concluded that heating had no significant effect on generation and propagation of fractures and the maximum height of the fractures formed in the floor strata was about 10 This paper describes a force auxiliary ventilation system, which is adopted in #30110 longwall panel at Longhua coal mine and its performance. The system aims to balance the pressure between the longwall face and its overlying heating goaf. The system consists of the booster fans, doors and regulators. A number of manometers and CO sensors were installed in and around the panel to monitor the system performance. The panel was successfully retreated and recovered with the system. The Longhua coal mine is located in Yulin city, Shanxi province, China. The mine is a longwall operation which produces about 4 The No. 30110 longwall panel of the #3 As the panel started to retreat, the overburden roof units started to deform, fracture and cave. This resulted in the formation of three zones in the roof, i.e., caved zone, fractured zone and deformation zone. The combined height of the caved and fractured zones was estimated to be in the range of 41.1–58.9 Extensive heating zones in the goaf of the #2 A force auxiliary ventilation system was designed in the panel 30110 to stop the gas flow between the panel face and its overlying goaf of the 2 The force auxiliary ventilation system includes booster fans, doors and regulators. Four booster fans were installed in the #1 cut-through of the panel, and two of them were connected in parallel and the other two were for backup. Each of the fans has a speed of 2960 A U-type water tube (manometer) was installed in the main panel recovery gateroad and was connected to the goaf of the No. 2 Prior to the implementation of the force auxiliary ventilation system in the panel, gas pressure in the goaf of the #2  Let A, B, C, D denote four specific points around the panel, as shown in With the force auxiliary ventilation system in the panel 30110, the pressure loss from points A to B ( The pressure loss from points B to C ( The pressure difference between points C and D ( To account for actual mining and ventilation conditions in the panel 30110 and to allow for 10% shifting of the gas pressure balance position in the interburden, the pressure difference across the regulator was slightly adjusted during the operation of the force auxiliary ventilation system. With the force system in operation, gas pressure at the #30110 panel face was higher than that in the goaf of the #2 If the gas pressure balance position is allowed to shift by 10% in the interburden between the face return corner and the goaf of the #2 Using Eqs. To study the performance of the force auxiliary ventilation system, three sets of key parameters are monitored. These were gas pressure difference between the #30110 panel and the goaf of the #2 Seven manometers (U-type tubes in this case) were installed in the panel. Six of them (#1 to #6) were used to monitor pressure difference between the panel and the goaf of the #2 The force auxiliary ventilation system became operational on the 21st of June, 2012 when the panel face was retreated 1346 The pressure difference between the panel face and the goaf of the #2 No. 7 manometer was used to monitor the pressure difference across the regulator. CO concentration was monitored along the panel face with the force auxiliary ventilation system, and the monitored results are shown in Based on the studies in Longhua coal mine, the following conclusions can be drawn: A force auxiliary ventilation system was used as an alternative and effective method to control gas flow between the panel 30110 and its overlying heating goaf lying about 30–40 The success in using a force auxiliary ventilation system depends on selection of the best gas pressure balance position between a panel face and its overlying heating goaf and pressure control at key points of the ventilation system. In the case of the panel 30110, pressure difference across the regulator should be controlled around 412 Seven manometers and five CO sensors were installed to monitor gas pressure difference and CO concentration in the panel 30110. Gas pressure and CO monitoring at some key locations in the ventilation system and prompt adjustments of pressure distribution in the system (if required) were an integrated parts of the system design, its implementation to ensure safe and effective operation of the system. The work was supported by the Scientific Research Foundation of Shandong University of Science and Technology for Recruited Talents and