Volcanic provinces are structurally active regions – undergoing continual deformation along faults. Within such fault structures, volcanic ash gouge, containing both crystalline and glassy material, may act as a potential fault plane lubricant. Here, we investigate the frictional properties of volcanic ash gouges with varying glass fractions using a rotary shear apparatus at a range of slip rates (1.3–1300 mm/s) and axial stresses (0.5–2.5 MPa). We show that the frictional behaviour of volcanic ash is in agreement with Byerlee's friction law at low slip velocities, irrespective of glass content. The results reveal a common non-linear reduction of the friction coefficient with slip velocity and yield a frictional law for fault zones containing volcanic ash gouge. Textural analysis reveals that strain localisation and the development of shear bands are more prominent at higher slip velocities (>10 mm/s). The textures observed here are similar to those recorded in ash gouge at the surface of extrusive spines at Mount St. Helens (USA). We use the rate-weakening component of the frictional law to estimate shear-stress-resistance reductions associated with episodic seismogenic slip events that accompany magma ascent pulses. We conclude that the internal structure of volcanic ash gouge may act as a kinematic marker of exogenic dome growth.Structural activity in volcanic provinces includes ground deformation ( Volcanic ash – i.e., fragments smaller than 2 mm – is the most abundant product of volcanic activity and directly results from fragmentation ( Dynamic fault rupture generates particles of all sizes, but upon slip only particles coarser than <10–15 μm are subject to grain size reduction; that is, the finest ash particles remain intransigent to wear during slip ( Our friction experiments were performed using a rotary shear apparatus (at Kochi Core Center, Japan) under a range of slip rates (1.3–1300 mm/s) and axial stresses (0.5–2.5 MPa) up to 10 m slip (see A series of 50 friction experiments were conducted on volcanic ash from the aforementioned volcanoes. Frictional slip at low velocity is characterised by an instantaneous increase and stabilisation of the shear resistance ( At the slowest investigated slip rate of 1.3 mm/s, frictional coefficients of the gouges investigated here (0.72–0.80) are consistent with Byerlee's internal friction coefficient of ∼0.85 derived from rock strength tests at low confining pressure ( The mechanism by which ash gouge accommodates slip is revealed by the progressive development of deformation structures. In particular, strain and damage is observed to increase as a function of slip distances as well as towards the slip surface (see also The data presented in this study may be applied to a wide range of volcanic settings, where slip occurs under a variety of circumstances and conditions. For example, during the 2004–2008 eruption of Mount St. Helens, the extrusion of 7 highly viscous spines clearly involved volcanic ash gouge ( The dynamic friction of rock and gouge provides first order constraints on several parameters controlling earthquake slip, including stress drop, mechanical work and frictional heating ( Larger earthquakes occurred in four distinct clusters during periods of active spine extrusion or break-up between October 2004 and December 2005 ( Spectral analysis can help constrain the dynamics of slip. The corner frequency ( In addition to kinetic and stress markers, Finally, we note here that steam is an indicator of the importance of temperature in volcanic conduits but also of the heat generated during frictional work. Although we did not record temperature during our experiments, it is worthwhile noting that the samples were very hot as sustained friction generated intense heat (up to some 400–580 °C; see This experimental study demonstrates that volcanic ash gouges from different volcanic systems and with a range of compositions have similar frictional behaviour, thus adhering to a single non-linear frictional law with important slip-weakening constraints. We conclude that volcanic ash gouge represents an important mechanical control on slip dynamics, which can be influential in regional fault settings as well as during magma extrusion at active volcanoes. It remains to be said that the presence of ash gouge at the conduit margin, and its mechanical contribution to slip events, cannot explain the entire complex behaviour monitored during spine extrusion. Yet, the universality of the proposed frictional law presented here implies that it may be readily applied to a variety of supracrustal structural problems as well as high-viscosity magma ascent models. We would like to thank H. Mukoyoshi for technical assistance. We wish to acknowledge research support from the