The increasing prevalence of chronic kidney disease (CKD) in the United States demands a closer evaluation of and attention to associated morbidities, and, particularly, the rising mortality related to cardiovascular disease in all age groups. Patients with CKD demonstrate an increased risk of coronary artery disease due to calcium deposition and subsequent arterial stiffening, in addition to left ventricular dysfunction with associated heart failure and arrhythmias. While clearly impacted by the traditional risk factors for development of cardiovascular disease (CVD), patients with CKD are also affected by non-traditional risk factors, including calcium overloading related to aggressive management of secondary hyperparathyroidism.
                  Recent data have shown that a substantial number of patients with CKD are deficient in vitamin D on a nutritional basis, in addition to the known decrease in the kidney-produced active metabolite during progressive CKD. Historically, vitamin D has been described as an endocrine hormone that regulates blood calcium and parathyroid hormone levels. It has become increasingly clear, through the recognition of a vitamin D receptor in most tissues, that vitamin D possesses functions well beyond calcium homeostasis, such that a deficiency may contribute to the development of CVD. In this brief review, the role of vitamin D activation through its vitamin D receptor will serve as an introduction to the magnitude of the nutritional deficits in children, adults, and those with CKD. As therapeutic entities in the management of renal osteodystrophy, vitamin D analogues play an important role in cardiovascular health that continues to evolve. Preliminary studies indicate that vitamin D therapy for control of secondary hyperparathyroidism may confer cardioprotection and reduce mortality. Attention to care of osteodystrophy in CKD must take into account heart health as well.Renal osteodystrophy is a term applied to the changes in mineral metabolism that occur uniformly as kidney disease progresses to the need for maintenance dialysis or transplantation. Recently, evidence-based guidelines have been issued for the care of osteodystrophy in adults and children CVD arises both from the pathophysiology of the osteodystrophy itself and from the treatment strategies promulgated since the early 1980s, when potent vitamin D analogues became available. This article will review some of the newer concepts describing how osteodystrophy leads to CVD and how treatment strategies may now be modified to delay the initiation and progression of heart disease in these patients. Recognition of the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) as an effective way to describe a population-based frequency of chronic kidney disease (CKD) When compared to the NHANES III data, analyses of mortality in adults aged 25 years and older with end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) have demonstrated a higher death rate from cardiovascular disease in all age groups CKD does not need to reach the severity level of ESKD to have an impact on cardiovascular mortality, as demonstrated recently by an evaluation of the effect of lower CKD stages on myocardial infarction (MI) outcomes Data from 1997 to 2001 have shown increased mortality rates among children with CKD between the ages of 0 and 19 years when compared to an older dialysis vintage (1992–1996), and certainly when compared to mortality rates in normal children  Vitamin D biology involves multiple compounds produced in several organs, from sources derived both from diet and sunlight exposure. Skin photo-isomerizes 7-dehydrocholesterol into several secosteroids that eventually become the parent compound, vitamin D Traditionally, vitamin D has been viewed as an endocrine hormone  It is clear that the optimal function of kidney 1α-hydroxylase is reduced with increasingly severe CKD. In adults, this reduction occurs as early as stage 2 CKD and is part of the pathophysiology of secondary hyperparathyroidism in stage 3 CKD What are the consequences of vitamin D insufficiency? Recognizing that the VDR is ubiquitous, recent studies have demonstrated that vitamin D is involved in much more than calcium homeostasis. At least three distinct functions of vitamin D biology are disturbed in CKD and may contribute to increased CVD: (1) modulation of renin activity, (2) control of inflammation, and (3) negative regulation of vascular endothelial cell proliferation Using a VDR-knockout (KO) mouse model to block the peripheral actions of 1,25D, Li and colleagues demonstrated an increase in serum renin concentrations in the VDR-KO mice Control of secondary hyperparathyroidism is central to the repair of bone and mineral disturbances that define the osteodystrophy of CKD. It appears that a sizable fraction of secondary hyperparathyroidism in stage 3 CKD may be due to vitamin D nutritional deficiency, and this observation led to the development of guidelines from the National Kidney Foundation that define the role of measuring 25-OHD levels in such circumstances Experimental studies by Wu-Wong and colleagues Because of the medical community’s zeal to control secondary hyperparathyroidism, clinical algorithms have emerged that demand the simultaneous solution of three complex, interrelated equations: maintenance of calcium homeostasis, maintenance of phosphate homeostasis, and regulation of parathyroid hormone secretion. Although each of these algorithms is beneficial for the bone disease of osteodystrophy, when taken together, they may be associated with an increased prevalence of CVD seen in patients with ESKD. Such factors as hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, a [Ca How did this occur? After the recognition that aluminum-based dietary phosphate binders might have caused aluminum osteodystrophy and encephalopathy, the clinical care of osteodystrophy mandated the use of alternate dietary phosphate binders. Calcium-based agents became available, and in combining them with newly available pharmacologic preparations of 1,25D in the early 1980s, we effectively produced a state of total body calcium overload in our patients. Unfortunately, only in the past few years has it been recognized that such calcium loading was detrimental, especially with calcifying CVD as its result. Therefore, it is encouraging to see that newer, non-calcium-based dietary phosphate binding agents not only can prevent coronary artery calcification but also can reduce existing serum calcium levels to some degree Osteodystrophy in children results in linear growth failure, in addition to bony deformities and secondary hyperparathyroidism Lastly, ethnicity appears to confer a disadvantage on African American children with ESKD on maintenance dialysis, as it relates both to hospitalization rates and particularly to CVD. There is roughly a doubling of risk for both events in African American children with ESKD, similar to that seen in African American adults with ESKD. At present, the reason for such an increased risk of CVD remains unknown. The impact of ethnicity is also an area of active research in the field of pediatric osteodystrophy. The role of vitamin D nutrition is being reexamined as a key component of early care of renal osteodystrophy in children and adults. Vitamin D plays important roles beyond calcium homeostasis, and the molecular biology of its receptor-mediated actions is spanning fields ranging from cancer through infectious disease. Central to its actions are its potent effects on vascular endothelial cells that appear to confer cardioprotection. Our understanding of the pathology and pathophysiology of the calcifying arteriopathy of CVD has led to new conclusions about the use of calcium-based dietary phosphate binders and less potent vitamin D analogues compared to the active hormone 1,25D. Limitation of total calcium intake toward the daily required intake (DRI) seems reasonable, especially when combined with the use of non-calcium-based binders in patients with CKD. The availability of alternate strategies for control of secondary hyperparathyroidism, such as calcimimetic agents, may herald a new era of osteodystrophy care that will ameliorate the rising risk of CVD in children with CKD. Strategies for the care of osteodystrophy in children with CKD must take into account unique clinical features, such as growth failure and the disordered GH–IGF axis. Successful care for all pediatric manifestations of osteodystrophy may well confer protection against the high rate of CVD currently observed in our patients.