The present study focuses on the conversion of heavy metals involved in molten incineration fly ashes to metal sulfides which could be thereafter separated by flotation. The sulfidation treatment was carried out for five molten incineration fly ashes (Fly ash-A to Fly ash-E) by contacting each fly ash with Na2S solution for a period of 10min to 6h. The initial molar ratio of S2− to Me2+ was adjusted to 1.20. The conversion of heavy metals to metal sulfides was evaluated by measuring the S2− residual concentrations using an ion selective electrode. The formation of metal sulfides was studied by XRD and SEM–EDS analyses.
                  In the case of Fly ash-A to Fly ash-D, more than 79% of heavy metals of zinc, lead and copper was converted to metal sulfides within the contacting period of 0.5h owing to a fast conversion of metal chlorides to metal sulfides. By contrast, the conversion of about 35% was achieved for Fly ash-E within the same contacting period, which was attributed to a high content of metal oxides. Further, the S2− to Me2+ molar ratio was reduced to 1.00 to minimize Na2S consumption and the conversions obtained within the contacting period of 0.5h varied from 76% for Fly ash-D to 91% for Fly ash-C. Finally, soluble salts such as NaCl and KCl were removed during the sulfidation treatment, which brought about a significant enrichment in metals content by a factor varying from 1.5 for Fly ash-D to 4.9 for Fly ash-A.In Japan, more than 70% of the municipal solid waste produced annually is incinerated to decrease its volume ( For the metal recovery from industrial wastes, various extraction techniques using mainly an acidic medium have been widely investigated. For instance, After the extraction treatment, the heavy metals can be precipitated as metal sulfides, hydroxides, carbonates or chelates. Considering metal recovery at the smelters, it is necessary to emphasize that heavy metals are naturally present as sulfide ores such as galena (PbS), sphalerite (ZnS) or covellite (CuS). Prior to the smelting, the enrichment of heavy metals by means of flotation technique is widely carried out ( This study aims at investigating sulfidation behavior of heavy metals of Zn, Pb and Cu involved in the molten incineration fly ashes (hereafter referred to as molten fly ash) with a sulfidation agent of Na Three molten fly ashes obtained from a municipal waste incinerator equipped with ash melting process were denoted as Fly ash-A, Fly ash-B and Fly ash-E, while two molten fly ashes acquired from an automobile shredder residues incinerator equipped with ash melting process were denoted as Fly ash-C and Fly ash-D. Before the experiments, the Fly ash-A was dried at a temperature of 105 The elemental composition of the molten fly ashes was determined in triplicate and the procedure is given as follows: an amount of 2.0 The content of chlorides in each molten fly ash was determined in triplicate using the following procedure: At first, an amount of 0.5 Crystallographic composition of molten fly ashes was evaluated using XRD analysis with scanning mode of 2 The sulfidation experiments were carried out in triplicate and the sulfidation procedure is described as follows: at first, an amount of 10.0 The concentrations of heavy metals in the filtrates were determined by means of an ICP and the residual concentrations of S The filter cakes were dried at an ambient temperature of about 25°C for 2d, and then subjected to XRD analysis with scanning mode of 2 The elemental composition of treated molten fly ashes was analyzed in the same way as that of untreated molten fly ashes. Subsequently, the enrichment factor (EF) was defined as a ratio of the sum of Zn, Pb and Cu in the treated fly ash ( The composition of each molten fly ash was determined in triplicate and the results are given in As for the heavy metals, the characteristic peaks of ZnO were identified in Fly ash-E, but no other characteristic peaks of heavy metals were found in Fly ash-A to Fly ash-D. This result suggested that heavy metals were either present in amorphous forms or the amount of a particular chemical form was not high enough to allow the detection by XRD. However, The effect of contacting period on the conversion of heavy metals of zinc, lead and copper to metal sulfides was investigated for all molten fly ashes. As shown in Moreover, in a related study, Further, despite an almost the same Zn content in Fly ash-A and Fly ash-D, different conversion values were obtained for Fly ash-A and Fly ash-D. It was considered that, in the case of Fly ash-A, zinc was present mainly as a soluble ZnCl In the previous experiments, results of which are presented in  The residual concentration of S  In a subsequent step, an attempt was made to find a relation between EF and the composition of untreated molten fly ashes in terms of the content of Na, K, Ca and chlorides.  In order to confirm the formation of metal sulfides, the treated Fly ash-A was analyzed also using SEM–EDS. The sulfidation treatment of five molten fly ashes with aqueous solution of Na In the case of Fly ash-A to Fly ash-D, it was found that more than 79% of heavy metals of zinc, lead and copper was converted to metal sulfides within the contacting period of 0.5 When the S Further, the removal of soluble salts brought about a significant enrichment in the content of heavy metals by a factor varying from 1.5 for Fly ash-D to 4.9 for Fly ash-A. It was also found that the enrichment factor increased with an increase in the contents of Na and K as well as an increase in the content of Cl Finally, the formation of metal sulfides was confirmed by XRD and SEM–EDS.