In this study the thermal calcination of two materials, high purity zinc carbonate hydroxide and the Calsimin zinc carbonate concentrate have been investigated. Isothermal studies have been performed on samples at different temperatures and times. Non-isothermal analysis has been carried out by TGA and DSC. It has been found that the calcination behaviour of both materials corresponds to the shrinking core model. The activation energy for the calcination of zinc carbonate hydroxide is found to be 88.7kJ/mol, and that for the Calsimin sample is 97.3kJ/mol.constant constant activation energy (J/mol) surface reaction rate constant (mol/cm molecular weight (g/mol) order of reaction ideal gas constant (J/mol radius of unreacted core at any time (cm) initial radius of particles (cm) time (s) temperature (K) weight of the sample at any time (mg) initial weight of the sample (mg) fraction of the reacted at time conversion of calcination reaction at any time zinc carbonate hydroxide content in the sample density (g/cm Situated in northwest Iran, near the city of Zanjan, the Angooran mine is the largest zinc and lead mine in the Middle East. Mineral processing and concentration operations result in the production of a high grade concentrate and a low grade residue. The concentrate has been the subject of this research. Since the ore is calcined prior to being fed into the fluidized bed furnace, it is necessary to have some information about the calcination kinetics of some compounds in the ore, and of the ore itself. The unreacted shrinking core model was used to investigate calcination reactions for both materials in this study In the general reaction The number of research articles on the calcination kinetics of zinc carbonate is very limited. There are, however, certain similarities between calcium carbonate and zinc carbonate. It is therefore appropriate to mention some of the studies carried out on calcium carbonate. Three main rate controlling steps in the calcination of calcium carbonate have been identified as heat transfer into the bulk of the particle the transfer of released CO a chemical reaction There have been many attempts to assign suitable models to the calcination of calcium carbonate As mentioned before, there are only few publications on the calcination of zinc carbonate In this study samples used were both in powder form and in pellets. Pellets of 4–6 Zinc carbonate hydroxide powder samples (<50 Calsimin concentrate powder (<0.5 In addition to isothermal tests, experiments were performed on both samples using TG and DSC. In TG, only a small sample is required to study the reaction progress and the temperature can be measured accurately DSC and TG analyses were performed on dried powder samples of both materials. DSC experiments were performed on Polymer Laboratories (STA/625) thermal analyzer, and for TG experiments Perkin-Elmer (TG/Pyris1) thermo-gravimetric analyzer was used. DSC analysis was carried out on samples weighing 7 In this study conversion was calculated using the following equations. Isothermal test results for pure zinc carbonate hydroxide and Calsimin concentrate are shown in In In   Based on the similarities between the calcination reaction of calcium carbonate and the samples considered in this study, the shrinking core model was adopted for this investigation. In the shrinking core model with the surface reaction rate controlling mechanism, the reaction takes place at the surface of the unreacted core and proceeds towards the centre. The surface and outer layers of the sample consist of a porous product (and other unreacted materials for Calsimin sample). If mass balance for the solid reactant is written and the simplifications depending on the above assumptions are made, governing equations are as follows: Two methods were used for the calculation of activation energy in the temperature range of 300–350 and 420–500 Activation energy of the calcination reactions may also be calculated using the approach that has been mentioned in Section For Calsimin concentrate, the activation energy is calculated as 96.0 The values of reaction activation energy calculated for both reactions indicate that the rate controlling step is a chemical reaction in both samples. This reaction is the chemical reaction at the surface of the unreacted core.  For Calsimin concentrate the temperature range is 340–440 DSC results may be used to calculate the heat released (or absorbed) during a reaction. The area under the peak for each reaction was thus found, and heat absorbed for each endothermic reaction was calculated as 860  For pure zinc carbonate hydroxide, weight loss due to calcinations occurs in the temperature range of 250–350 The de-carboxylation and de-hydroxylation reaction of zinc carbonate hydroxide occur simultaneously. The reaction enthalpy for the calcinations of zinc carbonate hydroxide is 67.17 The shrinking core model is suitable for the calcination of both zinc carbonate hydroxide and Calsimin concentrate. The rate controlling step is the chemical reaction at the surface. The activation energy for the calcinations of zinc carbonate hydroxide is 86.7–90.7 For both samples, an increase in the size up to 6