In the present research work Taguchi method was applied to investigate the effect of reductive leaching parameters and mechanical pretreatment of ilmenite on nano synthetic rutile synthesis. The parameters such as ilmenite to acid mass ratio, ilmenite to iron powder mass ratio, milling time and initial leaching temperature were selected for optimization of experimental conditions. Consequently, the milling time was the most effective parameter on synthetic rutile preparation compared to the rest of the selected parameters. The optimum conditions obtained were as follows: milling in Argon atmosphere 40min, initial reaction temperature 100°C, ilmenite to hydrochloric acid mass ratio 1:9.55 and ilmenite to iron powder mass ratio 1:0.075. The characterization of products indicated that the prepared powder with milling time 40min, temperature 100°C, ilmenite to hydrochloric acid mass ratio 1:12.8 and ilmenite to iron powder mass ratio 1:0.05 had particles size of less than 100nm. The analysis further confirmed that synthetic rutile nano powder had 91.1% TiO2. The nano powder obtained under the optimized condition had a BET surface area of 54.6m2/g.The importance of titania (TiO Some researchers for performing the reductive leaching of ilmenite concentrate used iron powder as a reductive agent to promote the leaching of ilmenite concentrate in hydrochloric acid ( There are various parameters affecting the properties of the produced synthetic rutile such as reaction temperature, ilmenite to acid mass ratio, pulp density, and agitation, leaching agent concentrate, ilmenite particle size, leaching time and also related parameters to kind of additive and mechanical activation conditions ( In recent years, the statistical experimental designs have been employed to efficient analysis of complex systems ( In Taguchi method, the experience and knowledge of researcher has a main role in the proper selection of variables and their levels. The main and interaction effect of factors can be investigated by using Taguchi method. The optimum conditions can be defined regarding the desired target of response such as “smaller is better”, “larger is better” or “nominal is the best”. The Taguchi method applied simple tools such as signal to noise ratio (S/N) and analysis of variance (ANOVA) to determine optimal conditions and effect of each factors on main properties. The effect of each selected parameters can be estimated through ANOVA test. However, the maximum S/N ratio values which are calculated regarding to test target for each factor in its selected levels is applied to determine optimum test conditions ( In the present study, the aim was to investigate the reductive leaching of mechanically activated ilmenite concentrate by hydrochloric acid. With applying the Taguchi method, the effect of four parameters such as ilmenite to acid mass ratio, ilmenite to iron powder mass ratio, milling time and temperature was investigated and the used technique was optimized according to the calculated S/N ratio of parameters. The developments of nano particles and structures synthesis routes gave access to various nanomaterials with different structural and physical properties according to their corresponding bulk material ( The Kahnoje ilmenite deposits are available in the southeast province of Iran, which is called Kerman has an estimated reserve about 43 The mechanical activation was conducted in a planetary ball mill under argon atmosphere. The milling operation was performed with rotation speed of 250 The leaching experiments were carried out according to the Taguchi experimental design in a 500  In this study, the milling time, ilmenite to hydrochloric acid mass ratio, ilmenite to iron powder mass ratio and the reaction temperature were considered in three levels to optimize process. The milling times were selected as 0, 40 and 360 The chemical composition of ilmenite concentrate and products of each experiments were indicated by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometry (ARL 8410 SEQUENTIAL). The products were examined three times by XRF test and the mean of TiO The XRD analysis was applied for examination of ilmenite concentrate, the milled samples and the products. The X-ray diffraction test was performed by Philips DW3710 instrument applying Cu Kα radiation at 50  In order to avoid probable phase changes, the milling operation carried out in the Argon atmosphere. The XRD patterns of ilmenite concentrate and milled powders indicated that all the peaks were matched with the standard XRD pattern of hexagonal FeTiO The XRD patterns of ilmenite concentrate and milled powders demonstrated that the increasing of milling time caused to the broadening and weakening of peaks ( The XRD patterns and BET results verified the mechanical activation increased the surface area and decreased the crystallinity of ilmenite concentrate which were responsible for enhanced reaction between milled powder and leaching agent. The cited results will be reconfirmed with achieved result from Taguchi method in next part of our study. A Taguchi orthogonal array experimental design was applied to optimize reductive leaching of mechanically activated ilmenite concentrate producing highest quantity of TiO The signal to noise ratio (S/N) approach was used for analysis of TiO For example:  The mean S/N ratio for each level of parameters is shown in In the case of optimum leaching temperature similar to previous investigation 100 The stoichiometry of HCl and Fe powder was increased in the proposed reactions ( Finally, the S/N ratio of optimized process was calculated by using Eq. Using the achieved optimal level of parameters, the maximum TiO Although nanosized titania can be denoted as one of the most valuable photocatalyst with wide application fields, the synthesis of new materials which have elements such as iron in their composition are important due to influence of iron on reactivity of these catalysts ( The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns revealed that major phase of ilmenite concentrate was hexagonal structure of FeTiO The chemical composition of products was analyzed through XRF test after dehydration followed by calcination in 400 The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of calcined products are presented in  The TEM images of these powders certify the formation of nanosized synthetic rutile with particles size which were less than 100 The BET surface area of nanosized synthetic rutile prepared through experiment 6 was 54.6 The nanosized synthetic rutile prepared in experiment 6 with main constituent of TiO In this research, the Taguchi's L The XRD patterns of calcined products (prepared during the designed experiments of Taguchi method) revealed without mechanical activation pretreatment, parts of ilmenite concentrate did not participate in the occurred reactions between ilmenite and hydrochloric acid. However, the XRD patterns indicated rutile as major phase formed in prepared powders from mechanically activated ilmenite. The TEM and SEM micrographs proved the nanosized synthetic rutile produced in experiments 6. The prepared nanosize synthetic rutile has 91.1% TiO In present study, the nano synthetic rutile was prepared among some of Taguchi experimental design products and more investigation was suggested. Since the physical and chemical properties of nanoparticles were differing from the corresponding bulk material, the nanosized synthetic rutile was recommended for characterization of new physical and chemical properties. Fe-doped TiO