The total polyphenolic and flavonoid contents, as well as the antioxidant free radical scavenging activity (DPPH test) of different sieved powders of Hedera helix (L.) and Scrophularia nodosa (L.), were assessed. Polyphenolic compound content varied significantly between different particle sizes (20–50; 50–100; 100–180; 180–315; >500μm). The intermediate classes (between 100μm and 315μm) exhibited the highest total polyphenol content with 28.3mggallicacideq./g dry matter (DM), total flavonoid content (8.6mgcatechineq./g DM) and antioxidant activity (23.5Troloxeq.mg/g DM). The lowest values were observed for the unsieved powder of Hedera helix (L.), and >500μm classes of Scrophularia nodosa (L.). Liquid chromatography coupled with UV detector and mass spectrometry (LC-PDA-ESI/MS) allowed identifying and quantifying polyphenols, flavonoids, iridoids, and triterpene saponins. These latter were exclusively identified by mass spectrometry; unusable signals being recorded by UV measurements. Results showed that most of the compounds presented maximal concentrations in intermediate particle sizes (100μm–315μm).The use of medicinal plants emerges as an alternative to synthetic products, which are used not only in traditional medicine but also in a number of food and pharmaceutical industries, due to their nutritional properties and bioactivity. The modern pharmaceutical industry is thus still looking for new active compounds from plant secondary metabolites  This work assesses the chemical properties of Dried aerial plant parts of HPLC-grade acetonitrile, water, methanol, and formic acid were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Saint-Quentin-Fallavier, France). Folin-Ciocalteu phenol reagent, gallic acid, 2,2′-Azobis(2-amidino-propane) dihydrochloride (AAPH), standards of chlorogenic acid, 1,5- and 4,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid, kaempferol-rutinoside, rutin, α-hederin, hédéracoside C, harpagoside, verbascoside, and quercetin-glucoside and quercetine-rhamnoside were acquired from Sigma-Aldrich. Hederasaponin B was obtained from ChemFaces (Wuhan, China). Sodium carbonate (Na Circa 1.7 Ground plant samples were sieved with the vibratory sieve shaker Analysette 3 Spartan (Fritsch, Idar-Oberstein, Germany) at 0.5 2 Total phenolic content (TPC) was measured as described by Total flavonoid compounds (TFC) were dosed by a colorimetric assay described by Antioxidant activity (AOA) is defined as the ability of a compound to inhibit oxidative degradation The analyte chromatographic separation was performed on a Gemini C18 column (150 The identification of compounds in All experiments were performed in triplicate. Data are expressed as means The histograms of The recorded results indicated that TFCs and TPCs were lower than values reported for  Concerning phenolic acids and α-hederin, the 20–100 Three molecular families were identified in The content assessment of the main active compounds in different powder fractions of