This chapter examines the flow of fluid underground, how geothermal reservoirs came to existence, the reservoirs' characteristics, and how they change with development. In essence, the historic flow of fluid created reservoirs, and the modification of this flow by exploitation is the basis for the science of geothermal reservoir engineering. Geothermal resources have been used for cultural purposes and mineral extraction for the last 2000 years. The development of geothermal reservoir engineering explains that research efforts related to geothermal systems and their exploitation have followed a pattern similar to that for groundwater and petroleum reservoirs. There are two approaches to geothermal reservoir assessment that are developed; the first is to map the reservoir, collecting as much information as possible and using this to define the physical properties of the subsurface object that was being explored. The second approach is to investigate the processes that might be occurring underground in order to see what roles they might play in the reservoir being exploited. In practice, these two approaches have continued together in many geothermal fields that have been developed since that time. The Development of Geothermal Reservoir Engineering Definitions Organization of this Book References and Units This book examines the flow of fluid underground, how geothermal reservoirs came to exist, the reservoirs’ characteristics, and how they change with development. In essence, the historic flow of fluid created reservoirs, and the modification of this flow by exploitation is the basis for the science of geothermal reservoir engineering. Geothermal resources have been used for cultural purposes and mineral extraction for the last 2000 years. The first modern “deep” drilling (>100 meters) to investigate the deeper resource commenced at Larderello in 1856, and the first power generation began almost 50 years later in 1904 (Cataldi et al., 1999). Relative to petroleum or groundwater resources, the development of geothermal resources that followed was slow. The first “real” power development, of 250 kWe at Larderello commenced in 1913, building up to more than 100 MWe by the 1940s. This was done with a steam-dominated resource. It was not until 1958 that electricity was first generated in significant amounts from a high-temperature liquid geothermal resource at Wairakei. Since that time, the development of steam- and liquid-dominated resources for power production has begun in many countries worldwide, with a total installed capacity exceeding 10,000 MWe in 2010. In both groundwater and petroleum resources, scientific research went along with expanding exploitation. At first this research was primarily directed toward prospecting to find and extract the fluid. As the effects of fluid extraction In comparison, geothermal reservoir engineering is a much smaller industry, with a correspondingly smaller professional workforce, but it too has now accumulated experience to form a specialized profession. Research efforts related to geothermal systems and their exploitation have followed a pattern similar to that for groundwater and petroleum reservoirs. The exception, of course, is that because of its later start, the high-precision tools and computers that were not available in the early days of groundwater and petroleum exploration have naturally played a larger role in the development of geothermal reservoir engineering. Without the sophisticated exploration methods now available to locate potential underground geothermal resources, during the early geothermal developments of the 1950s and 1960s, most exploration wells were drilled into areas defined by the discharge of steam and/or hot water and associated surface thermal activity. The initial geothermal developments were relatively small, with the result that the resource was not stressed, and a reliable understanding of reservoir behavior or for geothermal reservoir engineering was not required to predict future behavior. This does not mean that no scientific work was carried out. Early ideas of subsurface flow associated with geothermal discharges in Iceland were put forward by Bunsen in the 1840s (Björnsson, 2005), Von Knebel (1906), and Thorkelsson (1910) (Einarsson, 1942). Conduction of heat away from an isolated magmatic intrusion was discussed at about the same time by Ingersoll and Zobel (1913). Research in this area was limited, and publications relating directly to geothermal phenomena were intermittent. Hot springs have been used for millennia around the world for bathing, cooking, and hydrotherapy, and mineral deposits associated with the surface discharges have been exploited at least since the nineteenth century (Cataldi et al., 1999). The earliest exploitation for electrical energy was the use of geothermal steam at Larderello, Italy, starting in 1904. The progressive development of Larderello during the first half of the twentieth century gave practical experience in handling geothermal steam for power generation but Two approaches to geothermal reservoir assessment developed. The first was to map the reservoir, collecting as much information as possible and using this to define the physical properties of the subsurface object that was being explored. The second approach was to investigate the processes that might be occurring underground in order to see what roles they might play in the reservoir being exploited. In practice these two approaches have continued together in many geothermal fields that have been developed since that time. During the 1950s at Wairakei, the first approach led to the mapping of subsurface temperatures across the field (Banwell, 1957) and, from these maps, to inferences about the pattern of fluid flow in the reservoir. The second approach suggested the presence of thermal convection due to heat at depth and to theoretical studies of large-scale convection systems in porous media (Wooding, 1957, 1963) and the first numerical modeling (Donaldson, 1962). In a similar vein, studies at Steamboat Springs, Nevada (White, 1957), and Iceland (Bödvarsson, 1964) led to an improved understanding of how cold meteoric water may circulate to a certain depth and flow up to the surface to charge a geothermal field. More detailed analyses of the form now prominent in geothermal reservoir engineering slowly developed. Pressure transient analyses were applied sporadically in most areas of early geothermal exploration (see, for example, de Anda et al., 1961). In the 1960s, systematic analyses were made of fields in Iceland and Kamchatka (Thorsteinsson & Eliasson 1970; Sugrobov, 1970). Later in the decade, the first attempts to apply petroleum reservoir engineering were made (Whiting & Ramey, 1969; Ramey, 1970). By the mid-1960s, there was considerable geothermal exploration and development in progress around the world. The first power plants were commissioned in The Geysers in California, and extensive study programs were started in Mexico, Chile, Turkey, El Salvador, Japan, and various fields in the Imperial Valley of California. Data from a range of different fields were being produced and some of it published, and more problems were encountered and analyzed. The phrase “geothermal reservoir engineering” first appeared in the 1970s, and the area emerged as a distinct discipline. During this decade, scientific effort moved away from theoretical studies of what processes might possibly be important in the reservoir to practical analyses driven by the data now becoming available and the actual problems experienced in development. At the beginning of the 1980s, the first numerical simulation codes were developed, and a trial in which several codes were used to simulate a set of test problems demonstrated their consistency (Sorey, 1980). During the 1980s and 1990s, reservoir simulators became more capable, and increasing computing power meant that by the 1990s, it was reasonable to simulate a reservoir with enough blocks to be able to represent known geological structures and varying rock properties within the reservoir. As a result, by the 1990s, larger new developments were being sized on the basis of simulation results (see the discussion of Awibengkok in At the same time, downhole instruments were steadily improving in capability and resolution, making detailed temperature-pressure-spinner profiles possible. More important than either simulation or better instruments was the accumulation of collective experience within the profession. Although the basic concepts were all developed by the 1970s, and the fact that many recent technical papers are superficially similar to some from that time, the weight of experience means that these concepts are now being applied more rigorously and more consistently with observation. In some aspects of the geothermal reservoir engineer's work, it is now possible to refer to normal practice to define the procedures and expected results. In the first decade of the twenty-first century, experience, simulation, and instrumentation have all continued to improve. Perhaps the most significant change has been the increasing importance of environmental impacts of development. Seismic effects have become a limiting factor on some Engineered Geothermal System (EGS) projects (Glanz, 2010). Impacts on surface springs have always been an issue in development of the associated deep resource, and this concern has prevented some developments. Geothermal reservoir engineering is now clearly a distinct discipline. Distinctive features of geothermal reservoirs generally include the following: The primary permeability is in fractured rock. The reservoir extends a great distance vertically. For liquid-dominated reservoirs a caprock is not essential, and usually the high-temperature reservoir has some communication with surrounding cool groundwater. The vertical and lateral extent of the reservoir may not be clear. Basic to all reservoir engineering is the observation that almost everything that happens is the result of fluid flow. The flow of fluid (water, steam, gas, or mixtures of these) through rock, fractures, or a wellbore is the unifying feature of all geothermal reservoir analysis. Because many different terms are used when discussing geothermal systems (or sections or groupings of such systems), a nomenclature has been selected here that is followed throughout the book. The terms have been defined to keep their meanings clear and consistent. Unfortunately, the limited number of terms commonly used makes for considerable difficulty, since many of these terms have general meanings as well as the particular meanings chosen here. Most areas of geothermal activity are given some geographic name. Provided they are distinct and separate from neighboring areas of activity, they have been described as The total subsurface hydrologic system associated with a geothermal field is here termed a Finally and most important, there is the  Exploitation can introduce the flow of additional hot and cold fluids, the formation of a free surface, and an increase in boiling in the reservoir.  Beginning with      The geothermal literature is now so extensive that a comprehensive survey has not been attempted. Examples have been chosen and field experience quoted where it has given a useful illustration, but these examples are simply those that were appropriate and conveniently available. Similarly the References are the works that have been cited in the text, but they are not meant to be a comprehensive coverage of the literature. The text does not pretend to be a representative survey of the current literature. Where possible, references have been used that are readily available on the Web and, for preference, those that are available at no cost. Equations are written in SI units. In some cases, where it is conventional to use other units—for example, lip pressure or orifice plate calculations—SI units are not used, and these equations are marked with an asterisk (