The aim of the present research work was to investigate the possibility of adding a jarosite–alunite chemical precipitate, a waste product of a new hydrometallurgical process developed to treat economically low grade nickel oxides ores, in the raw meal for the production of Portland cement clinker. The precipitate was also tested in the production of non-expansive, sulfoaluminate-based cement clinker, as a substitute for gypsum because of its high sulfate content. For the Portland clinker, two samples of raw meals prepared, one with ordinary raw materials (reference sample) and another with 1% jarosite–alunite precipitate. Both raw meals were sintered at 1450 °C. For the sulfoaluminate-based clinker, one raw meal contained 20% gypsum (reference sample) whereas the other contained 11% of the precipitate. Both raw meals were sintered at 1300 °C. The results of chemical and mineralogical analyses as well as the microscopic examination showed that the use of the jarosite–alunite precipitate did not affect the mineralogical characteristics of the so produced Portland cement clinker. In the case of sulfoaluminate-based cement clinker, there was confirmed the formation of the sulfoaluminate phase (C4A3S¯), the most typical phase of this cement type.The general trend of today, for industrial wastes or by-products, is to examine alternative ways for their exploitation in order to eliminate cost of disposal and avoid soil and water contamination. Many of these undesirable industrial materials contain significant amounts of inorganic ingredients, such as oxides of silicon, aluminum, calcium and iron, which, at suitable combinations, can be used in the production of either Portland cement clinker or other special cements. Such material is a crystalline chemical precipitate consisting of basic sulfate salts of iron, aluminum and chromium of the jarosite–alunite types. The jarosite–alunite group of isostructural minerals is described by the general formula M(Fe The precipitate is produced at some stage of a new hydrometallurgical process ( The application of EPA tests has shown the jarosite–alunite precipitate to be environmentally stable and safe to be rejected in a tailings pond. It should also be noted that this precipitate, coming from the treatment of nickel oxide ores, does not contain hazardous elements such as Cd, As, or Hg, by contrast with the jarosite precipitate produced during the hydrometallurgical extraction of zinc from sulfide ores. However, it is important to find use for this jarosite–alunite precipitate in order to reduce the cost of the hydrometallurgical process by avoiding the construction of a large landfill. The aim of the present research work was to investigate the possibility of using the jarosite–alunite precipitate as a raw material in cement production, particularly for Portland and sulfoaluminate cements. It is well known that various industrial wastes, such as metallurgical slags, fly ash, glass, ceramics from the electronic industry, spent catalysts from refineries, sludge from waste water treatment and others, have been successfully used in clinker production ( On the other hand, many researchers who have investigated the production of calcium sulfoaluminate (C However, the so far published literature has given no attention to the use of hydrometallurgical wastes such as jarosite–alunite precipitate, in the production either of Portland cement clinker or other special cement types such as sulfoaluminate-based cement. The purpose of the present research work was the examination of the jarosite–alunite mixture addition to the raw meal, for the production of Portland and sulfoaluminate-based cement clinkers. Six runs were conducted to produce the jarosite–alunite precipitate, according to the method which was developed by the Laboratory of Metallurgy of the National Technical University of Athens, in order to remove the aluminum and chromium from laterite leach solutions, in a crystalline and filterable form ( The chemical analysis of the feed solution used for the production of the jarosite–alunite precipitate is shown in The above precipitates were mixed with other raw materials, such as limestone, schist, bauxite and gypsum, in appropriate proportions in order to produce the raw meals to be tested, one for Portland cement production (PC The chemical analyses of the raw materials used are given in The sintering process applied was common for the production of both types of cement clinkers. The raw meals were shaped in small spheres, with a diameter of 2 cm, and dried at 110 °C. Then, they were placed inside an oven at 500 °C, the temperature was increased to 1000 °C, at which the samples remained for 30 min, and, finally, the temperature was further increased to 1450 °C for Portland clinker and 1300 °C for sulfoaluminate-based cement clinker. At these last temperatures, the retention time of the samples was 30 min. At the end of the sintering process, the samples were removed from the oven and left to cool inside a dryer in order to avoid the effects of air and moisture. The clinkers produced were analyzed by chemical analysis, XRD and optical microscopy. The chemical analysis and the potential mineral composition of the Portland and sulfoaluminate-based clinkers produced are given in In the case of Portland cement clinker, the addition of the jarosite–alunite precipitate by 1% did not seem to affect its mineralogical composition. The minor modification in the C Regarding the sulfoaluminate cement clinkers, the absence of C The XRD analyses of the produced Portland and sulfoaluminate-based cement clinkers are given in As it can be seen in Regarding the C The microstructure of the Portland and sulfoaluminate-based clinkers was examined by optical microscopy in polished sections. In the case of Portland cement clinker, the addition of the jarosite–alunite precipitate by 1% did not seem to affect its microstructure and the formation of its characteristic mineralogical phases ( In the reference sulfoaluminate-based cement clinker, the main phase ( A jarosite–alunite precipitate was produced from a real laterite leach solution, according to a novel method developed by the Laboratory of Metallurgy of the National Technical University of Athens. According to this method, iron and aluminum were precipitated by 99% and 95%, respectively, at 95 °C. That was accomplished by gradually raising the initial pH of the leach liquor to an equilibrium pH value of 3.5 at such a rate as to keep supersaturation of iron and aluminum as low as possible, within a practical period of time (up to 12 h). The addition of jarosite–alunite precipitate by 1% in the raw meal had no influence on the formation of the mineralogical phases of the Portland cement clinker during the burning process. The alite phase occurred as small well-formed crystals. The belite phase could be seen as fine crystals dispersed in the ferrite and calcium aluminate phases. Finally, the liquid phase occurred as fine crystals, uniformly distributed. The addition of jarosite–alunite precipitate by 11% in the raw meal resulted in a sulfoaluminate-based cement clinker with a higher ferrite proportion due to the high iron content of the precipitate. The sulfoaluminate phase produced was well-formed and distinct among ferrite and belite. This last phase was in, relatively, lower proportion due to the lower concentration of silicon oxide in the raw meal. This work was done in cooperation with financial support of Hellenic Research Center of Cement, of Hercules Cement Company.