Acid leaching has been widely used in Pb–Pb chronology especially on meteorite samples, as it enhances the precision and accuracy of the chronology by separating radiogenic Pb from non-radiogenic Pb in the samples. Yet, the detailed mechanism of the radiogenic Pb separation remains elusive. Here we report scanning electron microscopy observations of acid-leached minerals from three achondrites that were previously analyzed for pyroxene PbPb dating (D'Orbigny, Ibitira and Northwest Africa 6704), and one stony‑iron meteorite (Brenham). Moreover, we present chemical analysis of acid leachates and residues of pyroxene and whole-rock fractions from the three achondrites using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. The combined results reveal the resistance of minerals to acid treatments with HNO3, HCl, and HF and, in turn, allow us to explore the prospects and limitations of acid leaching for PbPb chronology. In particular, we show that (i) washing with dilute acids can efficiently liberate contaminant terrestrial Pb adsorbed on the mineral surface; (ii) hot and more concentrated (~6 M) HNO3 and HCl can separate pyroxenes from sulfides and anorthitic plagioclase that are highly enriched in initial non-radiogenic Pb; (iii) albitic plagioclase and pyroxenes show limited dissolution during the HNO3 and HCl treatments, but are progressively leached by hot 1 M HF, making it difficult to separate them from each other; and (iv) within single pyroxene grains having exsolved lamellar textures, high-Ca lamellae are more efficiently leached by the HF treatment than low-Ca ones. In the context of a two-stage Pb isotopic evolution model for pyroxene lamellae, we demonstrate that heterogeneous and incomplete dissolution of pyroxene lamellae with dilute HF can result in inaccurate PbPb age estimates. This may account for previously observed scattered Pb isotopic data for meteorite samples that were taken as evidence for isotope fractionation in a radiogenic Pb component during HF treatments.Determining meteorite ages with high-precision and -accuracy is a prerequisite for decoding the early evolution of our solar system. The age determinations have been carried out by using radioactive decay systems. In the U–Pb system, there are two radioactive decay chains: extant radionuclides In practice, the precision and accuracy of Pb Some accessory minerals such as zircon and apatite have high U contents and To remove contaminant Pb and separate target phases from unfavorable phases, stepwise acid leaching (progressive dissolution) has been utilized in Pb The Pb isotopic data obtained for acid leachates and residues of meteorite samples including chondrules, Ca-Al-rich refractory inclusions (CAIs), and achondrite pyroxenes revealed that earlier leaching steps with dilute (<4 M) HNO In addition, Pb Acid leaching experiments have been conducted on various minerals to date ( To evaluate the effects of acid leaching on common meteorite-forming minerals, we studied three achondrites that were previously analyzed for pyroxene Pb D'Orbigny is a fine-grained (mm-sized) basaltic angrite. There is neither diagnostic shock nor metamorphic features, whereas the igneous texture indicates its rapid crystallization ( Ibitira is an un-brecciated, fine-grained (typically <0.2 mm in diameter) vesicular basaltic meteorite. It mainly comprises equant clinopyroxene (60%) and plagioclase (30%), with minor amounts of tridymite, intergrowths of ilmenite and Ti-chromite, kamacite, troilite, phosphates, and olivine ( Northwest Africa 6704 is an ungrouped achondrite displaying no diagnostic shock deformation effects. This meteorite is predominantly composed of orthopyroxene megacrysts up to 1.7 cm in length, with finer interstices of olivine, plagioclase, Cr-spinel (chromite), Ni–Fe metal (awaruite), sulfides (heazlewoodite and pentlandite) and whitlockite ( Brenham is the largest known pallasite meteorite. It comprises Ni A fragment of each meteorite was crushed in ethanol using an agate mortar and pestle. Individual minerals were concentrated by hand-picking under an optical microscope. Some aliquots of the crushed materials were analyzed without any mineral separation, which are referred to as “whole-rock” in this paper. Textural changes during acid leaching were investigated for orthopyroxene, plagioclase, olivine, Fe The SEM analysis was carried out on JEOL JSM-7000F and Hitachi S-4500 field emission (FE)-SEM microscopes at the University of Tokyo. Accelerating voltages of 7–15 kV, an emission current of 20 nA, and a working distance of 10 mm were used for the JEOL JSM-7000F, whereas an accelerating voltage of 15 kV, an emission current of 20 nA, and a working distance of 17 mm were used for the Hitachi S-4500 FE-SEM. To confirm the identities of the minerals present, major element analysis was performed on a representative selection of grains by using a Kevex Sigma energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS) attached to the Hitachi S-4500 FE-SEM. We have determined trace element abundances in acid leachates and residues of pyroxene and whole-rock fractions of the three achondrites. The pyroxene fractions (3.0–14.6 mg) were prepared by hand-picking from the crushed and sieved samples under a binocular microscope, whereas the whole-rock fractions (5.1–14.1 mg) are aliquots of the samples without mineral separation. Given the small aliquot sizes, however, the whole-rock fractions are not necessarily representative samples of the bulk compositions. Prior to acid leaching, all sample aliquots were ultrasonicated in distilled acetone (10 min × 3). Following The determination of element abundances was performed on a Thermo Fisher Scientific iCAP Q inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer at the University of Tokyo. The mass spectrometer was operated at a RF power of 1550 W and Ar gas flow rates of 14.0 L/min for cooling, 0.80 L/min for auxiliary, and 0.90–1.00 L/min for the nebulizer. The measurements were performed under standard mode, in which no gas was introduced into a collision/reaction cell. All sample solutions were mixed with an In-Bi internal standard mixture and introduced with a cyclonic spray chamber. Data were acquired in peak jumping mode with three points per peak and a total measurement time of 5 min. Calibration standards were prepared by mixing SPEX multi-elemental standard solutions XSTC-1, -8 and -331. Along the meteorite samples, three ca. 10 mg whole-rock fractions of a basaltic reference sample JB-2 (Geological Survey of Japan) were analyzed without acid leaching. Analytical precision (2σ) and deviations from literature values ( Representative secondary-electron images of minerals processed for the acid leaching are shown in Orthopyroxene and clinopyroxene grains processed by 0.5 M HNO Anorthitic and albitic plagioclase grains showed markedly different behaviors during the leaching steps ( Brenham troilite grains completely dissolved only when 6 M HCl was used; otherwise the surface morphology was significantly modified by the acid leaching ( Element concentrations in acid leachates and residues, which were calculated relative to the sample weights before acid leaching, are presented in Table S1. The relative elemental abundances in acid leachates and residues are graphically shown in The chondrite-normalized ( The results of textural observations ( The insights gained from the SEM observations are supported by the chemical data for acid leachates and residues of pyroxene and whole-rock fractions. The combined leachates of hot 6 M HNO Unlike the other acid leachates, the REE pattern of L-1 of the Ibitira whole-rock fraction has a negative Ce anomaly. As negative Ce anomalies have been commonly observed for secondary minerals formed during water–mineral interaction on the Earth's surface ( The relative resistance of the minerals revealed from the SEM observations and chemical data is generally compatible with the results of previous mineral dissolution experiments performed under less acidic conditions, which showed that: dissolution rates of minerals increase with higher temperature and lower pH ( apatite has a higher dissolution rate than silicate minerals ( dissolution rates of silicate minerals decrease with increasing the number of bridging oxygens per tetrahedral cation ( the dissolution rate of plagioclase increases with higher anorthite content ( Previous experiments further showed that dissolution rates of alkali feldspar and pyroxenes decrease with the increase of the activity of the leached cation in acid solution, whereas those of anorthite and forsterite are not affected by the cation activity ( The present results provide direct constraints on the effect of pyroxene composition on its dissolution rate in acids. On the basis of dissolution experiments, A low level of non-radiogenic Pb is a key condition for precise and accurate Pb Removal of contaminant low- In contrast to anorthitic plagioclase, albitic plagioclase cannot be removed by the acid treatments with either hot 6 M HNO Ibitira pyroxene grains have exsolved lamellae of augite and pigeonite that dissolved into hot dilute HF at different rates ( To quantify the potential effect, we consider the case that pigeonite and augite grains initially crystallized from a melt with the primordial Pb isotopic composition ( A plot of the modeling results ( The modeling results have implications for the cause of the previously observed Pb isotopic data offsets between dilute HF leachates and residues for Allende CAI A63 ( We argue that the observed data offsets may be attributed to the heterogeneous dissolution of exsolved pyroxene grains during HF leaching, because pyroxenes from Asuka 881394 and Allende CAIs as well as chondrules and matrix exhibit lamellar structures ( By combining the morphology of acid-washed minerals and the chemistry of acid leachates and residues, we have elucidated the mechanism by which acid leaching separate radiogenic and non-radiogenic components for Pb We are grateful to H. Yoshida, A. Kobayashi, and K. Ichimura for analytical supports and to Y. Amelin, K. Ozawa, and K. Itano for discussions. This work is financed by grants (Nos.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at