Calcium phosphate forming ability of thin calcium silicates film formed by electron-beam evaporation has been reported. Increasing calcium concentration in calcium silicates is necessary to provide high bioactivity, but there is limitation due to mechanical strength. In this paper, plasma treatment was proposed as post-treatment process for calcium silicate thinfilm to acquire high bioactivity. Thinfilm of calcium silicate was synthesized on titanium coated silicon wafer by means of electron-beam evaporation, and then annealed at 400 °C in air prior to helium atmospheric pressure dielectric barrier discharge (He-AP-DBD) treatment. He-AP–DBD treatment introduced hydrophilic surface with hydroxyl functional group on calcium silicate surface, and calcium phosphate formation was accelerated in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) containing CaCl2.Bioactive glasses have been developed for bone substitute material and coating processes with them have been reported to induce bio-reactivity on titanium surface for dental/orthopedic implants The hypothesis of this research was composed of 4 steps. The first step is hydroxyl functional group generation by He-AP–DBD. The second step is compulsive immobilization of hydroxyl functional group on the calcium silicate surface by He-AP–DBD. The third step is preparing hydrophilic surface. The last step is activated calcium phosphate formation. Samples of silicon wafer were used as substrates. The substrates were cleaned ultrasonically in acetone, methanol, and de-ionized water before deposition. Titanium beads for Ti deposition were purchased from Aldrich, and calcium silicate evaporants were prepared by ball milling and sintering process. Calcium oxide and silicon dioxide were mixed with a weight ratio of 3 to 7 by ball milling for 2 h in ethanol then dried. The powder mixtures were pressed, and then sintered at 1200 °C for 2 h. Before electron-beam deposition, Ar ion-beam cleaning was conducted in the same chamber where electron-beam deposition would be processed. Base pressure of 5.0 End-Hall type ion source was adopted for the ion-beam cleaning process. The Ar beam current was set to 1.5 A at 85 V, and processing time was 20 min. Thinfilm of titanium and calcium silicate was synthesized by electron-beam evaporator (10 kW rated power supply, Intech, Korea). The substrate holder was rotated during the process in order to deposit the film uniformly. After deposition of titanium (200 nm in thickness) on Si wafer, air was introduced into chamber for air-formed titanium oxide and then evacuated for the base pressure of 5.0 Dielectric barrier discharge type plasma head was employed for plasma treatment. Alumina plates (1 mm thickness) were used as dielectric materials. The distance between plates was 1 mm. Bipolar pulse power (ITM, IHP 1002) was selected as a high voltage power supply. Operation voltage, frequency, active pulse width and treatment time were 7.0 kV, 20 kHz, 5 µs and 120 s, respectively. The plasma atmosphere was helium. To measure hydrophilicity, contact angle measurement (SEO, Phoenix 150) was adopted with de-ionized water drops. Contact angle measurement was conducted within 30 min after the plasma treatment. Emission spectra radiated from plasma were collected by optical emission spectroscopy (OES, ACTONE SpectraPro 300i, focal length 300 mm). Change of surface functional group by plasma treatment was observed by FT-IR in ATR mode (Bruker, IFS-66/S). The surface morphology change and elemental composition were examined by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM; Hitachi, S-4200). Surface morphology of films was also examined by AFM with an Autoprobe CP (Park Scientific Instruments, PSI). The AFM images of 1 For calcium phosphate forming ability, samples were immersed in phosphate buffered saline containing CaCl The essential role of hydroxyl group for calcium phosphate formation on bioactive material is well discovered Emission spectra radiated from plasma collected by optical emission spectroscopy are shown in The surface immobilized hydroxyl group can be analyzed by ATR–FTIR, and Change of hydrophilicity by He-AP–DBD treatment was observed by contact angle measurement and shown in The bioactivity of He-AP–DBD treated calcium silicate was evaluated in phosphate buffered saline with SEM, and shown in Since calcium phosphate formation on bioglass and bioceramics is a heterogeneous reaction, surface area should be considered as a factor to control its bioactivity. Sol–gel derived bioglasses which have larger specific area have higher bioactivity than melt derived bioglasses if they are composed of the same composition Calcium phosphate formation is a surface reaction. Surface chemistry, surface energy and specific surface area are the major factors for the reaction. He-AP–DBD treatment modified the surface chemistry with large amount of excited hydroxyl group. The surface energy was also increased by energy transfer. However, surface morphology was preserved after He-AP–DBD treatment. More activated calcium silicate surface characteristics after He-AP–DBD treatment was observed by SEM with more entangled and thicker 2-dimensional nanocalcium phosphate walls. It could be concluded that the calcium silicate thinfilm could be activated not only by compositional change but also by He-AP–DBD treatment. He-AP–DBD treatment introduced hydrophilic surface with hydroxyl functional group and higher surface energy on calcium silicate surface. More entangled and thicker 2-dimensional nanowalls of calcium phosphate were observed on He-AP–DBD treated calcium silicate. Buffered saline would easily wet on hydrophilic surface and the hydroxyl groups acted as nucleation sites for calcium phosphate formation. This work was supported by a grant (code #: 08K1501-01220) from the Center for Nanostructured Materials Technology under 21st Century Frontier R&D Program of the Ministry of Science and Technology, Korea.