Autophagy is a dynamic and highly regulated process of self-digestion responsible for cell survival and reaction to oxidative stress. As oxidative stress is increased in uremia and is associated with vascular calcification, we studied the role of autophagy in vascular calcification induced by phosphate. In an in vitro phosphate-induced calcification model of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and in an in vivo model of chronic renal failure, autophagy was inhibited by the superoxide dismutase mimic MnTMPyP, superoxide dismutase-2 overexpression, and by knockdown of the sodium-dependent phosphate cotransporter Pit1. Although phosphate-induced VSMC apoptosis was reduced by an inhibitor of autophagy (3-methyladenine) and knockdown of autophagy protein 5, calcium deposition in VSMCs was increased during inhibition of autophagy, even with the apoptosis inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK. An inducer of autophagy, valproic acid, decreased calcification. Furthermore, 3-methyladenine significantly promoted phosphate-induced matrix vesicle release with increased alkaline phosphatase activity. Thus, autophagy may be an endogenous protective mechanism counteracting phosphate-induced vascular calcification by reducing matrix vesicle release. Therapeutic agents influencing the autophagic response may be of benefit to treat aging or disease-related vascular calcification and osteoporosis.Macroautophagy (hereafter referred to as autophagy) is a dynamic and highly regulated process of self-digestion. It is a highly conserved cellular process responsible for removal or recycling of long-lived proteins and organelles, and provides cells with an alternative source of nutrients from the reuse of cellular proteins and organelles. Vascular calcification is a major risk factor of cardiovascular mortality, particularly in patients with end-stage renal disease. Many studies have highlighted the important contribution of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS), especially superoxide (O To determine whether autophagy is involved in Pi-induced vascular calcification, we first examined the effect of Pi on autophagosome formation in VSMCs. Pi dose dependently (1.5–3 Mitochondrial ROS production contributes to autophagosome formation in many conditions, and the superoxide dismutase mimic MnTMPyP reduces Pi-induced calcification by eliminating mitochondrial ROS. HA-VSMCs were transfected with scramble small interfering RNA (siRNA) or Pit1 siRNA for 48 To address the potential role of autophagy in Pi-induced calcification in VSMCs, we first used 3-MA (5 Alizarin red S staining ( Autophagy induction under cellular stress may contribute to cell apoptosis or be a mechanism for cell survival, and VSMC apoptosis is one of the mechanisms of Pi-promoted vascular calcification. MVs were isolated from cell lysates by collagenase digestion. Pi significantly increased MV release, from 0.9 to 5.5 In this study, we showed that Pi-increased ROS levels potentiated autophagy in cultured VSMCs and aortic walls of a dietary adenine–induced rat CRF model, and the sodium-dependent Pi cotransporter Pit1 mediated the Pi-induced autophagy. Inhibition of autophagy by 3-MA or siRNA knockdown of the autophage protein Atg5 significantly aggravated Pi-induced calcium deposition As autophagy is linked to conditions such as neurodegenerative diseases, cancer, and cardiovascular diseases, it is a prime target for developing therapeutic treatments for these diseases. Our previous report Autophagy is a multifunctional process involved in various cellular activities We wondered how autophagy inhibition augmented Pi-induced calcium deposition. VSMC apoptosis is an important mechanism for Pi-promoted vascular calcification, and drugs that inhibit apoptosis can ameliorate calcification. Thus, an additional mineralization-specific mechanism could be involved in autophagy inhibition–aggravated calcification. Growing evidence suggests that membrane-bound vesicles from cells are involved in both physiological and pathological calcification. Several epidemiological studies suggested a relationship between vascular calcification, impaired bone metabolism, and increased mortality, both in patients with chronic kidney disease and the general aging population. Abdominal aortas were from the CRF rat model fed with 0.75% adenine and 0.9% phosphorus, as we described previously BASMCs and rat VSMCs were isolated and cultured as described. For calcification experiments, cells were seeded at a density of 1 × 10 Aortas (from the thoracic to the iliac arteries) were removed in a sterile manner from rats. After the adventitia and endothelium were carefully removed, the vessels were cut into 2- to 3-mm rings and placed in high-Pi (3 MVs were harvested by following a modified MV isolation protocol. Cell and aortic extracts were collected after treatment. The protein underwent sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transfer to a nitrocellulose membrane, which was incubated successively with 3% bovine serum albumin and the primary antibodies anti-LC3 (1:1000, CST, Danvers, MA), anti-cleaved caspase 3 (1:1000, CST), anti-Pit1/2, and anti-β-actin (1:500, both Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), followed by IRDye700- or 800—conjugated secondary antibody (1:20,000, Rockland, Gilbertsville, PA) for 1 Treated samples were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and then rendered permeable by incubation in 0.1% Triton X-100 in 5% bovine serum albumin–phosphate-buffered saline for 15 Cells in 6-well plates were washed three times with PBS and fixed with 10% formaldehyde for 10 VSMC apoptosis was assessed by measuring caspase 3/7 activity with the use of the Caspase-Glo 3/7 Assay Kit (Promega) and terminal transferase dUTP nick-end labeling assay (Promega). At 24 siRNA against rat Electron microscopy was performed at our institution’s microscopy facility. Briefly, cells were prefixed with 3% glutaraldehyde and postfixed with 2% osmium tetraoxide. After dehydration, cells were embedded in epoxy resin. Ultrathin sections were cut, contrasted with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and examined under a Zeiss EM-109 electron microscope (Carl Zeiss AG, Carl-Zeiss-Strasse, Oberkochen, Germany). ALP activity was measured colorimetrically as the hydrolysis of Data are reported as mean±s.e.m. Unpaired Student’s This study was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (2010CB912504 and 2011CB503904), the National Science & Technology Pillar Program (2012BAI39B03), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (81270370, 30900566, 81170099,81121061, and 31230035), and the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Mammalian Target of Rapamycin Complex-1 (mTORC1) Promotes Vascular Smooth Muscle Cell Calcification).       