Sintering is a raw material preparation process of blast furnace ironmaking. However, its high energy consumption and pollutant discharge have seriously impeded the development of iron and steel enterprises. In order to reduce the energy consumption and production cost while improving the sinter output and quality, a novel blending optimization model was established based on the in-depth analysis of blending principle in this study. According to the complementary principle of the basic properties between iron ores, the blending model takes the minimum blending cost as optimization objective, and searches the blending scheme group that meets the requirements of granulation and mineralization performance. Then the yield and quality indices and fuel consumption were predicted, and the optimized blending scheme that meets the user's demand is selected via multi-index comprehensive evaluation. The experimental results show that the blending cost of optimized schemes reduced by 0.19–4.19% and fuel consumption decreased by 1.16–3.79 kg per ton sinter, with the improvement of sinter yield and quality indices. The emission of CO2 can be reduced by 15,700–51,200 tons for an enterprise with annual output of 5 million tons of sinter.The crude steel production of China has exceeded 800 million tons since 2014, which accounting for about 50% of world's production. The convention blast furnace-converter process is mainly used in Chinese iron and steel enterprises, in which sinter accounts for nearly 75% of blast furnace burden [ The energy consumption of sintering is closely related to the properties of raw materials. However, a variety of raw materials are used in production plants with a range of compositions and particle sizes. Rational and efficient use of raw materials can not only reduce the production costs, but also lay the foundation for reducing energy consumption. Blending ore optimizing is to set the reasonable proportion of various raw materials by experimental research or optimization algorithm according to the supply conditions of iron ores and the composition requirements of sinter products. The early researchers were lay down blending scheme for sintering pot test rely on the engineers' experience or theoretical calculation, and adjust the proportions repeatedly according to sinter yield and quality indices [ Focusing on the high energy consumption of sintering, Junkai Wang et al. [ Sintering is a typical high-temperature reaction process. The physical and chemical properties of iron ore fines under high temperature directly affect its sintering performance. Fumio Matsuno et al. [ According to the research progress of blending optimization technology, a low-carbon and low-cost blending method was proposed in this study, and the corresponding blending optimization model was established. Firstly, this model takes the minimum iron ore blending cost as optimization function, and uses the optimum granulation and mineralization performance of mixture as constraints, to search raw materials proportion scheme. Then the solid fuel consumption, tumbler strength and productivity of sinter of each scheme are predicted via support vector machine. Finally, the optimized blending scheme with better technical and economic indicators is selected through comprehensive evaluation method. The experimental results show that the optimized blending scheme can reduce production costs and energy consumption while improve the sinter outputs and strength. The mixture states in sintering process at different scales are shown in On particle scale, the granulated pellets first exist in the form that the fine particles (or adhesive fines) are wrapped around coarse particles (or nuclear particles). As pellets temperature rises, the solid phase reaction occurs between mix materials to form low-melting substance, and the low-melting substance transform into primary liquid phase in adhesion layer while the temperature is further increased. Under the effect of primary liquid phase, the flux in large particle size will be melted, and the liquid phase will converge between granulated pellets with their fluidity increases. After reaching the highest temperature, crystals begin to precipitate, and the unfused ores is bonded to form sinter. From the multi-scale analysis, it can be seen that the granulation performance and mineralization performance of mixture have an important influence on the yield, quality and energy consumption indices of sinter. The better granulation performance of mixture, the better permeability of sintering bed, which helping to reduce the suction press and improve the heat transfer efficiency. The better mineralization performance can realize low temperature mineralization, and produce binding phase with better strength and metallurgical properties, which leading to reduce fuel consumption and improve sinter output and strength at the same time. Different iron ores have different granulation and mineralization properties, but they can be combined into a mixture with good performance in granulation and mineralization based on the complementarity principle. The connotation of iron ore blending optimization is to use this principle to improve the sintering performance of mixture, to achieve the best productivity and tumbler strength of sinter and lowest energy consumption. In order to search an optimum blending scheme, an optimization model framework is designed in this research, as illustrated in This model is divided into three steps: optimizing of raw materials proportion, predicting the sintering performance and evaluating the schemes. Firstly, a group of blending schemes which satisfies the constraints of granulation and mineralization performance of mixture and chemical composition of sinter, while has lower blending cost was generated by optimization algorithm. Secondly, the basic properties of raw materials that relates to the granulation and mineralization performance of mixture are used as inputs, to predict the fuel consumption, tumbler index and productivity. Finally, make multi-objective decision on the blending cost, fuel consumption, tumble strength and yield index of blending schemes, and pick out the optimum blending scheme. Set The granulation performance of mixture is mainly affected by the size distribution of raw materials. Through water sieve analysis performed in our previous work [ The microstructure analysis of sinter in our previous research shown that these is part of unfused ores inside sinter [ In addition to the constraints on sintering performance, the chemical composition of sinter must be meet the requirements of ironmaking process, which can be expressed as follows: Combined with the constraints of proportion range, the optimization model of raw materials proportion can be expressed as follows: The above model is a typical constrained optimization problem. The linear programming is very mature algorithm for solving this kind of problem, and there are many examples of its application [ Sintering performance refers to the process parameter like the solid fuel consumption, and the product index such as tumbler strength and productivity. Sintering process has the characteristics of complex lag, it takes a long time from raw materials to finished product. Predicting the sintering performance in the proportioning stage can provide important information for the adjustment of blending scheme. Therefore, the relationship between raw material properties and sintering performance was modeled by machine learning method in this study. Sintering performance are closely related to the granulation and mineralization performance of mixture, where granulation performance can be expressed by the relative content of adhesive fines, and the mineralization performance can be characterized by the chemical composition of melting zone (e.g. mol[CaO/ Fe For nonlinear functions fitting, support vector machine (SVM) is one of powerful tool, and it has been applied in different domains since its strong learning and generalization ability [ For the given data samples { The Lagrangian function established by the objective function and constraints is Based on the optimum condition, the partial derivatives of By introducing the kernel function The optimization model of raw materials proportion will give a number of blending schemes, which needs to be evaluated from the aspects of blending cost, solid fuel consumption, productivity and tumbler strength, so as to optimize the suitable blending scheme. In this study, a comprehensive index method was used to evaluate the blending schemes, given as: In this research, 80 sets of sintering experiments data were collected to train model, 50 groups of them were randomly selected as training samples, and the remaining 30 groups were used as testing set. The model was trained by LS-SVM in the form of RBF kernel function, and it has two important parameters  Take the raw material conditions (see Appendices) of sintering process in large-scale steel mill as an example, the optimization model was run under the constraints in  The blending cost, predicted results of sintering performance (includes solid fuel consumption, productivity, tumbler index) and comprehensive evaluation index (CEI) are shown in Sintering pot test were carried out for both base scheme and optimum scheme, experimental results listed in In order to improve the green manufacturing of iron ore sintering, a low-carbon and low-cost iron ore blending method is proposed and the corresponding optimization model is established in this paper. The main conclusions can be summarized as follows: A novel blending method is proposed based on the complementarity principle of granulation and mineralization performance of iron ores, which is represented by the relative content of adhesive fines and the chemical compositions of melting zone. The optimization model minimizes blending cost in the constraints of the optimum granulation and mineralization performance of mixture. The fuel consumption, tumbler strength and productivity of sinter is predicted using the basic properties of raw materials, and comprehensive evaluation index is calculated on the basic of predicted values. This integrate model optimizes the raw material cost with the consideration of sintering performance, it is an important tool to realize low-carbon and low-cost sintering. The experimental results show that the optimum blending schemes improve the output and strength of sinter while reducing the blending cost by 0.19–4.19% and decreasing the fuel consumption by 1.16 kg/t-sinter. The emission of CO This work was financially supported by the The physicochemical properties of iron ores, the chemical composition of adhesive fines and other materials used in optimization model are listed in