The influence of path length and slurry velocity on the performance of a reciprocating canister type super-conducting magnetic separator has been investigated. The canister train of a Carpco 5 T separator was removed and replaced with seven test cells each with a different length of stainless steel matrix, varying from 25 to 500 mm. A kaolin sample from the St. Austell area in Cornwall was dispersed and pumped through each matrix. The resultant product was analysed for iron.
                  The longer the path length, at a fixed flowrate, the greater was the removal of iron from the kaolin. Shorter path lengths, however, offer the potential advantage of multiple paths within a canister of fixed length. The optimum path length for the kaolin was found to be within the range 25–100 mm, depending on percentage iron removal. The optimum path length increased as the required iron removal rate was increased. Increasing the slurry velocity through the matrix reduced particle capture, with the effect being more significant at 2 T than at 5 T. The higher throughput achieved at the increased velocity however more than compensates for the reduction in performance.Magnetic separation is the most commonly used method for removing minerals that affect the brightness of the clay products. In 1989, Goonvean was the first company to install a superconducting reciprocating canister magnetic separator (CRYOFILTER RHG) capable of producing a 5 T field. The length of matrix that the raw clay passes through (path length) and slurry velocity were identified as important design/operating variables ( In USA, the path lengths are typically longer than for the Cornish clays. The kaolin tested was from the Greensplat pit, situated near St. Austell in Cornwall. The raw clay contained 1.1% Fe, had an ISO brightness of 83.6 and contained 51% by weight passing In order to vary the path length of the matrix the production canister train of the Cyrofilter was removed and replaced with test cells, each with a different length of matrix containing Eight samples representing the number of cell volumes processed were collected at the discharge end of the relevant test cell. The samples were flocculated, filtered, dried and analysed for Fe. The variation in cumulative iron removal with the number of bed volumes passed through the matrix, at a flow velocity of The effects of a variation in slurry velocity (1.5 and  The test results confirmed that increases in path length and field intensity along with a decrease in slurry velocity all increase the amount of material captured by the matrix. Reducing slurry velocity and increasing the matrix length would however have a negative effect on the throughput of the unit. Using the test data an evaluation of the optimum path length was made by comparing throughput with % Fe reduction for path lengths varied from 25–500 mm. Advantages of the smaller matrix length include a decreased velocity through the matrix (see The shorter path length requires the unit to reciprocate more frequently, with approximately 15 s of process time being lost every cycle. Other disadvantages of faster reciprocation are potential dilution of the clay from the final flush water, increased compressed air usage and increased wear and tear on valves and control systems. These factors are considered to be relatively unimportant compared to the calculated efficiency benefits of running with short path lengths. Using a similar evaluation technique to that for path length it has been calculated that the higher throughput achieved at the increased velocity (see  An increase in path length increases the removal of paramagnetic particles at a fixed slurry velocity. Increases in magnetic field strength and a reduction in flowrate at a fixed path length produce a similar effect. For the kaolin tested to achieve “typical” % Fe removal rates of 15–20% the shortest path length of 25 mm is the best option. As the target for Fe removal is raised the optimum path length increases. The test procedure described provides a means of selecting the path length to suit a particular clay and performance requirement.