This is the first of a series of publications concerned with a novel system that transforms the hydrodynamics of flotation. This system, referred to as a Reflux Flotation Cell, consists of a vertical flotation zone, with a system of parallel inclined channels below. The system is enclosed at the top by a fluidization distributor, while a central port is used to discharge the overflow product. The inclined channels located below the vertical section enhance the segregation of the bubbles from the tailings flow, permitting separations to be conducted at bubble surface fluxes well beyond the normal flooding condition, while also permitting extreme wash water fluxes. The system hydrodynamics produces spherical bubbly-foam, with a bubble volume fraction of order 0.5, ideal for counter-current washing, and hence desliming.
                  This paper addresses two objectives. The first concerns the fluidization boundary condition at the top of the device. We identify for the first time a conundrum that arises when Drift Flux theory and fluidization theory are used to describe the effect of wash water addition in flotation. A subtle but nevertheless significant change in the predicted bias flux arises when the system is formally fluidized, resulting in the wash water reporting with the overflow, and hence failing to provide the desired desliming. Our experimental work, however, demonstrated that the applied fluidization leads to strong positive bias, with a downwards liquid flux and in turn powerful desliming of hydrophilic particles. Indeed the system behaved as though the wash water was introduced below rather than at the upper boundary.
                  The second, and most important objective was to assess the system hydrodynamics with respect to extreme gas and wash water fluxes using firstly a particle-free system, and secondly assess the desliming achievable using a system containing hydrophilic particles. Thus in Part I the system was free of hydrophobic particles. The enhanced bubble–liquid segregation arising from the system of inclined channels permitted very high gas fluxes, sufficient to achieve a bubble surface flux of 144m2/m2
                     s, well beyond the theoretical flooding limit of ~100m2/m2
                     s (Wace et al., 1968). This high bubble surface flux was especially significant given this occurred during the application of extreme bias fluxes, as high as 2.5cm/s passing downwards. Experiments involving a silica feed were used to quantify the performance of the desliming, covering extreme gas and fluidization (wash) water fluxes. Silica rejection from the product exceeded 99%.Flotation is used extensively in the recovery of valuable minerals and coal. The conventional flotation process involves the transport of particle-laden bubbles up through a dispersed and dilute bubbly zone to form a foam zone, rich in hydrophobic particles. A distinct interface separates these two zones. Entrainment of ultrafine hydrophilic particles, known as slimes, into the foam has a severe and negative impact on the product grade. A foam zone provides an effective method for promoting water rejection and, in turn, slimes rejection. To improve the product grade, wash water is often sprayed onto the free-surface (top layer) of the foam to wash the entrained slimes down through the foam. Alternatively, the wash water can be injected into the foam beneath the free-surface. Either way it is very difficult to achieve uniform drainage of the wash water down through the foam given the tendency for water to also report directly with the product, or for the water to rupture the foam and achieve very little. Much of this difficulty arises due to the poor permeability of a foam. Of specific interest in this study is the direction of the interstitial water flow through the system of rising bubbles and foam, and its influence on the slimes yield reporting to the product overflow. To ensure the effectiveness of wash water in removing slimes, a net downward flow of liquid through the foam and bubbly zones, or a positive bias, is essential ( The objective of this study was to address the present hydrodynamic limitations of conventional flotation. Drift Flux theory ( These limitations are addressed here using a Reflux Classifier ( The focus of this study was on (i) the hydrodynamics of the RFC and (ii) the associated desliming of hydrophilic particles from the product stream. The hydrodynamics are explored theoretically in Consider the continuous operation of a flotation cell configured as an inverted gravity separation system in which the top of the cell is enclosed to confine the overflow to a narrow discharge port. The entering gas rises as a dispersed system of bubbles at a relatively low volume fraction, referred to as a dilute bubbly zone. Above this zone the gas rises up through the remainder of the system as foam, discharging through the upper system port. The sharp interface, which exists between these two zones, can be maintained at a fixed elevation through adjustment of the tailings discharge rate. As the gas flux increases the volume fraction of the gas in the bubbly zone increases, while the volume fraction of the gas in the foam zone decreases. Flooding occurs when the volume fraction of the gas above and below the interface becomes the same, and hence the interface disappears. In conventional flotation the flooding condition must be avoided by limiting the gas flux to levels well below this flooding limit. When wash water is introduced into the foam below the free-surface, a so-called “wet” foam of lower gas volume fraction forms below the injection point, while the foam above the injection point recovers and hence, in principle, remains unaffected by the wash water injection. In turn, when wash water is introduced and a “wet” foam formed, flooding is reached at a lower gas flux. It should be noted that in the extreme the “wet” foam state approaches that of a spherical foam, described here as a concentrated bubbly zone. In the Reflux Flotation Cell the system can be operated beyond the flooding condition due to the enhanced segregation achieved between the bubbles and the tailings flow within the inclined channels, with the volume fraction of the gas within the bubbly zone at relatively high levels of order 0.5. This action, however, is not considered as part of the Drift Flux analysis in this section. Hence the analysis is limited to gas fluxes below the flooding limit.   The well-known model of Other characteristic equations can be used to account for surface mobility and bubble deformity if necessary ( This section outlines the application of Drift Flux theory to flotation and what is meant by flux curve constrained flotation. For some readers it will be useful to firstly consider the analogous arrangement of a continuous steady state thickener, which is outlined in Appendix A. An equivalent approach is applied here in terms of the present problem concerned with the production of foam. A basic treatment is provided hence there is no wash water or fluidization applied to the foam. We begin by describing the system under batch conditions, then under continuous steady state conditions, and then discuss these conditions using an operating line on a flux curve. In the first instance the vessel is closed at the top, as shown in Part (i) of The theory of Note that here If the gas flux was suddenly switched off the observer would witness the overall height of the foam decrease at the velocity, Higher concentrations are present within the foam, increasing in value towards the top of the system, and clearly propagate at velocities lower in magnitude than the value of | By permitting an overflow velocity equal in magnitude to | The above discussion is readily quantified using an appropriate flux curve construction. The settling flux of the bubbles is given by the product of the settling velocity,  In the absence of fluidization (i.e. with no wash water) there is always a step change from the internal system concentration to that of the final exit concentration, The slope of the chord from the origin to the point at which the tangent meets the flux curve is clearly In the Appendix a modified flux curve construction is also presented, showing that the tangent condition represents a “bottle-neck” in the transport of particles (in this case gas bubbles) through the system. This “bottle-neck” denotes the maximum gas flux that can be transported to the overflow at this overflow velocity. At lower gas fluxes the system is unconstrained by the flux curve, given the transport of this gas flux is independent of the flux curve. However, the transport is flux curve constrained at higher gas fluxes. The propagation velocity, It follows that, Incorporating Eq. Combining this result with Eq. It is noted that in any equation involving the exponent, An explicit solution is obtained by specifying the value of Eliminating Thus Eqs. This system can be made to operate in a manner that is unconstrained by the flux curve. This occurs when the interface between the dilute bubbly zone and foam zone is allowed to rise upwards, through an increase in the overflow velocity,  The systems are operated at the same gas flux, and must have the same bubble volume fraction in the upper section. Thus, the liquid flux, In order to understand the state of the system below the point of wash water injection, we first need to describe the conditions above this zone. Thus we can use Eqs. The interstitial liquid of volume fraction, Combining Eqs. The volume fraction of the bubbles in the “wet” foam below the wash water injection in The total flux is also given by the sum of the bubble flux and the liquid flux. That is, Here, Eq. The slip velocity, given by Rearranging Eq. Thus the interstitial liquid velocity can be eliminated from Eqs. It then follows that Incorporating Eqs. It is noted that In this section we examine for the first time a subtle but important issue associated with the boundary condition at the upper surface of the flotation vessel. The system, shown in In the first instance the upper boundary is closed, and hence there is no discharge of foam. The rest of the system remains full, by either discharging or adding liquid as required. Imagine if the system was supplied with an exceedingly low flux of gas bubbles from below. These would rise up through the vertical section, accumulating at the top over a long period of time. A fluidized bed of bubbles would then be formed in the upper section, with the bed height increasing in the downwards direction very slowly with time. The bed concentration of bubbles, governed entirely by the fluidization flux, would be uniform in nature from the upper boundary condition down through the bed. Consider now the discharge of bubbly liquid through the upper boundary of the system. Here the fluidization is assumed to be sufficient to generate a relatively “wet” foam state known as spherical foam, essentially a concentrated bubbly zone. By permitting a sufficient rate of discharge, a constant fluidized bed height would eventually be established. Then the gas flux entering would equal the gas flux leaving. At this point in time a downwards positive bias must exist, almost equal to the fluidization flux, given the liquid discharge via the concentrated bubbly flow would be exceedingly low in comparison to the significant fluidization velocity. Of course, by increasing the gas flux to a significant level it is necessary to discharge the concentrated bubbly flow at a much higher rate in order to preserve the bed height. Each additional bubble discharges with a finite quantity of liquid. At this point the bed concentration of bubbles would continue to be uniform from the upper boundary condition down through the vessel, governed entirely by the fluidization flux. A downwards positive bias would still exist, but would be much smaller in magnitude than before due to the now significant discharge flux of concentrated bubbly liquid. Eventually, with a sufficiently high gas flux, the liquid discharge flux associated with the concentrated bubbly flow out of the top of the vessel would match the fluidization flux, and hence the bias would become zero. At some higher gas flux, however, the system will become flux curve constrained. Under this condition, the concentrated bubbly liquid discharge flux required to maintain a steady bed height would be so high that the downwards bias flux would in fact become negative. This liquid flux within the system is of course a positive liquid flux, A modified flux curve is produced by incorporating the specific level of wash water fluidization, The state of fluidization results in the upward bubble velocity, in the absence of fluidization, Under these conditions the concentration, For this fluidized bed case the settling velocity is balanced by the fluidization velocity and hence there is no step change in either velocity or concentration at the system boundary. Thus, The feed operating line, based on As noted above, the system is unconstrained by the flux curve when the value of the gas flux, For a system unconstrained by the flux curve, the net downwards flux of liquid, or liquid bias flux, Finally, we consider what happens when the fluidized system becomes flux curve constrained, with the imposed gas flux, Applying the product rule gives, Eq. Thus the modified propagation velocity is equal to the standard propagation velocity, Eq. We have used the term Clearly the volume fraction of the bubbles in the foam is not influenced by the fluidization flux when the system is flux curve constrained. It also follows that the liquid flux, Eq. For this flux curve constrained system fluidized at the upper boundary, Eq.  This work shows there is an important, yet subtle, distinction between wash water added at the upper distributor in Interestingly, there appears to be some uncertainty in the literature regarding the partitioning of the wash water between the lower foam and the overflow product. Indeed, simulations involving water addition above the free-surface have demonstrated a significant portion of the water added simply flows over the weir thereby failing to wash the gangue from the foam ( A schematic representation of the Reflux Flotation Cell (RFC) used in the experiments is shown in The air rate to the sparger was controlled using a rotameter. A slurry feed rate of 3 Two series of continuous steady state experiments were conducted. In each series a surfactant was introduced into both the feed slurry and fluidization water at a concentration of 0.2 The second series of experiments, presented in In this second series of experiments the surfactant, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), was used in order to ensure the silica particles did not float. Both the feed slurry and wash water were again set at 0.2 In this first series of experiments the surfactant, CTAB, was used in order to generate relatively fine and stable gas bubbles. The objective was to investigate the effect of fluidization water on the hydrodynamics of the foam/bubble suspension. The wash water was delivered to the RFC via a distributor at the upper system boundary. According to the earlier analysis in this paper, there is some uncertainty in how to interpret the fluidization boundary condition. The RFC is effectively an inverted fluidized bed, hence the liquid overflow flux from this device should be controllable via the underflow discharge rate. This series of fluidization experiments was conducted by initially forming steady state foam, with its base located above the downcomer outlet. It is noted that a pump was used in this study in order to provide additional control of the foam zone. Hence as the fluidization rate was increased, the underflow pumping rate was accordingly increased. Thus the foam interface of the fluidized bed was maintained at an approximately fixed level above the downcomer outlet, well above the inlet of the inclined channels. The overflow liquid flux, The smooth curve in The implication of preserving the overflow flux to a level similar to that produced in the absence of fluidization is demonstrated in The relationship between the overflow liquid flux and the volume fraction of bubbles in the fluidized bed, with increasing gas flux, is shown in Typically, a foam will range from extremely “dry”, where the volume fraction of the bubbles approaches 1, to extremely “wet” randomly close-packed spheres with a volume fraction of about 0.74 ( Ultrafine silica particles were used as a model system to assess the potential of the fluidization in desliming. It is noted that the surfactant, SDS, was used instead of CTAB in this series of experiments in order to ensure that the silica particles did not float. The bubbles observed were clearly coarser and found to have a mean size of 340 Initially, dilute silica slurry with a pulp density of 1.60±0.14% solids was fed into the RFC. The entrainment of silica, calculated in terms of its yield in the overflow, is shown in  Despite the small size of the bubbles ( The theoretical gas flux limit of a conventional system operated in the absence of wash water fluidization occurs at the flooding condition, which is obtained when the tangent of the operating line occurs at the point of inflexion. The relevant volume fraction at the inflexion point is  The dash line included in Additional experiments were conducted using a higher feed pulp density of 6.5±0.2% solids.  The Reflux Flotation Cell (RFC) is designed to overcome the inherent hydrodynamic constraints of conventional flotation cells. Drift Flux and fluidization theory were used to investigate the fluidization boundary condition of the system. The experimental results showed that the fluidization wash water was, in effect, delivered into the foam or concentrated bubbly zone via the distributor. Hence the fluidization wash water was permitted to travel downwards delivering significant positive bias and hence strong desliming of the flotation foam. The hydrodynamics of the Reflux Flotation Cell led to remarkably high bubble surface area fluxes of order 144 Silica was used as a model hydrophilic particle species in order to investigate the hydrodynamic benefits of the RFC configuration in desliming. In general the best performance was achieved by choosing to operate with a concentrated bubbly zone rather than foam. This bubbly zone had a lower volume fraction of bubbles in the vicinity of 0.5. The increased permeability proved ideal for efficient desliming at high wash water fluxes. The University of Newcastle holds international patents and patent applications on the Reflux Classifier and related technologies and has a Research and Development Agreement with FLSmidth Ludowici to develop these technologies. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the In this appendix the analogous system of a steady state thickener is outlined with reference to the theory of A dispersed flux of solid particles, The rise velocity of the sediment bed is determined by the maximum propagation velocity that can be sustained by the feed flux. Note that here The volume fraction of solids just below the surface of the rising bed is This pumping operation also results in a fixed interface position between the free-settling zone and sediment bed, and hence steady state. A small disturbance can easily lead to a rise or a fall in the bed level, so some effort is needed in order to keep the interface fixed. At this point the volume flux of solids, The above discussion is readily quantified using an appropriate flux curve construction. Although we normalize the flux curve using the particle terminal velocity, The tangent occurs at the volume fraction, Fig. A2 shows the alternative flux curve construction, based on a plot of the modified settling flux,