A new treatment of mallet fractures of the distal phalanx is presented. Open reduction and internal fixation was performed using a “hook” plate fabricated from a 1.3mm AO hand modular system straight plate. This technique avoids the need to place implants or wires through the small avulsion fragment while still being able to achieve a stable “tension-plate” type of fixation construct strong enough to allow protected early active motion of the distal interphalangeal joint. In minimising the need for prolonged splinting, patient comfort is also improved. In a consecutive series of nine fractures, union was achieved in all cases. At an average follow-up period of 17 months, four had excellent and five had good results using the Crawford rating scale. Using the Warren and Norris scale, all patients had a successful result. The final average active range of flexion of the distal interphalangeal joint was 64° and there was no extensor lag.Although a wide variety of both open and percutaneous surgical techniques have been described for the treatment of mallet fractures, accurate anatomic reduction and stable fixation of mallet fractures remains one of the most challenging operations in hand surgery. Common problems with existing pin, wire or screw techniques include loss of reduction, recurrent subluxation, pin migration, wire cut-out and the common requirement for prolonged transarticular K-wire splintage and consequent inability to initiate early motion of the distal interphalangeal joint. We report a new surgical treatment of mallet fractures of the distal phalanx. Open reduction and internal fixation was performed using a “hook” plate fabricated from a 1.3 Nine mallet avulsion fractures of the distal phalanx treated by open reduction and internal fixation using a “hook” plate fabricated from a 1.3 Our surgical indications included fractures involving more than one third of the articular surface, fractures associated with palmar subluxation of the distal phalanx that could not be corrected by closed reduction and mallet fragments, which had migrated proximally to a significant degree. Over a period of 2 years and 6 months, from October 2002 to June 2005, nine such displaced mallet fractures were identified and treated by open reduction and internal fixation using the described hook plate technique ( Pre-operative lateral X-rays of the finger were used to determine the presence of palmar subluxation of the distal phalanx, fragment displacement and fragment size ( Postoperatively, serial lateral and antero-posterior X-rays were taken immediately after operation, at 3 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months and 6 months, to determine time to healing and evidence of malunion or non-union. Clinical data collected included range of motion and extensor lag at the DIP joint, tender dorsal prominences at the attachment of the extensor tendon to the base of the distal phalanx and complications. Functional outcomes were determined using the Five cases were performed under general anaesthetic, one under regional (inter-scalene brachial plexus block) anaesthesia and three under local digital block ( A two-hole 1.3 The plate is placed and secured with a 1.3 Postoperatively, a thermoplastic Stack splint ( The average follow-up was 17 (range 6–37) months. All nine fractures were united by 6 weeks after surgery, with congruous joint surfaces. The average final active range of flexion of the distal interphalangeal joint was 64° (range 60°–70°) and extensor lag was not noted in any of these cases. All of mallet finger fractures had an excellent or good result. Using the There were no implant complications, infections or nail deformities. Dorsal soft-tissue swelling over the DIP joint was, common and was, sometimes, tender. However, this did not cause functional impairment and resolved over time. There was no residual pain by the time of final assessment. Although not mandatory, implant removal was planned for all cases in accordance with our local practice and at the time of article submission, this had been performed in all but two cases. The range of flexion was preserved and there was no deterioration in extensor lag after removal of implants. Long-term results with regard to degenerative arthritis are not available from this series. Mallet injuries are avulsions of the terminal extensor tendon, from the base of the distal phalanx, with or without a bony fragment. The disruption of the terminal extensor mechanism results in a characteristic flexion deformity of the distal interphalangeal joint. These injuries are commonly encountered in ball-related sports injuries from axial loading or a forceful flexion of the extended digit ( Surgical treatment is advocated for avulsion fractures involving more than one-third of the articular surface, for persistent subluxation or fragment displacement which cannot be adequately reduced by full extension of the distal interphalangeal joint in a splint ( A variety of surgical techniques have been described including open reduction and K-wire fixation ( Some deficiencies in existing techniques were highlighted in a biomechanical study by Reported postoperative complication rates of mallet fractures ranged from 3% to 53% ( In our own practice of pin, wire and screw-only techniques for mallet fractures, we have encountered similar problems of K-wire migration, wire cut-out or slippage of bone on the smooth pins, leading to a loss of reduction, and fragmentation of the dorsal fracture fragment following implant placement. In addition, the majority of techniques require percutaneous transarticular pin splintage, which does not allow early joint mobilisation and requires meticulous pin care with regular dressings. To address these concerns, we devised a hooked plate, which can be easily adapted from existing implants. The plate is fabricated from an AO 1.3 This limited study was designed to document the results of a new technique of open reduction and internal fixation of mallet fractures in situations where this was indicated. During this period, other methods of internal fixation were not routinely used and, thus, no comparisons between techniques can be made. This was intended as a small series reporting our early results and has a short average follow-up of 17 months. At 4–6 months, fracture union may be ascertained and the presence of any recurrent subluxation excluded. Range of motion and symptoms have usually stabilised or will continue to improve. However, a longer follow-up would be required to assess the incidence of osteoarthritis. Not all authors agree as to the significance of achieving anatomical reduction in mallet injuries as substantial remodelling can occur and the DIP joint contributes less to the full arc of movement of the finger than the proximal joints. Open reduction and internal fixation using the hook plate, allows early motion and can provide acceptable functional results in suitable cases. However, it is technically demanding. While there were no complications from the use of the “hook” plate in this series, our numbers are small and it is acknowledged that the potential for fixation failure and collapse, as well as development of postoperative adhesions, leading to stiffness, could lead to poor outcomes and significant disability.