The objective of this study is to investigate the effect of ball size on grinding kinetics in a pilot scale ball mill. Six different ball media gradings were tested. Comparative tests were conducted in batch ball mill having 1.2m diameter and 0.6m length at constant operating condition of mill such as media mass, mill speed and input specific energy. Feed samples were ground batchwise and representative sample was taken from inside the mill for each determined grinding period. Grinding process in ball mill was modeled and the specific rate of breakage was calculated for the each test. The results indicated that the relationship between different breakage rate and particle size has a maximum for each ball size distribution. Consequently, a new equation to correlate maximum ball size and particle size at maximum breakage occurs is proposed.Grinding is a significant step in whole stage of cement manufacturing process. Grinding of clinker is traditionally performed by tube mill, which consists of one or more different compartments and different sized grinding media. Despite the developments in energy saving grinding machines in cement manufacturing, it seems to retain their importance. Grinding is the most energy intensive unit operation in cement production. To produce 1 Production costs and environmental concerns are emphasizing the need to use less energy. The quality and volume of cement produced and electrical energy consumed are heavily dependent on the design and size of these equipments ( In recent years, considerable steps have been taken to improve comminution efficiency both in the development of machines with the ability to enhance energy utilization and in the optimal design of grinding systems to enable more efficient use to be made of existing machines ( Ball size is a critical parameter influencing the performance of a ball mill, particularly for multi-compartment ball mills used in cement industry. Studies for selection of optimum ball size are reported in the literature ( Comparative tests were conducted using the different pre-assembled ball charges given in The mill was crashed-stopped during various periods. Samples were representatively taken from inside the mill in distances of 20–30 For same feed size, the size distributions of products after grinding for various determined grinding time under different ball media are given in As seen in Using the particle size distributions of feed and mill content the grinding process in pilot scale ball mill was modelled and the specific breakage rate parameters ( Specific rate of breakage is related with operational and design parameters such as mill diameter and ball size. The relationship between maximum ball size ( The relationship between maximum ball size ( Ball mill performance is greatly affected by ball size. There are many factors affecting the choice of suitable ball size, such as feed size distribution, feed hardness, mill diameter, specific gravity of ball, etc. Bond has suggested a formula to determine the maximum ball size including most of these variables ( Perfect mixing model has been found successful in simulation and optimization studies. In this approach the effect of ball size on breakage rate parameter is characterized by formula Simulation study is the best way to realize what will happen in the circuit and to answer to almost all questions without any investment. If reliable models of the equipment are built based on experimental or industrial datum, simulation study can be achieved successfully. So knowing the effects of ball size on grinding kinetics is an essential part of simulation study in ball mills. Using the proposed mathematical Eq. This paper presents the results of an investigation into the effects of ball size on grinding kinetics in a pilot scale ball mill. The results denote that particle size at maximum breakage occurs ( We gratefully acknowledge the financial assistance of The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TÜBİTAK), Project MAG 104M369 and Hacettepe University.