Serpentinic ore, from the “Kastoria” nickeliferous deposit in Northern Greece, was first processed to reject as much of its calcite content as possible. Partial separation of calcite from the ore was achieved by the use of a strong magnetic field, the extent of which depended on feed particle size. The losses of nickel in the nonmagnetic product were about 5%, while the percentage CaO removal was about 37%. Based on the experimental findings, a mineral processing scheme was devised and applied in order to prepare a suitable sulphuric acid heap or agitation leaching feed.Greece is the only EU country with extensive but low-grade nickel laterites. They mainly occur as limonitic laterites and, to a lesser extent, as serpentinic laterites. The Greek laterites are unique in the world in that they are sedimentary and have originated by transport and sedimentation of laterite-derived material, generated by weathering of ultramafic rocks The Greek limonitic laterites have been exploited to produce ferronickel via a pyrometallurgical route. This involves prereduction of the ore in rotary kilns, reduction smelting in electric furnaces, and upgrading of the raw ferronickel in a converter to the final 20–25% Ni grade. Because of the rising cost of energy, the method is economically marginal when ore with 0.95–1% nickel is treated and is uneconomic for lower grade laterites. Direct application of the above pyrometallurgical method to existing serpentinic laterites is not feasible because the slag produced is difficult to melt, resulting in higher energy requirements and poor phases (metal–slag) separation. An innovative integrated hydrometallurgical method for nickel and cobalt extraction from Greek limonitic laterites has been developed and patented The “HEap Leach LAteriteS” (HELLAS) method comprises heap leaching of the ore with dilute sulphuric acid at ambient temperature, purification of the leach liquor produced by chemical precipitation at atmospheric pressure, and recovery of nickel and cobalt from the purified leach liquor either by solvent extraction and electrowinning or by chemical precipitation. A research project was undertaken to study the application of “HELLAS” to the “Kastoria” serpentinic deposit in Northern Greece The only known upgrading process presently practiced in serpentinic laterite beneficiation plants around the world is rock rejection. Laterite ores often contain boulders that may be barren of nickel. These boulders are typically surrounded by very fine, loosely adhering nickeliferous material. Since the nickel-bearing material is softer than the core of the boulder, mild abrasion may result in significant upgrading. This can be done in a “trommel” rock rejection device or in an autogenous grinding drum. In both cases, the barren cores can be washed and screened out Within the framework of the research project conducted for the “Kastoria” deposit, a magnetic separation process, not previously evaluated for this type of ore, was applied and the results are given in the present paper. A representative sample of 1.2 t of “Kastoria” ore was received from the “Kastoria” mine in Northern Greece, crushed to −50 mm. Its chemical analysis is given in The “Kastoria” laterite deposit was formed on serpentinised hartzburgite during the Eocene period. The ore appears as a discontinuous layer of sediment deposited on serpentinised ultramafic rock, which represents relics of old weathering crust The Kastoria laterite consists, predominantly, of nickeliferous serpentine [Mg Serpentine is the most important mineral. In some places it is replaced by cronstedtite [(Fe The goethite content in the ore is approximately 5%. Goethite appears in veinlets or in small grains distributed in the matrix of serpentine. It is more abundant in places where cronstedtite predominates. Chromite occurs in small grains within the matrix of serpentine and cronstedtite. Its content is about 1%. Small amounts of chlorite, saponite, talc flakes, and tremolite are also present. The microprobe analysis showed that the minerals serpentine and cronstedtite constitute the main nickel carriers in the “Kastoria” ore. More specifically, the NiO content in serpentine ranges from 0.98% to 6.38%, with a mean value from 20 analyses of 3.44%. The NiO content in cronstedtite ranges from 2.78% to 11.5%, averaging 5.86%. Saponite, goethite, and hematite are also nickeliferous minerals, containing on the average 1.6%, 1.3%, and 1.8% NiO, respectively; however, their contribution to the nickel content of the ore is limited, given their small relative amounts. As previously described, the above mineralogical analysis indicated that the main nickeliferous minerals were serpentine and cronstedtite while the main gangue minerals were quartz and calcite. Taking into consideration that nickeliferous minerals such as garnierite, limonite, and serpentine are slightly magnetic, while quartz and calcite are nonmagnetic, only a high intensity magnetic field would achieve their separation. This requires the use of high gradient magnetic separators (HGMS). Such a separation would be effective provided that an adequate degree of mineral liberation has been previously achieved by grinding. Considering that a large fraction of fines in the ore is not preferable for heap leaching, determining the coarsest size fraction of ore, for which magnetic separation is effective, was a major goal of this study. An amount of 600 kg from the initial “Kastoria” ore sample was homogenized in a mixing drum and divided by the “cross” method and homogenization to give subsamples of 150 kg and subsequently 36.5 kg. One of the 36.5-kg subsamples was further divided and a 4.9-kg portion was finally taken for dry size analysis. The results are shown in A sample of approximately 100 g from each size fraction was taken, using a Jones riffle splitter, ground to −100 mesh, and chemically analysed in order to determine which size fractions would either be rejected, as being barren of nickel and high in calcium, or further be processed by magnetic separation. The results of the chemical analysis of the ore size fractions are given in The rest of the 36.5-kg sample (31.6 kg) was screened, using 10-, 4-, 2-, and 1-mm sieves, for processing by different magnetic separators available in the laboratory. The size fractions thereby produced are given in The −50+10 mm size fraction was fed to a rotating autogenous grinding drum in order to effect rock rejection, prior to feeding the ore to magnetic separators. The product, after 15-min grinding in the drum and water washing of the coarsest fraction, was passed through the same as above sieve sizes and the results are given in The −50+10 mm fraction of the autogenous grinding product was set aside for possible rejection, depending on its nickel content, while the other fractions were added to the respective fractions of the initial sample for the magnetic separation study. The −10+4 and −4+2 mm fractions were fed to a permanent magnet HGMS machine, while the −1 and −2+1 mm fractions were processed in a variable intensity magnetic separation device. As seen in As seen in  Based on the above experimental findings, the following mineral processing scheme was devised and applied for the “Kastoria” ore in order to prepare a suitable sulphuric acid heap or agitation leaching feed: Classification of the −50-mm feed material by 16, 10, 4, and 1mm size screens. Crushing of the −50+16 mm ore in a jaw crusher to the size of −16 mm. Classification of the crusher product to the sizes of stage 1. Autogenous grinding of the −16+4 mm fraction in a revolving drum. Classification of the autogenous grinding product to the sizes of stage 1. Chemical analysis of the coarse size fractions for possible rejection of those with less than 0.5% Ni. Crushing to −4 mm of coarser fractions with nickel more than 0.5%. Magnetic separation of the −4+1 mm fraction in a HGMS device. The above scheme is expected to improve the leaching behaviour of the serpentinic ore by lowering the acid consumption during both agitation and heap leaching as well as improving the permeability of the ore heap. The authors wish to express their gratitude to the European Commission, Directorate General XII, for financial support according to contract no. BRE2-CT94-1020 and, also, to G.M.M.S.A. LARCO for the laterite samples provided.