It has been well known that the mechanical properties of materials are governed by the microstructural characteristics such as distribution of grains, texture and grain boundary character distribution (GBCD) To install crystal orientations into individual grains of a computer-generated microstructure, an experimental orientation distribution function (ODF) was utilized. Since ODF is a continuous statistical distribution of the orientations of a set of grains, one needs to discretize ODF into portions that individual grains contribute. An assumption of the Gaussian distribution of each orientation element led to the following approach. A two-dimensional microstructure was generated according to the Voronoi method Experimental ODF is a spatial map of the intensity distribution of the function f( A Metropolis method Crystal orientation of each grain, Q Random orientations were assigned to the initial microstructure, In contrast to the case of the misorientation angles, the distribution of the CSL boundaries in the random microstructures was dependent on c/a. The frequencies of the CSL boundaries computed in the present work were generally higher than those calculated by Warrington Texture components of a real HCP metal were extracted and then were discretized in a computer-generated microstructure GBCD of the computer-generated microstructure discretized with the ODF of the experimental Ti sheet, as shown in The frequencies of CSL boundaries were higher in the cold-rolled Ti sheet than in the annealed condition. This was due to the high frequency of boundaries with greater than 35° misorientation in the cold-rolled Ti sheet, as shown in It is generally accepted that the texture and GBCD are correlated. While the microstructure of a single strong texture component shows a high frequency Σ1 boundaries that of two strong texture components shows not only a high frequency of Σ1 boundaries but also a wide misorientation angle distribution between the two components. The following conclusions were drawn from the study of the texture in computer-generated microstructures of HCP materials: A computer code was developed to discretize crystal orientations deduced from ODF of real materials to individual grains of a simulated microstructure generated by a Monte-Carlo method. This was done under the assumption that each texture component could be described by a Gaussian distribution with characteristic half width and volume fraction. In the microstructure with random texture, the angular distribution of the misorientation of grain boundaries agreed well with the theoretical prediction of Morawiec. The frequency of Σ1 boundaries increased with the texture intensity. Also the grains with particular CSL boundaries increased in number if the CSL relationship held between two major texture components. The present computer generated microstructure is realistic and useful for studying the mechanism of microstructural evolution in HCP materials. This work was supported by Korea Institute of Science & Technology Evaluation and Planning under 1999 Basic Research Program in Atomic Energy Technology.