In hydrometallurgical processes, the use of metal sulphide instead of hydroxide precipitation has gained prominence in recent decades. The arguments for its preferential use are based on the high degree of metal removal at relatively low pH values; the sparingly soluble nature of sulphide precipitates; favourable dewatering characteristics and the stability of the metal sulphides formed. However, when choosing a metal sulphide precipitation route, various difficulties are encountered, two of which are described in the current work.
                  The first issue is that these metal sulphide precipitation processes, dominated by low solubilities and high supersaturation levels, favour the formation of fine particles due to the dominant mechanisms of homogeneous nucleation, aggregation and attrition.
                  The second issue is that, in areas of high local sulphide concentration, the excess sulphide can lead to the formation of aqueous polysulphide complexes, which consume the sulphide reagent and compromise the metal removal.In hydrometallurgical processes, the use of metal sulphide instead of hydroxide precipitation has gained prominence in recent decades ( The first issue is the nature of the particles formed in metal sulphide precipitation. Because of the extremely low solubilities of most metal sulphide salts, the supersaturation created by the interaction of the aqueous sulphide and metal species can be very high (up to 10 The second issue is the formation of aqueous polysulphide complexes under conditions of excess sulphide, which can be experienced either globally or locally. This phenomenon was observed in this work when using sulphide to separate copper as a copper sulphide precipitate. The same phenomenon was observed in mixed nickel and cobalt sulphide precipitation under batch conditions. The unexpected result in both cases was that it was not possible to precipitate the metal to the very low levels expected by purely solubility considerations, due to the solubilization of metal in aqueous polysulphide complexes consuming any excess of sulphide. All experiments were conducted with analytical grade NiSO The fluidised bed reactor, as illustrated in A pH probe (Hanna) was maintained at the level of the effluent port, above the maximum bed height, to monitor the effluent pH. The probe was connected to a custom-built pH controller unit, which helped maintain the pH by controlling the rate of acid (0.1 M H Liquid samples (10 ml), obtained from the sample ports, the recycle stream and the effluent stream, were filtered through a 0.45 μm nylon membrane filter and analysed to determine pH (Cyberscan 2500 pH meter) and metal in solution (Varian SpectrAA-30 atomic absorption spectrophotometer). Both filtered and unfiltered samples were taken, with unfiltered samples being acidified by adding hydrochloric acid to the sample to dissolve any precipitate present. Sand particles were prepared for analysis by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS). Total sulphide (H Fines were identified by the difference between the total and dissolved metal concentrations. Concentration profiles as a function of bed height were established to illustrate this. The efficiency of the column is defined in terms of the metal removal efficiency as well as the metal conversion defined by Eqs. Metal removal efficiency: metal concentration in the feed (ppm) metal concentration in the outlet (including fines) (ppm) Metal conversion: metal concentration in the feed (ppm) outlet filtered metal concentration (excluding fines) (ppm) The semi-batch bubble column reactor, as illustrated in Batch experiments were conducted in 500 ml beakers continuously stirred with a magnetic stirrer. Metal concentrations used were 250 (lower supersaturation) and 2000 ppm (high supersaturation) for nickel and 100 and 1000 ppm for cobalt. An aqueous source of sodium sulphide was added to the beakers and samples were periodically withdrawn, filtered through 0.45 μm cellulose nitrate syringe filters and analysed using atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS). A summary of all the experiments carried out for this work is given in For the nickel and cobalt aqueous sulphide experiments in the fluidised bed reactor (FBR Ni&Co), the calculated supersaturations for the low concentration levels (Ni It is apparent that the onset of fines formation occurs at approximately 10 min, where after they persist in solution. In this case, the late appearance of the fines is possibly an artefact of the start up procedure, with the high supersaturation levels responsible for homogeneous nucleation in the bulk fluid. In addition, the highly turbulent conditions in the reactor lead to fines formation due to attrition of the fragile layer deposited on the seeds. This hypothesis has been confirmed for the nickel hydroxy-carbonate system in a fluidised bed ( In contrast, for the copper sulphide experiments in the fluidised bed reactor, at both Highest and Very High supersaturations (FBR Cu Highest and Very High SS), illustrated in When the very high supersaturation conditions in For the fluidised bed reactor experiments using nickel and cobalt at higher concentration levels (FBR Ni&Co) and thus representing more realistic industrial concentrations, numerous operational problems were experienced while operating at these high concentrations and a significant quantity of fines was measured. Metal conversions of only 85% and 82% were achieved for nickel and cobalt, respectively, as illustrated in For the gaseous sulphide experiments, the motivation for the use of a gaseous sulphide source was an attempt to reduce the supersaturation levels by using mass transfer limitations. The results for the bubble column experiment (BC Ni&Co) with the pH controlled at 7.1 are presented in Under these conditions, the rapid generation of supersaturation is controlled by the rate of dissolution of the hydrogen sulphide gas ( The nickel and cobalt batch tests (B Ni&Co) showed that, when the metal: sulphide molar ratio was 1 M However, when excess sulphide was used, the remaining sulphide in solution was significantly less than expected from the stoichiometry (see Further evidence for this hypothesis is that the pH of the solution did not change during the dissolution period (see  An alternative hypothesis is based on the following reaction: For the copper sulphide experiments in the fluidised bed reactor (FBR Cu), the copper reacted with the sulphide as soon as it was added and rapidly formed a CuS precipitate (chemical composition confirmed by SEM–EDS analysis). Instabilities were observed during start-up, but steady state was reached after about 20 min. Maximum copper conversion of 99.62% and copper removal efficiency of 95.8% were achieved within the reactor. There was a minimal decrease in copper concentration after the third sulphide inlet point, indicating the instantaneous nature of the reaction. Sulphide tests were carried out on the fluidised bed reactor outlet stream at various time intervals. At no time did the concentration of total aqueous sulphide (S An implication of this work is that, when embarking on metal removal or recovery as metal sulphide, sulphide addition must be carefully controlled and areas in the reactor of high local sulphide concentration must be avoided. It has been shown here that the presence of sulphide in excess of stoichiometric requirements can have the effect of redissolving the precipitate and consuming the excess sulphide by formation of an aqueous polysulphide complex. The conclusions from the range of experiments conducted are as follows: Control of supersaturation is crucial in being able to minimise fines formation through both homogeneous nucleation, a limited crystal growth and attrition. Reducing the global supersaturation by increasing the dilution rate can reduce the formation of these fines by the inhibition of spontaneous homogenous nucleation. Decreasing the sulphide concentration at the inlet points and increasing the flow rate achieved a decrease in local supersaturation. In the fluidised bed reactor with nickel and cobalt, both the lower and higher supersaturations resulted in the formation of a significant quantity of fines. The fluidised bed reactor operated in this configuration and set of conditions is possibly not suitable for high levels of dissolved species since the rapid build up of a weakly attached amorphous precipitate becomes a significant source of fines formation. A gaseous source of sulphide can use the mass transfer limitation to depress the generation of supersaturation and thus control particle formation to some extent. The presence of excess sulphide compromises metal removal efficiency. One probable cause may be the formation of polysulphide species in the aqueous solution. Alternatively the high pH may be another factor responsible for this behaviour. The absence of significant quantities (< Grateful acknowledgements are due to Ashton Swartbooi and Karen Petersen, for their contributions to the experimental work.