Mature MGP (Matrix γ-carboxyglutamic acid protein) is known to inhibit soft connective tissues calcification. We investigated its possible involvement in pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), a genetic disorder whose clinical manifestations are due to mineralization of elastic fibers. PXE patients have lower serum concentration of total MGP compared to controls (P<0.001). Antibodies specific for the noncarboxylated (Glu-MGP) and for the γ-carboxylated (Gla-MGP) forms of MGP were assayed on ultrathin sections of dermis from controls and PXE patients. Normal elastic fibers in controls and patients were slightly positive for both forms of MGP, whereas Gla-MGP was more abundant within control's than within patient's elastic fibers (P<0.001). In patients' calcified elastic fibers, Glu-MGP intensively colocalized with mineral precipitates, whereas Gla-MGP precisely localized at the mineralization front. Data suggest that MGP is present within elastic fibers and is associated with calcification of dermal elastic fibers in PXE. To investigate whether local cells produce MGP, dermal fibroblasts were cultured in vitro and MGP was assayed at mRNA and protein levels. In spite of very similar MGP mRNA expression, cells from PXE patients produced 30% less of Gla-MGP compared to controls. Data were confirmed by immunocytochemistry on ultrathin sections. Normal fibroblasts in vitro were positive for both forms of MGP. PXE fibroblasts were positive for Glu-MGP and only barely positive for Gla-MGP (P<0.001). In conclusion, MGP is involved in elastic fiber calcification in PXE. The lower ratio of Gla-MGP over Glu-MGP in pathological fibroblasts compared to controls suggests these cells may play an important role in the ectopic calcification in PXE.The high concentration of calcium and phosphate in the extracellular space would lead to tissue calcification unless efficiently inhibited by a series of proteins and glycoproteins that have been found to operate in soft connective tissues to prevent calcium precipitation. Great attention has been recently paid to fetuin, which accumulates in the mineralized matrix of bone where it modulates apatite formation. Another protein involved in inhibition of calcium precipitation in soft connective tissues is matrix Gla protein (MGP), a 10-kDa secreted protein containing 5-glutamic acid residues that must be Several In the present study, we investigated on the possible involvement of MGP on elastic fiber calcification in PXE, by measuring MGP serum level and its distribution in the dermis of controls and PXE patients. Moreover, since fibroblasts are responsible for the homeostatic control of connective tissues, we investigated whether dermal fibroblasts isolated from patients had normal efficiency in the expression and maturation of MGP. The following parameters were investigated: (i) the serum MGP level in PXE patients compared to controls. (ii) the relative amount and immunolocalization of both The protocol for the present study was approved by the Medical Ethical Committee of the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia. Healthy subjects were recruited from volunteers; PXE subjects were from the collection present in our reference Center for the Diagnosis of PXE. Patients and controls were of comparable age (ranging from 18 to 65 years). Blood was taken by venipuncture from 30 controls (from 21 to 65 years, mean age 38±14 years; 4 men and 36 women) and from 30 PXE patients (from 13 to 64 years; mean age 41±14 years; 4 men and 36 women), collected in serum tubes, stored for 1 h at room temperature and centrifuged at 3000 After informed consent, skin biopsies were taken under local anesthesia from the neck or from the axilla of six PXE patients and six normal subjects who underwent surgery and did not show any clinical sign of connective tissue alterations. All PXE patients had severe clinical manifestations, such as coalescent skin papules on the posterior and lateral neck, in the axillae and groin, skin laxity in flexural areas. They were also diagnosed by ultrastructural analysis of skin biopsies and by identification of ABCC6 mutations on both alleles. Fibroblasts were plated in 75 cm Proteins extracted from a pool of fibroblasts derived from six patients and six controls were used for each assay. Proteins were dissolved in 8 M urea, 2% CHAPS, 65 mM dithioerythritol, 2% pH 3–10 ampholyte (GE HealthCare, UK), and trace of bromphenol blue and were then applied onto Immobiline pH 3–10 nonlinear DryStrips (7 cm long, GE HealthCare). Isoelectric focusing was performed on an IPGphor system (GE HealthCare) at 16°C according to the instruction manual. Immobilized pH gradient strips were reduced (2% dithioerythritol), alkylated (2.5% iodoacetamide) in equilibration buffer (6 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 30% glycerol, 2% SDS) and then loaded onto vertical SDS-PAGE gel (15%). The second dimension was run using an electrophoresis Unit (Bio-Rad). Gels were stained with ammoniacal silver nitrate. It was carried out after transfer of proteins to nitrocellulose membranes, applying a 200 mA constant current. Membranes were washed with TTBS (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5, plus 0.1% Tween20) and blocked with 3% BSA in TTBS. Nitrocellulose films were incubated with primary antibodies (mouse anti- Total RNA was isolated from cells using the RNeasy Protect cells Mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). Quality and quantity of RNA were checked by spectrophotometer and agarose gel. Then 3 Skin biopsies and cultured fibroblasts were processed for electron microscopy. Briefly, small fragments of skin biopsies or fibroblasts scraped from the substrate and centrifuged to form a pellet were immediately fixed in 2.5% paraformaldehyde in Tyrode's saline, pH 7.2, for 16–20 h at 4°C, followed by fixation in 0.5% osmium tetroxide (Fluka AG Chem) in the same buffer for 60 min at room temperature, dehydration in ethanol and propylene oxide and embedding in Spurr resin (Polysciences Inc., Warrington, PA, USA). Ultrathin sections were collected on nickel grids and processed for immunocytochemistry as already described. Serum MGP was assayed by using the test kit from Biomedica (Vienna, Austria). It is a competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in which microwell plates are coated with mouse monoclonal antibodies raised against human MGP. The protocol described by Schurgers The procoagulant activity of prothrombin (FIIc) and factor VIIc were measured in a coagulometer (ACL 300 Research; Instrumentation Laboratory, Milan, Italy) using Thromborel S and human coagulation factor II- and VII-deficient plasma (Behringwerke AG, Marburg, Germany). All values were expressed as a percentage of values obtained for pooled normal plasma. The intensity of immunostaining was evaluated by counting the number of gold particles present in 20 random fields on ultrathin sections of dermal elastic fibers or of cytoplasm of cultured dermal fibroblasts by applying a 1 Previous studies showed that, in humans, there are no significant differences in the MGP levels between genders and no significant variations with age. In order to investigate whether MGP is involved in elastic fiber calcification in PXE, ultrathin sections of skin biopsies from normal subjects and from patients affected by PXE were immunostained in parallel by using antibodies specific for the noncarboxylated (Glu-MGP) and for the In normal skin, fibroblasts were almost negative for Glu-MGP, whereas they were slightly positive for Gla-MGP (not shown). In the dermis of PXE patients, fibroblasts were almost negative for both forms of MGP (not shown). All components of the extracellular matrix, apart from elastic fibers, were always negative for both types of antibodies in all samples of both controls and patients. In contrast, elastic fibers were always positive for MGP. In particular, Glu-MGP was equally present within control's elastic fibers ( As already described in several reports, calcification of elastic fibers in the dermis of PXE can assume different structural forms, which are often present in distinct regions of the same fiber. The two antibodies tested reacted in a completely different manner on these two different regions. The antibody that recognizes Glu-MGP strongly reacted with the polymorphous calcified areas and with the finely dispersed calcified core of elastic fibers ( Since peripheral cells, namely fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells, are the major producers of MGP When measured at protein level, as illustrated in Data on the relative amounts of Glu-MGP (a) and Gla-MGP (b), identified by specific antibodies and normalized to the  Measurements of coagulation factors II and VII in the plasma of PXE patients did not reveal any significant difference between patients and controls. Values for coagulation factors II and VII were only 3 and 7% higher in PXE patients compared to controls (data not shown). Relevant findings of this work are that human dermal fibroblasts express and produce MGP, and that MGP is present within normal elastic fibers in the human dermis. Owing to the well-recognized role of MGP in preventing mineralization of soft connective tissues In the normal dermis, elastic fibers were immunologically positive for both Glu-MGP and Gla-MGP. By contrast, the noncalcified elastic fibers in PXE patients were almost negative for Gla-MGP. Therefore, elastic fibers of PXE patients would seem less protected from calcium precipitation due to their low content of the active These data may explain findings by Gordon The different role of Glu- and Gla-MGP on the mineralization process of elastic fibers was shown by the different localization of the antibodies specific for the two forms of MGP even within the same elastic fiber. Glu-MGP was always and abundantly present in the areas of either bulky or spotty mineralization. By contrast, Gla-MGP was only and precisely localized at the thin frontline separating the central mineralized core from the surrounding apparently normal elastin. These data are in agreement with those obtained by light microscopy on human aortas in the early phase of atherosclerosis and in Monckeberg's sclerosis where the Glu-MGP has been observed to colocalize with calcification, whereas Gla-MGP has been found around elastic fibers. It has been already demonstrated that MGP is synthesized by numerous cell types, including smooth muscle cells, We wanted to verify whether dermal fibroblasts express MGP and whether they may be responsible for the low amount of the Data obtained by immunoblotting were in perfect agreement with those by immunoelectron microscopy on thin sections of fibroblasts, where control cells were positive for Gla-MGP, whereas PXE fibroblasts were almost negative for the same antibodies. The lower expression of Total serum MGP content was lower in PXE patients compared to controls ( By immunoelectron microscopy, Glu-MGP was equally present within noncalcified elastic fibers of both controls and patients; by contrast, Gla-MGP was present in controls whereas it was almost absent from nonmineralized elastic fibers of patients. Similar findings were also found for dermal fibroblasts cultured From these data it would seem that local cells, such as fibroblasts, play an important role in preventing dermal elastic fiber calcification. It has been repeatedly shown that MGP, although it is a circulating protein, acts as inhibitor of the extracellular matrix calcification in the vicinity of cells expressing the protein. How to reconcile ABCC6 mutations in PXE with impaired expression and maturation of MGP is an open question. In the absence of knowledge on the physiological role of the membrane transporter responsible for PXE, we approach the problem of clinical manifestations in PXE by trying to understand the mechanisms of elastic fiber calcification, to identify cells involved and to characterize alterations of connective tissue metabolism relevant for the progression of disease. It has been repeatedly reported that fibroblasts from patients, despite their very low or absent expression of the PXE causative gene, We have recently reported that PXE fibroblasts The present report indicates that elastic fiber calcification in PXE is associated with scarce expression and accumulation within elastic fibers of the mature In conclusion, impaired maturation of MGP would be part of the metabolic alterations of PXE fibroblasts and could play a relevant role in time-dependent stability of elastic fibers in PXE. We are grateful to members of PXE-Italia ONLUS for their help in donating samples, to PXE-International for the support, to Dr Marcello Pinti who supervised RT-PCR experiments, and to Professor Lionel Bercovitch for precious criticisms and help with the manuscript. Grants and support: MIUR (2004064073-001); EC (LSHM-CT-2005-512117- GENESKIN); EC, LSHM-CT-2005-018960-ELASTAGE).