The analytical determination of phosphate constitutes a fundamental step for the evaluation of catalytic activities of many enzymes involved in the hydrolysis of phosphate-containing biomolecules. The most sensitive colorimetric methods to quantify phosphate are based on measuring the spectral changes produced by the adsorption of malachite green to 12-molybdophosphoric acid. Malachite green methods are time-consuming because they require the preparation of color reagent on the day of use, due to its low stability. In this work we propose a modification of the malachite green method that overcomes these problems and only requires a one-step, ready-to-use stock solution including perchloric acid and Pluronic F68. The improved reaction mixture allowed the quantification of phosphate with a limit of detection of 0.22 μM, a dynamical range up to 80 μM depending on the optical path-length, and a molar absorption coefficient at 640 nm of 94000 M−1cm−1. Color development reaches a steady level within 30 min and remains constant for at least 2 h. The high stability of the color reagent allows long-term storage for at least 1 year. The optimized procedure is especially useful to measure phosphate-containing biomolecule levels and enzyme activities when low values are critical.The analytical determination of orthophosphate anion (Pi) constitutes a key step for the evaluation of the catalytic activity of enzymes involved in the hydrolysis of phosphate esters and anhydrides. It is routinely carried out through its reaction with molybdate in strong acid solution. Under specific conditions the reaction gives a unique stoichiometric complex, the 12-molybdophosphoric acid (12-MPA) which has a well defined Keggin type structure including a central phosphate tetrahedron surrounded by twelve molybdate moieties [ This complex can be quantified by using three different groups of methods. In the first group the complex is extracted from the reaction sample using an organic water-immiscible solvent. If the phosphate to be released was labelled with [ In this work we propose a modification of the malachite green method that only requires a one-step ready to use stock solution. Making use of the knowledge of the chemistry of molybdenum compounds, the reaction mixture was redesigned to improve the sensitivity and the limit of detection. The use of Pluronic® F68 (a copolymer of polyoxyethylene and polyoxypropylene) allowed to obtain a color reagent which is stable for at least 1 year stored at room temperature. Potassium phosphate monobasic (primary standard); Ammonium heptamolybdate tetrahydrate and MgCl 17.6 g of ammonium heptamolybdate tetrahydrate were dissolved in 400 mL of water and mixed with 240 mL of HClO Up to 0.8 mL of a sample containing 0–20 nmol of Pi was mixed with 0.2 mL of the color reagent adjusting the final volume to 1 mL. After 30 min, absorbance was measured at 640 nm with a JASCO V-550 spectrophotometer using a 1 cm or 4 mm path length plastic cell. For plate reader applications sample and reagent volumes were reduced by ten times (final volume 100 μL).  Aliquots of Phosphatase activity was measured as the initial rate of release of Pi from phenyl phosphate [ Data presented in this work are representative of at least two independent experiments. Equations were fitted to the experimental data using a non-linear regression procedure based on the Gauss-Newton algorithm [ The absorption spectra of the 12-MPA/MG complexes were registered between 400 and 700 nm for phosphate concentrations in the range 0–20 μM ( It can be observed that in the absence of Pi, MG shows an absorption peak at 439–442 nm with absorbance values increasing linearly with the addition of Pi. Besides, and induced peak appears at 600–650 nm. It was proposed that in these conditions phosphate displace a central molybdate unit from a preformed dodecamolybdate complex forming 11-MPA, which in a rate limiting step includes a new molybdate anion, leading to the formation of 12-MPA [ The Lambert-Beer relation was verified for both peaks but the induced band exhibited lower absorbance values in the absence of Pi and higher sensitivity (see It was reported that formation of 12-MPA is strongly dependent on the molybdate concentration and the molybdate/phosphate mole ratio. Mo(VI) concentration must be at least 1–10 mM to allow polymerization at low pH, which is required to form 12-MPA [ As mentioned in the introduction, a strong acid solution is needed for the formation of 12-MPA. To reach this condition sulfuric and, in a less extent, hydrochloric acid were widely used. However, it is known that many common anions are able to interact with heteropoly acids [ The adsorption of MG to the 12-MPA nanoparticle was explored to optimize the concentration of malachite green in the final reaction mixture ( It can be observed that as MG concentration increases, the absorbance corresponding to the induced band at 640 nm increases approaching a constant value at MG concentrations higher than 500 μM. In these conditions almost all the nanoparticle surface is covered by MG molecules. Different adsorption isotherms were probed to analyze the experimental data, and a Langmuir type isotherm (eq. On the other hand, absorbance values in the absence of Pi slightly increase without apparent saturation. Thus a concentration of 700 μM was selected for the improved procedure. As mentioned, the addition of a surfactant is needed to avoid the formation of an insoluble dye. It has been reported that Tween 20, polyvinyl alcohol and Ultrawet 60 are good options for stabilizing the dye during the analytical procedure but not for long term storage of the color reagent [ Pluronic® F68 is a triblock copolymer of polyoxyethylene and polyoxypropylene whose generic name is poloxamer 188. It is widely used as nanoparticle stabilizer in industrial and pharmaceutical applications [ Furthermore, the addition of Pluronic F68 improves the long term storage of the color reactive ( The optimized composition of the reaction medium is shown in To compare the sensitivity of the proposed procedure, Pi standard solutions were prepared as described in Materials and Methods and then quantified using four colorimetric procedures, two from the molybdenun blue group and two from the MG group ( It can be observed that the optimized procedure for the malachite green method was more sensitive than the other colorimetric procedures. Given the widespread use of sulfuric or hydrochloric acid in molybdate-based methods for the determination of Pi, we further explore the effect of changing the source of H It was reported that the extent of linear response is governed by the presence of enough acidified Mo(VI) to stabilize 12-MPA [ It is known that SiO Subtractive interferences are produced mainly by some organic acids (e.g. citric, oxalic and tartaric acid) and fluoride, which can react with molybdate reducing the effective molybdate concentration for the formation of 12 MPA [ As was described in section Finally there is a group of species, including several organic solvents, which modify the output of the method (i.e. the absorbance of the reaction mixture containing MG-12-MPA complexes). For example, the presence of ethanol produce a significant increase in the absorbance values ( As was mentioned in the introduction, the analytical determination of Pi plays a key role in biochemistry. The main applications include the quantification of phosphate-containing biomolecules and the evaluation of the catalytic activity of enzymes involved in the hydrolysis of phosphate esters and anhydrides. As an example of these applications we show the use of the improved MG method in the quantification of phospholipids from  It can be observed that the release of Pi increases as a function of the mineralization time reaching a constant value after 10 min. The complete time course is well described by an exponential function. The best fit parameter values were:  Malachite green based procedures are the most sensitive colorimetric methods for the determination of phosphate. Despite its high sensitivity they have two major problems: the lack of stability of the MG/12-MPA complex, and the need of preparing the color reagent on the day of use. The procedure described in this work overcomes these problems by using Pluronic F68 as stabilizer of the MG/12-MPA nanoparticle. The high sensitivity of this optimized procedure makes it especially useful to measure phosphate-containing biomolecule levels and enzyme activities when low values are critical.  This work was supported by The following is the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at