The blending process is a key step in the production of dry powder inhaler formulations, but only little is known about the influence of process parameters. This is especially true for high shear blending of ternary formulations. For this reason, this study aims to investigate the influence of high shear mixing process parameters (mixing time and rotation speed) on the fine particle fraction (FPF) of ternary mixtures when using budesonide as model drug, two different carrier materials and two different mixing orders. Prolonged mixing time and higher rotation speeds led to lower FPFs, possibly due to higher press-on forces acting on the active pharmaceutical ingredients (API). In addition, a clear correlation between the energy consumption of the blender (the energy input into the blend) and the reduction of the FPF could be shown. Furthermore blending the carrier and the fines before adding the API was also found to be favorable.Active pharmaceutical ingredients Budesonide Conditioned bulk density [g/mL] Calculated surface area [m Double-distilled Dry powder inhaler Energy [Ws; J; nm] Energy (empty) [Ws; J; nm] Energy (transferred) [Ws; J; nm] Force [N] Fine particle fraction High performance liquid chromatography InhaLac InhaLac Mass [g] Next generation impactor Density [g/mL] Pressure (Press-on forces) [N/m Relative standard deviation Standard deviation Scanning electron microscopy Surface roughness index Specific surface area [m Blending time with the API [s] Volumetric diameter, where 50% of the particles are smaller [μm] In order to facilitate powder handling of dry powder inhaler (DPI) formulations, APIs are often mixed with coarser lactose carriers. During the blending process the drug particles need to be sufficient distributed over the carrier particles to ensure blend homogeneity, but they must also have the ability to be detached and aerosolized during inhalation. The balance of these mechanisms is very important and influenced by the energy input into the formulation by the mixing process itself. Therefore, the blending process is a key step in the production of these formulations which needs substantial optimization work during development ( Different grades of alpha-lactose monohydrate (carrier: InhaLac An Alpine Picoline with Picomix To investigate the effects of the mixer on the carrier materials, 55 To estimate the energy input, rotation speed and motor output (performance and torque) were monitored by the Alpine Picoline during blending with the Picomix Aerodynamic particle size distribution was determined using a Next Generation Impactor (NGI) equipped with a critical flow controller (both Copley Scientific, Nottingham, UK) and a vacuum pump (Erweka, Heusenstamm, Germany) set at a flow rate of 78.3 The budesonide content of the samples was quantified with following HPLC method: LiChroCART Samples dissolved in double-distilled (dd) H Mobile phase: ddH Flow rate: 1 Wavelength of UV detector: 248 nm. A linear calibration (R Laser light diffraction was performed to analyze the particle size distribution (PSD). Samples were dispersed with 3 The specific surface area of the carrier materials was measured using the nitrogen adsorption Brunauer, Emmet and Teller (BET) method with a Gemini 2360 system (Micromeritics Instrument Corporation, Norcross, USA) at 77 One possibility to determine the roughness of particle surfaces has been introduced by de Boer et al. ( A freeman FT4 Powder Rheometer (Freeman Technology, Tewkesbury, UK) was used to measure the CBD of the mixtures. Due to the use of a test vessel with a fixed volume (25 The morphology of the substances and blends was examined using SEM. The powder was fixed on an aluminium specimen with the help of a carbon sticker. Specimens were gently tapped to remove excess particles but avoid detachment of lactose fines or drug from the carrier crystals. The samples were coated with gold using a BAL-Tec SCP 050 Sputter Coater (Leica Instuments, Wetzlar, Germany). A coating thickness of 20 Statistical analysis was carried out using the statistical function of the software Excel 2010 (Microsoft Corporation, Redmond WA, USA). For analysis of variance an F-test with an error probability of α Particle sizes of the materials are given in Apart from carrier size, particle morphology also differed ( As shown in The SEM images ( The particle size distribution of the mixtures showed no increase in fraction of particles <5 After mixing, all blends with IH230 showed a good homogeneity (all RSD <2.7%) and an appropriate recovery (> 95.0%; This is also the case for most of the blends with IH70 (all RSD < This loss of API particles was more pronounced for IH70 as the total proportion of fine particles of the mixtures is lower and the inertial forces are higher than for IH230.  Contrary observations have been made in previous studies. Balducci et al. could demonstrate an increase in FPF with increasing rotation speed of a high shear blender ( For all rotation speeds higher FPFs were achieved when the carrier and fines were mixed before adding the API, compared to blending carrier and API first before adding the fines. This behavior was observed for both carriers. The reason is that in the first case the fines have the chance to locate at sites on the carrier with higher surface energy (e.g., cavities) ( Interestingly, Jones et al. also observed that in some cases, depending on the API concentration and mixing time, it was beneficial to blend the carrier and API first before adding fines ( A further reason for the higher FPFs of the mixtures in which the fines were added in the first mixing step could be the buffer effect during blending. Fines coarser than the drug particles may act as a buffer between colliding carrier particles and protect drug particles from press-on forces during mixing ( As already had been shown for rotation speed experiments, the extended mixing duration also had an effect on the particle size distribution of the pure carrier ( Comparable to rotation speed results, the fraction of particles <5 The mixing time had no effect on the homogeneity of the mixtures ( The recovery was again reduced with increasing mixing times. As explanations, the same mechanisms can be taken into consideration than for the rotation speed results. The decrease in recovery is again more pronounced for IH70 than for IH230. Increasing the blending time resulted in a FPF decrease (all p In order to compare the influence of the rotation speed and the mixing time, the measured fine particle fractions can be plotted against the energy consumption required for the mixing process. As illustrated in Consequently, if the blender requires more power to move the rotor, the total energy required for the blending process increases also. If this energy may be transferred to the mixture, a higher energy consumption should lead to higher press-on forces. Selvam et al. determined that the rotation speed influences press-on forces quadratically ( Due to the fact that the rotation speed varies from one test to another test, the theoretical energy consumption for an empty mixing chamber can be calculated for the respective rotation speed actually measured to produce the mixture. For this purpose the line equation y  The assumption that the energy is completely transferred into the powder is very simplified and involves the error that some of the energy might be converted into heat. Since the rotation speeds used in this study were comparatively low, the influence of the heat development should be negligible. In addition, the filling capacity of the mixer should also have an effect on the energy consumption of the blender. The influence of the particular filling capacity can be taken into account by adding the powder volume for every blending step which contained the API. If it is further assumed that a completely smooth particle transfers more energy in the form of press-on forces than a rough particle, Eq. (4) is obtained: With Eq. (4), the total amount of press-on forces which has been applied to the powder during the mixing process can be calculated. In order to consider the influence of the particle size of the carrier material, the respective CSA can be included. Consequently, the force transmitted to a single carrier particle can be calculated with Eq. (5): As shown in Measuring the performance data is a useful tool, as the energy consumption can be correlated with press-on forces which were acting during the blending process. However, in order to be able to prove the general validity of this model further investigations are needed. The influence of filling extent, the surface texture and particle size distribution of the carrier material and the model drug itself must be further evaluated. In another study, it had been already shown that the influence of mixing time and mixing order can be transferred to another blender type, such as the Turbula This study shows the influence of high shear mixing parameters (mixing time and rotation speed) and mixing order on the aerosol performance (FPF) of budesonide blends when using different lactose carrier materials, including fines. In this study prolonged mixing time or higher rotation speeds led to lower FPFs. In addition, a correlation between the energy consumption of the blender and the press-on forces, which were accountable for the reduction of the FPF, could be shown. Whereas blending time correlates linearly to press-on forces, rotation speed showed quadratic dependencies. Hence, to optimize the drug detachment, mixtures should be mixed as short as possible, as higher mixing intensities led to a decrease in FPF. Furthermore blending the carrier and the fines before adding the API was also found to be favorable, because of the saturation of active sites and the buffer effect of lactose fines. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.