Nano-scaled SnO2–V2O5 mixed oxide is synthesized by a hydrothermal method in an autoclave. For comparative evaluation, V2O5 single oxide is prepared by a conventional process from ammonium vanadate. The capacitive behaviour of the following electrodes is studied by cyclic voltammetry in 0.1M KCl solutions: carbon nano-tubes (CNT), V2O5, V2O5–CNT, and SnO2–V2O5–CNT. At a scan rate of 100mVs−1, the SnO2–V2O5–CNT electrode provides the best performance, viz., 121.4Fg−1. The nano-scaled mixed oxide is characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Raman spectra.Electrochemical capacitors (ECs), or supercapacitors, have attracted much attention in recent times. In an attempt to increase the performance of ECs, various permutations and combinations of metal oxides and other organic and inorganic moieties have been investigated. Such materials are added either Vanadium pentaoxide (V The focus of investigation reported here is the synthesis and characterization of a nano-scale SnO Solid NH NH Carbon nano-tubes and the oxides (both simple and mixed) were taken in a mole ratio of 1:10 and mixed thoroughly in a mortar prior to fixing on the surface of a graphite electrode that was impregnated with paraffin. The following electrode materials were prepared: V All electrochemical experiments were conducted with a PGSTAT 30 Autolab system (Ecochemie, Utrecht, The Netherlands), which was connected to a PC running with EcoChemie GPES software. The reference electrode was Ag|AgCl (3 Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) data from the samples were obtained by means of a Siemens D 5000 X-ray diffractometer with Bragg–Brentano geometry and Cu Kα radiation ( The XRD patterns of as-prepared and calcined SnO The Raman spectrum recorded for the as-prepared mixed oxide is given in Scanning electron micrographs of V The hydrothermal synthesis of SnO Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) recorded for CNT immobilized on the surface of PIGE are given in Similar CV responses have been observed for V The CVs for the composite CNT–V A comparative evaluation of representative CVs of CNT, V The higher specific capacitance of CNT–V The most unexpected result is the low value of specific capacitance obtained for CNT immobilized on PIGE in 0.1 In this communication, SnO This work is supported by the Ministry of Education and Human Resources Development (MOE), the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy (MOCIE) and the Ministry of Labor (MOLAB) through the fostering project of the Lab of Excellency. Dr. Mohan Rao thanks for the support by The Korea Research Foundation and The Korean Federation of Science and Technology Societies Grant funded by Korea government (MOEHRD, Basic Research Promotion Fund).