Logistics have been used to analyse agricultural operations, such as chemical application, mineral or organic fertilisation and harvesting-handling operations. Recently, due to national or European commitments concerning livestock waste management, this waste is being applied in many crops instead of other mineral fertilisers. The organic fertiliser produced has a high availability although most of the crops it is applied to have strict timeliness issues concerning its application. Here, organic fertilizer (as liquid manure) distribution logistic system is modelled by using a combined simulation and linear programming method. The method applies in certain crops and field areas taking into account specific agronomical, legislation and other constraints with the objective of minimising the optimal annual cost. Given their direct connection with the organic fertiliser distribution, the operations of cultivation and seeding were included. In a basic scenario, the optimal cost was assessed for both crops in total cultivated area of 120 ha. Three modified scenarios are presented. The first regards one more tractor as being available and provides a reduction of 3.8% in the total annual cost in comparison with the basic scenario. In the second and third modified scenarios fields having high nitrogen demand next to the farm are considered with one or two tractors and savings of 2.5% and 6.1%, respectively, compared to the basic scenario are implied. Finally, it was concluded that the effect of distance from the manure production to the location of the fields could reduce costs by 6.5%.Over the last few decades there has been significant progress in agricultural production, on many levels. Computer-based planning, simulation and scheduling of operations in parallel with advances in agricultural machinery management are only some of them ( In order to manage and evaluate the agricultural operations, many different simulation methods and tools have been developed and demonstrated ( Scheduling tasks in agricultural operations can be of vital importance given the sensitivity of indirect (timeliness) and direct (lost profit) costs that are connected to them. Researchers have been working on scheduling of various field operations including both energy crops and agri-food crops ( One of the most important operations that requires scheduling efforts is the application of liquid organic fertiliser (LOF) application in the form manure to different types of fields and crops ( LOF application contributes mainly to environmental degradation given that the nutrients incorporated in this type of fertiliser are often higher than the recommended amounts needed to satisfy crop requirements ( The objective of this study is to develop a method that can be used for scheduling the problem of LOF (here referring to liquid manure) distribution, based on the combined use of a simulation model and a linear programming (LP) model, under specific agronomic and technical regulations, and timeliness restrictions. Also, this study focuses on the assessment of the usability of this method by an application on various crops under different scenarios (combining various configurations of field areas and nitrogen dosages). It focuses on the analysis of the effect of the distances between the LOF production facilities and the field areas on the total operational minimum cost. The structure of the present work is as follows: initially, the design of methodology for the LP model is introduced given the specific problem; this is followed by the results section, where a case study regarding two different crops is provided together with the extracted solutions according to the LP model; three modified scenarios and the effect of distance on the optimal cost are discussed, and the work is wrapped up with the discussion of the results and conclusions. The current study includes the distribution of liquid organic fertilizer (LOF) in specific field areas in connection with the cultivation and seeding operation on the same areas. This was followed given the particular feature of the LOF to lose much of its chemical composition if it is not incorporated directly into the soil of the field. Regarding LOF distribution, the current study was based on the simulation model of The primary objective of the problem is the optimal distribution of LOF according to specific agricultural, technical and legislative constraints as described below. For this reason, the main factors described in the LP model are crops, time (weeks), distances (from field-to-LOF production location) and nitrogen dosages (higher nitrogen dosages imply larger volume of manure to be applied to the field). These factors ((1)–(3)) are connected with the main decision variables and presented below: These three decision variables drive all the other variables in the LP model as they are presented below:  If seeding is performed on week otherwise If cultivating is performed on week otherwise If LOF is applied on week otherwise If LOF is applied on week otherwise To optimise the operations connected in the model with the application of LOF, cultivation and seeding, the selected approach was to minimise the cost of the operations. The objective function of the optimisation problem refers to the cost of the three operations (application of LOF, cultivation and seeding) and the cost related to the area that due to binding constraints is not treated ( In addition, the objective function considers a percentage of lost profit per each week before or after the optimal operational period. The specific presentences used here are those defined in Based on the above, the objective function of the LP program is written as: Constraints (5)–(7) reset to zero the inventory for seeding operation, field cultivation and LOF application, respectively at the beginning of the simulation period. The accumulated inventory for seeding operation, field cultivating and LOF application for the rest of the weeks of the simulation are expressed by constraints (8)–(10), respectively. In parallel, constraint (11) regards on the progressive amount of LOF in the tank at the farm location, in order to proceed with LOF application only when there is sufficient LOF stored in the farm. The total seeded area at a specific week should coincident with the total cultivated area of the previous week. This is ensured by inequality (12). In the same way, the total cultivated area at a specific week should be the same as the total area where LOF has been applied during the precursory week (inequality (13)). Inequalities (14)–(16) describes the condition that all areas should have been seeded, cultivated and fertilised, including also the field areas that are not operated, due to some binding constraints. Equations In order to execute the ΜΙP model the IBM ILOG CPLEX Optimisation Studio® (IBM, New York, USA, Version 12.7.1.0) software was used. The basic characteristics of the portable computer that was used were: Intel Core i7 processor at 2.5 GHz, 16 GB RAM running at 64-bit with Windows 10 software. The processing time for the ΜΙP model in the basic scenario was app. 5 s. In order to evaluate the current scheduling problem, results from our earlier published work regarding the comparison of distribution systems for biogas plant residual were included ( The simulation experiments regard a total area of 120 ha, where the operations of LOF application, cultivation and seeding take place. The selected crops shared equally the total field area (60 ha each). As presented in Also, other constraints were taken into account on a weekly basis. These are connected to the workability of each operation as it is shown in the Gantt chart of The maximum operating hours of the tractor are defined for each week and were assumed to be the same for each week. There is initial LOF storage at the beginning of the testing period ( The LOF quantity produced at the farm is the same each week. The total volume of LOF is distributed through a single pass and regards the upper nitrogen bound per field area and crop.  The operational working times (h ha Given the operational working time for field cultivation and seeding, the corresponding operational costs (€ ha The fertilising logistics cost (€ ha The LP model generates results for every field operation (i.e. LOF application, cultivation and seeding) for each specific week and crop in specific field areas. In the basic scenario the optimal solution, i.e. the minimum cost, for the execution of these field operations was estimated to €43,586. According to the results of the model, there is a field area equal to 1.88 ha of wheat total field area that was not cultivated. The non-cultivated area derived from the fact that only one tractor was available to carry all field operations, and it was too costly (for both penalty and distance reasons) to cultivate this area. Hereafter, the results regarding the optimal exploitation period (in weeks) for maize and wheat as they extracted from the LP model, are presented in The first scenario was connected to the introduction of a second tractor to execute the total field area in both crops without having any hectare not operated. The addition of one tractor had an effect on the results of the LP model and, of course, in the optimal solution that was equal to €41,904. In this scenario, the LOF was applied in all of the field areas. The extracted results of Scenario 1 are presented in To illustrate the possible application of the method, a second scenario assesses the optimal scheduling for a minimum cost under a different field areas' configuration regarding maize only, given that wheat does not allow to apply high nitrogen dosages due to agronomic reasons. The configuration followed in the Scenario 2 is presented in In the case of one tractor, the optimal solution of the problem of operation scheduling was €42,474 without applying LOF at 1.8 ha of wheat (∼2% of total cost). The main percentages per operation for both crops are presented in Scenario 3 keeps the same field area configuration shown in In order to evaluate better the four scenarios, they are presented graphically in For a more thorough analysis, the effect of distance on the optimal annual cost was performed. For this reason, it was assumed that the whole field area (60 ha) of both crops require a LOF dosage of 170 kg [N] ha A combination of simulation and linear programming method was developed to optimise the time schedule for LOF application in connection with cultivation and seeding operations. A number of constraints were included given not only specific agronomical and technical regulations but also timeliness restrictions. To evaluate the usability of this method, different scenarios were assessed in two selected crops, namely maize and wheat. The basic scenario was connected to the execution of all field operations by a single tractor, and the optimal minimum cost was equal to €43,585 for the tested period (year). A second scenario (Scenario 1) was also assessed in the same field areas' configuration as the basic scenario but by using two tractors for the field operations. As a result, there is 3.85% less annual cost in the Scenario 1 compared to the basic scenario. A modified scenario (Scenario 2) was considered, also, including a different configuration of field areas and nitrogen dosages resulting in 2.55% less annual cost compared to the basic scenario. In addition, in Scenario 3, a reduction equal to 6.13% compared to the basic scenario is presented. Finally, the effect of distance in the total minimum cost is presented by using one or two tractors. The analysis pointed out reduced optimal cost (in the case of two tractors) varying from 2.3% (in 1 km) up to 6.5% (in 10 km) increasing almost proportionally the savings in distances above 10 km. There are specific national and European regulations regarding the amount and density of LOF that can be applied in each field crop for vulnerable and non-vulnerable soils. Further research include the implementation of weather data which highly affect the optimal cost given that on specific periods and regions the tractor workability may be quite low because of weather conditions. In this case, a decision-making model could select either to apply LOF out of the optimal period incurring penalties or leave the field areas without being applied with LOF including the lost profit. Taking into account that by using a reasonably modern computer the computational time is very low (∼5 s), this work has the potential to be transformed to an online tool that could include real time data and extract results close to real time. For further research, the present work can be expanded to the implementation of machinery workability measures for all the field operations annually (including harvesting operations) under the objective of minimising cost and the best scheduling of field operations. This work was funded by the