The effect of growth-retarding, obesifying lesions in the ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMN) on bone geometry and biomechanics was investigated in male weanling rats. The animals received bilateral, symmetrical, electrolytic lesions (VMNL rats) shortly after weanling (age 27 days); sham-operated rats served as controls (SCON). The rats were maintained for 42 postoperative days and then terminated. Body weight, nose–tail length, food intake, carcass water, and lean body mass were all significantly (p < 0.001) reduced in the VMNL group compared to SCON rats. Carcass fat, lipogenic efficiency (carcass fat % laid down/mean food intake) (both p < 0.001) and epididymal fat pad weight (p < 0.01) were significantly increased in VMNL versus SCON. Femur length, anteroposterior diameter (both p < 0.001), and mediolateral femur diameter (p < 0.01) were significantly reduced in VMNL versus SCON rats, but torque and angle of torque were comparable among the groups. VMNL rats femora also showed a significant greater maximum shear stress compared to the control animals. The reduced parameters in the VMNL rats are in good agreement with the previously demonstrated reduced plasma and pituitary growth hormone levels found in this hypothalamus preparation.We have previously reported that growth-retarding experimental lesions in the hypothalamus of weanling rats significantly alter bone geometry and biomechanical properties. This is the case with weanling rats with dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus lesions (DMNL rats) Somatically, the VMNL rat shows reduced lean body mass, protein, and water, but increased carcass fat and heavier epididymal fat pads, and reduced linear growth. In general, others Endocrinologically, VMNL rats are hyperinsulinemic and hyperlipidemic in the presence of normoglycemia Metabolically, the weanling VMNL rat shows increased incorporation of glucose into adipose tissue, incorporates more fatty acid carbon into lipid, and oxidizes glucose with greater avidity (incorporation into CO Because of the above changes, we have hypothesized that this third model of hypothalamic lesion-induced growth retardation will show changes in bone geometry and biomechanical properties. The following experiment was performed to test this hypothesis. Weanling, male, Sprague–Dawley rats (Harlan–Sprague–Dawley, Indianapolis, IN) were accommodated in individual cages in a light cycle (L:D 12:12, lights on at 0600 h) and temperature-controlled (23°C) room and given lab chow (RMH 300, Lacrosse Industries, Syracuse, NY) and tap water ad lib (automated watering system). At age 27 days, the animals (body weight 71.1 ± 0.98 g) were anesthetized with Pentobarbital (50 mg/kg, i.p.) and received bilateral electrolytic lesions in the VMN, using a stereotaxic instrument (Baltimore Instrument Company, Baltimore, MD). The electrodes were spar varnish coated, 0.25-mm diameter, stainless steel wires with a bared tip. The coordinates used were: anteroposterior (AP): 5.0 mm from the intraaural line, lateral (LAT): 0.5 mm from the midsagittal sinus, and dorsoventral (DV): 8.25 mm from the dura. A direct anodal current of 1.5 A was allowed to flow for 10 s. These animals are henceforth referred to as “VMNL rats.” Sham-operated controls (SCON) were produced by insertion of the electrode into the hypothalamus at the same coordinates without current flow. However, the DV insertion was 7.25 mm from the dura. The electrode remained in situ for 10 s and was then withdrawn. The incisions were closed with stainless steel clips (Clay Adams, Parsippany, NJ), and the animals returned to their cages. Food was returned to the cages the following morning, and was thereafter measured on alternate days (Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays). On the day before sacrifice (day 41), all animals were lightly anesthetized with Halothane (Abbott, North Chicago, IL) for the measurement of nose–tail length and killed on the following day by decapitation. Epididymal fat pads were dissected out and weighed. Brains were excised and fixed in 10% buffered formalin and processed as previously described The intact left femur was harvested with its surrounding tissues to prevent drying and was frozen at −25°C. Femur dimensions of length and two diameters anteroposterior and mediolateral at the midshaft at 90° to each other were obtained using a digital caliper. Femora were fixed at each end using methylmethacrylate and tested in a custom-made torsion testing machine until fracture occurred. The displacement and torque records were used to calculate the angle of deformation, torsional energy absorbed, shear modulus, and maximum shear stress. The maximum shear stress, or “strength,” is the quotient of the torque times the radius divided by the polar moment of inertia. Calculations were performed on a PC with Statview Software, Abacus, Berkeley, CA. This normalizes the data to account for the smaller size of the VMNL bones Carcasses were shaved and frozen for the subsequent determination of total fat, water, and lean body mass as previously described    The histological evidence—bilateral symmetrical lesions—and the somatic data, i.e., increased carcass fat, lipogenic efficiency, fat pad weight, and reduced linear growth indicate that the rats used in this experiment represent the VMNL syndrome Although we have not measured circulating insulin levels in the present study, we have ample evidence from the past We have failed in the weanling rat with DMNL to demonstrate deleterious changes in bone biomechanical parameters despite changes in geometry The smaller bone size in VMNL rat is to be expected in animals with lower GH levels, and may be mediated by insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) The reduced torque in VMNL rats may also be attributable to a deficient GH-IGF-I axis. Obese human patients had increasing fasting plasma insulin and decreased plasma GH concentrations, but IGF-I concentrations were in the normal range. However, Tappy et al. Obesity produced by a 2-year consumption of a high-fat sucrose diet had a significant adverse effect on rat bone morphology and biomechanics In contrast to the smaller bone of the DMNL that failed to demonstrate deleterious changes in maximal shear stress The greater maximum shear stress of the VMNL may have resulted from dehydration. Dehydration has been documented in rats with VMN lesions Bone growth is load dependent, inasmuch as greater strains will stimulate greater growth rate This research was supported by a VA Merit Review grant (I.Z.) and Department of Veterans Affairs research funds (L.L.B.).