Several machines, such as jaw, gyratory or roll crushers use the physical effect of compression to crush hard and brittle rocks. Because of the tremendous expenditures of money and equipment necessary to investigate the comminution of large particles hardly any scientific investigations were carried out so far. Therefore, these crushers are still sized rather by empirical than by scientific approaches.
                  In order to investigate the principles of comminution by compression of large rocks a test apparatus was built and rocks of different dimensions were tested. Since machines which use the effect of compression apply a defined displacement to a rock the main crushing properties were gained as a function of the applied throw and the particle size of the rock: likelihood of breakage, maximum crushing force, mass specific crushing work, crushed fragment size distribution, crushed fragment shape distribution.The first processing step of a mineral processing plant is usually the crushing of the raw material. Rocks with diameters as large as 2 m are blasted and/or excavated in a mine or in a quarry and need to be reduced in size by crushers suitable for the following processing steps. Typical product sizes of a crushing plant are e.g. 0–25 mm if the product has to be used as feed material for ball mills or 2 till 65 mm if the product is used as aggregates. The design of a crushing plant is based on the material to be crushed. Several types of crushers using different physical effects of comminution (e.g. compression, impact) can be chosen. Crushers which apply the effect of compression during comminution are strongly recommended for hard, brittle and abrasive rocks, i.e. rocks with a significant amount and size of minerals with a hardness according to Mohs of 6 till 7 and higher. Especially crushers in the first and second stage (jaw, gyratory and roll crushers) use the effect of comminution by compression of single particles within the processing zone of the machine. Although these crushers are built for more than 100 years, hardly any scientifically based method is used to size those machines. Some methods are based, e.g. on the hypothesis according to Kick or more common according to Bond. Most companies use indeed empirical methods. The reasons for this problem are associated with the tremendous expenditures for a suitable test apparatus, the test work itself and the handling problems of the samples. In a first step, a test apparatus was built to enable the comminution of single particles by defined enforced displacements. As samples, rocks of diorite with various diameters were tested. In the processing zones of crushers such as jaw, roll or gyratory crushers the rock particles are mainly crushed as single individual particles and not in a particle bed. On each particle a throw is applied no matter how much energy is required or how high the crushing forces are necessary. In order to investigate and simulate the process of crushing within the processing zone of a crusher, an apparatus was built which enforces a defined displacement (compression) on a rock particle ( The container which carries the rock is not moving and is supported by force measurement devices. The piston is movable and guided by four columns. This piston is moved by a hydraulic cylinder system which can apply a force maximum of 4000 kN and a displacement of more than 0.5 m. The movement of the piston is measured by a linear displacement pickup. Therefore, it is possible to measure crushing forces The material to be crushed can be characterized by its dimensions, its shape, its anisotropy of its breaking behaviour and its resistance against comminution. The dimensions of the rocks have an important influence on the crushing forces. Therefore, rocks of a diameter of approximately 20 till 600 mm were collected in a quarry. The diameter is defined here as a diameter of a mass equivalent sphere of the same material. The particles are then classified into the different fractions [mm]. Rocks of the fractions 25/40, 56/80, 80/140, 140/200, 200/250, 250/320, and 450/560 were used for testing. The shape of the samples has an impact on the force-displacement behaviour during comminution as well. Since the material was slightly anisotropic, the platy material after blasting in the quarry was eliminated. Only the more “cubical” rocks were used as samples. The isotropy of the material is investigated by stereological means on three thin sections ( The resistance is usually characterized by the compressive strength of the rock. The selected diorite shows values of 180 till 240 MPa, i. e. a “medium-hard” hardrock. The sizing of a machine needs to be based on the properties of the particulate material. Therefore, a distinction between the breakage or fracture and the crushing properties is necessary. Breakage is a physical process and is defined here as the first crack through a rock. That is why the breakage parameters can be considered as mechanical or physical features of a particulate material (see likelihood of breakage, maximum breakage force (force necessary for crack initiation), mass specific breakage energy (energy absorbed at crack initiation) and the granulometric properties of the broken product, breakage fragment size distribution (breakage function), breakage fragment shape distribution. Breakage is defined as a loss of broken fragments exceeding 10% Crushing is a technical process. In addition to the primary breakage of a particle additional breakages can occur depending on the magnitude of the “stressing” factor. In case of comminution by compression the “stressing” factor is the displacement applied to the particle. Therefore, the crushing parameters are technical features. The crushing parameters consist of the resistance against crushing; likelihood of breakage (breakage as the first step of crushing), maximum crushing force, mass specific crushing work and the granulometric properties of the crushed product, crushed fragment size distribution (crushing function), crushed fragment shape distribution. The example of the forces shows the difference. The maximum breakage force is the necessary force to initiate the first complete crack through a rock independently of the magnitude of the applied displacement whereas the maximum crushing force describes the maximum force which occurs during a defined displacement no matter how often the rock particle breaks. Since the crushing parameters are necessary to size the machines, these parameters are summarized in the following. The test program comprises the determination of the main crushing properties. The main influencing factors are the applied displacement and the diameter of the samples, whereas the displacement is the “stressing” factor. The compression displacement In coarse crushing the fragment shape is a function of the fragment size. The products are assessed by their properties of the macro shape ( In order to determine the crushing properties statistically sound it is necessary to run several tests on samples with the same diameter. The number of tests is determined by a confidence probability of The likelihood of breakage For a better use of the crushing forces during the sizing process of a crusher it is more suitable to relate the force to the area of projection giving a projection area related crushing force The crushing work can be related to the mass of the particle. The experiments show a reduced specific crushing work All broken fragments from a particle with a diameter Therefore, the crushed fragment size distribution (crushing function) can be discribed by the parameters Besides the particle diameter the particle shape is an important feature of the product quality. There are different possibilities to assess the particle shape. One possibility is related to the German standard DIN 52114, i.e. the ratio between the largest and smallest particle dimension. All particles with a ratio bigger than 3 are defined as misshapen. The systematic investigation of the comminution of coarse irregular particles by compression yields information on the resistance of rocks against crushing and the granulometric properties of the crushed product. With a relative compression displacement of 20% all particles are broken independently from their initial diameter, i.e. there is no crushing within the upper part of the processing zone of a crusher which uses the effect of compression. There is only the shaping of the rock till it reaches the zone where the displacement is large enough. The investigation of the maximum crushing force shows the same tendencies than the known effects on smaller particles ( The specific crushing work decreases with a larger rock diameter too, i. e. coarser crushing needs less specific energy than finer crushing. It was not possible to find a diameter within the investigated particle size range where the specific crushing work is independent of the particle diameter, i.e. the hypothesis of Kick could not be supported with this type of rock and up to a rock diameter of approximately 0.5 m. However, further investigations at the Institute of Mineral Processing Machines, which are not published yet, show that the decline of strength and specific work with the particle diameter is not equal with all kinds of rocks but is dependent on the material. The crushed fragment size distribution can be well described by the two feed diameter related parameters mean fragment diameter and upper fragment diameter and the parameter standard deviation of a truncated logarithmic normal distribution. The parameters depend on the relative displacement and are not functions of the rock diameter. The investigations of the fragment shapes support the observation on crushers that the product is mainly misshapen according to DIN 52114 with crushers which use the single particle comminution by compression within the processing zone. In general, those machines cannot be used as crushers which produce well shapen particles. The investigations of coarse particles yield a basis to size crushers. Since the results depend on the material to be crushed as well further investigations are necessary in order to assess the influence of the rock material.