Objectives
                  Our goal is to review design strategies for the fabrication of calcium phosphate ceramic scaffolds (CPS), in light of their transient role in bone tissue engineering and associated requirements for effective bone regeneration.
               
                  Methods
                  We examine the various design options available to meet mechanical and biological requirements of CPS and later focus on the importance of proper characterization of CPS in terms of architecture, mechanical properties and time-sensitive properties such as biodegradability. Finally, relationships between in vitro versus in vivo testing are addressed, with an attempt to highlight reliable performance predictors.
               
                  Results
                  A combinatory design strategy should be used with CPS, taking into consideration 3D architecture, adequate surface chemistry and topography, all of which are needed to promote bone formation. CPS represent the media of choice for delivery of osteogenic factors and anti-infectives. Non-osteoblast mediated mineral deposition can confound in vitro osteogenesis testing of CPS and therefore the expression of a variety of proteins or genes including collagen type I, bone sialoprotein and osteocalcin should be confirmed in addition to increased mineral content.
               
                  Conclusions
                  CPS are a superior scaffold material for bone regeneration because they actively promote osteogenesis. Biodegradability of CPS via calcium and phosphate release represents a unique asset. Structural control of CPS at the macro, micro and nanoscale and their combination with cells and polymeric materials is likely to lead to significant developments in bone tissue engineering.Autologous bone grafts remain the gold standard in bone replacement procedures with the highest success rates for bone regeneration Amongst available scaffold materials, calcium phosphate-based ceramics represent a unique avenue based on tunable similarities in both crystalline structure and chemistry between calcium phosphate ceramics and bone apatite, the mineral phase of bone tissue that is similar, albeit distinct, from hydroxyapatite (HA) due to its carbonate content and reduced or absent hydroxyl groups CPS are manufactured using a palette of techniques from polymer foam replication to ceramic foaming, inclusion of porogens, 3D printing and gel casting. This variety of manufacturing techniques illustrates the difficulty of producing ceramic scaffolds with controlled pore size, porosity and mechanical integrity. Regardless of manufacturing technique, the last step is a thermal treatment or sintering step. This high temperature step has traditionally triggered design issues due to the competition between the high temperatures required for sintering and crystalline phase thermal decomposition. Additionally, for bioactive glass-ceramics, competition between sintering and crystallization processes renders sintering to full density difficult to achieve. Our goal is to review design strategies for the fabrication of CPS, in light of their transient role in bone tissue engineering and associated requirements for effective bone regeneration. We later focus on the importance of proper characterization of CPS in terms of architecture, mechanical properties and time-sensitive properties such as biodegradability. Finally, relationships between As mentioned earlier, an ideal scaffold material for synthetic bone grafts should be osteoinductive, osteoconductive, promote osseointegration, be able to deliver osteogenic agents, anti-infectives and stem cells, and degrade at the same rate as new bone forms Osteoinduction can be defined as the chemical stimulation of human mesenchymal stem cells into bone-forming osteoblasts, thereby inducing osteogenesis Strontium or magnesium-substituted hydroxyapatites also exhibit greater solubility than undoped HA, with a larger unit cell for Sr-HA and a smaller unit cell for Mg-HA Osteoconductivity is another highly desirable property for a synthetic bone graft substitute and means that new “bone can grow onto a surface” Other green fabrication techniques available for producing open cell ceramics include addition of porogens, foaming and gel casting and rapid prototyping, with a large number of variants Although CPS are designed to biodegrade over time, they should promote osseointegration, which is defined as the formation of a chemical bond between bone and the surface of an implanted material without formation of fibrous tissue. Osseointegration is promoted by surface charge Strategies to enhance successful bone regeneration by CPS include the addition of growth factors, cytokines, stem cells, and anti-infectives. Given the propensity of CPS to adsorb and concentrate osteoinductive and angiogenic molecules naturally present in the body and thereby enhance bone healing It is important to use a controlled release delivery vehicle for growth factors because they are proteins that are rapidly denatured if administered systemically. Even more importantly, a delivery system is needed in order to release the growth factor at a low dose locally in a contained manner within the wound site. Growth factors have a broad range of activity on many different cell types throughout the body and uncontrolled non-local administration can lead to tissue malformation associated with painful and life threatening side effects. Complication rates between 10% and 50% have been reported in spine fusion when using BMP-2 delivered from a weakly confining collagen sponge that resulted in ectopic bone formation in and around the spinal canal, post-operative radiculitis, vertebral osteolysis, allergic/hyperinflammatory response, and new malignancies The final thermal treatment or sintering step during CPS manufacture requires that the addition of osteogenic molecules occur after the structural CPS component is manufactured to avoid destroying their biological activity by the heat. Application of a growth factor as a surface coating is thus the only technique available for combining growth factors with CPS. Simple adsorption of the active biomolecule to the CPS surface was the initial approach used, but that technique is associated with an undesirable burst release Antibiotic delivery from CPS continues to be investigated since infection remains a significant problem associated with orthopaedic and dental surgeries. Silver has antibacterial properties and because of its non-organic nature can be doped into CPS by mixing Ag Bone regeneration induced by the delivery of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and other progenitor cells currently suffers from a lack of reproducibility for many reasons including donor variability, heterogeneity within the cell source, and loss of multipotency with expansion As to which CPS is the best to guide the osteogenic differentiation of MSCs, it seems to depend on whether MSCs are seeded on the scaffolds or if the scaffolds are being implanted without cells and endogenous MSCs self-seed the scaffold. For example, Matsushima The unique architecture of open cell ceramics has such a significant impact on their mechanical properties that it becomes critical to fully characterize all structural parameters if any modeling of structure versus properties relationships is to be attempted As indicated earlier, pore size is a critical parameter for CPS. For polymeric foam products, the pore size is often determined by measuring the number of pores per inch on digital micrographs of a sectioned foam, using the well-established linear intercept method. However, this technique is not applicable to CPS for the following reasons: (1) there is no distinction made between pore and window, (2) the pore size will depend on the location of the section, (3) there is likely to be a significant scattering of the data. Other techniques for determining pore size involve digital image analysis routines. Either optical or scanning electron micrographs can be analyzed and both pore diameter and pore size distribution are derived automatically. However, as for the linear intercept technique, great care should be taken to account for the fact that these images are a 2D projection of a 3D pore structure. Assuming that the pores are spherical, a correction factor of 1.62 can be derived Micro computed tomography (micro-CT) permits a more precise representation of pore size, shape and distribution Perhaps the most commonly tested mechanical property for ceramic scaffolds is the compressive strength. Typically, specimens are kept unconstrained and loaded in compression. The compressive strength is calculated from the stress–strain curve. Although this appears to be a straightforward test, the lack of standardization across laboratories renders comparisons very difficult. Referring to ASTM standard F2883-11 Solubility is another important property of calcium phosphate scaffolds that is required by design. It is best measured according to ISO standard 10993-14. Results may vary considerably depending on the form and particle size. Inclusion of a control ceramic of known solubility may help validate the data obtained for both types of media. It would be of extreme clinical value to be able to reliably predict human Due the variability of the There are a large number of combinatory design strategies available for CPS that should be considered in order to generate a suitable 3D architecture, adequate surface chemistry and topography, all of which are needed to promote bone formation. CPS represent the media of choice for delivery of osteogenic factors and anti-infectives. CPS are a superior scaffold material for bone regeneration because they actively promote osteogenesis. Biodegradability with calcium and phosphate release represents a unique asset. Structural control of CPS at the macro, micro and nanoscale and their combination with cells and polymeric materials is likely to lead to significant developments in bone tissue engineering. This work was supported in part by the