Hot wire chemical vapor deposition (HWCVD) provides a low cost fabrication technology for hyrdogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) based thin film single junction and tandem solar cells. In this paper, we report our results on the high deposition rate device quality a-Si:H films deposited by HWCVD at low substrate temperature. Films have been deposited using tantalum filament with highest deposition rates of 16
                     
                        
                           Å
                        
                     /s and having the desired device quality properties like high photoconductivity gain (σ
                     ph/σ
                     dark), low microstructure factor (as revealed by IR spectroscopy), good short range order parameter and acceptable thickness uniformity over the deposited area. An average photoconductivity gain of ≈3×105 has been obtained for the films deposited at rates ∼15
                     
                        
                           Å
                        
                     /s and the substrate temperature of 200°C. The p- and n-type films have also been deposited by the HWCVD. Single junction p–i–n solar cells on ASAHi U-type substrates, fabricated using these layers have an efficiency of 5.1% under AM1.5 illumination. Depositing anti-reflection coating on front side, reflection coating before back contact and using textured TCO layer for light trapping would further improve the efficiency of the cell.Various techniques have been used to fabricate a-Si:H based single junction and tandem thin film solar cell devices. Recently, HWCVD Hydrogenated amorphous silicon solar cells have strategic advantage over CIGS and CdTe solar cells. The disadvantages of cadmium telluride cells lie in the very materials themselves. The heavy metal cadmium is toxic (as much like lead) and has the tendency to accumulate in the food chain. The metal tellurium is available in limited quantities, thus limiting supply and therefore leads to an increased cost. Similarly in case of CIGS solar cell time consuming and expensive batch-wise deposition techniques are used, partly forced by the complex phase diagram of Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se) We know that cost reduction of the electricity generated by a solar cell is the important challenge in the field of thin film photovoltaics. Cost reduction is possible if device quality a-Si:H layers are deposited at high deposition rate on low cost substrates and at low substrate temperature. But it is well known that low pressure, medium silane flow rate, and higher substrate temperature are generally required to maintain device quality a-Si:H films Intrinsic a-Si:H films were fabricated by HWCVD process at substrate temperatures ( Film thickness was determined by Dektak II surface profilometer, from which the deposition rate was determined. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy was used to measure bonding configuration in the a-Si:H films. The microstructure factor ( Different filament materials have been used by researchers for carrying out HWCVD of a-Si:H films. We have used tungsten and tantalum filament for the deposition of a-Si:H films. First films were deposited using tungsten filament but it was observed that tungsten filament had a short operational life due to silicide formation and broke down after 4–5 From the analysis of FTIR spectra of a-Si:H films deposited at different The Raman spectra of the HWCVD deposited a-Si:H films are shown in p–i–n single junction amorphous silicon solar cell with structure, glass/SnO Device quality a-Si:H films with a deposition rate of 15