The practice of using aggregate stemming in production blasting has typically been justified in terms of the improvements in fines generation, consistent with the benefits of confining more explosive energy in the rock during blasting. However, at the Red Dog mine in Alaska, ongoing Mine-to-Mill efforts have identified a further benefit from stemming that had previously not been quantified, specifically the marked reduction in SAG feed size and throughput variability. These reductions represent a substantial benefit in terms of flotation circuit stability, which have allowed the Mill Operations to better optimize the grade and recovery. A secondary but important benefit to come out of the change in stemming practice has been the reduced wear in the gyratory crusher, resulting in a significantly longer period between relines. This paper compares the key mill performance indicators when the mine moved from drill cuttings to aggregate as stemming in the blast holes.The Red Dog mine in northwest Alaska is the largest producer of zinc concentrate in the world, and is operated by Teck Cominco under an agreement with the NANA regional Alaskan native corporation. Red Dog is an open pit deposit of base metal sulfides and oxides. Ore is trucked to a blending stockpile ahead of the gyratory crusher. Ore stockpile construction and reclamation is a carefully managed procedure to produce a very consistent zinc mill feed grade at the required blend of ore types. Typically, ore from approximately 20 pit locations is used to construct a single stockpile. Current operating rates are 3.2 Red Dog Operations began in 1989 and currently the circuit consists of a primary gyratory crusher, followed by three parallel variable speed 22 foot diameter SAG mills and two parallel ball mill/hydrocyclone circuits. A schematic of the current circuit is shown in An engineering project was undertaken in 1999/2000 at the Red Dog mine to determine the extent that Semi-Autogenous Grinding (SAG) mill throughput could be increased by blasting differently. The Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Center (JKMRC) blast fragmentation, jaw crusher, and SAG mill breakage models ( The analysis was designed to answer the following key questions: Has stemming increased the amount of fines reporting to the gyratory crusher? Has there been a significant change in mill throughput since the introduction of aggregate stemming? Have there been any associated benefits in mill performance since the introduction of the aggregate stemming? Some of the complications and unknowns expected in the analysis include: Unmeasured variables and plant interruptions may distort statistical analysis of daily production data. The change in the size distribution of the ROM material is difficult to quantify by conventional sampling methods. The effect of stemming may be overshadowed by ore hardness and grade changes between stockpiles. To quantify the effect of stemming type on SAG mill throughput, two stockpiles were selected just prior to the change and two other stockpiles were selected well after the new stemming practice was introduced. These were SP 183/4 and SP 186/7 respectively. Stockpile 185 was omitted since it represented the transition between the two types of stemming. That is, the crushed material sourced from blast holes stemmed with drill cuttings had not been completely processed at the start of SP 185. The mill feed grades for SP 183/4 and SP 186/7 were similar, 21.0% and 20.7% Zn respectively. The installation of Split Online in 2000, on the Gyratory Crusher product conveyor belt and all three SAG feed conveyor belts, allowed detailed ore sizing information to be retrieved from the Proscon mill data logging system. Split Online is an image processing based system for the continuous measurement of particle size in primary crushing and AG/SAG milling. A description of the system and how it works is given in Several key performance indicators (KPIs) were selected for the comparison, including the Gyratory Crusher Product Size, expressed as % <25 The daily results suggest the change to aggregate stemming has reduced the size of the gyratory crusher product, as expected. In terms of the fines, there has been a 3% (rel) increase in the % <25 As the performance of the flotation circuit is dependent on the stability of the mill feed, the impact of the aggregate stemming was also analyzed in terms of the variability on SAG throughput. Historically the SAG mills at Red Dog have been subject to significant swings in throughput due to segregation and the dozer pushing in the coarse ore stockpile (COSP), particularly during winter months. Poor control of the crusher gap only exacerbates this problem. These swings can, to some extent, be mitigated by balancing the tonnage setpoints between all three SAG mills, assuming that not all three mills are overloaded at the same time. However, efforts by the control room operator to maintain a constant throughput have been met with limited success. Providing a more consistent feed size would clearly be more optimal.  Having seen a major improvement in SAG feed size stability on a day-to-day basis, a further analysis was carried out to quantify the throughput variation on any given day, before and after aggregate stemming was introduced. The The hydroset position on the two days used to compare the variation in feed size and throughput ( Though this analysis is still not 100% conclusive based on the limited number of data sets, the improvement in stability is significant. Looking at the first six months since the introduction of the new stemming practice, the operating data has shown a much improved consistency in SAG throughput when equipment availability was high, particularly for SAG 3. This has clearly allowed Red Dog Mill Operations to optimize the circuit better than they were able to do in the past. The photography results of the blast monitoring, shown in The use of aggregate as the stemming material instead of the drill cuttings would have increased the explosive efficiency. But would the improved efficiency alone be responsible for the reduced variability is SAG feed size and throughput? The literature suggests that blasting may not only influence the ROM size distribution delivered to the primary crusher but also the residual strength of the coarser fragments, which may affect the grinding circuit throughput. This is referred to as blast damage or blast-induced pre-conditioning. Since the introduction of aggregate stemming there has been a marked reduction in the F80 size, as already noted. With this change the frequency of adjusting the gyratory crusher gap also reduced, which would suggest the crusher has worked less hard to maintain the target size range. That is, the wear on the crusher has reduced. In this case then, we should expect to extend the period between relines of the concave and mantle. According to the mine department, the wear life of the gyratory has been extended to approximately 1.3 million tonnes, from the original 1.0 to 1.1 million tonnes. This essentially means Red Dog can expect to see one less reline per year, thereby reducing costs in labor and parts, and avoiding the need to run the stand-by jaw crusher. In an attempt to identify the effect of aggregate stemming on mill throughput, production data from January 1–8, May 2002 were analyzed, representing Stockpiles 183–187. SP 183 and 184 were prepared from blast shots with drill cuttings as stemming, whereas SP 186 and 187 had aggregate stemming in the shots. The main three variables of interest were the gyratory crusher sizing, mill throughput and power utilization of the SAG mills. Initial results indicate a 3% decrease in the F80 size and a 3% increase in the amount of <25 Apart from the increase in throughput, the major benefit seems to be the marked reduction in SAG feed size and throughput variability. On average the variation in the feed size has dropped by 36%, whilst the variation in the normalized mill feed throughput and SAG grinding index has also reduced by 59% and 27% respectively. These reductions represent a substantial benefit in terms of flotation circuit stability, which has allowed Mill Operations to better optimize the grade and recovery. Some of the improvements seen in the performance of the mill since the introduction of aggregate stemming can be attributed to the reduced variation in SAG feed size and throughput. The improvements appear to be related to the increased energy efficiency resulting from the use of aggregate stemming in blasting, which is believed to have resulted in pre-conditioning of the rock delivered to the gyratory crusher. A secondary but important benefit to come out of the change in stemming has been the reduced wear in the gyratory crusher, leading to a 20% longer period between relines. This represents a major saving in labor and parts costs, and relieves the mill from having to run as often on jaw crushed material, that is more variable and hence disruptive to the entire circuit. The author wishes to acknowledge Teck Cominco Alaska Incorporated for their permission to publish the information contained in this paper.