Raman microscopic imaging was just recently introduced into the analysis of residual Roman and Portland cement grains in 19th century cement stone, displaying evidence of the experimental adaptation of contemporary technological knowledge and practice to local circumstance. Beyond calcium ferrites, this study deals with ferruginous clinker phases that are atypical compared to present-day commercial conditions of manufacture, such as iron oxides, clinopyroxenes or pyroxenoids. Analog, microtexture, mineralogy and chemical composition of pulverized ferrosilicate slag used in the course of the 19th century as mineral additive in lime mortar reflect local resource utilization, recording the melting history within the furnace and the effectiveness of the reduction process of a single smelting event. In the case of the discussed example, chemical imaging by Raman microscopy allowed deducing a lime-rich, low-silica melt exposed to fairly reducing conditions because of the detection of the pyrometallurgic phases fayalite (Fe2SiO4), kirschsteinite (CaFeSiO4) and calcioolivine (Ca2SiO4) in zoned olivine laths and (with the melilite gehlenite, Ca2Al2SiO7) in the interstitial matrix, cross-cut by dendritic wuestite (FeO). The presented analytical approach faces the high spatial complexity of such mortar samples by microspectroscopic imaging with micrometer lateral resolution and their chemical complexity by extracting the rich chemical information content from Raman spectra. Intensity maps of marker bands provide spatial phase distributions. Furthermore, maps of peak positions can give access to the dissemination of spectroscopically similar phases of solid solution series (e.g., olivine and calcium aluminate ferrite) as well as varying amounts of incorporated foreign cations (e.g., in hematite).In the second half of the 19th century, the industrial progress and the construction boom increased the demand and stimulated the development of new types of mineral binders and mortars. Especially Roman and Portland cements played an essential role as hydraulic binder materials in building construction and façade ornamentation. Beyond that, contemporary textbooks and journals reveal a variety of mineral additives to improve the physical and mechanical characteristics of traditional lime mortars and document lively discussions concerning the probable mechanism of action and the effectiveness of such additive compounds The crystalline interstitial groundmass of Portland cement clinker, consisting of the main hydraulic phases calcium aluminate and calcium aluminate ferrite, and surrounding the calcium silicate phases alite (Ca Size and heterogeneous phase assemblage of residual cement grains in historical cement stone differ significantly from those of modern Portland cement clinker burnt in rotary kilns due to limitations of the manufacturing techniques available in the 19th century (comminution and homogeneity of the feedstock, burning temperature and residence time in the intermittently operated bottle and shaft kilns, grinding machinery, etc.) Likewise, the chemistry and morphology of crystalline and amorphous pyrometallurgical phases in iron slag used as mineral additive, in combination with the slag texture, can provide technological insights into the kiln parameters during the smelting and solidification process and unravel by that the historical level of technological know-how achieved in the processing of local raw and flux materials (furnace design, capability to reach high furnace temperatures and a suitably reducing atmosphere, use of effective ventilation systems, etc.). Representative patterns valuable for the determination of the provenance of slags or parent materials, respectively, are discussed in the literature, especially in archaeometallurgical context In the following we discuss observations concerning a lime render applied in 1838 to the façade of the Loreto Chapel in Fribourg, Switzerland, as well as Portland and Roman cement stone from cast building ornaments originating from a residential building in Zurich raised in 1875, and a villa in French Riviera built between 1905 and 1912. The mortar samples were prepared for analysis in a specialized lab by embedding in epoxy resin under vacuum and manufacturing polished thin sections, which were studied under a polarizing light microscope (Zeiss AxioScope.A1 MAT equipped with AxioCam MRc) in transmitted polarized light. The micrographs shown in Fig. S1 in the Supplementary material were acquired using a Laborlux microscope (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). In case of Raman measurements were performed using a table-top Jasco NRS-4100 Raman microscopy system coupled to an upright Olympus microscope, equipped with notch filters and a charge-coupled device (CCD) detector (Andor). A diode-pumped solid-state laser with λ The data presented in After a first check with the instrument software, all data was evaluated using own (T.S.) LabView-based software (LabView, National Instruments). Phases were identified by comparing whole Raman spectra with reference data either downloaded from the RRUFF spectral database library Raman maps were evaluated by plotting two-dimensional distributions of either (1) background-corrected intensities of selected marker bands (e.g. peak integrals as shown in The addition of pulverized iron slag, iron hammer scales or waste fillings of iron to slaked lime is recommended in textbooks and professional articles spread during the 19th century for improving the performance of traditional air-setting mortar mixtures. Different authors [e.g. Refs. As can be seen in Other reduced pyrometallurgic phases containing ferrous iron are present in the powdered slag in the form of elongated, skeletal olivine laths. The habitus of natural forsterite crystals in basaltic rocks is used to estimate the cooling rate and the degree of undercooling of the basaltic melt, an approach often adopted in the archaeometallurgical interpretation of the growth textures of olivine phases in crystallized silicate slags The identification of both wuestite and olivine by optical microscopy was verified by comparing Raman data with either database spectra Archaeometrical studies of prehistoric, ancient and medieval furnace slags report compositionally zoned olivine crystals with forsteritic (Mg-rich) cores, fayalitic (Fe-rich) inner rims and Ca-rich outer rims, attributable to a decrease in temperature due to lime flux added to the mineral charge to achieve minimal temperature melting or to compositional variations of the system due to the extraction of melt and recharge of the furnace during processing The Raman spectra of the three olivine group members fayalite, kirschsteinite and calcioolivine gathered by single-spot measurements in the interstitial matrix between the olivine laths are compiled in Unlike Portland cement, Roman cement was produced since the patent registration in 1796 by burning marlstone at temperatures below sintering. As a consequence, the clinker of this hydraulic binder, typically preserved as differently calcined unhydrated particles in historical mortars, is lacking of both tricalcium silicate (C The Raman maps in Gehlenite ( Calcium metasilicate occurs in three modifications, the monoclinic high temperature forms pseudowollastonite (or bourgeoisite, β-CaSiO Owing to predominantly oxidizing conditions during cement manufacture, the majority of iron in the examined residual ferruginous clinker phases is trivalent. Yellow crystals (see unhydrated cement grain in the By means of SEM, J. Weber et al. observed small aggregates of dicalcium ferrite crystals (in conventional cement notation C Portland cement is produced by heating a well-defined mixture of limestone and clay to temperatures about 1450 The Raman peaks at 608 Orthorhombic srebrodolskite (Ca Similar to the differences between synthetic and natural dicalcium ferrite, the Raman spectrum of synthesized monoclinic β-C In addition to β-belite and ferrite phases, calcium oxide was detected as another main constituent of the residual cement grain shown in The interstitial iron-bearing material in residual Roman and Portland cement grains in polished thin sections of 19th century cement stone is frequently beyond reach for petrographic microscopy. Raman microscopy, in contrast, allows observing the heterogeneous phase assemblage of binder relicts, resulting from the different thermal history experienced by the individual clinker nodules in the bottle or shaft kiln, at the micrometer scale. Representative sampling provided, variety and chemical differences of ferruginous phases in unhydrated cement particles can be read in combination with contemporary textbooks as a function of the progressive technological advances at the turn of the century. We detected phases that are atypical compared to present-day commercial conditions of manufacture – coloring components, but for the most part not hydraulic reactive (e.g. the ferruginous clinopyroxenes esseneite and ferrosilite) or in strong sensitivity to the pore solution chemistry such as the members of the ferrite solid solution series Likewise, composition and habitus of pyrometallurgic phases in finely ground iron smelting slag, recommended and used as artificial pozzolana in 19th century lime mortars, provides evidence of the historical technological standard of knowledge concerning metallurgical processes and local craftsmanship in the application of artificial hydraulic mortar aggregates. In the case discussed here, the slag grains, mainly composed of the three olivine group members fayalite, kirschsteinite and calcioolivine, as well as gehlenite and wuestite, did not react with the lime binder. Raman imaging proves to be a promising analytical approach in unraveling the informative potential of mineral binder relicts and additives, allowing a more substantial comparison of individual historical mortar samples, which reflect the rich diversity of the not yet standardized mixtures applied in the course of the 19th century. As discussed in detail in our recent studies The authors gratefully acknowledge Prof. Ueli Fritz (Bern University of the Arts, Bern, Switzerland) and Michelle Jegge for providing samples from the Villa Ile-de-France, Saint-Jean-Cap-Ferrat (France), and the Loreto Chapel, Fribourg (Switzerland), respectively. We likewise thank Meletta Strebel Architekten AG (Zurich, Switzerland) for the samples from the façade of the residential building Florastrasse 54, Zurich. This work was supported by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at