Background
                  To investigate the effects of platelet-rich plasma (PRP)-incorporated autologous granular bone grafts for treatment in the precollapse stages (Association of Research Circulation Osseous stage II–III) of posttraumatic osteonecrosis of the femoral head.
               
                  Methods
                  A total of 46 patients were eligible and enrolled in the study. Twenty-four patients were treated with core decompression and PRP-incorporated autologous granular bone grafting (treatment group), and 22 patients were treated with core decompression and autologous granular bone grafting (control group). During a minimum follow-up duration of 36 months, X-ray and computed tomography were used to evaluate the radiological results, and the Harris hip score (HHS) and visual analog scale were chosen to assess the clinical results.
               
                  Results
                  Both the treatment and control groups had a significantly improved HHS (P < .001). The minimum clinically important difference for the HHS was reached in 91.7% of the treatment group and 68.2% of the control group (P < .05). The HHS and visual analog scale in the treatment group were significantly improved than that in the control group at the last follow-up (P < .05). Successful clinical and radiological results were achieved 87.5% and 79.2% in the treatment group compared with 59.1% and 50.0% in the control group (P < .05), respectively. The survival rates based on the requirement for further hip surgery as an endpoint were higher in the treatment group in comparison to those in the control group (P < .05).
               
                  Conclusion
                  PRP-incorporated autologous granular bone grafting is a safe and effective procedure for treatment in the precollapse stages (Association of Research Circulation Osseous stage II–III) of posttraumatic osteonecrosis of the femoral head.Post-traumatic osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH) is one severe complication of femoral neck fractures, which often causes femoral head collapse and osteoarthritis if left untreated. Prevention of the collapse of the femoral head and preservation of the function of the hip joint are 2 major therapeutic purposes in the early stages of ONFH In recent years, core decompression is the most commonly used hip-preserving approach for treatment in the precollapse stage of ONFH Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) is an autologous concentration of human platelets in a small volume of plasma at supraphysiologic levels. PRP is rich in autologous growth factors, such as PDGFs, transforming growth factor beta 1 and 2 (TGF-β1, TGF-β2), IGFs, and epidermal growth factors (EGFs), and it has been shown to have positive effects on the stimulation of tissue healing A randomized, controlled trial was conducted between January 2008 and December 2013 at the single university teaching hospital. This study protocol was approved by our institutional review board, and written informed consent was obtained from all study participants. The inclusion criteria were post-traumatic ONFH of Association of Research Circulation Osseous (ARCO) stages II to III in patients aged between 18 and 55 years. The exclusion criteria were age older than 55 years, previous pathologic fractures, severe metabolic diseases (such as hemophilia, rheumatic arthritis, and diabetes mellitus), autoimmune diseases, blood disorders, and receiving invasive or surgical treatment on a hip for treatment of ONFH. To achieve good intraobserver and interobserver reliability, 1 experienced orthopedic surgeon and 1 experienced radiologist, who were blinded to the treatment protocol, worked together to make the final decision of the Tonnis grade/ARCO stage of the affected hip joints. The final diagnosis of ONFH mainly depended on the image findings from X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scanning, and all the patients underwent the same preoperative X-ray and CT imaging. A population-based cohort in a single institution was established between January 2008 and December 2013 with a minimum follow-up of 36 months. Patients fulfilling the inclusion criteria were randomly divided into 2 groups: the core decompression and PRP-incorporated autologous granular bone graft group (treatment group), and the core decompression and autologous granular bone graft group (control group). The patients were randomized depending on randomized numbers generated using a sealed-envelope method. Sixty patients with post-traumatic ONFH were assessed for eligibility. Fourteen patients were excluded because they did not meet the inclusion criteria (7 patients), declined to participate (3 patients), or were lost to follow-up (4 patients). The remaining 46 patients were eligible and enrolled in the study. Twenty-four patients were treated with core decompression and PRP-incorporated autologous granular bone grafting, and the remaining 22 patients with core decompression and autologous granular bone grafting ( Before inducing anesthesia, 90 mL of peripheral venous blood was withdrawn and collected in 9-mL tubes containing 3.8% (w/v) sodium citrate. The blood samples were centrifuged by a single spin at 500 g for 8 minutes at room temperature to separate the blood into 3 layers. The PRP was located in the intermediate layer between the layer of red blood cells and layer of acellular plasma (platelet-poor plasma). PRP was then collected in sterile tubes for the surgeries. The platelet counts in this plasma were 1.5-2 times greater than those in peripheral blood, with no leukocytes. About 8-10 mL of PRP was finally harvested using this method. Ten percent calcium chloride was used to activate the platelets just before application. The preparation and formulation of PRP were completed by the same surgeon for all surgeries in the treatment group. Under regional or general anesthesia, all patients underwent surgery on a fracture table. The hip was exposed through a lateral approach in the supine position. With excision of subcutaneous tissue and the lateral fascia, followed by blunt dissection of the vastus lateralis muscle, a longitudinal capsular incision exposed the anterior aspect of the hip. Previously cannulated screws or dynamic hip screws (DHSs) were removed. Core decompression was performed as observed using the C-arm radiograph. During the core decompression, a large single drill, the diameter of which was 12.5 mm, was used to remove the necrotic tissue of the femoral head. If the previous treatment method used DHSs, the existing large drill of the DHSs could be used to perform core decompression after removal of the previous fixation. The necrotic bone was then removed locally. The fresh autologous granular bones were harvested from an about 4 cm × 3 cm × 1.5 cm-sized piece of autogenous iliac crest and cut into an about 5 mm × 5 mm × 5 mm granular volume. In the treatment group, the fresh autologous granular bones were mixed with the PRP and well packed in the necrotic area, and a bone tamp was used to pack the autologous granular bones in an appropriate density through the core decompression channel. In addition, sterilized medical bone wax was applied to block the end of the channel in order to avoid PRP and granular bone loss in all patients during the procedures. An intraoperative C-arm fluoroscope was used to confirm the adequacy of the grafting. The surgical procedure in the control group was the same as that in the treatment group, but without the PRP. All patients received cefazolin for 24 or 48 hours. Postoperatively, active movements of the knee and hip were encouraged. Non-weight-bearing movements for 6 weeks were instructed, after which partial weight-bearing with the aid of a mobility aid was allowed for the following 10 weeks. Full weight-bearing was allowed after 16 weeks. We employed the Harris hip score (HHS) and visual analog scale (VAS) of hip pain to evaluate the function recovery of the hips. Patients were assessed preoperatively and at routine postoperative intervals of 3, 6, 12, 24, and 36 months by an experienced resident who was blinded to the patients’ treatment. X-ray images including posteroanterior and lateral views and CT scans of the hips were also obtained at the same time points for each patient. The prime outcomes of the study were clinical and radiological failure. Clinical failure was defined as an HHS <70 points or a requirement for further hip surgery. For each group, the percentage of patients who achieved the minimum clinically important difference (MCID) was also analyzed. The MCID was defined as a 10-point increase in the HHS. Radiological failure was defined as new collapse occurrence or increased collapse occurrence of greater than 2 mm Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 19.0 for Windows. Descriptive statistics were used to record the baseline characteristics. The chi-square test was chosen to compare nominal data. Metric data were evaluated using the Mann-Whitney Detailed baseline patient characteristics are shown in During a minimum duration of follow-up of 36 months after surgery, both the treatment and control groups had a significantly improved HHS ( Post-traumatic ONFH is a major complication of femoral neck fractures that is difficult to cure and requires various solutions. There is no consistency in the reported incidence of post-traumatic ONFH, which has been about 20%-40% following femoral neck fractures Autologous harvested bones are frequently used for treating bone defects and promoting bone fusions as they promote bone regeneration and repair The standard platelet concentration for transfusion has been based on PRP, and it has been reported that the concentrations of growth factors in PRP release and form lysates in patients with ONFH as much as in healthy individuals However, this study presents several limitations. The sample size of this study was small, and there is still the need for a large number of patients to support the further advantages of core decompression and PRP-incorporated autologous granular bone grafting, which can also further reveal the mechanisms of treatment factors in this procedure. Meanwhile, the shape of the bone graft granules still needs further studies to be evaluated and explored in order to find a more rational shape. Lastly, we focused on the treatment of ONFH secondary to trauma when we first designed the study. This may be one underlying limitation of our study because whether it could be used to treat other causes of ONFH still has to be considered with caution and must be further validated, which could be the scope of future research. In summary, PRP-incorporated autologous granular bone grafting appears to be an effective and safe method for treatment in ARCO stages II to III of post-traumatic ONFH, which could achieve better clinical and radiological results compared with autologous granular bone grafting alone. Combining fresh autologous granular bone and PRP may provide the void filler and structural support after necrotic bone removal, which offers a chance for the PRP and fresh bone graft to combine their advantages together during the core decompression procedure. The present study has demonstrated encouraging effects of this method and provides another choice for treatment in ARCO stages II to III of post-traumatic ONFH. We acknowledge the key projects from the Nanjing Military Region during the 12th Five-Year Plan Period (No. 10MA073 and No. 12MA067). 