Saprolitic ores from Sulawesi Island (SS ore) contain serpentine and goethite as major minerals, whereas the main minerals in saprolitic ore from Halmahera Island (SH ore) are talc and goethite. Most of the nickel was incorporated in a magnesium–silica-containing mineral. The effects on nickel extraction of leaching temperature, citric acid concentration, and ore particle size were determined to investigate the leaching performances and leaching kinetics of the two saprolitic ores. Nickel leaching efficiency from SS ore is always higher than that from SH ore under the same leaching conditions. The mineral contents of the ores significantly affected the leaching performances and mineral dissolution behaviors of the samples. The results of nickel leaching efficiency and analysis of the solid residues suggest that all dissolved nickel originated from serpentine, which is more easily leached than goethite and talc. The rate of nickel extraction for SS ore was faster than that for SH ore. Nickel leaching from SS ore and SH ore followed the shrinking-core model and was controlled by diffusion of a reactant or product through the solid product layer.In the future, hydrometallurgical methods or aqueous treatments will become the primary techniques for the recovery of nickel and other metals from nickel laterite ores, especially low-grade laterite ores, because they enable valuable metals such as nickel, cobalt, iron, magnesium, chromium, and aluminum to be extracted comprehensively ( The use of organic acids in dissolution of the metals in nickel laterite ores is an alternative method that has advantages in terms of environmental issues. Many researchers have confirmed that citric acid is the most effective organic acid in the leaching of nickel laterites ( Citric acid contains three carboxyl groups with dissociation constants for the three protons expressed as pK There are two possible mechanisms for metal dissolution by citric acid: (1) attack of acid and metal ion displacement by hydronium ions, and (2) forming soluble metal–ligand complexes by metal chelation ( Indonesia is one of the largest producers of nickel ore in the world, and has approximately 16% of total global nickel resources in the form of lateritic ores. They are widely distributed and spread among the islands of Kalimantan, Sulawesi, Halmahera, Gag, and Papua ( Indonesian nickel laterite ores have been the subject of a number of previous mineralogical studies ( Saprolitic ores are silicate laterite type ores, formed after a long period of aggressive weathering and located deeper in the laterite profile than limonitic laterites. Saprolitic ores are usually magnesium rich and the majority of the goethite is replaced by serpentine, with the iron and nickel substituting for magnesium. Typically, most nickel is associated within the saprolitic ore by substituting for magnesium in serpentine minerals. Although goethite is the major component of limonitic ores, some saprolitic ores also contain goethite as a minor component and nickel is sometimes also incorporated into goethite. The aim of this study was to obtain a better understanding of the comparative leaching performances, mineral dissolution behavior, and leaching kinetics of different Indonesian saprolitic ores from two different mining areas, under atmospheric leaching conditions using citric acid. This is important in the design of alternative techniques for treating such ores. The findings of the study can be adopted for leaching of other lateritic ores from different locations. Saprolitic ores from two different mining areas in Indonesia (i.e., Sulawesi Island and Halmahera Island) were used. The samples were mineralogically and chemically characterized. X-ray fluorescence (XRF; ZSX Primus II, Rigaku, Tokyo, Japan) and inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES; Perkin Elmer 8500, Waltham, MA, USA) were used to determine the chemical compositions of these samples. The mineral phases of the raw ore samples were identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD; Ultima IV, Rigaku, Tokyo, Japan), using CuKα radiation, in the 2 Chemical leaching experiments were performed using 300 The chemical contents of the ores, determined using ICP-OES and XRF analyses ( The TG-DTA technique was used to confirm the FTIR and XRD data. Results from DTA show the temperatures at which thermal reactions such as phase transformation and thermal decomposition take place in a material when it is heated continuously to high temperature, and also the intensity and general characteristics (endothermic or exothermic) of such reactions ( The XRD patterns ( The results ( The results shown in Moreover, it was found that 1 The nickel leaching efficiency from SS and SH ores showed similar trends, but the maximum leaching efficiency achieved from SS ore was higher than that from SH ore at all citric acid concentrations. The results summarized in Nickel is assumed to be incorporated in serpentine, goethite, and talc; therefore, nickel dissolution must always coincide with the dissolution of the other metals contained in these minerals, particularly magnesium, iron, and aluminum. The saprolitic ore samples used in this study contained both serpentine and goethite. Goethite particles are smaller than serpentine particles (  Although serpentine and talc are silicate minerals, they have different structures and physicochemical properties. In the serpentine structure, one octahedral layer is bound to one tetrahedral layer (  In addition to strengthening these conclusions, the differences between the changes in the solution pH during the leaching process for each sample ( The relative dependence of nickel leaching on nickel containing mineral dissolution can be further examined on the basis of heterogeneous kinetic models that can be represented by the general reaction aA(aq) The kinetics of nickel dissolution can be represented by two solid–liquid kinetic models, proposed by The apparent rate constants ( The three data points in The current analysis also shows that the kinetic behaviors of nickel leaching from both SS and SH ores are similar, although the nickel-leaching performances of the samples are different. These results support the finding that for both samples all the dissolved nickel originated from the same mineral, i.e., serpentine. It can therefore be concluded that the performances in atmospheric leaching of nickel from saprolitic ores by citric acid depend on the serpentine contents, and the serpentine dissolution (Eq. The chemical contents of the ores indicated that both samples were typical low-grade saprolitic laterite. Although both samples have similar chemical contents, the mineral composition differs. The SS ore contains serpentine and goethite as the main minerals, whereas the major phases in SH ore are talc and goethite. The maximum leaching efficiency of nickel was achieved from SS ore (96%) and SH ore (73%) under the same leaching conditions, i.e., citric acid concentration 1 The results of nickel leaching efficiency and analysis of the solid residues using XRD and FTIR spectroscopy showed that all dissolved nickel originated from serpentine, which is more easily leached than goethite and talc. Because of the lower serpentine content of SH ore, nickel leaching rate from this sample was lower than that from SS ore. In terms of the kinetics of nickel extraction, the results for both ore samples were similar, and showed that nickel leaching from SS and SH ores follows the SCM and is controlled by diffusion of a reactant or product through the solid product layer. This finding is significant for the design of nickel-leaching processes for different lateritic ores using citric acid at atmospheric conditions and low temperature. The authors gratefully acknowledge a