Until 2014, Russia's Gazprom had a natural gas monopoly in Lithuania. In order to break the Russian monopoly, the Lithuanian state financed an import terminal for liquefied natural gas (LNG) in Klaipėda. In addition to building the terminal, Lithuania signed a long-term contract (LTC) which can be interpreted as a minimum import volume quota for LNG having higher marginal supply costs than Russian gas. This study assesses the potential of such a minimum import volume quota to mitigate the market power of a monopolistic supplier. A market consisting of a dominant supplier with low marginal supply costs and a competitive fringe with high marginal supply costs is analyzed. It is shown that there is a minimum import volume quota for fringe supplies that optimizes the consumer surplus, which is adjusted by a compensation paid for the fringe's market entry. Therefore, the Lithuanian decision to incentivize the market entry of high-cost LNG can be rationalized.In recent years, natural gas prices in Eastern Europe have been significantly higher than in Central or Western Europe ( Although the political goal of supply diversification was achieved by this measure, an economic assessment of the terminal crucially depends on global LNG market developments. The objective of this paper, therefore, is to investigate the economic rationale behind the Lithuanian policy to incentivize must-run imports of high-cost LNG. Such incentives may not be necessary in the case of comparably low LNG prices, i.e. LNG would be imported without a minimum import requirement if an LNG import terminal has been constructed. However, the LTC leads to economic disadvantages for the owner of the LNG terminal if LNG import prices are higher than the gas price paid to the dominant supplier. If the owner of the LNG terminal is the state, as is the case in Lithuania, the potential losses generated by the LNG imports are then passed on to the citizens or gas customers in one way or another. Hence, one would intuitively think that securing a LTC for LNG may induce additional burdens for gas customers in situations with comparably high LNG import prices. However, the study at hand argues that a minimum import requirement for LNG could enhance Lithuanian national welfare Generally speaking, our analysis investigates a market consisting of a dominant supplier with low marginal supply costs and a competitive fringe with high marginal supply costs. In this setting, a minimum volume quota The structure of the paper is as follows: There are two aspects of our research that, to the best of our knowledge, have yet to be investigated in the literature. First, a minimum import volume quota for a high-cost fringe as a trade policy instrument to increase the consumer surplus of a national market is a novelty. Second, the application of this policy instrument to the Lithuanian natural gas market is new. We have identified three different branches of literature that are relevant for our investigation: 1) literature on (strategic) trade theory, 2) industrial organization literature focusing on fringe-firm intervention and multiple sourcing, and 3) literature on the Lithuanian natural gas market. Strategic trade theory (also referred to as “strategic trade policy”) investigates policy instruments affecting the output of a dominant foreign firm. Within the literature, there exist several studies analyzing the effects of tariffs and quotas for the national welfare of a country. The first seminal work to examine the equivalence of different trade restrictions was The aforementioned literature analyzes instruments having a direct effect on the dominant supplier. A minimum quota in our study supports the market entry of the high-cost supplier and has thereby only an indirect effect on the output of the dominant firm. A similar effect is examined by A further stream of literature that is relevant for this analysis can be clustered under the concepts of multiple sourcing and fringe-firm intervention as part of the literature on partial industry regulation. According to There are only a few contributions in the literature on resource markets addressing the Lithuanian energy market. Works that include the Baltic gas markets in analyzing the European gas security of supply are e.g. Before the Lithuanian natural gas market is analyzed in more detail, the effect of a minimum import quota on a market for a homogenous good is analyzed within a theoretical framework. First, general functional forms of the cost and supply functions in the model are considered. Later on, linear simplifications for those functions are used. A country demands a homogeneous good There are two sources for the good: (i) a dominant supplier Fringe firms sell their output at the marginal cost The optimal Assuming an interior solution, the optimal national quota is given with This can be reformulated as follows: On the left hand side of Eq. ( A strictly positive quota    The first order conditions of the dominant supplier's problem are given by Thus, for an interior solution The numerator of the right hand side of Eq. ( The requirement that the fringe's marginal costs should not be too high intuitively makes sense. Importing fringe volume by the quota is more expensive, the higher the marginal costs of the fringe. The condition about the convexity of the inverse demand function, however, is more difficult to interpret intuitively because there are two opposing effects: 1) A very convex inverse demand function implies that a parallel leftward shift of the inverse demand will ceteris paribus lead to higher outputs by the dominant supplier (for any Besides the impact of the quota on the importing country's adjusted consumer surplus, the total welfare (including the producer surplus of the dominant supplier and the fringe firms) is of interest. The welfare is defined as As shown in As a simplification, we now assume a linear inverse demand function: Additionally, linear cost functions for the dominant supplier D and the fringe F are assumed: Plugging this into Eq. ( Eq. (  After it was shown in general that it is possible to design volume quotas optimizing the consumer surplus adjusted by payments to the fringe firms, the introduced model is applied to the case of the Lithuanian gas market in the next section. As outlined in the introduction, the Lithuanian gas market changed in 2014 from a monopoly structure to a market structure with a dominant supplier having low marginal supply costs and a competitive fringe having high marginal supply costs. In addition, Lithuania signed a LTC for LNG, which can be interpreted as a minimum volume quota for LNG allowing us to apply the theoretical considerations developed in In absence of natural gas resources, Lithuania is 100% dependent on imports. Because the country was a former part of the Soviet Union, its only import pipeline is connected to Russia. Prior to December 2014, when the LNG import terminal in Klaipėda started operation, Gazprom had a monopoly for gas sales to Lithuania, which resulted in comparably high gas prices ( In addition to building the LNG terminal, Lithuania signed a LTC with Norway's Statoil with an annual contracted quantity (ACQ) of 0.55 bcm and a take-or-pay (TOP) volume of 0.44 bcm of LNG. Historically, the purpose of LTCs in the gas industry was to mitigate price and volume risks and ensure the usage of certain infrastructure elements, e.g. pipelines and LNG terminals. In the Lithuanian case, this may have been a motivation behind signing the LTC, too. However, it is clear that the LTC would be a bad decision from the point of view of a profit optimizing terminal owner if the marginal supply costs of LNG would be above the gas price in the Lithuanian gas market (the price having to be paid to Gazprom). Because the marginal supply costs of LNG are higher than the marginal supply costs of Russian gas, there is indeed the risk of such unfavorable market conditions for the LNG terminal. Therefore, it is unlikely that private actors would have financed a LNG terminal in Lithuania. Indeed, no actor other than the Lithuanian state took the risk of the investment. The costs of the investments were passed on to the gas customers by supplements on gas ( The assumptions of the model framework described in In this subsection the monopoly situation before the construction of the LNG terminal is considered. The analysis is based on linear functions for the inverse demand and supply costs. In line with Due to the fact that the Lithuanian LNG terminal was commissioned in December of 2014, it is assumed that the average price and demand situation in 2014 still corresponded to a monopoly situation. With the historic demand of 2.54 bcm and the price of 394 €/1000 m With the parameters discussed above, this results in a point elasticity of −1.22. Based on the inverse demand function of 2014, the Lithuanian decision to sign the LTC for 0.44 bcm/a of LNG is now evaluated. Because the marginal supply costs The left hand side of The right hand side of After discussing the implications of a minimum quota on import volumes, the effects on gas prices are analyzed in a next step. Hereto, Besides gas prices, the influence of the LNG import quota on the Lithuanian consumer surplus adjusted by the payment for the LNG imports is analyzed.  The construction costs of the Klaipėda terminal add up to 101 million EUR, and a yearly lease of 55.3 million EUR needs to be paid (  While it is intuitive that the total welfare is lowered by the quota, our analysis shows that the national welfare in Lithuania could be enhanced by this measure. Besides the economic advantages, an additional positive effect of the quota is an increased security of supply in Lithuania due to the diversification of supplies (away from Russian gas). In order to evaluate the Lithuanian strategy to mitigate Gazprom's market power, alternative concepts to reduce market power should be considered. Such other potential strategies include, e.g., a further integration of markets by additional pipeline connections As can be seen in This analysis explains the economic rationale to incentivize the import of LNG in isolated gas markets like Lithuania by a minimum import quota. Before building the LNG terminal, Russia had a monopoly for natural gas in Lithuania, which led to high gas prices. In such a situation, supplier diversification can increase the national welfare due to a decrease in prices. If the price of LNG available at the global market is in the range of the marginal supply costs of the dominant supplier, the profitability of the LNG terminal can be ensured without market intervention. The analysis at hand, however, focuses on a situation in which the fringe volumes have higher marginal supply costs compared to the dominant supplier leading to a situation in which the dominant supplier can still exercise market power despite the existence of alternative supplies. It is shown that a minimum volume quota for the high-cost fringe leads to an increase in the consumer surplus adjusted by a compensation paid to the fringe firms. For a specific market situation, an optimal quota, from the point of view of the importing country, can be found. As a policy implication, countries with gas markets with dominant suppliers other than Lithuania could also consider to incentivize the import of competitively priced gas, ideally with flexible volume quotas.    A quota would not increase the welfare if This yields The second term is zero or negative because   Therefore, it follows For Please note that the welfare strictly decreases for  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at