This paper develops a database for studying the circumstances under which dynamic loading of earthquake can cause slope failure in deep open pit mines with a long lifetime. The database includes 177 open pit mines hit by earthquake and 95 natural slopes and 37 tailing dams which have been failed by earthquakes. Both earthquake parameters and geomechanical characteristics involved in each case-study are investigated. From this information, the elements playing role in the earthquake-triggered failures in natural slopes and tailing dams are identified and used to indicate conditions that may result in earthquake-induced failures in open pit mines. The result shows that even though the valley shape geometry and absence of the top weathered layer make open pit mines less prone to earthquake-induced failures, excessive pore pressure in pit slopes still carries the risk of earthquake-triggered failures in open pit slopes. Only limited numbers of open pit mines have been so far exposed to earthquakes with the same parameters as those causing failure in natural slopes and tailing dams. That is, the response of open pit mines to higher magnitude, shallower, and closer earthquakes is still unknown. Studying the earthquakes that have caused failure in other slopes, it is concluded that open pit mines may still experience reportable failures if struck by earthquakes with local depth of less than 40km, epicentral distance of less than 100km, and magnitude of greater than 6.0. The necessity of accounting for seismic loading in slope stability analyses and active dewatering for open pit mines located in seismically active areas are also discussed.There is considerable debate about the circumstances under which seismic analyses is necessary for ensuring the stability of slopes in open pit mines. There have been a few, if any, reportable failures triggered by earthquakes in open pit mines. Studying the inconsistent behaviors of pit slopes, natural slopes, and tailing dams under dynamic loading of earthquakes provides a better understanding of the circumstances under which pit slopes may fail due to seismic events. This study becomes even more crucial as the depth and life of open pit mines are extending by the use of the new mining techniques. Advancements in monitoring systems allow the open pit designers to plan deeper and steeper pits, especially in large and deep porphyry deposits mostly located around subduction zones with high seismic activities. These designs lead to lower safety factors in which a small external force (i.e. earthquake) could bring the safety factor to less than 1.0 and cause failures. Moreover, the new mining methods like highwall mining extend the final pit slope life which increases the probability of seismic activities during their life time. There have been attempts to examine the impacts of earthquake parameters, including magnitude, focal depth, and epi-central distance on reported failures of natural slopes. Other studies also investigated some natural slopes exposed to earthquakes and showed the significance of geometry, material properties, and water content in the stability of natural slopes. The database comprises of published data on the internal and external factors involving earthquake-induced failures in 95 natural slopes and 37 tailing dams. Available data on 177 large open pit mines (LOP) that have been subjected to earthquakes are also explored. The necessity of accounting for the external factors is to categorize the case studies in terms of earthquake parameters and thus to compare natural slopes, tailing dams and pit slopes that are under similar dynamic loading of earthquakes. That is, the behavior of an open pit mines under earthquake should be compared to that of natural slopes and tailing dams subjected to the same earthquake parameters. The parameters considered include intensity, epi-central distance, focal depth, and magnitude. Intensity integrates the overall impacts of earthquake parameters including magnitude, epi-central distance, and focal depth. Various relations exist for different regions for estimating the intensity as an earthquake parameter.  Although the analyses of intensity show that open pit mines are not susceptible to earthquake-triggered failures, it is still unclear whether the intensity calculated by Eq. The magnitude of earthquake induced dynamic loading depends on the earthquake's epi-central According to Earthquakes are known to occur down to 700 Figure (right) shows the depth of the earthquakes that have occurred close to pit slopes. This figure depicts that 62 (35%) open pit mines in the database have been exposed to earthquakes shallower than 70 Both focal depth and epi-central distance play role in the magnitude of dynamic loading applied to the structures on the surface and can therefore define zones featuring different levels of earthquake hazards. Analyzing the natural slopes in the database and their relative external factors suggests that 90% of the earthquake-induced failures occurred in epi-central distance and focal depths of less than 100 The earthquake magnitude is a measure of the dynamic loading on the surface. Discussing external factors, we showed that there are a few open pit case studies in the database that have been exposed to earthquakes with parameters that could have triggered failure in natural slope. Further investigating the internal factors, including water conditions, geomechanical properties of the material involved in failure, slope geometrical effects, and failure types can better explain the behavioral inconsistency between pit slopes and other slope types under dynamic loading of earthquakes. Geometry of slopes has a significant impact on amplifying the ground shaking on hills, and slope ridges. Considering the typical hill-shaped geometry of tailing dams, the same geometrical effects play the major role in the respective earthquake-triggered failures. In contrast to natural slopes and tailing dams, the valley-shaped or one-face-slope geometry of open pit mines can be introduced as one of the factors responsible for preventing the topographical amplification from prevailing ( Studies show that when waves travel from hard rock to soft soil, the amplitude of the waves increases to carry the same amount of energy, creating stronger shaking intensity. Moreover, the deeper sediment above the bedrock, which means thicker soil layer, creates a stronger amplification. Tailing dams can be subject to the stiffness contrast amplification effect. This effect is widely observed in tailing dams constructed by upstream method. This is due to the unconsolidated material on top of the stiff tailing dam core resulting in a stiffness contrast amplification during earthquake. In comparison with the natural slopes and tailing dams, open pit mines are less prone to getting affected by this phenomenon because of the typical competent rocks of large open pit mines. Moreover, the top soil layer is mined in the first stages of mining process and after creating the pit slope, the slope face is cut frequently during mining procedure. As such, weathering cannot contribute to the failures due to the earthquake loading. The effects of topography and stiffness contrast can be further analyzed using numerical analysis. Criteria adopted to identify failures also differ between natural slopes and pit slopes. Deep failures in rock structures are the major concern for the open pit mine operations. This is partly because shallow failures such as rock falls are not deemed a reportable failure in open pit mines and partly because the metamorphic and igneous rocks with high strengths are the host rocks for many minerals in open pit mine. One of the significant differences between natural slopes and open pit mine slopes is their life time period.  Given the above information, it is noticeable that water plays a part in deep earthquake-triggered failures in natural rock structures. The database shows water has been involved in more than 85% of earthquake-induced natural slope failures and 65% of tailing dam failures. We have elaborated a database for studying the circumstances under which dynamic loading of earthquake can cause slope failure in open pit mines although no reportable earthquake-induced failure has been so far reported in these mines. For studying the reasons behind the reported immunity of open pit mines, we analyzed the conditions under which natural slopes and tailing dams have frequently experienced failures due to earthquakes. The contribution of this paper is to find conditions where accounting for dynamic loading of earthquake is crucial for analyzing the stability of future pit slopes which are deeper and have longer life. The developed database comprises published data on the natural slope and tailing dam failures due to earthquakes and also accommodates open pit mines struck by earthquake. Analyzing the external factors, earthquake parameters, we showed that the response of open pit mines to higher magnitude, shallower, and closer earthquakes is still under question. For mining in areas with recorded earthquakes of shallower than 40 With a more comprehensive set of data collected, future studies can quantitatively signify the effects of plan curvature of natural and open pit slopes on the likelihood of earthquake induced failures. Furthermore, numerical analysis may be implemented to compare the effect of curvature and stiffness contrast in natural slopes and open pit mines. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at The following KMZ files contain the Google maps of the most important areas described in this article.