Background
                  Distal radius malunion is a major complication of distal radius fractures, reported in 0 to 33% of cases. Corrective osteotomy to restore normal anatomy usually provides improved function and significant pain relief. We report the outcomes in a case-series with special attention to the potential influence of the initial management.
               
                  Material and methods
                  This single-centre retrospective study included 12 patients with a mean age of 35years (range, 14–60years) who were managed by different surgeons. There were 8 extra-articular fractures, including 3 with volar angulation, 2 anterior marginal fractures, and 2 intra-articular T-shaped fractures; the dominant side was involved in 7/12 patients. Initial fracture management was with an anterior plate in 2 patients, Kapandji intra-focal pinning in 5 patients, plate and pin fixation in 2 patients, and non-operative reduction in 3 patients. The malunion was anterior in 10 patients, including 2 with intra-articular malunion, and posterior in 2 patients. Corrective osteotomy of the radius was performed in all 12 patients between 2005 and 2012. In 11/12 patients, mean time from fracture to osteotomy was 168days (range, 45–180days). The defect was filled using an iliac bone graft in 7 patients and a bone substitute in 4 patients. No procedures on the distal radio-ulnar joint were performed.
               
                  Results
                  All 12 patients were evaluated 24months after the corrective osteotomy. They showed gains in ranges not only of flexion/extension, but also of pronation/supination. All patients reported improved wrist function. The flexion/extension arc increased by 40° (+21° of flexion and +19° of extension) and the pronation/supination arc by 46° (+13° of pronation and +15° of supination). Mean visual analogue scale score for pain was 1.7 (range, 0–3). Complications recorded within 2years after corrective osteotomy were complex regional pain syndrome type I (n
                     =1), radio-carpal osteoarthritis (n
                     =3), and restricted supination due to incongruity of the distal radio-ulnar joint surfaces (n
                     =3). This last abnormality should therefore receive careful attention during the management of distal radius malunion.
               
                  Discussion
                  In our case-series study, 3 (25%) patients required revision surgery for persistent loss of supination. The main error in these patients was failure to perform a complementary procedure on the distal radio-ulnar joint despite postoperative joint incongruity. This finding and data from a literature review warrant a high level of awareness that distal radio-ulnar joint congruity governs the outcome of corrective osteotomy for distal radius malunion.Distal radius fractures account for 75% of all forearm fractures The objective of this study was to evaluate the outcomes of surgical treatment of distal radius malunion in our surgical centre. A single-centre retrospective study was conducted in patients managed by multiple surgeons. The centre was a department of orthopaedic and trauma surgery with a level 1 emergency centre in a university hospital. A single investigator, who was independent from the surgeons, recorded preoperative and postoperative clinical and radiological data from the medical charts. The diagnosis of malunion was based on excessive anterior or posterior tilt combined with shortening of the radius. Surgery was indicated if the patient reported functional impairment and had radiological evidence of malunion. Consecutive patients who underwent corrective osteotomy of the radius to treat distal radius malunion between 2005 and 2012 were included. Exclusion criteria were distal radius malunion that was not corrected or that was treated only by a surgical procedure on the DRUJ. Before corrective osteotomy, antero-posterior radiographs, true lateral radiographs, and CT of the wrist were obtained in all patients. Radial inclination and ulnar variance were determined on the antero-posterior radiographs and radial joint surface obliquity on the lateral radiograph ( The procedures were performed by seven different surgeons, under regional and local anaesthesia. The Henry volar approach was used in all 10 patients. The flexor tendons and median nerve were reflected. The pronator quadratus muscle was approached and, if still present, opened longitudinally and separated from the volar aspect of the radius. The fracture site was identified by inserting two pins parallel to the joint space. A saw was then used to perform a transverse bone cut parallel to the two pins, while leaving an intact posterior hinge. The cut was opened by placing a Meary spreader and the correction was checked by fluoroscopy. The goal was to obtain 10° of forward tilt of the radial joint surface. The defect created by the osteotomy was filled with a rectangular graft of iliac cortical and cancellous bone in 5 patients and a rectangular hydroxyapatite block (Biosorb, SBM, Lourdes, France) in 4 patients. No graft material was used in the remaining patient. The osteotomy site and graft were then stabilised by implanting a volar plate (Aptus Radius In both patients, a dorsal longitudinal incision was performed between the third and fourth extensor compartments. The dorsal retinaculum was opened and the terminal branch of the posterior inter-osseous nerve was routinely isolated and removed. Two parallel pins were implanted to identify the fracture site and to guide the transverse osteotomy performed using a saw. The osteotomy extended to the intra-articular compartment in 1 patient. A Meary spreader was used to correct the deformity by inducing 10° of forward tilt of the radial joint surface. A graft composed of iliac cortical and cancellous bone was implanted to fill the defect. Fixation was with a dedicated dorsal plate (Aptus Radius Immobilisation was with a forearm orthosis for 45 A single investigator who was independent from the surgeons retrospectively assessed the medical charts. The clinical evaluation relied on the visual analogue scale (VAS) pain score and goniometer measurements of wrist flexion/extension and pronation/supination. We were able to contact 10 of the 12 patients, who completed the Quick-DASH questionnaire Antero-posterior and lateral radiographs of the treated wrist in the neutral position were obtained immediately after surgery then 24 Mean preoperative and postoperative values of continuous wrist motion variables were compared using the non-parametric Mann–Whitney test. Of the 12 patients included in the study, 11 underwent corrective osteotomy 45 to 180 Mean patient age at the time of the fracture was 35 The main patient complaint was restricted pronation and supination, followed by pain. With the elbow flexed, mean motion ranges measured by goniometry before osteotomy were as follows: flexion, 37.5° (10° to 50°); extension, 41.6° (20° to 60°); pronation, 54.1° (30° to 80°); and supination, 30° (0° to 60°). The mean VAS pain score was 2.4 (range, 1–4). Patients consistently reported improved wrist motion and function 24  Progressive radio-carpal osteoarthritis developed in 3 patients. The osteoarthritis stage according to the Knirk and Jupiter classification was 1 in 1 patient and 2 in 2 patients Mean ulnar variance was –1.3 (range, –9 to +3), mean radial inclination was 21.25° (range, 14° to 32°), and mean radial joint surface obliquity was –2.5° (range, –30° to 24°). All grafts showed good osteo-integration with no difference between iliac bone grafts and bone substitute. Complex regional pain syndrome type I developed in 1 patient during the 24 Osteoarthritis of the radio-scaphoid joint developed after corrective osteotomy in 3 patients. Among them, 1 required revision surgery for complete wrist denervation 18 No cases of infection or non-union were recorded. No complications related to iliac graft harvesting were observed. Neither was there any complications related to plate fixation, and none of the plates were removed within 2 We found no statistically significant differences between the preoperative and postoperative motion range values. In 1973, Kapandji The quality of anatomic restoration of the distal radius and DRUJ governs the functional outcomes. In a 1997 cadaver study, Bronstein et al. Most studies included dorsally and volarly angulated malunions. However, Saffar et al. Saffar et al. Based on our findings, we agree with Saffar et al. Coulet et al. Although the radiological angles were returned to their normal values, the mean supination increase was only 6° in the 10 patients with anterior malunions, after exclusion of the 2 patients who had revision surgery. These fair outcomes are at variance with the excellent results reported by Sato et al. Saffar et al. Our 2 patients with posterior malunions were managed with a dorsal approach and opening-wedge osteotomy filled with an iliac graft. Biplanar closing-wedge osteotomy, a technique described by Posner et al. More generally, radial malunions are responsible for carpal bone malalignment, which correlates directly with the functional outcomes The management of distal radius malunions is complex. The primary objective of surgery is restoration of the normal anatomy, with the goal of improving wrist range of motion and decreasing pain. In our study, isolated transverse osteotomy of the distal radius failed to restore sufficient supination. To obtain optimal clinical outcomes, distal radius osteotomy must correct the rotational component of the malunion. Surgery on the ulna to restore DRUJ anatomy is needed in some cases to optimise the postoperative functional outcomes. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.