Metallurgical cokes are made by destructive distillation of bituminous coals and they have a high content in elemental carbon; however, the inorganic elements that were part of the original bituminous coal remain trapped in the resultant coke, having very different capacities for absorbing microwave radiation. Therefore, when cokes are irradiated with microwaves, some parts of the particle will undergo rapid heating, while others parts will heat up slowly. Moreover, due to the electrical conductivity exhibited by metallurgical cokes, microwave radiation gives rise to electric arcs or microplasmas, producing hot spots. As a result of the expansion and the stresses caused by thermal shock, small cracks and micro-fissures appear on the surfaces, leading to a weakening of the coke particles and facilitating their grindability. This paper studies, at laboratory scale, the microwave-assisted grinding of metallurgical coke and assesses the improvement in grindability and the amount of energy saved. It was found that treatment consisting of short pulses of microwave irradiation produces better results than the continuous heating used in previous studies.The grinding of coke at industrial scale is associated with high energy and maintenance costs Microwave heating is fundamentally different from conventional heating. Microwaves are a form of electromagnetic energy that can penetrate inside the sample, allowing volumetric heating The efficiency and success of microwave treatment depends essentially on the characteristics of the mineral or material to be treated, i.e., its chemical composition (whether it is a good microwave absorber or not), the size of the particles and the distribution of the different components inside the matrix Both the steel making and cement industries grind metallurgical coke in their production processes The aim of this paper is to investigate the effect of microwave radiation on a metallurgical coke and to examine the advantages that this treatment has for the subsequent grinding process. A treatment consisting of microwave irradiation pulses yielded better results than the continuous microwave heating employed in other studies.  Dry coke: the initial coke had a moisture content of 10 Wet coke: the dried coke was artificially moistened by immersing the material in pure water for 12 Microwave radiation was applied using a multimode oven at a constant power of 700 Two main irradiation modes were employed in this study: 1 3 These modes were chosen on the basis of the criteria of effectiveness and safety. Other modes with longer irradiation periods were also considered but these are not recommended because under some circumstances there is a fire risk. Rest periods of different duration, between 1 and 7 Most of the MW pre-treatments were carried out using 20-gram coke samples due to their easy manageability. A 20 A Retsch ball mill – model MM400 – was used to grind both the MW pretreated and untreated coke samples. The mill consisted of two steel cylinders 3.5 At 5 The breakage rates achieved with the mill, When metallurgical coke leaves the coke oven it is subjected to quenching which consists in placing it under a shower of water. As a result a certain amount of water remains on the coke surface when the grinding process begins. To determine the influence of the moisture content, two starting samples, a dry and a wet coke, were prepared (see Experimental section for details). The reproducibility of sample grindability is an important factor for validating the milling parameters. Therefore, six 20-gram mass samples of dry coke not subjected to any MW pre-treatment were ground at 10 The thermal shock from the repeated sequences of microwave irradiation pulses produces small cracks and micro-fisures in the particles leading to a improvement in grindability. Visual evidence of this effect is provided in SEM micrographs of the particle microstructure before and after a 3 Another important factor to consider is the change produced in the moisture content when the wet sample is pre-treated in the MW. The wet coke shows a loss of moisture proportional to the microwave exposure time, as can be seen in Two main MW pre-treatment modes: 1 To evaluate numerically the optimal conditions (mode and The results are shown in Once the optimal operation mode and τ time have been chosen (i.e., mode 1 However, if Numerically, the breakage rates ( From the results presented in The energy costs of the MW pre-treatment process at laboratory scale were evaluated as a preliminary step to scaling up. For the 20 By setting The MW pre-treatment leads to a grinding process that produces a larger mass fraction of particles below 1  When the relative grinding energy consumption is higher than 1, the grinding process with MW pre-treatment is effective in saving energy. The grinding process at laboratory scale increases rapidly to values >1 as can be seen from the RWI profile for both types of coke. This means that the MW treatment is beneficial from an energy point of view, because of the low grinding requirements (i.e. the mass fraction of particles >1 Experimental tests in order to determine the mass limit at which MW pre-treatment is effective were carried out. For this purpose the oven was loaded with different amounts of sample up to a maximum capacity of 500 The MW energy consumption of the process, in the 1 It should also be borne in mind that the laboratory mill used in this study is not the most efficient energy consuming mill due to the low capacity of its cylinders. The energy consumption of the laboratory mill used in this study was estimated as 6.300 and The RWI of a process employing an industrial mill for dry and wet coke is shown in It can be seen that in this case the RWI profiles do not reach one unit as rapidly as in the laboratory case, compare The results show that an energy saving of up to 40% can be achieved, at laboratory scale, when MW treatment is employed. Short MW cycles are more efficient than the application of MW energy in a continuous form. It was found that a high level of moisture in the cokes had a negative effect on the MW pre-treatment as the energy applied is mainly used to dry the surface moisture prior to the thermal shock treatment. The optimum MW energy requirements for laboratory scale conditions was found to be 1.75