This techno-economic study compares several process technologies for the production of ethanol from lignocellulosic material, based on a 5- to 8-year time frame for implementation. While several previous techno-economic studies have focused on future technology benchmarks, this study examines the short-term commercial viability of biochemical ethanol production. With that goal, yields (where possible) were based on publicly available experimental data rather than projected data. Four pretreatment technologies (dilute-acid, 2-stage dilute-acid, hot water, and ammonia fiber explosion or AFEX); and three downstream process variations (pervaporation, separate 5-carbon and 6-carbon sugars fermentation, and on-site enzyme production) were included in the analysis. Each of these scenarios was modeled and economic analysis was performed for an “nth plant” (a plant with the same technologies that have been employed in previous commercial plants) to estimate the total capital investment (TCI) and product value (PV). PV is the ethanol production cost, including a 10% return on investment. Sensitivity analysis has been performed to assess the impact of process variations and economic parameters on the PV.
                  The dilute-acid pretreatment process has the lowest PV among all process scenarios, which is estimated to be $1.36/l of gasoline equivalent [LGE] ($5.13/gal of gasoline equivalent [GGE]). Sensitivity analysis shows that the PV is most sensitive to feedstock cost, enzyme cost, and installed equipment costs. A significant fraction of capital costs is related to producing heat and power from lignin in the biomass.
                  Cellulosic ethanol production has yet to be commercialized. Hence, a pioneer plant is expected to be more costly to build and operate than an nth plant. To assess the impact of technological maturity on pioneer plant cost, a cost growth analysis was performed. The estimated value of PV for the pioneer plant is substantially larger than for the nth plant. The PV for the pioneer plant model with dilute-acid pretreatment is $2.30/LGE ($8.72/GGE) for the most probable scenario, and the estimated TCI was more than double the nth plant cost.There is a growing interest in liquid biofuels produced from renewable biomass resources to reduce dependence on crude oil. The US demand for gasoline is about 103 Ethanol – along with other types of biofuels such as butanol, bio-gasoline, and dimethylfuran – can be derived from lignocellulose via different reaction pathways Following pretreatment, the biomass cellulose and hemicellulose components are hydrolyzed to monosaccharides (primarily glucose and xylose) either by acids or enzymes. The sugars are then fermented by yeast or by bacteria to produce ethanol. With separate fermentation of C5 and C6 (5-carbon and 6-carbon) sugars using selective microbes, higher ethanol yields can be achieved than with co-fermentation This study, which is a techno-economic analysis of biochemical ethanol production from corn stover, focuses on technologies projected to be viable within a 5- to 8-year time frame. Based on this time frame – and after considering time for design, construction, and start-up – the process would likely have to be based on experimental data available today. Initially, 35 published technologies of various liquid fuels were reviewed, and a matrix was prepared considering economics, technological maturity, environmental aspects, process performance, and technical and economic risks. Both butanol and ethanol production processes were initially included in the technology matrix. However, butanol technologies are at the lab-scale or very early pilot stage of development, and published data on butanol-producing organisms indicate low yields relative to ethanol production, so they are not included in further analysis. Seven lignocellulosic ethanol process scenarios were selected, with four involving pretreatment variations (dilute-acid, 2-stage dilute-acid, hot water, and ammonia fiber explosion or AFEX); and three involving downstream process variations (pervaporation, separate C5 and C6 fermentation, and on-site enzyme production). Each of these scenarios is modeled in detail and economic analysis is performed assuming an A list of assumptions common to all process scenarios includes the following: Plant capacity is 2000 2007 Publicly available and experimentally validated reaction conversions and parameters are used. Equipment, chemical, and labor costs indexed to 2007 Process and steam generation plants depreciate in 7 and 20 Project is 100% equity financed. Contingency factor is 20% of total project investment. Capital investment is spread over 3 Working capital is 15% of fixed capital investment. Project life is 20 The internal rate of return is 10%. The average corn stover composition is based on stover from the Kramer farm in Wray, Colorado Process models were developed for the seven selected process scenarios using ASPEN Plus™ Process Simulator. Pinch analysis is used to optimize the process heat requirement, and the mass and energy flow rates from simulations are used to size process equipment. The costs of most of the equipment are obtained from vendor quotes from previous studies by NREL The production costs include feedstock, variable operating costs (such as process chemicals, enzyme, nutrients, etc.), and fixed operating costs (employee salaries, overhead, maintenance, and insurance). The chemical and nutrient prices were obtained from previous NREL studies The PV (which includes production costs and a 10% rate of return) was calculated by iterating the ethanol selling price to achieve a net present value of zero. Because the lignocellulosic ethanol process has yet to be commercialized, a number of engineering design and performance uncertainties may arise. These uncertainties are accounted for in the cost growth analysis for a pioneer plant following a methodology developed by the RAND Corporation The base case cellulosic ethanol process, modified from that used for the NREL 2002 design report All seven process scenarios were simulated using current published data, which will be referred to as 2007 experimentally verified data (EVD). The reaction conversions for pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis for all scenarios (except for 2-stage dilute-acid treatment) are obtained from CAFI research For each of the process scenarios (except the on-site enzyme production scenario), the analysis assumed that enzymes are purchased from an external supplier and so, this section is absent. Pretreatment, enzymatic hydrolysis, on-site enzyme production and product recovery are subjected to process variations as mentioned in the methodology. The remaining sections are common for each of the seven process variations and are the same as the 2002 NREL design report The pretreatment area in the dilute-acid pretreatment scenario is modeled identically to the 2002 NREL design report In the hot water pretreatment scenario, the chopped and washed biomass from the pretreatment section is mixed with recycled hot water from the distillation column bottoms In the AFEX pretreatment scenario, the biomass is treated with liquid ammonia under high pressure (17.2 bars) at 60 The hydrolyzate from dilute-acid, hot water, and AFEX pretreatments is pumped into one of several parallel saccharification vessels where enzymes are added in the saccharification and fermentation section of the plant Recombinant A scenario with a fermentation process variation was explored, with xylose and glucose being fermented separately using the selective fermentative microbes As an alternative to purchasing enzymes, the production of enzymes on-site was studied as a process variation. It is thought that production of enzymes on-site might reduce enzyme cost by eliminating transportation and the need to add stabilizers to reduce enzyme degradation during storage. In this scenario, Ethanol is recovered from beer and dissolved solids by two-step distillation: a beer splitter column followed by a rectification column. Distillation is an energy-intensive operation. To minimize energy consumption in this section, a pervaporation separation scenario to replace the beer column is evaluated. Pervaporation refers to separation using a membrane with liquid feed on one side, and a low-pressure, gaseous permeate output on the other. Components in the liquid feed preferentially permeate through the membrane, and then evaporate into the gaseous phase. Pervaporation does not involve large heat input, which reduces costs associated with the heat and steam needed for reboilers in the base case distillation columns. In the pervaporation scenario, a membrane is inserted in place of the beer column. The pervaporation system output is calculated from separation and total material flux factors to achieve the same separation as the existing beer column of 40 Wastewater is treated and recycled as process water, while steam and electricity are produced using the remaining biomass components as boiler fuel. RAND Corporation developed two multi-factor linear regressions to estimate production shortfalls and capital growth of pioneer process plants The second regression equation (“cost growth”) estimates the increase in actual capital cost over the original estimate. Parameters for cost growth are based on the cost estimate for equipment not demonstrated at the commercial scale, the potential for buildup of impurities, the number of continuously linked steps, and the inclusiveness of pre-start-up and land costs, and the level of site-specific information that is included in the cost estimate. Three scenarios are considered in the pioneer plant analysis – most probable, optimistic, and pessimistic – representing the range of estimates for variables used in the regression equations for cost growth and plant performance. However, only a comparison of the There are two variables that have the most significant impact on plant performance. The first variable accounts for the number of steps not demonstrated on a commercial scale. The new steps for the process and units considered here are feedstock handling, pretreatment, saccharification, co-fermentation, beer column, and the fluidized bed combustor. The second variable accounts for the mass and energy balances that can be verified with commercial production data. This variable was assigned a low value for the most probable scenario because, with the exception of distillation, none of the mass and energy flows can be commercially verified. For the equation for cost growth, there are two variables that are the most significant. One of the variables accounts for the percentage of total cost of new technologies employed in the plant. Feedstock handling, pretreatment, the saccharification vessels, co-fermentation, beer column and the fluidized bed combustor are included as new technologies. The variable accounting for potential buildup of impurities that can affect the process was given a mid-range value. There is a possibility of degradation products such as furfurals building up in the process, which are inhibitory to fermentative organisms. The other parameters for cost growth were less impactful for the range of variables chosen. In the discounted cash flow spreadsheet, the total capital investment (TCI) of the base case Results of the techno-economic process model and product values (PV) are presented in There is significant variation of ethanol yields per mass of dry feedstock among the pretreatment processes, with 2-stage dilute-acid pretreatment being the lowest (47 The PV for the dilute-acid pretreatment scenario is $1.36/LGE, which is the lowest among all scenarios ( The capital and operating cost breakdown by process areas and cost components for the dilute-acid pretreatment scenario is shown in It should be noted that the installed cost of the boiler/turbogenerator is 34.2% of the total. An often-cited advantage of cellulosic ethanol over corn grain ethanol is that the internally used energy is supplied by the plant by-products. However, this advantage in renewable energy to fossil fuel input ratio may prove to be a major financial impediment to commercialization because of the significant capital costs. An alternative to burning plant by-products for heat and power is burning natural gas. A natural gas boiler was costed at $3 Alternative saccharification/fermentation and distillation scenarios were explored to determine their impact on PV. A trade-off exists with separate C5 and C6 sugar fermentation between higher ethanol yields, and increased capital cost of additional fermentation vessels, as well as the additional operating expenses resulting from lower ethanol concentration in the beer (4–7%). Ethanol yield in the base case scenario was 289 Distillation is a cost-intensive operation, and the cost increases as ethanol concentration in the beer decreases. As a less energy-intensive process, pervaporation could decrease the operating costs compared to distillation. In this scenario, the pervaporation membrane is used in place of the beer column. Because of the reduced energy consumption of pervaporation, more steam is available for electricity generation, and the exported electricity value increases nearly $2 It is assumed that for the base case scenario, enzyme broth is purchased from external sources. However, production of enzymes on-site may offer economic advantages because it eliminates the cost of broth concentration, enzyme stabilizers, and transportation – costs that are not included this analysis. The annual enzyme cost for the base case scenario is $0.28/LGE. The PV from the on-site enzyme production process scenario is $1.42/LGE, which is $0.06/LGE higher than the base case scenario. This difference is a result of a significant fraction of the feedstock (9.2% of the hydrolyzate) being diverted to the enzyme production area, which reduces the plant capacity by 22.7 Process-specific uncertainty analysis – involving pretreatment and saccharification process conditions and reaction conversions – has been performed on all pretreatment process scenarios to study the impact of operating temperature, retention time, acid concentrations, and yields on PV. These uncertainties are based on a range of results found in the literature The PV is most sensitive to pretreatment retention time, xylan conversions, solids loading, and cellulose conversions. When the residence time of the dilute-acid pretreatment reactor is increased from 2 to 10 An overall economic uncertainty analysis on the dilute-acid pretreatment scenario has also been performed. The selected uncertainty parameters were feedstock cost, enzyme loading, enzyme cost, contingency factor, installed pretreatment reactor cost, total installed equipment cost, and export electricity price (the results are presented in The installed equipment cost was varied to represent different installation factors. When the installed equipment cost increased from $164 million (corresponding weighted average installation factor of 1.5 for base case scenario) to $194 million (corresponding installation factor of 2.05  The PV for the most probable scenario is $2.30/LGE, which is 69% more than the PV estimated for the The results of this study deviate considerably from a number of previous techno-economic analyses of cellulosic ethanol production. There are many contributing factors to this deviation and an explanation of the most significant of these factors is discussed here. After updating the feedstock and ethanol prices to 2007 dollars, much of the difference from previous studies can be explained by the clear correlation that exists between feedstock price and ethanol price. However, all of the studies except that of Nguyen and Saddler The ethanol price from the study published by Sendich et al. The enzyme cost used in this study is much higher than that used in other studies; and because enzyme cost is such a significant fraction of the PV, it contributes significantly to the discrepancy between the current study and previous studies. For example, the enzyme prices used in prior studies The PV for the dilute-acid pretreatment scenario is $1.36/LGE, which is the lowest among all pretreatments and process variations. This is due primarily to the higher sugar yields – and, therefore, ethanol yields – from dilute-acid pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis than for the other process scenarios. The exception to this is the scenario with separate C5 and C6 sugar fermentation, which has higher ethanol yields. However, the PV is higher because of the high capital cost of extra fermentation vessels needed to ferment the sugars separately. A high level of uncertainty exists for the cost of cellulase enzymes, which leads to a wide range of PV observed in the sensitivity analysis. The range of enzyme price used in the sensitivity analysis corresponds to enzyme costs of $0.14–$0.80/LGE. The range of PV following from these enzyme prices is $1.22–$1.89/LGE. Similarly, there is continued debate regarding the price of corn stover. The range of PV from the sensitivity of the feedstock price is $1.22–$1.51-/LGE. While these raw materials contribute to a high degree of financial uncertainty of cellulosic ethanol production, it may prove difficult to fully understand their costs until markets exist. Installed equipment costs for an To estimate the potential risk associated with process scale-up, a pioneer plant risk analysis was conducted. Under the most probable assumptions for pioneer plant operation for the dilute-acid pretreatment scenario, the PV is $2.30/LGE. Additionally, the TCI for the most probable case is estimated to double from the cost of an Significant opportunities exist to reduce the PV through biochemical technology breakthroughs. Enzyme cost in this study is assumed to be $0.27/LGE, representing a potential ethanol cost reduction by reducing enzyme production cost and increasing specific activity. In the dilute-acid pretreatment model in this study, 75.6% of xylose is converted to ethanol during fermentation and none of the other hemicellulose sugars are converted to ethanol. The development of organisms that can ferment xylose at conversions similar to those of glucose to ethanol– as well as other hemicellulose sugars – also offers potential for reducing ethanol cost. This project was made possible by support from ConocoPhillips Company and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory. We would like to thank the Department of Energy (DOE) Office of the Biomass Program for support and feedback. Rick Elander of NREL and Tim Eggeman of Neoterics International provided assistance with the CAFI model results. We greatly appreciate the helpful comments throughout the project from Bob Wallace of Pennsylvania State University, Ron Brown of ConocoPhillips Company, and Ed Merrow and Andras Marton of Independent Project Analysis, Inc. We also thank Seth Snyder from Argonne National Labs, Ahmad Hilaly from Archer Daniels Midland, Mark Laser from Dartmouth, and Al Kosley and Lou Burke From ConocoPhillips Company who took the time to participate in a peer review meeting midway through the project.