The role of reagents utilised in iron ores flotation is reviewed. Desliming and flotation stages should be performed at pH levels as low as possible to reduce the expenses with caustic soda. Ether amines are by far the mostly utilised class of collector. The degree of neutralisation of the ether amine is an important process parameter. The partial substitution of amine by non-polar oils seems to be an attractive route. Part of the amine may be also replaced by polyglycols in its frother role. Starches still represent the most important class of iron oxides depressant. Very pure corn starch may be successfully replaced by products from the food industry containing proteins. Oil grades in the starch higher than 1.8% may act as froth inhibitors. Cassava starch may be an economically attractive option since the production capacity meets the required demand level.Quartz is the major gangue mineral present in iron ores. Flotation is the usual concentration method employed for the ores in the fine size range (<149 The reverse cationic route is by far the most widely utilised method. Quartz is floated with ether amines (R–(OCH The anionic direct flotation of iron oxides seems to be an attractive route for the concentration of low grade ores or material currently stored in tailings ponds. Fatty acids may be used as collectors, but the depression of gangue minerals is a challenge that still must be overcome. The anionic reverse flotation of activated quartz was a route employed in the early days of quartz flotation, when amines were not available to mineral processors. Desliming prior to the reverse cationic flotation of iron ores was introduced with the USBM process (  Primary fatty amines, utilised in the pioneer USBM process, are no longer employed in the flotation of iron ores. They were modified with the insertion of the polar group (O–CH  The conjunction of ether amine and the Brazilian “diesel oil” has also been utilised in plant practice. This product is similar to the fuel oil ASTM #5, widely employed in phosphate flotation in Florida. The emulsification of the oil phase in the amine solution is the key to the success of this technique ( Non-polar oils were successfully used in the past, emulsified with fatty acids, in anionic flotation of iron oxides, in Sweden and Russia ( The anionic flotation of iron oxides represented the usual plant practice in the past. The use of direct flotation of iron oxides seems still attractive in the case of low grade ores, marginal ores that might be floated to increase the stripping ratio, and also in the recovery of material stored in tailings ponds. Nevertheless, most of the laboratory investigations indicated that the flotation of iron oxides with either anionic (fatty acids) or amphoteric collectors (sarcosinates and sulphosuccinamates) yields concentrates with high silica contents. Sodium silicates are not effective depressants in these systems ( Starches are the universal depressants of iron oxides in the flotation of iron ores. Starch may be extracted from several vegetable species such as corn, cassava, potato, wheat, rice, arrowroot, etc.). In the mineral industry, corn starches are by far the most widely used species. Corn starch has been used in iron ore flotation in Brazil since 1978. The trade name of the reagent was Collamil, consisting of a very fine and very pure product. The amylose plus amylopectin content reached 98% to 99%, dry basis, the balance being represented by minor contents of fibres, mineral matter, oil and proteins. This starch was used at Samarco and also at phosphate concentration plants. There were no technical reasons to search for alternatives to Collamil. On the other hand, one company held the monopoly of its supply. Serious commercial problems arose from this monopoly and Samarco performed laboratory scale investigations on the performance of alternatives to Collamil ( Results from plant practice showed that the use of non-conventional starch did not impair the metallurgical performance of the concentrator in terms of iron recovery and contaminants contents in the concentrate. The price of the alternative depressant was approximately one half of the price of conventional starch. There was a strong competition among eight different suppliers, a scenario by far more comfortable than the previous monopoly. Despite the practical industrial evidence that both types of starch yielded similar performances, the suppliers of conventional starch claimed that the proteins content might be harmful to the flotation performance. Experimental results from microflotation tests in a modified Hallimond tube showed that zein, the most abundant corn protein, is a hematite depressant as efficient as amylopectin and conventional corn starch ( Therefore, the adequate industrial performance of non-conventional starch was not accidental. The demand for corn grits by the snacks food industry, at a much higher price than the mineral industry could afford, pushed the corn industry to offer another food segment product, locally known as “fubá”. “Fubá” is finer than grits and presents a larger content of oil. The corn grains are initially degermed, for the germ, containing basically proteins and oil, is a valuable product for the food industry. The degermed grains are then abraded, for removal of the pericarp or hull, and dry ground in hammer mills, producing different size fractions. Because the germ and the portion of the endosperm near the germ are softer than the rest of the grain, the finer fractions are richer in oil. The fact that oils are froth and foams inhibitors is well known from theories on the elasticity of films surrounding gas bubbles, but plant operators came to well understand the effect on the hard way. Some small suppliers occasionally do not find a market for the germ fraction and decide to grind the whole corn kernel. The result is a starch with an extremely high oil content that may surpass 3%. The consequence on the flotation machine operation is complete froth suppression, representing many hours of production interruption. Oil contents higher than 1.8% in starches are considered to represent a risk concerning froth stability. The risk increases if the loss on ignition content of the ore is high. Concerning the solubilising of corn starch, there are two possibilities: heating the suspension of starch in water at 56 Corn is not the only natural source of starch. In many tropical areas of countries, such as Brazil, a vegetable called cassava, manioc or yuca, grows extensively and almost wildly. The cost of production is lower compared with corn. A first class starch may be extracted from cassava, with the advantage that the starch fraction content (amylopectin Potato starch has been used industrially in Europe, but there are no records of its use in the mining industry. The vegetable potato degrades much faster than corn, for example. Among depressants from other sources, carboxy methyl cellulose (CMC) is one that presents a strong potential. Technically, this reagent was approved as an alternative to starch. Several laboratory test programmes, with different iron ores from the Iron Ore Quadrangle, have already been performed with commercial grade CMCs, of varying degrees of substitution and diverse molecular weights. In general all CMCs tested gave concentrate grades of lower silica than starch but Fe grades of the tailings are slightly higher for CMCs tested so far ( To be competitive in terms of operational cost, CMCs dosage must be at least 5 times smaller than that of starches. Tested dosages were in the range from 1/10 to 1/5 of starch. Some CMCs presented fairly good results even when used at 1/10 of the starch dosage. Another option under investigation is the use of synthetic polymers, employed as flocculants, as partial replacement for starch ( Despite the existence of records of the use of specific frothers (alcohol and polypropylene glycol) in the reverse flotation of iron ores in the USA ( Synthetic polyglycol-type frothers, replacing about 10% of the total amine dosage, increased both recovery and selectivity in several tests. Pine oil frothers also performed well when replacing amines. On the other hand, linear branched alcohol did not present improvements in comparison to amine only tests. Next steps will include industrial scale tests in at least two plants in Brazil ( The influence of non-ionic surfactants on the cationic flotation of quartz with etheramine was investigated at bench scale by The plant practice of iron ores flotation involves the conventional reverse cationic route, with ether amines employed as quartz collector and gelatinised corn starch used as iron oxides depressant. Options already incorporated in industrial operation, concerning the collector, include combining mono-amines with di-amines and partial substitution of amines by fuel oil. The high purity corn starch (99% starch, dry basis) was successfully replaced by less pure products used in the food industry, including cassava starch. The oil content of the starch is a major concern due to its froth inhibiting action. The caustic soda consumption may be lowered in concentrators where the desliming stage has been optimised.