The paper examines the cracks initiation, propagation and coalescence until failure in a crystalline rock under stress states involving rock volumes varying in size, from nano (Berkovich indentation in Continuous Stiffness Measurement mode) to micro (Vickers indentation, scratching) and macro (Rockwell indentation, Rock Impact Hardness Number) scales. The experimental work was performed on a calcitic marble characterized by two different textures (xenoblastic and granoblastic). The grain boundaries microcracks were deeply studied with Focused Ion Beam–Scanning Electron Microscopy technique, innovative approach in Rock Mechanics. The experimental results show that, at the three investigation scales, the microcracks give rise to the rock failure with fractures propagation mechanisms varying with the microstructure. In the granoblastic texture, fracturing is ruled by grain boundaries microcracks, which often appear almost open. Conversely, the fracture behavior of the xenoblastic marble seems dominated by the grains cleavage, even at the macroscale.The igneous, metamorphic and evaporitic rocks are aggregates of single or poly-mineral grains. They are affected by microdiscontinuities differing for their genesis, shape and size (i.e. intragranular, transgranular, intergranular and grain boundaries microcracks) The microcracks network can determine an anisotropic mechanical response of the rock, depending on the cracks statistically dominant orientation more than the grains iso-orientation Therefore, in order to properly understand the above mentioned mechanisms, we performed a wide investigations campaign with a multidisciplinary and multiscale approach, from nano to macroscale, on a calcitic marble. We induced the neoformation of microcracks in different ways and studied the influence of preexisting microdiscontinuities on the crack initiation, growth and coalescence. In particular, several indentation and scratching techniques were applied on samples of different sizes with various loads on the indenter (from nano to macroscale) in order to obtain a broad framework of the rock fracturing mechanisms with changing both the induced stress states and the sample volume. Indeed, Berkovich nanoindentations were conducted inside the grains to examine, quantitatively and qualitatively, the interactions between the induced stress field and the intragranular cracks, while Vickers and Rockwell indentations and scratching, involving more grains and grains boundaries, were carried out to analyze the interactions between the indenter and the other types of cracks. Moreover, through Vickers indentations at various loads, the effect of the applied load on the marble hardness, in terms of indentation size effect (ISE), was quantified. The method In conclusion, the experimentation, whose results are discussed in this paper, is innovative, since, despite the importance of studying the deformation and failure phenomena at the lowest scale for many engineering applications (drilling, blasting, sawing and comminution), the approach adopted and described in the present paper is very limited. Indeed, only recently, Bandini et al. The marble under investigation (Tuscany, Italy) is made up of calcite grains whose sizes range from 0.1 to 0.3 The multiscale experimental methodology is schematized in In order to study the interaction between indentations and microdiscontinuities, indentation tests were carried out on samples of granoblastic and xenoblastic marbles. Berkovich nanoindentations in CSM modality were performed inside calcite grains composing the two textures (xenoblastic and granoblastic). The testing was carried out with Agilent G200 Nano Indenter, equipped with the three-side pyramidal Berkovich diamond indenter. The CSM mode Two parallelepiped-shaped samples, one for each type of marble, were prepared. Their surfaces were smoothed properly checking the parallelism and the perpendicularity. The tested surface was well polished by utilizing a 30 At the macroscale, moreover, Rock Impact Hardness Number (RIHN) tests were undertaken on xenoblastic and granoblastic marble samples. The test The instrumented indentation testing was developed to measure the mechanical properties of materials from the indentation load and induced displacements during a loading and unloading cycle. In an instrumented indentation, a diamond tip is pushed into the sample and the indenter displacement During loading, deformation is supposed to be both elastic and plastic, as a permanent impression forms. During unloading, it is assumed that only the elastic strains are recovered. The elastic nature of the unloading curve facilitates the analysis and the contact process can be modeled by using the Sneddon’s elastic solution The reduced modulus describes the elastic contact between the indented material and the indenter tip, taking into account elastic displacements occur in both the specimen and the indenter, and can be defined as: For a perfect indenter, the contact area can be calculated from the depth of the contact between the indenter and the sample However, a real indenter is never perfect due to the bluntness of the indenter tip. To take into account the effect of the indenter-tip-defect on the determination of the projected contact area, Oliver and Pharr For the Vickers indenter used in the present experiments, the tip defect The contact stiffness is defined as the slope of the upper part of the unloading curve that may be modeled using the following power law: For the contact stiffness When the indentation load is applied, the reaction force is partly taken up by the deflection of the load frame, which is typically added to the indentation depth registrations, because of the instrument finite stiffness. Consequently, the indentation depth values recorded by the equipment should be corrected taking into account the load frame stiffness, as follows: Traditionally, the frame compliance is measured by the instrument manufacturer and is internally set within the software of data acquisition. In nanoindentation, it is a common practice to use fused silica to determine the area function of the indenter and to calculate the compliance correction term. Such a procedure gives perfectly good results when testing materials with similar values of the elastic modulus and hardness as the reference specimen, but it may provide bad results for materials with a different stiffness In the present research, in Vickers indentations the frame compliance is determined following the method proposed in The procedure of The hardness of a material represents its resistance to plastic deformation usually by indentation. The general relation to calculate hardness In the micro and nano-range, unlikely macro-range, hardness is load dependent and this hardness load dependence is known as indentation size effect (ISE). The ISE has been associated with various causes such as work hardening, roughness, piling-up, sinking-in, shape of the indenter, surface energy, varying composition and crystal anisotropy. Many relationships In the Nix and Gao model In the granoblastic marble most grain contacts appear partially open (intergranular cracks), while in the xenoblastic one they are well fused and interlocked and porosity is mainly composed of small pores inside the rock. In the xenoblastic marble the grains are strictly connected to each other and difficult to highlight. The indenter penetration into the two textures induces fractures at each scale. Inside the grains, fracturing is ruled by the calcite cleavage planes. With increasing the indentation load, in Vickers and Rockwell indentations and scratching, the induced effects extend well beyond the contact area between the indenter and the specimen. Generally, when the grain boundaries are involved into indentation or scratching processes, the induced fracturing differs in the two marbles. In particular, in the granoblastic texture the induced stresses determine the propagation and coalescence of grain boundaries microcracks causing the grains detachment. It results more irregular indent borders, which follow the grains contacts, and the similar failure modes were observed under scratching. Indeed, the grooves borders appear rugged and follow the contacts between the grains ( Conversely, in the xenoblastic marble the indentations and scratching induced intragranular fractures even if the stresses induced by indentation involve several grains and grain boundaries. In particular, the grains surrounding the Vickers and Rockwell impressions appear microcracked with intragranular fractures, oriented along the cleavage planes directions. Moreover, the grooves formed by scratching seem more regular (  As concerns the Vickers indentations, in Typical grain sizes distributions of granoblastic and xenoblastic marble samples under the impacts of the steel mass in RIHN are compared in The SEM observations of the granoblastic and xenoblastic lumps produced by the impact crushing ( The two textures have the same total porosity ( With continuously increasing the indentation load (Rockwell indentation and scratching testing) the induced stress states in the granoblastic texture determine the fracture propagation along the contacts between the grains with an increase of the grain boundaries aperture until grain decohesion, causing the observed more pronounced ISE ( The Berkovich nanoindentations on calcite grains of the two textures do not show differences in their mechanical response, highlighting that the mechanical behavior of such a monocrystalline rock largely depends on the characteristics of the microcracks network along grain boundaries. Indeed, by processing nanoindentation data, the calcite grains forming the two textures show the same elastic modulus and hardness, i.e. 70 The research work results showed the potentiality of a new multiscale approach to predict the mechanical behaviour of crystalline rocks at any size scale (from laboratory samples to rock mass), starting from the observations at the lowest scales. Indeed, the multiscale methodology described in this paper allowed to more adequately interpret the different crack initiation, propagation, coalescence and failure mechanisms and stress–strain relationship of the two investigated marbles (xenoblastic and granoblastic) at the macroscale starting from micro and nanoscale analyses. In particular, the xenoblastic texture showed a higher strength and a stress–strain curve, in uniaxial compression test, with an insignificant downward curvature at low axial stresses, which points out a lower content of open microcracks compared to the granoblastic one, as observed by the indentation results with loads less than 1 Presently, the proposed methodology was limited in this paper to a monocrystalline rock. On the basis of the obtained interesting results, investigations with such an approach will be extended in the future to polycrystalline rocks to study also the influence of the mineral grains. Nanoindentation testing, scratching, Rockwell indentations and FIB–SEM analyses were performed at the Interdepartmental Laboratory of Electron Microscopy of "Roma Tre" University, Rome Italy (