The adsorption properties of 4-amino-1,2,4-triazole resin (4-ATR) for Re(VII) were investigated by static and dynamic adsorption–desorption measurements with ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy. The influence of conditions such as temperature, initial solution pH and contact time on the adsorption curve was studied. It was found that the 4-amino-1,2,4-triazole resin was suitable for adsorption of Re(VII). The saturated adsorption capacity was 354 mg·g−1resin at pH 2.6 in HAc–NaAc medium at 298 K. The adsorption rate constant was k
                     298
                     =8.2×10−5 s−1. The adsorption behavior of 4-ATR for Re(VII) obeyed the Freundlich empirical equation; whilst changes in adsorption with temperature gave an enthalpy change ΔH = −
                     11.8 kJ·mol−1. The molar ratio of the functional group of 4-ATR to Re(VII) was about 2:1. Re(VII) adsorbed on 4-ATR was eluted by 1.0~5.0 mol·L−1 HCl with 100% quantitative elution in 4.0 mol·L−1 HCl solution. The resin can be regenerated and reused without apparent decrease in adsorption capacity.Rhenium is a less common metal with high melting point and plays an important role in many fields such as chemical and metallurgical industries. However, it always exists in molybdenite rather than an individual mineral in nature. In recent years, rhenium is in short supply on the world market, thus its recovery from molybdenite and waste solutions presents an interesting task. There are various methods to recover Re(VII) like precipitation, extraction, distillation and ion exchange on polymeric materials. In some papers, the adsorption of rhenium was carried out by strong basic anion exchangers IRA 400, Dowex-1, Wofatit SBW, AV-17, AM and ASBF-1 that all have a quaternary amine functional group. The elution of rhenium from these ion-exchangers can be accomplished with thiocyanate or with mineral acid solutions (HClO In recent years, there is a constant demand for more selective resins for the recovery of either toxic or valuable metals from hydrometallurgical liquids. In this respect, the chelating polymers draw much attention since they display high selectivity towards heavy and noble metal cations ( The aqueous stock rhenium(VII) solution of 1000 mg/L was obtained by dissolving 0.1000 g rhenium powder (99.99%) and 5 mL concentrated nitric acid in purified water. The aqueous stock solution containing 1000 mg/L molybdenum(VI) was prepared by dissolving 1.8403 g (NH Macroporous crosslinked chloro-methylated polystyrene beads (3 g) and N,N-dimethylformamide (150 ml DMF) were added into a 3 neck flask equipped with condenser, thermometer and nitrogen gas inlet tube and allowed to swell overnight. After swelling, 4-amino-1,2,4-triazole (5.44 g- molar ratio 4-AT/Cl The concentration of ReO A desired amount of treated resin was pre-swollen in the buffer solution for 24 h before adding a required amount of standard Re(VII) solution and shaken at 100 r/min at a constant temperature for 10 h to reach equilibrium absorption. The effect of pH on ReO The Freundlich equation is the empirical relationship whereby it is assumed that the adsorption energy of a metal binding to a site on an adsorbent depends on whether or not the adjacent sites are already occupied. Equilibrium isotherm studies were carried out with different weights of resin (10.0 mg–30.0 mg) at 298°K and pH 2.6. Kinetic studies were conducted to determine the time taken by the resin to reach equilibrium with a Re(VII) concentration of 7.2 mg/50.0 mL and 10 mg resin at pH 2.6 and 298K. Small (0.15 mL) samples of clear solution was taken out at intervals over 10 h and volume changes corrected. The saturated capacity was determined at 298K using [Re(VII)] The effect of anion on the adsorption of Re(VII) on 4-ATR was conducted by putting different amount of NH 10.0 mg resin was added into a mixed solution composed of pH 2.6 buffer solution and the desired amount of standard Re(VII) solution. After adsorption equilibrium was established, and the adsorption capacity of the resin for Re(VII) was obtained, the resin was washed three times with pH 2.6 buffer solution and then shaken with 4.0 mol/L HCl eluant until equilibrium was again reached and the percentage of elution obtained. Rhenium, in the form of ammonium perrhenate was recovered from Sarcheshmeh molybdenite concentrates by roasting the concentrates with slaked lime ( The results demonstrated that for Re(VII), the distribution coefficient (D) decreased with the increase of pH (curve 1). But for Mo(VI), the distribution coefficient initially increased to a maximum around pH 4.0 before decreasing gradually (curve 2). The value of lgD is 4.0 for Re(VII) and the separation coefficient between Re(VII) and Mo(VI) This empirical Freundlich formula: The experimental Re(VII) ion adsorption isotherm is presented in According to  The experimental results in Under the experimental conditions shown in According to the equation: As Cl The adsorption capacity of the resin for Re(VII) is 354 mg·g Alternatively, a plot of adsorption amount vs ([Re(VII)]/[Re(VII)]+ [R]) yields a curve shown in When HCl was used as an eluant, the percentage of elution varies with 1.0 mol·L Three tests of regeneration were also carried out which showed no change in the adsorption capacity of 4-ATR, therefore allowing the resin to be regenerated and reused.  The rhenium(VII) perrhenate ion can be optimally adsorbed on 4-amino-1,2,4-triazole resin in the HAc–NaAc buffer system at pH 2.6. The saturated adsorption capacity on the synthesized resin was 354 mg·g Under the experimental conditions, the adsorption rate constant is This project was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang Province (No.Y404279).