Traumatic periprosthetic fractures adjacent a hip resurfacing prosthesis are rare. When proximal fractures are encountered the obvious surgical solution is to revise to a large head stemmed femoral component. A previously well functioning implant may however be retained as various non-operative and operative treatment options exist. This paper reports the case history of a traumatic periprosthetic fracture successfully treated with cannulated screw fixation and reviews the current literature.The femoral neck fracture rate in the first year following hip resurfacing has been reported as 1.31%. There is a naturally occurring rate of femoral neck fracture in a population regardless of whether or not they have had resurfacing surgery. As this young active population ages, we are likely to encounter a rise in periprosthetic fractures adjacent resurfacing implants. When secondary to avascular necrosis the usual treatment is conversion to a stemmed femoral component. In the setting of trauma however both non-operative and operative treatment options exist. This paper reports a periprosthetic fracture in a resurfaced hip successfully treated with cannulated screw fixation and reviews the current literature. A healthy 69-year old male with end stage osteoarthritis of his right hip underwent Birmingham (Smith & Nephew, Memphis, Tenn) Hip Resurfacing through an anterolateral approach. His post-operative course was uneventful and at six-month follow up he was pain free and had returned to full activity. One year following his index procedure he fell from a standing height sustaining a basal cervical periprosthetic fracture ( The fracture was reduced closed under traction. Two 6.5 When a traumatic periprosthetic fracture is encountered the surgeon must decide whether to retain a previously well functioning prosthesis or convert to a stemmed total hip replacement. There a number of case reports supporting a conservative treatment strategy for un-displaced neck of femur fractures. When considering surgical fixation the main obstacle encountered is adequate proximal fragment purchase, whilst avoiding the femoral stem and not disrupting the cement mantle. The target area between the stem and the inner surface of the femoral component in a 50 Cannulated screws have been used successfully to treat mid-cervical, basi-cervical and inter-trochanteric neck of femur fractures ( Inter-trochanteric fractures have also been managed successfully with a blade plate, reversed distal femoral locking plates and proximal femoral locking plates. Sub-trochanteric fractures have been treated using a reconstruction nail, contoured AO DCP and more recently trochanteric entry point cephallo-medullary nails. Revising the hip to a long stemmed femoral component negates the benefits of conservation of femoral bone stock in the young patient and involves removing an otherwise well aligned and fixed implant. Traumatic femoral neck fractures involving hip resurfacing prostheses may be treated surgically without revision with a good functional outcome. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.