The determination of the earthquake energy budget remains a challenging issue for Earth scientists, as understanding the partitioning of energy is a key towards the understanding the physics of earthquakes. Here we estimate the partition of the mechanical work density into heat and surface energy (energy required to create new fracture surface) during seismic slip on a location along a fault. Earthquake energy partitioning is determined from field and microstructural analyses of a fault segment decorated by pseudotachylyte (solidified friction-induced melt produced during seismic slip) exhumed from a depth of ~10 km—typical for earthquake hypocenters in the continental crust. Frictional heat per unit fault area estimated from the thickness of pseudotachylytes is ~27 MJ m−2. Surface energy, estimated from microcrack density inside clast (i.e., cracked grains) entrapped in the pseudotachylyte and in the fault wall rock, ranges between 0.10 and 0.85 MJ m−2. Our estimates for the studied fault segment suggest that ~97–99% of the energy was dissipated as heat during seismic slip. We conclude that at 10 km depth, less than 3% of the total mechanical work density is adsorbed as surface energy on the fault plane during earthquake rupture.The earthquake energy balance states that the total (elastic and gravitational) energy variation is partly radiated out of the source and partly absorbed on the fault plane by fracturing and frictional dissipation ( In general, Although some studies assume that fracture energy ( Here we attempt at using pseudotachylyte-bearing faults to get information on the energy partitioning between Pseudotachylyte consists of a solidified melt including survivor clasts of the wall rock. For seismic melts, the frictional heat The surface energy produced during rupture propagation is ( To determine the partitioning between surface energy and heat, we need to investigate fault segments exhumed from seismogenic depths that record a single seismic rupture that propagated trough an intact rock. Examples of these faults can be found in the Gole Larghe Fault in the Italian Southern Alps. The exhumed strike–slip Gole Larghe fault zone crosscut in an E–W-orientation the tonalites (granitoid rocks consisting of 48% plagioclase, 29% quartz, 17% biotite and 6% K-feldspar ( The use of Eqs. Pseudotachylyte vein networks are usually complex including both fault veins, along the slip surface, and injection veins ramifying off the fault into the host rock (e.g., In the following text, we distinguished between clasts (i.e., survivor lithic clasts suspended in the solidified melt) and fragments (or fractured domains inside the survivor clasts). The pseudotachylytes typically contain clasts of fragmented quartz and plagioclase that survived melting ( fragments within plagioclase clasts are easily distinguishable in Back Scatter (BSE) SEM images ( plagioclase is the most abundant component of the tonalite (i.e., the plagioclase fragmentation is expected to contribute for the largest part to the specific surface energy Because plagioclase has an higher In FE-SEM images, fragments of plagioclase We collected BSE FE-SEM images of different plagioclase clasts using a large range of magnifications (from 500× to 16,000×) (e.g., Each fragment size distribution is well approximated by a polyline consisting of different segments of slope Following the common practice, we will refer to the fragment size distribution as “fractal”, also in the case when the power law covers less than two decades ( At the outcrop scale, only a few fractures extend off the main fault ( The determination of Based on the above values of the Eq. Both the field investigation and the microstructural analysis indicate that the pseudotachylytes of the studied fault segment were not preceded by precursor cataclasites which, in contrast, commonly predate pseudotachylytes in most of the Gole Larghe faults (see The size distributions of both type 1 and type 2 fragments show a kink at about The above distribution is different from those observed in natural ( Kinking in the distribution is more marked for type 1 than for type 2 fragments, with The fragments of some plagioclase clast cores do not show any evidence of zoning or melting (type 2 fragments) and, therefore, they were probably not affected during the high temperature stages of the frictional process. The fragments size distribution in type 2 clasts is well approximated by a power law distribution with The corrected fragment distribution within type 2 clast may be assumed to represent the relict pristine microstructure produced during seismic fracture propagation and slip and is used to estimate The total surface area of the fragments in the image area ( To determine For the considered distribution and given the The specific surface energy The above estimates indicate that the surface energy 0.10–0.85 MJ m The small values for How does There is another original contribution in the present study. The surface energy F. Mulargia, S. Nielsen, Z. Reches, P. Spudich and E. Tinti are thanked for discussions. An anonymous reviewer is thanked for his constructive comments. INGV, JEOL and ZEISS are thanked for collecting FE-SEM images. A. Novello and L. Tauro are thanked for sample preparation. The costs of this study were covered by grants from the Università degli Studi di Padova (Progetto di Ateneo 2003), INGV 2006, MUR 2006–2007 and CARIPARO. J. Hadizadeh was supported by NSF-Earth 0229654 during the course of this study. Image analysis was conducted with SXM Image.