Control of the morphology of carbonate crystals plays an indispensable role in mineralization process. We investigated the relationship between HPMC concentration and different molar ratios of Mg/Ca on the carbonate crystallization by monitoring crystal polymorph, crystal size, and morphology. In this experiment, the total molars of [Mg2+] and [Ca2+] were 50 mM. The results demonstrated that different molar ratio of Ma/Ca primarily can help different morphology form in multidimensional spline space, for instance, lens-like calcite, spindle shaped aragonite and polyhedron nesquehonite. Moreover, the metastable aragonite phase of CaCO3 can come into being with the existence of HPMC. Meanwhile, the Mg2+ would inhibit the growth of calcite and facilitate the production of the aragonite when the Mg2+ concentration is lower than 25 mM in solution. With increasing the molar ratio of Mg/Ca, the nesquehonite precipitation would be induced when the magnesium concentration is sufficiently high. The nesquehonite grew along the same (4 0 0) orientation in that the HPMC can be controlled by the basic units during the aggregation and reorientation process. The results of polarizing microscope also provided forceful support for the crystal growth mechanism. The thermodynamical stable phase of anhydrous calcium carbonate (CaCO3) was nucleated preferentially after the combination between Ca2+ and CO3
                     2−, then, the Mg2+ can bond with the oxygen atoms in HPMC due to electrostatic adherence and combine with CO3
                     2− and H2O to form a nesquehonite crystal phase. The results illustrated that the extent of binding affinity during HPMC with Ca2+ or Mg2+ was suggested to be in connection with the reconstructuring process and the morphology of final carbonate crystals.Biominerals, such as bones, teeth, and shells, are hard tissues formed by living organisms via a highly regulated process known as biomineralization. Controlling the polymorph is a key issue for their applications In this paper, HPMC was used as organic templates to synthesize carbonate crystals by altering the concentration of Ca All chemicals (AR) listed below were used in this study without further purification. These chemicals which includes HPMC (200000 viscosity), calcium chloride anhydrous (CaCl In a typical procedure, the samples were synthesized as follows: The solutions were formulated by Ca      Mg According to XRD, the composition of the nanocrystals at the Mg/Ca molar ratio of 3/7 is calcite and aragonite. The morphologies of the nanocrystals polymorphs are investigated using the SEM as The XRD patterns for the different molar ratios of Mg/Ca for the nanocrystals in FT-IR spectra of the crystal polymorphs display characteristic absorption bands corresponding to the C-O bond vibrations, namely; symmetric stretching, out-of-plane bending, a doubly degenerate asymmetric stretching, and a doubly degenerated in-plane bending The effect of HPMC concentration on nanocrystals was studied in the range of 0.5–2.0 g/L. With HPMC of 0.5 g/L, the particle-stacked fusiform-like and petal-like nanocrystals were illustrated in In order to further clarify the growth mechanism of aragonite, the structure of aragonite was characterized by SEM and TEM. The morphologies of aragonite were exhibited in To make clear of the growth pattern of nesquehonite, the characterization images of SEM and TEM were displayed in Through the above results of the SEM, the formation mechanism of crystals was analyzed as follows: When the magnesium ions are lower, the morphologies of the nanocrystals are mainly controlled by thermodynamics, because calcite is thermodynamically most stable while the aragonite is most unstable. Therefore, when the Mg/Ca molar ratio was at 1:9, the most stable thermodynamic calcite was formed first. In the continuous increase of the content Mg Aragonite nanocrystal can be explained by the structure of HPMC. HPMC hydrogels are composed of a three-dimensional network structure with macromolecules and water. The network structure consists of the main chain of large molecules which includes the hydrophilic groups and hydrophobic groups of the side chain. The aperture sizes of pores in the network (each aperture could be regarded as a micro-solution mineralization system) are different. At the beginning of the reaction, Ca  A series of graphs in After careful study of the polymorphism of crystals, one could observe the regulation of HPMC and Mg In summary, the result of characterization showed that: (1) the existence of Mg The authors declare no competing financial interest. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the