This study sought to determine the role of the pro-apoptotic gene, Bax, in fracture healing by comparing femoral fracture healing in Bax knockout (KO) and wild-type C57BL/6J (background strain) mice. Bax KO fractures were larger, had more bone mineral content, had ∼2-fold larger cartilage area per callus area in the first and second weeks of fracture healing, and showed an increased osteoclast surface area in the third and fourth weeks of fracture healing compared to C57BL/6J fractures. The increased cartilage area in the Bax KO fracture callus was due to increases in number of both pre-hypertropic and hypertropic chondrocytes. TUNEL analysis showed no significant differences in the number of either chondrocyte or non-chondrocyte apoptotic cells between Bax KO and C57BL/6J fractures at 7 or 14 days post-fracture, indicating that the increased number of chondrocytes in Bax KO fractures was not due to reduced apoptosis. Analysis of expression of apoptotic genes revealed that although the expression levels of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL were not different between the Bax KO and C57BL/6J mice at 7 or 14 days post-fracture, the expression of BH3-domain only Bak and “Bik-like” pro-apoptotic gene increased ∼1.5-fold and ∼2-fold, respectively, in Bax KO fractures at 7 and 14 days post-fracture, compared to C57BL/6J fractures, suggesting that up-regulation of the Bak and Bik-like pro-apoptotic genes in Bax KO mice might compensate for the lack of Bax functions in the context of apoptosis. Analysis by in vivo incorporation of bromodeoxyuridine into chondrocytes within the fracture tissues indicated a highly significant increase in chondrocyte proliferation in Bax KO fractures compared to C57BL/6J fractures at day 7. The increased expression of collagen 2α1 and 9α1 gene in Bax KO fractures during early healing was consistent with an increased chondrocyte proliferation. In conclusion, this study demonstrates for the first time that Bax has an important role in the early stage of fracture healing, and that the increased callus size and cartilage area in Bax KO fractures was due to increased chondrocyte proliferation and not to reduced apoptosis or increased chondrocyte hypertrophy. The unexpected effect of Bax deficiency on chondrocyte proliferation implicates a novel regulatory function for Bax on chondrocyte proliferation during fracture repair.Fracture repair involves multiple molecular regulatory pathways that coordinate the proliferation, development, as well as timely apoptosis of the diverse cells and tissues that form the fracture callus. Accordingly, apoptosis is an important regulatory mechanism of skeletal development and repair. An example of a functional role of apoptosis in bone development and repair is the chondrocyte program of cell maturation during cartilage development in the growth plate and the fracture callus Proliferation and apoptosis have both been characterized throughout fracture healing in the rodent model, where they were found to be associated with different stages of fracture repair. Previous knockout mouse studies have demonstrated that components of both the intrinsic pathway Bax, the “Bcl-2-associated X” protein, is a key pro-apoptotic component of the intrinsic mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis. Like other related pro-apoptotic proteins, such as Bak, Bax promotes apoptosis when it is not complexed with the various members of the Bcl family of anti-apoptotic proteins Bax knockout (KO) mice have no detectable phenotype, except in the bone marrow under infectious challenge The mouse femoral fracture model was adapted from the three-point bending technique described for rat femurs Fracture callus parameters between mouse strains were compared by X-ray and pQCT analyses. Groups of between 6 and 8 C57BL/6J and 6 and 11 Bax KO mice were evaluated at the different post-fracture healing times. Total non-cortical (i.e. cancellous) bone mineral content (BMC), average cross-sectional areas of the callus cancellous bone and total callus tissues were determined at nine serial 1-mm intervals along the length of the fracture callus by pQCT at 7, 14, 21, 28 and 35 days post-fracture. The values for all nine slices were used to calculate the total BMC and area of the entire fracture callus for each mouse strain. The pQCT threshold setting of 214 was used to resolve cancellous bone from soft tissues, and the threshold setting of 570 was used to resolve the cancellous and cortical bone. Histological analysis and comparison of fracture healing in Bax KO and C57BL/6J control mice were performed at different post-fracture times. After euthanasia, mouse femurs were collected, cleaned of adhering tissue, fixed in 10% formalin and decalcified in 14% EDTA in phosphate-buffered saline, pH 7.1, for three weeks. Bones were then embedded in paraffin wax. Sections (5 μm in thickness) from each fracture callus at 7, 14 and 21 days of healing were stained with Safranin-Orange to examine the fracture cartilage. Duplicate sections in groups of 4 to 6 mice from each strain at each time were also stained for tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) activity using naphthol AS-BI as the substrate. Two longitudinal sections of 5 μm in thickness, each harvested from different regions of the fracture callus near the center of the femur, were each analyzed by counting 5 representative fields per section, and the means reported as osteoclasts per area of fracture callus. The area of stained fracture cartilage was quantified in each of two sections from groups of 4 to 6 C57BL/6J mice and 4 to 5 Bax KO mice at each post-fracture time using the Image-Pro 4.0 analysis software (Media Cybernetics, Silver Spring, MD), and reported as percentage of the total callus area. Fracture callus osteoclasts were identified as TRAP-positive, multinucleated cells and measured as the number of osteoclasts per mm Cell apoptosis for each callus was assessed by a TUNEL assay kit (Promega, Madison, WI) on paraffin-embedded sections of 7 and 14 days healing fractures. Groups of 7 C57BL/6J and 7 Bax KO mice were evaluated at 7 and 14 days post-fracture. Briefly, thin sections were first incubated with proteinase K (20 μg/ml) for 20 min. The DNA fragments of apoptotic cells were end-labeled by biotinylated nucleotide mix through the action of the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase. The labeled apoptotic cells were identified by avidin-linked horseradish peroxidase-mediated oxidation of a chromogen/substrate (3,3′-diaminobenzidine/H  Additional fractures were produced to compare gene expression by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in Bax KO and wild-type fracture tissues. Four C57BL/6J and 3 Bax KO and fractured femurs were collected each at 7 days and 14 days post-fracture, separated from the epiphyses and stored in liquid nitrogen. The frozen tissues were subsequently pulverized, total RNA isolated by the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) and reverse-transcribed to cDNA using the SuperScript III™ kit from (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY). The expression of cartilage-related and mitochondrial apoptosis-related genes of interest was analyzed by real-time RT-PCR using the Qiagen “Quantitect” SybrGreen-based assay kit and Bio-Rad real-time PCR machine (Bio-Rad Laboratories — MJ Research, Hercules, CA) according to the instructions provided in the kit. The primers for real-time PCR for each gene of interest and the mouse cyclophilin A housekeeping gene were synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc. (Coralville, IA) and are shown with their specific RT-PCR reaction conditions in Statistical analysis was performed by two-way ANOVA followed by the LSD or Scheffe post-hoc test or by two-tailed Student's X-ray examination of the fracture healing up to 35 days post-fracture revealed that Bax KO mice had a larger mineralized fracture callus at 14 days post-fracture ( Histological examination of the cartilage sections within the calluses at 7 days post-fracture revealed that the Bax KO fracture had substantially more Safranin-Orange-stained cartilage than the C57BL/6J wild-type fracture ( Remodeling of the fracture calluses is initiated and mediated by an up-regulation of osteoclast recruitment and activity. Therefore, the effect of Bax deficiency on the number of osteoclasts on bone surface within the healing fractures was also investigated. Consistent with the contention that the remodeling of bony calluses in Bax KO mice at the later phase of the fracture healing (i.e., 21 and 28 days post-fracture) was more accelerated than that in C57BL/6J mice, To evaluate whether the greater amounts of cartilage in Bax KO fracture calluses at the earlier healing phase (i.e., 7 and 14 days post-fracture) was due to an increased number of chondrocytes and/or an enlarged size (i.e., hypertrophy) of chondrocytes, we counted and compared the total number of chondrocytes within the cartilage area of 7-day and 14-day healing calluses of each mouse strain. Consistent with the larger cartilage area to callus area ( To further assess the effects of Bax deficiency on the number of pre-hypertrophic and hypertrophic chondrocytes in Bax KO fractures compared to C57BL/6J fractures, we measured relative expression levels of chondrocyte-specific collagen genes by real-time PCR measurements ( To evaluate the possibility that the increases in the amount of cartilage and the number of chondrocytes in Bax KO fracture callus was the result of a decrease in cell apoptosis due to Bax deficiency, we measured the relative percentage of cells that were undergoing apoptosis (as indicated by the TUNEL staining) in fracture cartilage and non-cartilage tissues between Bax KO and C57BL/6J fractures at 7 days post-fracture. The relative percentage of apoptotic chondrocytes or non-cartilage bone and marrow cells in both Bax KO and C57BL/6J fracture calluses was low, each between 1% and 2%. More importantly, there were no significant differences in the relative percentage of apoptotic chondrocytes and other bone or marrow cells between the 7-day Bax KO and C57BL/6J fracture calluses ( To evaluate whether the lack of a difference in apoptosis between Bax KO and C57BL/6J fracture calluses was due to a compensatory up-regulation of the expression of one or more pro-apoptotic genes or decreases of one or more anti-apoptotic genes of the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway, the relative gene expression levels of several well known pro- and anti-apoptotic genes of the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway were measured at 7 and 14 days post-fracture by real-time RT-PCR. To determine whether the increased cartilage production and the number of chondrocytes in Bax KO fractures was due to an increased chondrocyte proliferation, we compared the proliferation of pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes within the Bax KO fracture calluses with that of C57BL/6J fracture calluses at 7 days post-fracture by the The intrinsic mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis is a vital physiologic process to eliminate damaged or unwanted cells during tissue development and repair, including fracture repair Three additional findings of the fracture healing process of Bax KO mice compared to that of C57BL/6J mice are noteworthy. First, although Bax is a pro-apoptotic gene, our The second noteworthy observation is that, in addition to the formation of the larger and more mineralized bony fracture callus in Bax KO mice during the early healing phase, the larger Bax KO calluses also appeared to undergo a more rapid remodeling during the later healing phase than the smaller fracture callus of C57BL/6J mice. As a result, there were no significant differences in the callus size, bony callus area, and callus BMC between Bax KO mice and C57BL/6J mice beyond 28 days post-fracture. In fact, the Bax KO calluses were indistinguishable from the healing C57BL/6J calluses beyond 28 days with respect to mineral density and content, as well as bone histology. The more rapid remodeling in Bax KO fracture calluses compared to C57BL/6J calluses was probably due to an increase in osteoclastic resorption, since Bax KO fractures had 30% and 50% more osteoclasts per bone surface of fracture tissues than the C57BL/6J fractures at 21 and 28 days, respectively. The mechanism by which Bax deficiency led to an increase in the number of active osteoclasts and the rapid callus remodeling during the later phase of fracture repair has not been determined. On the one hand, because Bax is a pro-apoptotic gene, our finding of an increased number of osteoclasts on bone surface of the remodeling callus in Bax KO mice is consistent with a reduced osteoclast apoptosis in Bax-deficient mice. On the other hand, the findings of the TUNEL analysis, which did not show any significant differences in the number of apoptotic bone and marrow cells within the healing calluses between Bax KO and C57BL/6J mice, are not consistent with the interpretation that the increased number of osteoclasts was due largely to a reduced osteoclast apoptosis in Bax KO fractures. However, because apoptosis is a major regulatory mechanism that determines the life span and number of active osteoclasts The third intriguing finding of this study is that there was > Regardless of the physiological significance of the increased callus cartilage and greater numbers of chondrocytes during early fracture healing in Bax KO mice, our Finally, this study may have also disclosed an important difference between the functional role of the intrinsic mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis and that of the cytokine-mediated extrinsic apoptosis pathway in fracture repair. In this regard, a previous study with TNF-α receptor KO mouse femoral fracture model In summary, this study has demonstrated for the first time that Bax has an important regulatory role in the early fracture healing, and that the increased callus size and cartilage area in Bax KO fractures was due largely to increased chondrocyte proliferation and not to reduced apoptosis or increased chondrocyte hypertrophy. The unexpected effect of Bax deficiency on the proliferation of pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes implicates a novel regulatory function for Bax as a negative regulator of the proliferation of chondrocytes during fracture repair. This work was supported by the U.S. Army Medical Research Acquisition Activity Assistance Award No.DAMD17-03-2-0021. The U.S. Army Medical Research Acquisition Activity, 820 Chandler Street, Fort Detrick, MD 21702-5014, is the awarding and administering acquisition office. The information contained in this publication does not necessarily reflect the position or the policy of the government, and no official endorsement should be inferred. We are grateful to Emile Davis, Nancy Lowen, Ryan Porte and Jann Smallwood for technical assistance. All work was performed in facilities provided by the Department of Veterans Affairs.