To determine oxygen isotope fractionation between aragonite and water, aragonite was slowly precipitated from Ca(HCO3)2 solution at 0 to 50°C in the presence of Mg2+ or SO4
                     2−. The phase compositions and morphologies of synthetic minerals were detected by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) techniques. The effects of aragonite precipitation rate and excess dissolved CO2 gas in the initial Ca(HCO3)2 solution on oxygen isotope fractionation between aragonite and water were investigated. For the CaCO3 minerals slowly precipitated by the CaCO3 or NaHCO3 dissolution method at 0 to 50°C, the XRD and SEM analyses show that the rate of aragonite precipitation increased with temperature. Correspondingly, oxygen isotope fractionations between aragonite and water deviated progressively farther from equilibrium. Additionally, an excess of dissolved CO2 gas in the initial Ca(HCO3)2 solution results in an increase in apparent oxygen isotope fractionations. As a consequence, the experimentally determined oxygen isotope fractionations at 50°C indicate disequilibrium, whereas the relatively lower fractionation values obtained at 0 and 25°C from the solution with less dissolved CO2 gas and low precipitation rates indicate a closer approach to equilibrium. Combining the lower values at 0 and 25°C with previous data derived from a two-step overgrowth technique at 50 and 70°C, a fractionation equation for the aragonite-water system at 0 to 70°C is obtained as follows: 
                        
                           103
                              lnα=20.44×103/T−41.48.
                        
                     
                  
                  This equation represents the first experimental calibration of oxygen isotope fractionation between inorganically precipitated aragonite and water at low temperatures. By considering the kinetic mechanism of oxygen isotope disequilibrium, we argue that this equation is a close proxy for thermodynamic equilibrium fractionation in the low-temperature mineral. Therefore, the discrepancies in CaCO3-H2O fractionation factors between different synthesis experiments may imply that some of the studies reflect steady-state fractionations during aragonite precipitation and subsequent polymorphic transition to calcite at different run conditions.Calcium carbonate is one of the most important minerals in reconstructing paleoclimate and paleoenvironment by means of oxygen isotope analysis. A large amount of data have been accumulated for oxygen isotope fractionation in CaCO Statistical-mechanical calculations predict that carbon and oxygen isotope fractionations should occur between calcite and aragonite because of differences in the internal vibrational frequencies of the carbonate ions in the two polymorphs Experimental calibrations of the CaCO Because aragonite is a metastable polymorph of CaCO The purposes of this work are to study the influence of carbonate precipitation rate on oxygen isotope fractionation by chemical synthesis methods and to determine the equilibrium fractionation factors between aragonite and water during inorganic precipitation of CaCO In principle, aragonite can be synthesized by either the overgrowth technique To 500 mL deionized water,1.25 g of analytical-grade reagent or synthesized CaCO To test the effect of Mg To investigate the dependence of oxygen isotope fractionation on Ca(HCO A given amount of analytical-grade reagent NaHCO To investigate the effect of dissolved amounts of CO A sample was slowly precipitated from Ca(HCO In all synthesis runs at 25 and 50°C, water-flowing condensers were used to minimize the loss of water vapor during the thermostatic precipitation. We observed that in general, mineral precipitation started to take place after 4 weeks at 0°C and after 1 week at 25°C, but overnight at 50°C. In all cases, final mineral precipitates were obtained by vacuum filtration and rinsed three times with deionized water and once with acetone. The precipitate slurry was dried under an infrared lamp for 5 h, followed by 12 h in a 110°C vacuum oven. Carbonate yields estimated by weighing after filtration were > 80% and proportional to Ca(HCO The phase composition and structure of CaCO Oxygen and carbon isotope analyses of carbonates were conducted by the conventional phosphoric acid method Three different CaCO As shown in The morphology of CaCO The SEM observations help identify whether equilibrium oxygen isotope fractionation is likely to have achieved between aragonite and water. In general, the slower the rate of the mineral formation, the closer the mineral is to isotope equilibrium (e.g.,  Samples 98CB03, 98CB04, and 98CB05 in our experiments were obtained at 25°C, in which sample 98CB04 is pure calcite because of the absence of Mg Sample 97CB09W is a pure aragonite that was slowly precipitated at 50°C from Ca(HCO  To study the influence of Ca(HCO Because of the potential polymorphic transition of aragonite to calcite during CaCO For the pure aragonite and aragonite-dominant phases, the measured oxygen isotope fractionations between CaCO As shown in  The excess dissolved CO Samples 97CB17 and 97CB18 were synthesized at 25°C in containers 1 and 2, respectively. A CaCO During the synthesis procedures, much longer time (3 d) was taken to bubble CO Kinetics and mechanism of CaCO Oxygen isotope fractionations between aragonite and water at 50 and 70°C have been determined by In both  By combining the lower fractionation values obtained using the smaller amounts of dissolved CO       As shown in Calculations of reduced partition function ratios for oxygen isotopes in calcite were conducted by  The synthesis method for calcite used by It appears that there is sufficient complexity in calibrating oxygen isotope fractionations for the calcite-aragonite-water systems by means of the inorganic chemical experiments. The complexity of biogenic carbonates thus remains to be resolved. Isotope disequilibrium is common in most biogenic carbonates (e.g., The effects of metabolic activity on oxygen isotope fractionation are unpredictable, and therefore, caution is advised in using oxygen isotope fractionations between biogenic CaCO This study was supported by funds from the Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 49903001 and 40033010) and the Chinese Academy of Sciences (KZCX2-107). We thank Profs. Zhou Guien and Li Fanqin as well as Mrs. Jia Yunbo for their assistance with XRD and SEM measurements. This paper benefited from the constructive comments by Dr. F. J. Longstaffe and two anonymous reviewers. We greatly appreciate Dr. B. E. Taylor’s editorial effort, which significantly improved the paper. Thanks are extended to Dr. Youxue Zhang for his effort in polishing the English presentation. 