On the 21st–22nd of May1809 Napoleon Bonaparte saw his first major defeat on land at the Battle of Aspern, just north-east of Vienna. Of the 167,000 soldiers who fought for the French and Austrian armies, a total of 55,000 died on the battlefield. Salvage excavations prior to the construction of large urban development project (2008–2016) have revealed several burial sites related to the Battle of Aspern. The skeletal remains of 30 soldiers were excavated and underwent a detailed bioarchaeological study to elucidate both the impact of 19th-century military conditions on soldiers in life, as well as how they died on the battlefield.
                  This paper presents the analysis of peri-mortem trauma observed in 21 of the 30 skeletons (70.0%) excavated from the battlefield of Aspern. Following standard criteria in forensic and palaeopathological trauma studies, this study revealed a predominance of ballistic trauma (20 cases in 17 individuals), while only nine individuals (eleven cases) displayed evidence of blunt force trauma. By contrast, no evidence of sharp force trauma was identified in the skeletal remains. These results are discussed within the historic context of the Napoleonic Wars to reconstruct causes of injury and circumstances of death.Human behaviour on the battlefield captures the values of the combatant societies under significant stress and pushed to extremes; thus, the study of conflict ‘has a powerful ability to illuminate human behaviour’ ( This paper presents the bioarchaeological evidence of warfare in a sample of 30 soldiers who died in 1809 on the battlefield of Aspern (Austria), one of the major battles of the Napoleonic Wars between 1803 and 1815. Fuelled by the onset of industrialisation, this period saw one of the most decisive transitions of warfare in human history: the introduction of ‘total war’, or the complete mobilisation of civilian and military resources with the aim to destroy the enemy ( Taking place on the 21 Over the course of the first day of the battle, the villages of Aspern and Essling were both taken and re-taken several times ( The weaponry used during the Battle of Aspern was typical of armament from the early 19 Body armour was exclusively worn by the cuirassiers who were equipped with a “cuirass” consisting of a metal front and back plate in the French army, but only had a single front piece in the Austrian army ( Due to the often large number of casualties during the numerous Napoleonic era battles, only officers or selected individuals would have been buried separately in local cemeteries or churches, whereas the vast majority of fallen soldiers were simply buried in pits or trenches on the battlefield, often where they fell ( The human skeletal remains discussed in this paper were recovered by Stadtarchäologie Wien during extensive salvage excavations carried out between 2008 and 2016 ( In total nine graves were excavated, but only the human remains from five sites were available for study (shown in All 30 individuals from the battlefield of Aspern considered in this study were analysed in the Bioarchaeology Laboratory at the Austrian Archaeological Institute of the Austrian Academy of Science in Vienna. The remains were assessed for sex, age-at-death, the presence of pathological changes, as well as signs of ante- and peri-mortem trauma ( The methods applied for the identification and classification of peri-mortem, weapon-related trauma are well established in the forensic and palaeopathological literature and will thus only be briefly summarized here (e.g. All skeletal elements were examined macroscopically for evidence of peri-mortem injury, aided by a hand-held magnifying glass at 10x magnification. Bone fractures were identified as peri-mortem according to the criteria outlined by Blunt force trauma can be defined as a slow-loading impact to a focal area of bone, resulting in a degree of damage which directly correlates to the amount of kinetic energy transferred from the impacting object to the bone ( Ballistic trauma is a specialised form of projectile trauma related to an object discharged from any kind of gun or ammunition (e.g. Sharp force injury is caused by dynamic, slow-loading, compressive force from a sharp object that leads to bone damage in the form of an incision (broad or narrow) ( A specialised form of trauma less well documented that further needs to be considered in the context of the analysis of the Battle of Aspern is blast trauma following direct or indirect exposure to an explosion. This is a complex set of injuries which is clinically divided into four categories: injuries from blast waves (primary injuries), projectiles (secondary injuries), blast winds (tertiary injuries) and thermal effects (quaternary injuries) ( Of the 30 individuals, 26 were identified as definitely male, one as a probable male and three were recorded as indeterminate sex ( Evidence of peri-mortem trauma was identified in 21 of the 30 individuals (70.0%) from the burial sites at the battlefield of Aspern. Evidence of ballistic trauma was identified in 17 (567%) and blunt force trauma in nine soldiers (300%) while unambiguous evidence of sharp force trauma was not observed. A statistical analysis of blast trauma was omitted due to the difficulties associated with the identification of blast trauma and differentiation from other causes of its two main skeletal components, blunt and ballistic trauma. Thirteen individuals present a single observed skeletal injury, six individuals display two injuries and two individuals display three skeletal injuries. This amounts to a total of 31 documented cases of peri-mortem trauma including 20 cases (645%) of ballistic and 11 cases (355%) of blunt force trauma ( Peri-mortem injuries in 13 individuals could further be analysed for the direction of impact. While in the majority of cases (10 individuals, 52.0% of all observed), the musket ball entered the body from the front, three individuals (9.5%) showed clear evidence of being shot from behind ( Historical documentation, archaeological evidence, and bioarchaeological analysis all strongly suggest that the individuals buried on the Aspern battlefield are soldiers who died as a direct result of combat. Conforming to expectations for battle-related burials, the majority of the soldiers (21 of the 30 individuals, 70.0%) displayed evidence of peri-mortem skeletal injury. Additionally, several musket balls found lodged in the bodies of 14 soldiers ( Consistent with historical records of contemporary 19 In addition to the mode of injury, the directionality of ballistic trauma was considered in this analysis. Because historic sources indicate that soldiers were buried where they fell, it was anticipated that an analysis of the injury location and direction would provide information regarding the position of the mass graves within the battle order and course of events. Although the majority of the soldiers considered in this study were hit from the front, a small number of individuals from two mass graves (V4 and V33) demonstrated clear evidence of being shot from behind. However, no clear pattern between burial location and directionality of injury was observed, as individuals with peri-mortem injuries to the front and/or back of the body were buried alongside one another. This could imply that the soldiers within one mass grave fell during different episodes of the battle or it could merely be reflecting the chaos within the battle lines as a result of artillery attacks. Alternatively, it remains possible that those individuals shot in the back were injured during the many small episodes of retreat, which took place repeatedly throughout the two-day battle ( Despite its importance, identifying specific modes of injury can be challenging in palaeopathological analyses, where generally only skeletal tissues are preserved and often in fragmented forms. Although forensic and palaeopathological studies of ballistic trauma are largely confined to discussions of gun-shot wounds from modern small-calibre weapons (e.g. Although no study to date, has specifically examined the differences between modern bullets and musket balls ( An additional explanation for the many cases of unspecified blunt force trauma may be found by taking a closer look at the distribution of the type and location of peri-mortem trauma between different graves, and thus different locations on the battlefield. Individuals with multiple injuries were only observed in mass grave V33, containing the remains of at least 12 individuals. Eight of these individuals displayed multiple peri-mortem injuries, but only seven of the total of 17 injuries were clearly identifiable as ballistic trauma, while the other 10 instances of trauma were attributed to non-specific blunt force. One possible explanation for these multiple blunt force injuries could be trampling of the fallen soldiers by the horses of the attacking or retreating cavalry. Widespread injury, death or mutilation of corpses by trampling during battle is well evidenced in Larrey’s accounts ( During the Napoleonic Wars, the main type of explosive device in use was the “common shell” or grenade, a hollow iron sphere filled with gunpowder and ignited through a fuse, which had to be fired by howitzers or mortars ( The absence of any clear evidence of sharp force trauma in the soldiers from the Battle of Aspern is noteworthy. Bladed weapons such as swords, sabres, rapiers and three-edged bayonets were standard equipment in both the Austrian and the French armies during the Napoleonic Wars. Although, with the exception of bayonets, most types of bladed weapon would have been restricted to officers ( The skeletal human remains of 30 soldiers who died on the battlefield during the Battle of Aspern in Austria in 1809 were analysed for evidence of battle-related, peri-mortem trauma, revealing a high degree of ballistic and blunt force trauma. The types of trauma encountered, as well as their distribution throughout the skeleton, conform to contemporary military strategies with a heavy reliance on infantry using muskets and cannons. No clear patterning in the distribution was observable, likely attesting to the chaos amidst fighting between infantry lines. The study further demonstrates the difficulties of identifying evidence of ballistic post-cranial trauma and differentiating it from blunt force trauma, especially if low-velocity, large-calibre weapons such as muskets or cannons were used. It further demonstrates that the skeletal manifestations of trauma inflicted by historic period firearms are still relatively poorly understood and highlights the need for further research in this area. Moreover, in combination with historic sources, we further suggest that the high degree of non-specific blunt force trauma may, at least, be partially attributed to the trampling of fallen soldiers by cavalry moving up or retreating, a fact further supported by dead horses buried in the vicinity of the reported mass graves. The consequences of blast trauma caused by exploding shells also remains poorly understood and difficult to identify in skeletal human remains from archaeological battlefields. Thus, despite the small sample size, the research on the soldiers from the battlefield of Aspern provides a new perspective on the Battle of Aspern and 19 The analysis was carried out with the support of the Stadtarchäologie Wien, who kindly provided the opportunity to study the skeletons from Aspern. Field directors M. Penz and S. Sakl-Oberthaler provided information on the archaeological context of the soldiers. M. Kronberger (Curator of Archaeology, Wien Museum) is thanked for information on earlier excavations on the battlefield of Aspern. Further thanks are due to T. Jakob (Durham University, UK) and M. Gamble (Austrian Archaeological Institute) for language editing and valuable thoughts on earlier drafts of this paper.