This paper investigates the characterisation of alumina-doped titania nanoparticles, milled under high-shear over time, in the presence of sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP) dispersant. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) indicated that prolonged milling times led to the formation of 10 nm particle fines which were electrostatically attracted to larger particles, where no change in the crystal structure was observed. Primary particle sizes measured by dynamic light scattering (DLS) and TEM were in agreement and showed no change in primary particle size (∼250 nm) with respect to milling time, however, there was a clear reduction in the magnitude of the slow mode decay associated to aggregates. The TiO2 was found to have an isoelectric point (iep) in the range of pH 3–4.5, where an increase in milling time led to a lower pHiep, indicative of an increase in SHMP coverage, which was further supported by an intensification in phosphorus content measured by X-ray fluorescence (XRF). Phosphorus content and zeta potential analysis before and after centrifugal washing showed that SHMP was partially removed or hydrolysed for the longer milled pigment samples, whereas no change was observed for shorter milled samples. Relaxation NMR was also performed, where enhanced relaxation rates at longer milling times were associated partially to increases in surface area and exposure of Al sites, as well as physicochemical changes to SHMP density and structure. It is thought that extended milling times may lead to hydrolysis or other structural changes of the dispersant from the high energy milling conditions, allowing easier removal after washing for longer milled pigments.Titanium dioxide (TiO Dopants are regularly added during the chloride process. For example, small quantities of AlCl Polyphosphate salts are widely used as dispersants in mineral and material processing industries, due to their ability to adsorb onto metal-oxides and clay-particle surfaces including illite, montmorillonite, kaolinite and dolomite Although efforts have been made to understand the influence of dispersants on slurry rheology during milling (see review by He A number of studies have been conducted on the milling of TiO Phase transformations have also been reported for high energy ball milling of anatase with prolonged milling times. Begin-Colin TiO Studying industrially relevant processes is often not straight-forward, as the dispersions are commonly highly concentrated, opaque and may contain a variety of inorganic contaminants Solvent relaxation NMR has been used to study the adsorption of polymers and dispersants onto particles and shows changes in the relaxation rate of bound water at the particle interface This paper presents the characterisation of industrially produced alumina-doped TiO Unmilled and milled titanium dioxide pigment samples were supplied by Venator. Sodium hexametaphosphate (Univar), known by the trade name Calgon, and abbreviated as SHMP throughout this manuscript, was added prior to the milling process to control titania dispersion properties. Stock acid and base solutions were prepared to vary the pH of suspensions, where hydrochloric acid (Sigma-Aldrich, reagent grade, 37%) was used to decrease the pH and potassium hydroxide pellets (Sigma-Aldrich) were used to increase the pH. Pure potassium chloride salt (Sigma-Aldrich) was used as background electrolyte for surface charge analysis. A copper sulphate solution (Xigo Nanotools) was used as received to calibrate the frequency prior to NMR resonant frequency measurements. Ethanol absolute was purchased from Fisher Scientific and used as received for TEM sample preparation. The industrially produced pigment samples were firstly adjusted to pH 10–10.5 with NaOH and sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP) was added prior to milling at 0.14% w/w as P The so-obtained dried titania powder was heavily agglomerated due to capillary forces, and in order to handle the samples for dispersion characterisation, they were gently crushed using a mortar and pestle for 5 min. All suspensions were made in milli-Q water and dispersed using an ultrasonic bath (Clifton Sonic) for 30 min, unless otherwise stated. Samples were then further dispersed using an ultrasonic probe, a Sonic Dismembrator (Fisher Scientific), at 20% amplitude for 1 min using a 6 mm horn tip. Some of the milled samples were washed post-milling in an attempt to remove poorly adsorbed SHMP, and these are stated as Samples of TiO The dispersion state of TiO Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was used as elemental analysis for TiO Titanium dioxide samples were analysed after 1 and 32 min milling. The X-ray powder diffraction patterns were obtained to investigate the nature of the crystalline phase and calculate the crystallite sizes, using a D8 X-ray Diffractometer (Bruker) and CuKα radiation source. The titanium dioxide samples were prepared as powders and deposited onto a silicon holder. The samples were scanned from 2 Crystallite size, A Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments) was used to measure the zeta potential of the unmilled and milled dispersions. Dispersions of TiO Titanium dioxide suspensions were prepared from the milled powder at 2 wt% in ultrapure deionised water and dispersed, as per For all the investigated milled suspensions, the collected intensity auto-correlation data exhibited two relaxation modes. As seen in Care must be exercised when characterising TiO There was a concern that the amount of energy brought into the system during sonication could break the aggregates that may be present in the TiO Milled slurries obtained at ∼400 gL Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area and pore size measurements were obtained for milled titanium dioxide samples by the nitrogen adsorption-desorption method at 77.3 K, using a TriStar 3000 (Micromeritics) surface analyser. TiO All relaxation measurements were obtained using an Acorn Area (Xigo Nanotools), 13 MHz desktop NMR spectrometer. Prior to any operation, the instrument was thermally equilibrated for 24 h, after which the resonance frequency was measured using a copper sulphate solution. A resonance frequency of approximately 13.07 MHz is regarded as adequate for a measurement to proceed. A 90°-pulse length of 5.67 µs, 180°-pulse length of 11.33 µs and a gain value of 10 dB were used for all relaxation measurements. The Suspensions were prepared at 2.5 wt% in deionised water as previously described. The specific surface area ( The Washed and unwashed TiO Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images ( It should be noted that throughout this discussion the term ‘aggregate’ is referred to as an assembly of particles which are sufficiently strongly bound that they require bead milling to break the particle-particle bonds. This contrasts to the term ‘agglomerate’ which is referred to as a collection of aggregated particles which has formed upon drying, these are softer bound and as later discussed can be broken by sonicating the suspension. The average particle size was calculated using the Feret diameter of the TiO Critically, titania samples milled for 32 min showed evidence of particle fracturing ( The crystal structure of primary particles was investigated by analysis of lattice fringes in high magnification TEM images ( It was suspected that the ball milling media (glass ballotini) may contaminate the titania samples for extended milling times up to 32 min. Additionally, due to the industrial nature of the samples, other contaminants may also be present. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was used as elemental analysis for the plunge-frozen 32 min milled sample, as presented in  The (1 1 0) peak at 2Theta ≈ 27° for rutile relates to the crystallite size of the shortest dimension, and the (0 0 1) or (0 0 2) plane corresponds to the longest dimension Zeta potential values for 1 and 32 min milled alumina doped TiO   Additionally, there are important differences between washed and unwashed samples. From the XRF data ( The interaction of SHMP and titania can be complex, with both chemisorption (considered irreversible) and electrostatic physisorption (considered reversible) are possible  As discussed within The diffusive nature of the fast relaxation mode was confirmed with a light scattering device allowing DLS measurements to be performed at different scattering angles (see Particle size determination from XDC, based on terminal settling described by the Stokes law, can be used to probe a wider range of sizes ( The hydrodynamic diameters of the washed and unwashed milled TiO  Changes in specific surface area, as measured by BET (in the dry state) were also compared to wet dispersion results from the NMR relaxometry measurements. Differences are observed in the NMR relaxation rate enhancement ( For dispersant-free suspensions of particles with identical surface chemistry, the relaxation rate scales linearly with increasing surface area  In an attempt to better understand relaxation changes with milling time, it was decided to consider both While it is evident that longer milling times lead to an increase in adsorption density of the SHMP, it was assumed that the adsorption plateaus post 8 min, limiting further surface chemistry contributions (as discussed). However, given the potential for extended milling times to lead to hydrolysis or other structural changes of the dispersant because of the high energy milling conditions, we may have to consider the influence of the dispersant structure in addition to the influence of its density on NMR relaxation. It may be that hydrolysed SHMP has a greater influence on NMR surface relaxation than un-modified SHMP, although, due to the convoluted nature of the overall response, it is very difficult to further define the interactions between SHMP and the bound water. After centrifugal washing, an increase in The effect of milling time on the interactions between aluminium doped titania pigment particles and polyphosphate (SHMP) dispersant has been studied using multiple characterisation techniques. TEM highlighted the presence of ∼20 nm fractured fines in samples milled for 32 min that were found to have d-spacings correlating to a rutile crystal structure, implying that milling did not induce changes in crystal structure. Although the milling conditions that induced these breakage events are under high-shear, such large milling RPM, are required in order to scale down the milling process from production plant scale to lab scale. The appearance of fractured TiO The TiO Relaxation NMR data was also used to estimate surface area changes as a function of milling time. It showed a close to linear increase in surface area, and no plateau was detected, due to either the increase in surface area from fractured fines in the samples milled for longer times, or due to the increase in SHMP concentration and/or dispersant restructuring at the surface of the titana particles. It was hypothesised that hydrolysed SHMP has a greater influence on the NMR relaxation rate of bound water molecules leading to an enhancement in The article metadata is available in the University of Leeds repository. Laura Elliott (2019): Characterisation of polyphosphate dispersant interactions with aluminium-doped titania nanoparticles during milling data set. University of Leeds. [Dataset]. https://doi.org/10.5518/576. Article metadata is available under a Creative Commons Attribution licence (CC-BY). The authors would like to thank the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: