The effect of different working variables on the chlorination of MoO3 in the presence of carbon was studied under atmospheric pressure in an isothermal fixed bed reactor at laboratory scale, with continuous gas flow. The reagents used were chlorine gas and powder molybdenum trioxide and carbon black. The effects on the reaction rate of several variables––carbon content in the mixture, mixing time, flow rate, chlorine molar fraction, reaction time and temperature––were studied. The experimental results showed that (a) MoO3 conversion is markedly affected by temperature and reaction time, and slightly affected by chlorine molar fraction and flow rate; (b) the following carbochlorination reaction: 2MoO3(s)+C(s)+2Cl2(g)→2MoO2Cl2(g)+CO2(g) can be proposed from the identification of all the products obtained; (c) there is an active chlorinating species that would generate on the carbon surface. On the basis of these results, a mechanism is proposed for this complex heterogeneous solid–gas reaction that would explain the higher reactivity observed in the carbochlorination reactions at low temperatures with respect to the direct chlorination verified at temperatures higher than 500 °C. To justify this mechanism, a thermodynamic analysis that supports the experimental results was carried out.Molybdenum is a highly refractory element mainly used in the manufacturing of steels, alloys and superalloys to increase their mechanic resistance, hardness, stiffness, and their resistance to corrosion and wearing. The increasing use of refractory metals in modern industry and the exhaustion of both high-grade and concentrated ores has created the need to find and develop new methods for their extraction from other materials. The main sources from which refractory metals are extracted are the oxides contained in industrial wastes or in low-grade ores, whose processing by conventional hydrometallurgic methods is difficult and sometimes not even possible.  Although it is true that different chlorinating agents (phosgene, ethylene chloride, carbon tetrachloride, chlorine and carbon monoxide mixtures, among others) are available for the formation of chlorides and oxychlorides of refractory metals, the elevated costs of these reagents prevents their use in industrial processes. Instead, carbon is employed as reducing agent and chlorine gas as chlorinating agent, as is the case of the extraction of Zr and Ti from its mineral oxides ( The chlorination of metallic oxides in the presence of carbon has attracted the interest of numerous researchers since it permits to recover metals of commercial interest (such as refractory metallic oxides as MoO It has been noted that in these reactions the presence of carbon has a double effect on the chlorination rate. First, it thermodynamically favors the formation of oxychlorides of the metal, as demonstrated by The purpose of this work is to analyze the effects of different factors on the chlorination of MoO  • A feed zone composed of two cylinders containing the chlorine gas (Cl • A reaction zone, formed by a fixed bed reactor, placed vertically inside an oven heated by an electric resistance and controlled by a temperature controller of the proportional-differential-integral type. The reactor was provided with a central removable tube that permitted to insert a thermocouple in order to know the temperature in the reaction zone by means of a digital thermometer. • A zone for the collection of the reaction products consisting of a U-shaped collecting tube, where most of the reaction products were condensed, and three washing traps for the collection of those reaction products that were not condensed in the tube as well as of the unreacted exceeding chlorine gas. The following reagents were used: • Molybdenum trioxide powder (Analar BDH) of purity higher than 99.99%, with a surface area of 0.4×10 • Carbon black, manufactured by Cabot Corporation, with a surface area of 11.1×10 • The gases used were 99% chlorine (Indupa, Argentina) and 99.9% nitrogen (A.G.A., Argentina). All the gases were dried before entering the reaction zone. All other reagents used were of pro analysi quality. The reagent solid samples used in the carbochlorination experiments were mixtures of MoO Once the reagent solid sample (of approximately 0.5×10 The reaction products of MoO The degree of transformation of molybdenum trioxide was defined as: Chemical analyses performed at different values of the studied variables indicated that the only reaction products in the carbochlorination experiments were MoO The direct chlorination of MoO In order to obtain basic experimental data for a later kinetic treatment of MoO • • • The results ( • As shown by • The chlorination and carbochlorination of pure refractory metal oxides leads to the formation of their different chlorides or oxychlorides or of mixtures of these products, depending on the experimental conditions. On the basis of the information provided in references (   In order to match our experimental results with the probability of occurrence of the above proposed reactions, we calculated the change of free energy, Since it is probable that the carbochlorination reaction first goes through the stage of chlorine atom formation, we calculated the change of free energy of reactions The graphs obtained for these calculations ( The only reaction products detected in the carbochlorination experiments were MoO In carbochlorinarion, the direct contact between carbon and the oxides is not essential ( Taking consideration the preceding observations and the results obtained in the present investigation, the mechanism of carbochlorination of MoO    It must be noted that the sum of equations The complex heterogeneous reaction of molybdenum trioxide carbochlorination has been studied experimentally. The global carbochlorination reaction proposed is supported by the fact that all the reaction products have been experimentally determined. Our experimental results showed that the conversion of MoO The following effects of carbon demonstrate its important role in the chlorination reaction: (a) a reducing effect, by capturing the oxygen released in the oxide chlorination stage and forming oxidized compounds; (b) a catalytic effect, by activation of the chlorine to give the chlorine atom active species. Both effects contribute to make carbochlorination more thermodynamically feasible than chlorination. A simple mechanism was proposed for the carbochlorination reaction, comprising the following stages: (1) formation of chlorine atom on the carbon surface; (2) chlorination of molybdenum trioxide with chlorine atom; and (3) carbon oxidation. The conclusions derived from this work will be applied to the development of a kinetic model that will include all the stages (diffusion, adsorption, reaction and desorption) involved in a complex heterogeneous reaction such as molybdenum trioxide carbochlorination. The authors wish to thank the Universidad Nacional de San Luis, Argentina, and Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientı&#x0301;ficas y Técnicas, Argentina, for financial support of this study.