Soil compaction, a determinant of forest regeneration and ecosystem functioning (e.g., biomass production), can show an aggregated spatial pattern which can be shaped by the effect of tree canopy. This work studies the influence of tree canopy type (Quercus ilex subsp. ballota, and Pinus pinaster) on the spatial distribution of variables related to soil compaction in a Mediterranean forest in southern Spain. The spatial structure of this plant-soil interaction was analyzed using the spatial analysis by distance indices methodology (SADIE). Our results showed that variables related to soil compaction, such as bulk density, penetration resistance, water content and organic matter, showed an aggregated spatial pattern which was associated to the species’ tree canopy and presence of open sites. Thus, high organic matter content and low bulk density were found under the Quercus canopy, whereas the contrary was observed under the Pinus canopy. Open sites showed similar soil properties to those than under the Pinus canopy. Soil compaction pattern and tree canopy had a clear effect on herbaceous production. In two consecutive years (2007 and 2008), herbaceous production was higher under the Quercus canopy than under the Pinus canopy. Mean values of herbaceous production in open sites were similar to those under the Quercus canopy, and no spatial association was found between open sites and herbaceous production. Structural equation modeling (SEM) was used to describe the causal relationships between tree canopy types, soil compaction related variables and herbaceous production. Results showed that tree canopy affects soil compaction variables and its effects on herbaceous production are mainly produced by a positive effect of organic matter (at 2–7cm depth) and a negative effect of penetration resistance (at 9–14cm depth). Therefore, forest management should consider that the replacement of one species for another or changes in tree density are likely to have important consequences in soil compaction and ecosystem functioning.In the Iberian Peninsula, most of the original The main problem in the conservation of the Soil compaction is generally measured as bulk density or penetration resistance. It is highly related to physical soil properties such as texture, porosity or structure, which are important due to their role in water and nutrient uptake by plants. Many studies on soil compaction emphasize its multifactor character, because it results from the interaction of different soil variables. Soil compaction effects on plant growth are highly dependent on soil type ( This work attempts to: (i) determine the existence of a spatial pattern of soil compaction in a Mediterranean forest; (ii) analyze the effect of tree canopy type on soil compaction variables; and (iii) elaborate a model to explain the effects of tree canopy type on soil compaction variables (bulk density, penetration resistance, organic matter and mass water content) and on herbaceous production in an integrated way using structural equation models (SEM) ( The study site is located in the Natural Park of Sierra de Cardeña y Montoro (Córdoba, Spain) (38°14′9″N, 4°21′55″W) within a fenced area to exclude ungulate herbivory ( Tree vegetation is dominated by This area has not been managed or subjected to ungulate herbivory for at least 10 In the spring of 2008, soil sampling was carried out at two depths (2–7 Tree canopy was estimated through the lineal intersection method between an imaginary vertical line at each sampling point, considering the absence (0) or presence (1) of tree canopy. The identity of each tree ( In July 2007 and 2008 total aboveground herbaceous biomass was harvested in a 25 The spatial pattern of soil compaction related variables was analyzed by SADIE: Spatial analysis by distance indices ( A covariation spatial analysis was carried out to compare the spatial aggregation patterns of variables. We computed an index of overall association ( Structural equation modeling (SEM) ( The cluster indices ( The presented model was structured into three groups of variables: (1) tree canopy type ( Bulk density, mass water content and penetration resistance showed an aggregated pattern at both the 2–7 In general, the variables measured in the first depth range (bulk density, mass water content and penetration resistance) were positively associated to the corresponding variables measured in the second depth range ( Some variables showed a significant dissociation. For example, bulk density was dissociated with organic matter in both depth ranges ( SADIE covariation analysis showed that soil compaction variables were related to tree canopy type and open sites. However, the effect was mainly found in the first depth range (2–7 No differences in light availability were observed between the Herbaceous production (in 2007 and 2008) was positively associated to organic matter content (2–7 Results of the model for the first depth range (2–7 Results of the model for the second depth range (9–14 Soil physical properties (bulk density and penetration resistance), organic matter and mass water content were aggregated throughout space and at the two sampling depths in a consistent pattern ( In general, open sites showed similar soil properties to those under Although tree density at the site is relatively low ( These differences in soil properties cannot be explained by past land use, particularly the differential activity of browsers under There was a difference in age between Herbaceous production was linked to both soil physical properties and tree canopy type (  These association patterns between tree canopy, soil variables and herbaceous production ( Some Soil variables associated to compaction (bulk density, penetration resistance, water and organic matter content) exhibit an aggregate spatial pattern. This pattern was closely related to tree canopy, but the effects depend on the species. We are grateful to Raquel Casado and Victoria González for setting up the plot. We also thank Elena Suárez, Manolo Olmo and Kris Calero for field work assistance, Enrique Ramírez for the topography analysis, Alfonso and Ignacio García-Ferrer for the use of the total station, José Luis Quero for instructing us in the SADIE technique, Cristina Gómez, David Gómez and José Manuel Recio for assistance during the soil analysis, and Lori De Hond for linguistic assistance. We also thank three anonymous reviewers for their suggestions, which substantially improved this paper. This work was financed by DINAMED Project (CGL2005-05830-C03-02/BOS), INTERBOS Project (CGL2008-04503-CO3-02) and DIVERBOS Project (CGL2011-30285-C02-02) through the Ministry of Science and Innovation of Spain and co-financed with FEDER funds (European Union) and ANASINQUE Project (PGC2010-RNM-5782) financed by Junta de Andalucía.