The anecic earthworm Lumbricus terrestris L. is known to strongly affect organic matter transformation and soil development in temperate ecosystems. Processes in the gut of the earthworm play an important role where sand grains contribute to the grinding of leaf litter in the muscular gizzard. To investigate effects of sand and litter availability and earthworm gut passage on carbon and nitrogen mineralisation two experiments were set up, one with beech forest soil and beech litter, the other with arable soil and rye litter, thereby exploring the effects of agricultural management and litter type on mobilisation and stabilisation of organic matter.
                  Three different sand concentrations were tested in the forest soil: without, with 25% and with 50% sand (dry weight). In the arable soil only treatments without and with 25% sand were established. The soil was taken from a beech forest on limestone and from a long-term agricultural experiment. Earthworms were fed fragmentised beech or rye litter (<4 mm), or were kept without litter. Earthworm casts produced during 65 days were placed in microcosms and incubated at 20 °C for 280 days. CO2 production and mineral nitrogen in leaching water were measured at regular intervals. Earthworms lost more mass in arable than in forest soil; even though in arable soil the earthworms produced two times more casts. Litter availability reduced burrow construction. Casts were more enriched in carbon and nitrogen if litter was available. Leaching of Nmin from casts of L. terrestris strongly exceeded that of the corresponding soil treatments in the arable soil but not in the forest soil. In earthworm casts decomposition of rye litter was strongly increased, in particular early in the experiment. In contrast, the decomposition of beech litter was reduced initially and stimulated later. The addition of sand stimulated carbon mineralisation in both organic matter in soil and enclosed in earthworm casts. In soils with high clay content (forest soil) the stimulating effect of sand was less pronounced than in soils with low clay content (arable soil). Overall, except in earthworm casts of the forest soil without litter, cumulative CO2 production exceeded that in the corresponding soil suggesting that in earthworm casts mobilisation rather than stabilisation processes prevail.Earthworms contribute significantly to organic matter turnover by ingesting and fragmenting large quantities of litter and incorporating it into the mineral soil ( Processes in the gut of This study investigates the effect of the availability of sand and litter on carbon mineralisation and nitrogen mobilisation in ageing casts of Soil samples were taken from two sites representing an arable farming system and a mature beech forest. The arable field site forms part of a long-term fertilisation experiment in Halle (central Germany, Saxony-Anhalt), known as “Eternal Rye”. At the study site winter rye ( Rye straw and beech leaf litter were used in the experiments representing the dominant litter types at the arable and forest site, respectively. Rye straw (44.7% C, 0.5% N) was collected after harvest from a rye field close to Darmstadt (Hesse, Germany). Almost 1-year-old, little decomposed beech leaf litter (44.5% C, 1.6% N) was collected from the soil surface in late summer in the forest where the soil had been taken. The litter materials were air-dried and mechanically fragmented into pieces <4 mm. Sand was homogeneously mixed with the soil. Pure quartz sand with a particle size distribution of 40%, 40% and 20% in the <0.5, 0.5–1 and 1–2 mm fractions was used. In the forest soil experiment treatments with the addition of 25% and 50% sand of soil dry weight were established. In the arable soil experiment only the addition of 25% sand was studied because of the high sand content of this soil. Adult specimens of For production of cast materials earthworms were incubated in planar cages consisting of two transparent PVC sheets (650×310×3 mm) separated by PVC strips (10-mm thick) at the two sides and the bottom. Each cage was separated vertically into two compartments (650×100×10 mm) by a plastic strip. The cages were filled with soil to a height of 550 mm; the forest soil was compacted to a bulk density of 0.7 (without sand), 0.85 (25% sand) and 1.0 kg dry wt l In total 24 planar cages were filled with arable soil, 12 without sand and 12 with 25% sand. To six of each 6 g rye litter was placed on top of the soil. For the experiment with forest soil 24 planar cages were established, 8 without sand, 8 with 25% sand and 8 with 50% sand. To half of them 6 g beech litter was added to the soil surface. Before placement into the experimental cages the earthworms were kept on wet filter paper to void their gut for 3 days; the filter paper was changed after 2 days. Two adult Earthworm casts (0–65 days old) and soil equivalent to 100 g dry wt for the arable soil experiment and 30 g dry wt for the forest soil experiment were transferred into microcosms. Casts and corresponding soils from the prior treatments with and without litter were established: without sand, with 25% sand and with 50% sand (forest soil experiment); without sand and with 25% sand (arable soil experiment). Treatments were replicated six times (arable soil experiment) and three times (forest soil experiment). The microcosms consisted of air tight Perspex tubes (height 150 mm, ∅ 45 mm) fixed on ceramic plates. The microcosms allow drainage of soil materials at semi-natural conditions by lowering the atmospheric pressure in a box below the ceramic plates. Leaching water from each of the microcosms was sampled in vessels placed underneath the microcosms in the box. The microcosms were closed at the top by a lid which had a small vessel attached to the underside. This vessel could be filled with alkali to absorb CO Microcosms were incubated at 20 °C for 280 days and watered weekly with 10 ml distilled H Data on earthworm body mass, amount of casts produced and lengths of burrows were analysed by two-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the factors “sand” (without, with 25% and with 50% sand in the forest soil experiment, and without and with 25% sand in the arable soil experiment) and “litter” (without and with beech litter in the forest soil experiment and without and with rye litter in the arable soil experiment). Data on cumulative CO Earthworm body mass generally decreased in both arable and forest soil during the incubation period ( The addition of sand increased cast production by Total carbon and nitrogen content of the arable soil was considerably lower than that of the forest soil but C/N ratio was higher in the arable soil ( Leaching of mineral nitrogen (N Rates of CO Generally, both sand and litter significantly increased cumulative CO Generally, the effect of earthworms on CO The role of anecic earthworm species, such as Present results suggest that ingestion of sand may facilitate assimilation in anecic earthworms, as loss in body mass of Nitrogen leaching, mainly in the form of NO The focus of this study was to evaluate whether organic matter enclosed in earthworm casts is stabilised or if mobilisation processes predominate. Since in many soils the topsoil materials consist in large part of earthworm casts it is essential to understand decomposition processes in earthworm casts ( In the arable soil without addition of rye straw cumulative carbon mineralisation in casts and in soil was similar. In contrast, it was strongly increased in earthworm casts in treatments with rye straw. The amount of plant residues in earthworm casts are considerably higher compared to the corresponding soil with litter where litter was manually mixed into the soil. As a result, the fraction of partly decomposed plant residues which had a rapid turnover was higher in earthworm casts. This might be one reason for the enhanced cumulative CO Sand generally increased carbon mineralisation even when it was only manually mixed into the soil. Decomposition and mineralisation of organic matter is known to be faster in coarse-textured soils than in fine-textured soils ( In conclusion, this study indicates that an increasing sand content generally increases carbon mineralisation in soil. The increased content of sand and the higher litter content in casts of earthworms alter the decomposition of organic matter enclosed in casts. In soils with high clay content the addition of sand may affect the decomposition of organic matter little but in general, the addition of sand stimulates carbon mineralisation and this applies to both organic matter in soil and enclosed in earthworm casts. Overall, soil characteristics, such as the clay content and nutrient concentrations and also soil moisture, determine whether enclosure of organic matter in casts of earthworms results in stabilisation or mobilisation of organic matter. Financial support was provided by the DFG priority program SPP 1090 “Soils as source and sink for CO