High rate sulfate reducing bioreactors can be effectively used in the treatment of acid mine drainage (AMD). The main disadvantage of sulfate reducing bioreactors is the requirement of a suitable carbon source and electron donor as the dissolved organic carbon content of AMD is usually quite low. In this study, a landfill leachate was used as a low-cost carbon source for sulfate reducing bacteria in a fluidized-bed (FBR) reactor for the treatment of synthetic AMD. Ethanol was replaced with leachate in the feed of FBR operated longer than 150days at 35°C. Although sulfate reduction rates decreased appreciably when ethanol (3.44gsulfate/L/d) was replaced with leachate (0.90gsulfate/L/d), leachate-fed FBR still performed well as the pH increased to neutral values, soluble metal removals were 82–99.9%, and total metal removals were 80–99.9%. In the case of leachate, electron flow to sulfate reduction decreased significantly. Higher performance may be achieved at chemical oxygen demand (COD)/sulfate ratios higher than 1.0. This study showed that leachate may be used as a low-cost soluble substrate for sulfate reducing bacteria in high rate bioreactors for AMD treatment.The exploitation of sulfide minerals results in the oxidation of iron and sulfur containing minerals, such as pyrite (FeS The production of AMD can be summarized by the oxidation of pyrite in the presence of oxygen and water (reaction Other sulfide minerals are oxidized in a similar way as pyrite, releasing metals and sulfate in solution and therefore, AMD may contain several metals and metalloids (e.g. Cu, Fe, Zn, Al, Pb, As, Cd) at toxic concentrations. For example, Sulfidogenic treatment of AMD is a viable option due to lower cost and better sludge quality as compared to conventional chemical treatment. Sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB) reduce sulfate to hydrogen sulfide under anaerobic conditions using organic compounds or H Although sulfidogenic treatment is effective for AMD treatment, addition of a suitable carbon source and electron donor for sulfate reduction is often necessary as the dissolved organic carbon content of AMD is very low (<10 In most of the studies on the sulfidogenic biotreatment of AMD using high-rate bioreactors, expensive chemicals such as lactate and ethanol have been used as carbon and electron source for SRB ( For passive sulfidogenic treatment systems, generally solid organic substrates (e.g. sewage sludge, leaf mulch, wood chips, animal manure, sawdust, cellulose) have been used as alternative carbon and electron sources for SRB (see Soluble substrates should be used as a carbon and energy source in high-rate sulfidogenic bioreactors. Although wastewaters containing biodegradable organics are good candidates, the number of studies exploring their use is relatively limited (see The cost of ethanol for sulfate reducing process is approximately 0.24 Landfill leachate, produced when water percolates downward through a landfill, may be a possible carbon source for SRB. Generally it has a high biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and high concentration of soluble organic carbon. This study aims at investigating the possibility of using a young-landfill leachate as a low-cost carbon and energy source for SRB in a sulfidogenic FBR for the treatment of AMD. A laboratory scale FBR with a total volume of 600 The FBR was fed with synthetic wastewater containing 1.315 The characteristics of young landfill leachate from Sanliurfa landfill site were; COD 11,500 The feed solution was sampled once a week and the FBR liquid samples were periodically drawn from the recycle line. Before the measurements of sulfate, COD, soluble metals, and sulfide, the samples were centrifuged at 3000 Electron flow from COD oxidation to sulfate reduction was calculated assuming 0.67 Sulfate reduction and COD oxidation performances of the bioreactor are presented in On day 37, half of feed COD was replaced with landfill leachate (period II in On day 66 (period III, In the 4th period ( In order to remove remaining COD and oxidize sulfide to elemental sulfur, an aerobic process, such as activated sludge process, may be used after sulfidogenic AMD treatment. The influent and effluent pH values and the concentrations of effluent alkalinity and sulfide are provided in Similarly, the effluent alkalinity concentrations were 1900 Although the sulfate reduction performances in the 2nd and 3rd periods were quite similar ( Dissolved sulfide (DS) generation followed a similar trend with effluent alkalinity ( The electrons generated from COD oxidation can be used for fermentation, sulfate reduction, biomass production and methane generation. Electron flow to sulfate reduction calculated according to Eq. When half of the feed COD was replaced by leachate, the electron flow to sulfate reduction decreased to 56 Average influent, effluent soluble and effluent total metal concentrations were presented in Although the influent Cu concentration was much higher than Zn, the effluent total Cu concentration was much lower in period 3. Similar observation was previously noted by This study illustrated that young landfill leachate can be used as a carbon and electron source for SRB to treat AMD as soluble metal removals were 82–99.9%, and total metal removals were 80–99.9%. The sulfate reduction rates, the production of dissolved sulfide and alkalinity decreased when ethanol was replaced with landfill leachate and when metals were added into the reactor feed. However, the reactor still performed well as the wastewater pH increased and metals were removed with high efficiencies. The decreased sulfate reduction rate was likely due to the channeling of electrons from the organic compounds of the leachate to other metabolic processes rather than sulfate reduction. As a conclusion, landfill leachate may be used as a low-cost soluble carbon and electron source for SRB in high-rate sulfidogenic bioreactors for AMD treatment. This study was funded by the Scientific & Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK Projects No. 109Y374). The support of CSIRO Minerals Down Under Flagship to A.H. Kaksonen is gratefully acknowledged.