The combination of “ex situ” portable X ray fluorescence with unsupervised and supervised pattern recognition techniques such as hierarchical cluster analysis, principal components analysis, factor analysis and linear discriminant analysis have been applied to rock samples, in order to validate a “in situ” macroscopic rock samples classification of samples collected in the Boris Angelo mining area (Central Chile), during a drill-hole survey carried out to evaluate the economic potential of this Cu deposit. The analysed elements were Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Mn, Pb, Rb, Sr, Ti and Zn. The statistical treatment of the geological data has been arisen from the application of the Box–Cox transformation used to transform the data set in normal form to minimize the non-normal distribution of the data. From the statistical results obtained it can be concluded that the macroscopic classification applied to the transformed data permits at least, to distinguish quite well in relation to two of the rock classes defined (70.5% correctly classified (p
                     <0.05)) as well as for four of the five alteration types defined “in situ” (75% of the total samples).The extraction of metals from the earth crust initially requires the identification of the areas in which they have anomalous concentration in relation to the host rock of the ore mineralization and, in general sense, to the background in the mining zone. In this sense, the geological characterization of the potential host rocks of ore mineralization is crucial and must be the preliminary objective in any exploration survey. In relation with this fact, two fundamental stages must be covered, the establishment of the geological cartography and the drill-hole survey. The former because permits the knowledge of the main geological features (lithologies, structures, mineralization evidences, etc.) and the latter because gives an invaluable set of data over the geology under the surface. From the study of the information obtained in these stages it is possible to get a three dimensional idea about the existing rocks and their characteristics. Thus recognition and classification of the different rock types, as well as its alteration pattern, play an important role which could be critic in the selection of the areas that could be adequate to explore host ore bodies with economic interest. During the initial field campaign necessary in order to obtain the data, a lot of samples are generated. In this sense, they must be classified attending criteria closely related to the type of deposits to be exploited, e.g. type of lithologies, hydrothermal alteration patterns among others. In the most of the cases these criteria are applied “in situ” in remote areas without confirmatory analytical information from a laboratory, and, in the best of the cases, using basic equipment like a magnifying glass or some safe and easily portable chemical reagent. In this way, it could be helpful to dispose of qualimetric tools that could validate this macroscopic rock samples classification in order to facilitate and accelerated the remained work necessary to determine the goodness of the ulterior mining exploration of the zone investigated. Bearing in mind these reasons, the use of analytical techniques as portable X-ray fluorescence (P-XRF) combined with statistical pattern recognition techniques can be offered as an adequate tool in order to obtain a feasible model that could permits the assessment of a validated macroscopic rock samples classification in an ore exploration survey. Up to the present day, the use of field portable X-ray fluorescence (P-XRF) analysers In parallel, it has been demonstrated that the use of unsupervised and supervised pattern recognition techniques permits to extract reliable information from analytical parameters for exploratory assessment of geological sets Nowadays, copper is one of the most demanded materials on the metal market showing a growing demand perspective at the present such as the future. Together with this growing demand, the exploration of this metal has been widespread for the entire world to satisfy the copper supply. In this context, Chile is the first copper-producing country holding a 36% of the world production of this metal. Boris Angelo Cu–(Ag) deposit is located in the “stratabound Cu–(Ag) belt” The Boris Angelo Cu–(Ag) deposit is located in the easternmost Coastal Cordillera, in Central Chile, between 32°30′S and 70°40′W ( From the point of view of the alteration patterns, the area of the metallic deposit is affected by hydrothermal alteration, caused by the interaction between hot and slightly acidic fluids and the host rocks During the field campaign 44 rock samples, corresponding to ore grade zones and barren zones, were taken from five different drill-hole cores selected (see The monitored parameters were the concentration of Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Mn, Pb, Rb, Sr, Ti and Zn. The measurements were made in the laboratory to select the better measure conditions; the equipment used in this study was a field portable X-ray fluorescence analyser NITON XLt 792 (Niton, Billerica, USA), with a 40 In relation to the holder to be used in the procedure, the influence of the type of material used was studied analysing a set of 15 holders for each type of containers without sample. No statistical differences ( In relation with the influence of the source count time, the best results were obtained using 90 The Relative percentage difference (RPD) found for each measured element in the five replicated analysis of the samples has been: 5.9 The accuracy of the method for all the elements except Rb, was corroborated analysing nine replicates of two Certified Materials: CRM052-050 (RT Corporation, Salisbury, United Kingdom) and RTS-1 (Canadian Certified Reference Methods Project, CANMET, Ottawa, Canada). According to the US EPA Method 6200 recommendations for soil samples The establishment of the accuracy in the determination of Rb was made by means of an “in house validation protocol”. Thus, three sets of spiked matrix matched samples (nine replicates) containing known Rb concentrations (one level for each set of spiked samples) were measured. The RPD estimated was 12, which is in good agreement with those obtained for the rest of the elements. The precision was estimated as intermediate precision by the RPD of the nine measurements of each reference materials or spiked-matrix samples for Rb. In all the cases the obtained RPD values are lesser than 15. In order to estimate the detection limits sets of nine replicate samples that contained the target elements at concentration levels close to the detection limit estimated by US EPA Method 6200  In order to transform the data set into normal form, Box–Cox transformation was used In all the cases, the univariate and multivariate statistical treatment of the data was performed using: (a) Statgraphic Centurion XV (15.2.05 version) for Windows (Statpoint Technologies Inc, Warrenton, USA), Matlab Version 7.0.4 R14 (The Mathworks, Inc.) and the PLS Toolbox Version 3.0.4 (eigenvector Research, Inc.). Hierarchical agglomerative (HCA) was performed on the normalized data set by means of Manhattan (city-block) distance – a particular case of Minkowski distance (taxicab geometry) – as similarity measurement and Ward's method as amalgamation rule. These criterions have been selected with two objectives: (i) to find at each stage those two clusters whose merger gives the minimum increase in the total within group error sum of squares (Ward objective) and, (ii) to dampen the effect of outliers bearing in mind using city-block distance the average differences across dimensions are not squares. It was applied to the Box–Cox transformed monitoring matrix data set in order to observe the relationship between natural grouping observed and the two criteria of macroscopic classification made (lithologies and alteration patterns). On the other hand, in order to verify the natural grouping obtained in HCA, a PCA was applied to the standardized normalized data set. Finally, to reduce the interdependence of the data set of standardized normalized variables and to obtain knowledge of the underlying structure of the data, FA was applied. In this case the factorization type used was a principal component which supposes that all of the variability of the data corresponds exclusively to common factors. The orthogonal rotation of the axis defined by PCA, and obtained maximizing (Varimax rotation) produces new groups of variables called varifactors (VFs), which usually group the studied variables in accordance with common features which can include unobservable, hypothetical and/or latent variables This method has been applied in order to obtain a discriminant model that permits us to validate the “in situ” macroscopic rock samples classification of the sample assuming the number of groups or classes, as well as, the group membership of each sample taken.	Thus, by means of linear discriminant analysis, a discriminant function has been built up for each group on raw data. The classification functions associated to each group defined could be used to determine to which group each sample most likely belongs. In this study, LDA were performed on the Box–Cox transformed measured data. The Dendrogram resulting from HCA of normalized data set is represented in The PCA (made on the basis of eigenvalues On the other hand, from the scattered plot obtained, considering PC1 and PC2 ( In relation with the previous HCA it can be observed that, although the natural behaviour of the samples is quite similar, the lineal combination of the normalized values of concentrations of the elements made by PCA permit us the grouping of the samples into two groups well defined: Group A, constituted by porphyritic sub-volcanic rocks, and Group B, constituted mainly for the rest of the lithologies classes. When the FA was applied, the Varimax rotation of the axes defined by the PCs explains again about 73.9% of the total variance of the normalized data, but modify the weight of the normalized variables in the Three VFs obtained by means of the eigenfactor In general, the unsupervised pattern recognition methods applied to the Box–Cox transformed concentrations of the analysed elements by P-XRF permit assess that in all cases 61.4% of the samples are “naturally” grouped as belonging to the macroscopic group named porphyritic sub-volcanic rocks (rock code 12). The samples macroscopically classified as porphyritic dykes and brecciated porphyritic sub-volcanic rocks (rock codes 11 and 13 respectively) present a slightly defined patter of distribution between them. The dispersion shown by rocks classified like volcanoclastics rocks (rock code 14) could be attributed to the compositional heterogeneity characteristics of them. In order to verify the natural grouping obtained and to validate the macroscopic classification, by means a statistical significant discriminant model, a LDA was performed. The discriminant functions were calculated considering the Box–Cox normalized metals concentrations that mainly affect to VF1. On these bases, i.e. WCa, WFe, WK, WRb, WSr and WTi, three discriminant orthogonal functions were calculated. DF1 and DF2 contribute 99.20% to the total discriminant power being both functions statistically significant at 95% percentage. Eqs.  In relation with the macroscopic classification made on basis of hydrothermal alteration criteria, from the analysis of the Dendrogram (see The results arisen from PCA (see In relation with the information obtain from FA, the scattered plot of the first two varifactors is shown in On the other hand, VF1 could be considered in close relation with alteration process, because most of the elements with highest weight, i.e. Ca, K, Rb and Sr could be involved in hydrothermal process VF2 is influenced by the normalized concentrations of base metals as Mn and Zn, while VF3 are influenced by Cu and Pb. These elements could be related with ore mineralization process, nevertheless all the samples show a similar scattered distribution pattern in the diagrams without significance statistical differences inter samples. Finally, in order to obtain a feasible classification model a PLS-LDA was made. In this case, considering geochemical features, i.e. (a) elements closely related to hydrothermal alterations, i.e. WCa, WK, WRb, WSr and (b) the element with economical interest, WCu. On these bases, four discriminant orthogonal functions were calculated. DF1 and DF2 contribute 89.13% to the total discriminant power being both functions the most statistically significant at 95% percentage. Eqs.  The statistical treatment of the Box–Cox transformed geological data obtained from “ex situ” portable X ray fluorescence measurements of ore exploratory samples with unsupervised and supervised pattern recognition techniques such as HCA, PCA, FA and LDA has been shown as a helpfully tool for validate the “in situ” macroscopic rock samples classification applied to an exploratory survey in a potential mining area. From the LDA it can be concluded that in relation with the macroscopic rock samples classification based on lithology classes assuming a probability level of 80% the discriminant model obtained confirms correctly 81.8% of the analysed samples. When the alteration types are considered, the discriminant model obtained permits to confirm four of the five alteration types defined “in situ” (75% of the total samples). Thus, it can be pointed out that the classification assessed could be applied to facilitate and accelerated the remained work necessary to determine the goodness of the ulterior mining exploration. On the other hand, the proposed approach could be apply directly “in situ” without pre-treatment of the rock samples during exploratory in those cases in which the characteristic of the samples could be well assessed. This work was supported by the Spanish project CGL-2006-02594-BTE (founded by