Creating a stimulated reservoir domain (SRD) is a necessity to effectively extract natural gas from shale reservoirs. After hydraulic fracturing, a shale reservoir has three distinct domains: SRD, non-stimulated reservoir domain (NSRD) and hydraulic fractures (HFs). In previous studies, the property contrasts and interactions between different domains are often not fully considered. In this study, a fully coupled multi-domain and multi-physics model is developed to incorporate these complexities. The shale reservoir is characterized as an assembly of three distinct components: organic kerogen, inorganic matrix and HF. Furthermore, the kerogen and inorganic matrix are defined as dual-porosity-dual-permeability media, while the HF is simplified as a 1-D cracked medium. Particularly, the inorganic matrix has different properties in each of the SRD and NSRD to reflect the stimulation effect of hydraulic fracturing on the near-HF matrix. Under this framework, a series of partial differential equations (PDEs) fully coupled by mass transfer and mechanical deformation relations were derived to define various processes in the shale reservoir. These PDEs were numerically solved by the finite element method. The proposed model is validated against analytical solutions and verified against gas production data from the field. Sensitivity analyses reveal: (1) that both size and internal structure of the SRD significantly affect gas extraction by improving SRD properties and in creating low-pressure zones around the NSRD; (2) that the NSRD determines the sustainability of gas production; and (3) that the change of mechanical properties in one domain affects the evolution of transport properties in the entire reservoir.Extracting natural gas from organic-rich shale formations is becoming an important issue in the oil and gas industry due to its enormous success in North America over the last two decades One of the complexities of shale reservoirs is heterogeneity. Differing from conventional sandstone reservoirs (mainly containing inorganic minerals), gas shale matrix is composed of kerogen pockets (organic matter) within inorganic matrix (referred to as IM, the combination of clay and detrital minerals) Multi-domain characteristic is another essential complexity of shale reservoirs. Hydraulic fracturing not only creates a set of primary hydro-fractures (HFs) with millimetre-scale apertures, but also enhances the permeability of the shale matrix near HFs by initiating numerous secondary hydro-fractures and activating the original natural fractures. An illustration of a hydraulically fractured shale formation with HFs and secondary hydro-fractures is shown in The third complexity within a producing shale gas reservoir is that multiple physical processes with feedbacks occur within this system. First, the mechanical deformation of shale is a significant influencing factor in stress-sensitive shale gas plays In this study, a series of fully coupled partial differential equations (PDEs) are developed to define shale gas extraction processes through dynamic porosity and permeability models of each component in different domains so that the complexities of interactions between different domains and among multiple physics can be deeply understood. Explicit fracture modelling and multi-continuum modelling methods are combined to achieve this. Particularly, both SRD and NSRD are characterized as dual-porosity-dual-permeability domains to reflect the heterogeneity of the shale. The SRD can be either continuous or discontinuous in geometry, where multiple properties differ from those in the NSRD to comprehensively reflect the stimulation effect of hydraulic fracturing on the shale matrix. This hybrid model is then validated against two previously published analytical models. It is also verified by comparing the simulation results against two sets of gas extraction data from the field. Based on sensitivity analysis, the multi-domain effects in mass transfer and mechanical deformation during shale gas production are investigated and discussed. In this section, a conceptual model is introduced to define the multiple physical processes in different porous media and domains in a shale gas reservoir, as well as the mass transfer and mechanical coupling relations between them. Especially, SRD and NSRD are defined based on the different rock properties of the IM in different regions to reflect the stimulation effect of hydraulic fracturing on the shale reservoir, and a 5-stage sequential flow conception is used to describe the sequence of gas transport. A typical stimulated shale gas reservoir composed of three porous media (HF, IM and kerogen) distributed in three domains (HF, SRD and NSRD) is illustrated in A sequential process is summarized to depict gas transport in the shale reservoir as illustrated in As mentioned previously, three physical processes influencing shale gas extraction should be considered in modelling: Above all, each medium in each domain is influenced by the varying effective stress. Therefore, a stress–strain constitutive relationship is needed to couple the deformation of the entire reservoir In this section, a mechanical equation is first given to fully couple the stress-deformation relationship for the entire shale formation. After that, the equations describing gas transport in each porous medium and domain, and the mass exchange between them are derived. As two core properties, effective porosity and apparent permeability are defined to incorporate the effects of various physical processes We begin with the stress – strain relationship of the entire shale reservoir based on the Biot’s theory of poroelasticity and the dual-porosity assumption Apparent from Eq. Note that Additionally, On the right-hand-side of Eq. Furthermore, the strain tensor Combining Eqs. Based on mass conservation, the general governing equation for gas storage and flow in kerogen can be written as The storage term To elucidate the effective porosity and apparent permeability models incorporating multiple effects, a schematic illustrating the various mechanisms of gas transport in kerogen is shown in A porosity model, proposed by Cui and Bustin The next issue is to determine the expression for Combining Eqs. Thus, Eqs. We further consider the volumetric change of the adsorbed gas layer based on By applying the cubic law again, Based on the analogy of Eqs. Knudsen number With the depletion of reservoir pressure, the free gas in kerogen flows to IM under the driving differential pressure between these two porous media – this is the sink term. Accord to the inter-media mass transfer theory proposed by Kazemi et al. (1992) The governing equation for the IM takes a similar form to that of kerogen except for the following differences: (1) Desorption is not considered; (2) The shape of the inorganic pores are prescribed as slots instead of circular capillaries; (3) The IM has two domains, i.e., SRD and NSRD with different properties. These two domains exchange gas mass through a boundary condition; (4) IM receives gas from kerogen while giving gas to the HFs. The governing equation in the IM for SRD and NSRD can be expressed as: Considering stress dependence, applying the Cui and Bustin model The apparent permeability of the IM ( At the boundary between SRD and NSRD, the pressure should be continuous as: Similarly, the mass flux should also be continuous at this boundary: Combining Eqs. Clearly, this equation is essential in representing gas production from a shale reservoir because it builds connections for mass transfer between kerogen, IM in SRD, IM in NSRD and HF by a source term and boundary conditions. Hydraulic fractures are conceptually simplified as a 1-D cracked medium at the outlet boundary of the IM. The stress dependence is considered here, while flow regime effect is ignored due to the relatively large aperture of the HF (millimetre-level). Desorption is also ignored. The governing equation is According to the definition of pore compressibility of the HF ( Integrating this equation yields a simple expression for If the porosity change is small, the change ratio (the value of a quantity at a certain time point divided by its corresponding initial value) of the HF aperture can be approximately considered as equal to that of porosity For a slot-type fracture, the permeability can be expressed as Both inflow and outflow of gas in the HF are controlled by boundary conditions. As apparent in Eqs. Combining Eqs. Eqs. Two sets of gas production data in shale gas plays in North America are obtained from the published literature to verify the proposed model. The fully coupled equations derived in We further simulated 50-year of production from the Marcellus Shale by using the proposed numerical model. The evolution of pressure distribution in IM is displayed in As an example for a continuous SRD, the second simulation case represents a reservoir in Barnett Shale in the United States. Modeling parameters are obtained from the literature The proposed model provides insight into shale gas extraction because it comprehensively includes characteristics of shale reservoirs, mechanisms of gas transport in shale, and interactions between multiple media and domains. Here, we give some important simulation results and discussion to strengthen the understanding of mass transfer and mechanical deformation in different domains during shale gas production. All the results in this section are based on a sensitivity analysis of the simulation case for the Marcellus shale reservoir mentioned above. The basic property contrasts between HF, SRD and NSRD determine the different roles played by these domains in shale gas production. More specifically, HF, as the most permeable domain, provides necessary flow channels for gas flowing out of the tight shale, but it has very low gas storage due to its small total volume. The NSRD has the highest reserve due to its large volume, but it has an extremely low permeability. Moreover, NSRD does not contact the HF, implying a slow gas depletion process in the NSRD. As a result, the contribution of the HF to total recovery is near negligible, while that of the NSRD is only apparent in the late period of production In engineering practice, the SRD can be continuous or discontinuous and its size can be large or small, which depends on the cost and technical type/efficiency of hydraulic fracking. To study the effect of SRD size, we take different widths of a single sub-SRD surrounding a single HF ( Another point related to SRD size is that, when a discontinuous SRD exists, gas depletion in the NSRD between sub-SRDs is faster than the situation without an SRD. To elucidate this phenomenon, IM pressure distributions after 2-year production in the reservoir, both with and without discontinuous SRD, are shown in (HF + continuous SRD) > (HF + discontinuous SRD) > only HF This relation is consistent with the 50-year production results shown in Initial basic properties such as porosity and permeability of SRD and NSRD also affect shale gas production. These properties can be considered as reflections of the internal structure of the domains The effects of IM permeability in the SRD ( These results also confirm the validity of our 5-stage sequence of gas transport summarized in To further understand the various roles played by different domains in shale gas production, the contributions of different storage mechanisms in each domain to the cumulative production during 50-year extraction are calculated and shown in The various roles played by different domains are also reflected by the contributions of the HF, SRD and NSRD to flow rate (daily production). The contributions of storage forms in different domains to flow rate shown in In summary, multi-domain effects (caused by the fracturing-induced property contrasts in different domains and gas transport sequence in the full reservoir) lead to performance differences and role conversions of these domains during mass transfer during shale gas production. The HF provides a high-permeability flow channel from the reservoir to the wellbore, but gathers little gas volume. The SRD is the major gas source controlling the early decades of production, while its importance ultimately decreases with time. Correspondingly, the NSRD has only a minor influences on production in the early period, but gradually becomes crucial, and nearly as important as the SRD in the late period of the gas extraction process. Therefore, the NSRD is vital for the sustainability of gas production. These effects, often neglected in previous models, have been successfully incorporated in our model to improve the fidelity of simulation. The proposed model in this work is coupled by mechanical deformation within the entire shale formation - in addition to representing the mass transfer process, as noted in The effects of IM compressibility of the SRD ( Some previous studies (e.g., The influence of HF compressibility ( Due to the coupled mechanical interactions between different domains, the change oin HF compressibility also affects permeability evolution in the SRD and the NSRD. The effects of These results, related to rock compressibility, demonstrate that the fracking-induced change of mechanical properties of the SRD and the HF influence the evolutions of transport properties in the entire reservoir. Thus, coupled mechanical deformation should be considered in shale reservoir simulations to prevent overestimating cumulative production. In addition, the change of mechanical properties in one domain will affect the permeability evolution in the entire shale reservoir as driven by the mechanical compatibility enforced between different domains. These results also reiterate the necessity of high-quality proppant packing for hydraulic fracturing treatments to prevent severe closure of the HF. In this study, a fully coupled multi-domain and multi-physics model is developed to evaluate gas extraction processes from shale reservoirs. The processes in each domain (SRD – stimulated reservoir domain; NSRD – non-stimulated reservoir domain; HF – primary hydraulic fractures) are modelled, while the complexities of interactions between different domains and components are incorporated through cross-coupling relations of mass transfer and mechanical deformation. These PDEs were numerically solved by using the finite element method, and verified against analytical solutions and field observations. Based on our model results, the following conclusions can be drawn: Both SRD size and internal structure play key roles in shale gas production. The size is directly related to the cost of stimulation while the internal structure is determined by the stimulation technique. Different stimulation treatments may create different patterns of fractures in SRDs, which are reflected by the property contrasts that develop between SRDs and NSRDs. Our model results illustrate that complex internal structures of SRDs are favourable for gas production. From the perspective of mass transfer, an SRD enhances gas production in two ways. One is by directly improving gas flow capacity by enhancing porosity and permeability in the SRD. The other is by indirectly accelerating gas depletion in the NSRD by creating low-pressure zones around the NSRD. HF, SRD and NSRD play different roles respectively in shale gas extraction, due to their property contrasts and sequential orders of gas transport. The HF provides a high-permeability flow channel connecting matrix and wellbore, while the role conversion between SRD and NSRD determines the long-term sustainability of gas production. The change in mechanical properties in one domain affects the evolution of transport properties throughout the entire reservoir. Deformation in shale caused by gas pressure depletion in different domains associated with mechanical property contrasts influences the effective strain distribution throughout the entire shale reservoir. Subsequently, permeability in each domain evolves with time and space. Eventually, permeability evolution in all domains determines the gas production.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Australian Government Research Training Program (RTP) scholarship and the For a given medium Gas viscosity Knudsen number