Understanding of the thrombotic response (activation of the intrinsic coagulation system followed by platelet activation) from blood components upon contact with a titanium dental implant is important and not fully understood. The aims of this study were to evaluate: (1) the thrombogenic response of whole blood, platelet-rich plasma (PRP) and platelet-poor plasma (PPP) in contact with a highly thrombogenic surface as titanium, (2) the thrombogenic response of clinically used surfaces as hydroxyapatite (HA), machined titanium (mTi), TiO2 grit-blasted titanium (TiOB) and fluoride ion-modified grit-blasted titanium (TiOB-F). An in vitro slide chamber model, furnished with heparin, was used in which whole blood, PRP or PPP came in contact with slides of the test surfaces. After incubation (60min rotation at 22rpm in a 37°C water bath), blood/plasma was mixed with EDTA or citrate, further centrifuged at +4°C (2200g at 10min). Finally, plasma was collected pending analysis. Whole blood in contact with Ti alloy resulted in the binding of platelets to the material surface and in the generation of thrombin–antithrombin (TAT) complexes. With whole blood TAT levels increased 1000-fold compared with PRP and PPP, in which both almost no increase of TAT could be detected. In addition, the platelet activation showed a similar pattern with a 15-fold higher release of β-TG in whole blood. In the in vitro chamber model with the clinically relevant materials, the fluoride-modified surface (TiOB-F) showed pronounced TAT generation compared with TiOB, mTi and HA. Similar results were achieved for platelet consumption and activation markers of the intrinsic coagulation system. Taken together these results implicates first that whole blood is necessary for sufficient thrombin generation and platelet activation during placement of implants. Second, a fluoride ion modification seems to augment the thrombogenic properties of titanium.Titanium is widely used in surgical implants today and generally provides good bio-functionality and biocompatibility. It has been extensively used as a biomaterial since the late 1970s. We have previously shown that titanium is much more thrombogenic than two other often used biomaterials used in implants, i.e. PVC and steel. We hypothesized that the superior osseointegration property of titanium is the result of its thrombogenicity Osseointegrated implants has for many years been an accepted method in restoring lost dentition Lundgren et al. Already extensively used in oral and maxillofacial reconstruction, PRP has been argued to have an even better positive effect than whole blood on bone formation on the titanium surfaces in the previously described clinical situation. Several studies have addressed this question but presented conflicting results Other ways to improve the osteogenic properties of implant material is the use of different coatings or chemical modification of the implant surface. Hydroxyapatite (HA) coating used in dental implantology, however, questioned in the literature whether predictable long-term results can be achieved The purpose of the present investigation was to study activation in vitro of platelets and coagulation in contact with titanium in whole blood, PRP and platelet-poor plasma (PPP), with focus on the importance of whole blood for thrombin generation and the subsequent platelet activation. Secondly, we aimed to investigate the ability of clinically used implant materials (including titanium with surface modifications) to activate blood cascade systems and to discuss their correlation to bone formation and osseointegration. For blood, PRP and PPP compatibility evaluations, surfaces of titanium were produced in the form of 25 For the blood compatibility evaluation of the clinically used material, circular discs with a diameter of 25 Discs with TiOBlast™ (TiOB) and Osseospeed™ (TiOB-F) surfaces were kindly prepared and provided by Astra Tech AB, Mölndal, Sweden. The exact preparation sequence of these surfaces is proprietary of the company and not known to the authors. In the first set of experiments, prior to incubation with blood, PRP and PPP, the Ti–Nb–Zr surfaces were cleaned in 5% (w/v) ammonium persulphate (APS) at 60 The surface topography was measured with an interferometer (MicroXam, Phase-Shift, Arizona, USA). Two or three discs of each surface preparation were randomly selected and measured on three areas each. The size of the measuring area was in all cases 200 The slide chamber (see below), tubes and micropipette tips were furnished with Corline heparin surface (Uppsala, Sweden) according to the manufacturers’ recommendation. The surface concentration of heparin was 0.5 For whole blood, PRP and PPP experiments 40–50 For evaluation of the clinically used material, whole blood was collected from healthy volunteers ( All preparations were collected using heparin-coated tubes and micropipette tips. The slide chamber, previously described by Hong et al. PBS containing 1% (w/v) BSA and 0.05% (v/v) Tween 20 was used as working buffer and PBS containing 0.05% (v/v) Tween 20 as washing buffer in all EIAs. EIAs were used for the detection of TAT in plasma. EDTA-plasma was analysed using Enzygnost For detection of For determination of FXIIa–AT, FXIIa–C1INH, FXIa–AT and FXIa–C1INH complexes in plasma, an EIA described by Sanchez J et al. For measurement of C3a in plasma an EIA described by Nilsson Ekdahl et al. was used sC5b-9 in plasma was detected using a modification of the EIA described by Mollnes et al. The results are expressed as mean±SE. The results were statistically evaluated using one factor ANOVA. A conservative post hoc test, Bonferroni/Dunn was applied to determine statistical significance between materials. Whole blood, PRP and PPP in contact with titanium were tested in the slide chamber model. For cell counts, see Activation of the coagulation system, as reflected in the generation of TAT, showed that the activation was most pronounced with whole blood ( The differences between PRP and PPP were not statistically significant In addition, the platelet activation showed a similar pattern with a 15-fold higher release of Activation of the intrinsic coagulation system, as reflected in the generation of FXIIa–C1INH, FXIIa–AT, FXIa–C1INH and FXIa–AT complexes, showed that the activation was most pronounced with whole blood whereas the generation with PRP and PPP was low ( FXIIa–AT generation increased 15-fold with blood but was almost negligible with PRP and PPP. The values for whole blood were again significantly higher in relation to PRP and PPP ( FXIa–C1INH showed low generation with small increase in whole blood, whereas the increase was even lesser with PRP and PPP ( The generation of FXIa–AT complexes mirrored FXIIa–AT and FXIIa–C1INH generation with a high increase in blood and a low contact activation with PRP and PPP ( The topographical modifications used in the present paper resulted in two surfaces with a minimal rough surface (Sa 0–1 Whole blood in contact with clinically used surfaces was tested in the slide chamber model. Activation of the coagulation system, as reflected in the generation of TAT, showed that the activation was most pronounced with TiOB-F ( The platelet binding reflected as platelet consumption exhibit a pattern similar to the thrombin generation with the most extensive reduction of the platelet count with TiOB-F. The platelet reduction with TiOB-F was significantly higher compared with mTi and HA ( The platelet activation showed a different pattern with a 22-fold release of Activation of the intrinsic coagulation system, as reflected in the generation of FXIIa–C1INH, FXIIa–AT and FXIa–AT complexes, showed that the activation was most pronounced with TiOB-F whereas the generation with the other surfaces was lower ( FXIIa–AT generation increased 15-fold with TiOB-F but was with a 7-fold increase for TiOB and 3-fold for HA and mTi. The values for TiOB-F were again significantly higher in relation to the other tested surfaces ( FXIa–AT generation was extensive with TiOB-F causing a 330-fold increase whereas the increase was again intermediate for TiOB with 70-fold increase and 45-fold for mTi. The least generation was obtained for HA with a 9-fold elevation. The values for TiOB-F were again significantly higher than those for the other three ( Complement activation was increased with the HA surface compared with the different titanium surfaces ( Generation of sC5b-9 was low on all surfaces, but the most enhanced generation was obtained for HA with 4-fold increase and intermediate 3-fold for TiOB-F and the lowest values was obtained for mTi and TiOB with a 2-fold elevation. The value for HA was significantly higher than those for TiOB and mTi ( In the present study, we have investigated the importance of whole blood for thrombin generation and the subsequent platelet activation in contact with titanium alloy surfaces. Secondly, the influence of various surface treatments of implants on thrombogenicity has been studied. We were able to show an almost total loss of thrombin generation when PRP or PPP was tested instead of whole blood. The low binding of platelets to the material surface and the low In general, the intrinsic pathway is believed to be the main activator of the coagulation cascade when blood come in contact with biomaterials and this is supported by our own findings The response to both PVC and titanium appears to begin with a low-grade generation of thrombin, triggered by factor XII, that involves erythrocytes and which activates platelets. This is followed by the activation of a platelet-dependent amplification loop that produces most of the thrombin Together these observations show that a low basal level of thrombin generation, which depends on erythrocytes, occur upon activation of the intrinsic pathway and suggests that thrombin generation is necessary for the initial activation of platelets and for further platelet-dependent amplification of thrombin generation The increased thrombin generation on the surfaces of titanium implants may also both stimulate proliferation and inhibit apoptosis of osteoblasts There are an increasing number of studies in maxillofacial reconstructive literature that suggest some benefit of PRP in the rate of bone formation and the quality of bone formed. However, the beneficial impact of PRP have been questioned in some reports where no improvement in bone remodelling could be shown The thrombogenic properties of a dental implant in contact with whole blood has been evaluated clinically, but not thoroughly discussed, by Ellegaard et al. In a study on whole blood by Park and Davies Furthermore, we also investigated the thrombogenic properties of implant materials with different coatings or surface modifications for clinical application. We were able to show increased activation of blood coagulation with two commercially available surfaces, TiO The haemostatic plug with its fibrin network on these materials might be an optimal scaffold for regeneration of bone tissue. Augmented levels of contact activation In our study, the least thrombogenic response was achieved with the HA surface followed by the machined titanium that showed a higher response. There are few reports on clotting properties of HA in the literature; the majority deals with plasma or purified protein solutions in contact with the material. In a study, Steinberg et al. The present study addressed the mechanism of coagulation activation by implant materials both in presence and absence of red blood cells. Taken together these results implicates that One can speculate if: (1) the thrombogenic properties of titanium in contact with whole blood cause both a substantial thrombin generation and an enhanced release from This study was supported by grants from the Swedish foundation for Strategic Research, the Swedish Research Council (no. 5647), the Swedish Dental Association, Uppsala County Council, faculty grants and a grant from NIH no. AI066343-01.