A novel mineral slurry assaying method combining visible and near-infrared reflectance spectroscopy and traditional X-ray fluorescence has recently been developed. The improved method is capable of high-frequency assaying of slurry grades in zinc and copper flotation, thus being able to reveal possible rapid oscillations in the grades. In this study, the new measurements are used to detect oscillations in a copper flotation circuit. In addition, a recursive extension of a data-based signal analysis method, singular spectrum analysis, is introduced and applied to process data measured from the flotation circuit. The aim of the study is to pinpoint and eliminate the cause of the oscillations on-line in order to improve the performance of the circuit. It is shown that the oscillations can effectively be detected by the proposed method and that the structural similarity between the oscillatory signal and the other process signals can be quantified in real time.Monitoring and control of mineral flotation plants is largely based on the on-line chemical analysis of the process streams ( Oscillations in industrial processes are unwanted phenomena, since all deviations of the process variables from the optimal values reduce the process performance. In mineral flotation the optimum operating condition is a trade-off between the concentrate grade and recovery of the valuable mineral ( The detection and analysis of faults and disturbances in industrial processes is a widely studied subject. The extensive review by Techniques for oscillation detection based on the data have been introduced in the literature ( In this study a slightly different approach is taken by applying and developing singular spectrum analysis (SSA) for characterization of the oscillations. SSA is a data-based technique for analyzing the structure of time series ( The aim of this study is to utilize the novel high-frequency copper grade measurements to detect harmful oscillations in a flotation circuit. To serve this purpose, a recursive extension to the basic SSA method (rSSA) is introduced. rSSA enables the continuous on-line calculation and similarity measurement of signal structures. The results can be used to detect the plant-wide oscillations on-line and to pinpoint or narrow down the underlying cause. The article is structured as follows: In The oscillation analysis presented in this study was conducted at the concentration plant of Pyhäsalmi mine (Inmet Mining Corporation) in central Finland. The main products of the mine are copper, zinc and sulfur, and the concentration is performed in this order in three consecutive flotation circuits. The concentration process starts with grinding, where the crushed ore is mixed with water and ground to small particle size in order to liberate the different minerals. The resulting slurry is pumped to the flotation circuits. Each circuit consists of flotation cells used to separate the specific mineral particles from other particles. In a flotation cell, slurry is mixed with air bubbles that rise to the surface and form a froth layer. Because of the flotation chemicals added to the slurry, the specific mineral particles attach to the rising bubbles and are carried with the froth over the edge of the cell as a concentrate flow. The rest of the slurry flows out from the bottom of the cell as a tailing flow. By repeating this separation in several interconnected stages, the final concentrate is obtained. The structure of the copper flotation circuit at Pyhäsalmi is shown in The starting point for this study was the improved assays of the copper content of the final concentrate, obtained by the slurry spectroscope prototype (see The oscillations detected in the copper content were compared to the process history data. The data consisted of the slurry levels in all the cell banks and the flow rates of the final tailing (CuT), final concentrate (CuC) and scavenger concentrate (CuSC), which were measured after the corresponding pump pits and pumps. Data were collected for 72 The first part of this section briefly describes the calculation and properties of the basic SSA, mainly based on the book by The two main phases of singular spectrum analysis are decomposition and reconstruction. In decomposition the original time series is windowed into a set of overlapping fixed length vectors consisting of consecutive samples of the series. By applying multivariate data-based methods to these vectors the data are then decomposed into different structural components representing the trends, oscillations and noise of the original time series. In the reconstruction phase a subset of the components is selected to reproduce an estimate of the signal in which the interesting signal properties are emphasized. Both the reconstructed signal and the extracted structure information can be used for further analysis.  It is worth noting that the trajectory matrix is a Hankel matrix, meaning that the values on each skew diagonal are constant. The trajectory matrix is then treated as any data matrix containing multivariate data samples: each column corresponds to a variable, and each row to a sample of an As a result of PCA, each loading vector  Since only a subset of all elementary matrices in the original decomposition The basic version of SSA as presented here is only suitable for a signal that is measured before the analysis, and thus has a fixed and known length. Moreover, the structure of the signal has to remain roughly constant in time so that the captured eigensignals are capable of describing the whole time interval. If the signal contains major structural changes, it is possible to apply the basic SSA separately to different parts of the signal ( To be able to apply SSA in real-time detection of oscillations of industrial processes, an on-line version of the algorithm that describes the current signal structure at each time instant is required. This can be accomplished by emphasizing the most recent data and recursively updating the PCA model.   The eigensignals However, the diagonal averaging operation can be omitted since, at time As a result of rSSA, for every   The forgetting factor, on the other hand, describes the amount of change that is to be expected in the signal structure. If rapid changes are likely, a smaller forgetting factor will force the algorithm to adapt quicker to the new structure. On the other hand, A third choice is related to the grouping of the latent variables in the reconstruction phase, that is, how to select the indices  A convenient way to estimate the structural similarity of a lagged vector The results obtained by the rSSA analysis of the mineral flotation circuit data ( The copper content signal of the final copper concentrate (CuC) during the analysis period is shown in the upper part of The recursive SSA was first applied to the copper content signal with window length The six main eigensignals The second eigensignal pair in The presence of steady oscillations in a signal can be assumed to keep the signal structure approximately constant, whereas the structure of a non-periodic signal (after trend removal) is more likely to change. Based on this, the heterogeneity The lowest pane in It seems that the presented heterogeneity measure offers a potential way to automatically detect the presence of oscillations in a signal. If the analysis was performed for a stable signal (with noise), the main SSA eigensignals would capture only random variations caused by the noise, and the signal structure would change very quickly. On the other hand, the presence of any periodicity in the signal keeps the heterogeneity low. After detecting the unwanted oscillations in the process signal, the next step is to find out what causes them. To obtain this, rSSA was applied to all signals collected from the process with the same parameters as for the copper grade signal, and the heterogeneity measure  The structure of the slurry level signal of the second cleaning cell bank (CuCFII) is also quite similar to the copper grade. Especially during the oscillation period the similarity is quite obvious, thus suggesting that the slurry level in CuCFII is oscillating as well. In addition, the rougher concentrate (CuRC) flow is showing signs of the same oscillation, whereas the copper tailing (CuT) flow is more or less similar with the grade signal during the whole time period. The slurry levels in the other cleaning cell banks also have some similarities with the grade signal. The middlings, rougher and scavenger levels, however, have a different structure at least during the oscillation period. The results of the heterogeneity analysis can be confirmed by visual inspection of the rSSA reconstruction of the signals. In The frequency contents of the signals are visualized by showing the DFTs of the first eigensignals The oscillation period between the hours 23 and 57 is clearly seen in the DFT of the signals of copper grade, concentrate flow and level of the cleaning cell bank II, as already detected by the heterogeneity analysis. A slight increase in the frequency is detected during the period as the main frequency shifts from around 1.5 to almost 2 oscillations per hour. The frequencies of the rest of the signals show progressively less similarities with the copper grade. The source of the copper concentrate grade oscillations can be narrowed down by the analysis presented. Clearly, the earliest signal in which the oscillations are found is the rougher concentrate flow, thus indicating that the rougher bank, or at least the rougher concentrate pump pit, belongs to the oscillating part of the circuit. The cleaner stages 0, I, III, and IV merely pass the oscillations on to the final concentrate (see In fact, the heavy oscillation of the slurry level in the cleaner stage II could itself be the cause of the oscillation of the final concentrate grade. Based on laboratory measurements, it is known that the copper grade of the cleaner II concentrate is generally lower than the grade of the slurry flow that it is combined with just before the cleaner stage III. An oscillating slurry level in the cleaner bank II results in oscillating concentrate flow over the edge of the bank. Thus, a periodically varying amount of lower-grade concentrate from the cleaner stage II is mixed with the higher-grade slurry from the pump pit of the cleaner stage I, which in turn means that the grade of the mixture is oscillating. This grade oscillation could further be seen in the final concentrate, and could also affect the other parts of the circuit through the feedback connections. Additional visual inspection of the frequencies in Oscillations in mineral flotation reduce the concentration performance and cause economic losses since the optimal grade–recovery-relation is not constantly maintained. Recently the detection of rapid oscillations has become possible due to the improved mineral slurry assaying method based on the combination of reflectance spectroscopy and traditional X-ray fluorescence analysis. The rapid oscillations of the copper concentrate grade measured by the new measurement from a typical copper flotation circuit were studied. A new recursive singular spectrum analysis method capable of on-line analysis of the signal structures was introduced. The oscillatory structure of the copper grade was compared to the structure of the other process signals in order to find the possible cause of the oscillations. A strong similarity was found between the flow rate and the grade of the final concentrate. The slurry level in the second cleaner flotation cell and the concentrate flow rate of the rougher concentrate were shown to clearly reveal the same oscillations. Some traces of the oscillations were detected in other process signals (e.g. in the final tailing flow rate). The most likely source for the oscillations is, however, the oscillating level of the cleaner stage II. There the amplitude of the level change is the highest, and the periodically varying mixing of the low-grade concentrate from the cleaner stage II with another higher-grade slurry flow can easily result in an oscillating slurry grade in the final concentrate. The collaboration and help of the personnel of Pyhäsalmi Mine Oy and Outotec Minerals Oy is gratefully acknowledged.