A novel approach was made for synthesis of in-situ MgAl2O4 particles in Al-4Mg alloy by addition of H3BO3 (0–2 wt%) precursor under Ultrasonic Treatment (UT). The synthesized composites were characterized by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) analysis. An improved reaction of H3BO3 with aluminium alloy was observed on 5 min UT. Increase in H3BO3 addition reduces the grain size of the aluminium alloy till 5–6 times although the ultrasonic effect further contributes greatly to the grain refinement by 2–3 times reduction additionally. Substantial grain refinement by UT was elucidated to the cavitation enhanced reaction of H3BO3 which resulted in the increased number density of MgAl2O4 particles. Enhanced wettability of the MgAl2O4 particles under UT makes it as potential heterogeneous nucleation sites of Al.Grain refinement method is utilized to yield uniform, fine and equiaxed grain structure in the Al alloys for several decades Al melt oxidises during casting which is unavoidable and forms oxide films which are disadvantageous to the performance. However, these oxides are thermodynamically stable in Al and possess better lattice matching with aluminium to act as potent nucleant substrates Consequently, it is highly vital to study its mechanism of formation and nucleation potency in order to enable its usage in the grain refinement of alloys. Yun Wang et al. MgAl Al-4Mg alloy was prepared in the resistance furnace using commercial pure aluminium and magnesium. H H Generation of in-situ MgAl Metals generally exhibit poor wetting characteristics with the ceramics. Wetting is enhanced when the reaction product is formed by single or multiple displacement reactions at the particle-liquid interface SEM analysis ( The microstructural observation of Al-4Mg-2H Once an initial layer of MgAl Ultrasonic cavitation and acoustic streaming phenomena enhances the It is anticipated that nucleation of cavities is due to the gas absorbed on the suspended particles. Then on cavitation implosion, simultaneous generation of high temperature, pressure and liquid jets takes place which aids in 1) breakage and dispersion of MgAl Optical microstructures of Al-4Mg alloy (without UT and with UT) is displayed in Optical microstructure of Al-4Mg-H Minimum lattice misfit between the nucleant and nucleating phase reduces the interfacial energy thereby enables to achieve low contact angle. MgAl Conversely, UT helps in overcoming such aforesaid drawbacks by increasing the number density and providing sufficient undercooling for the smaller particles. In case of Al-4Mg-2H The substantial grain refinement up to 134 ± 25 µm upon UT clearly indicates that it does not depend on H  In-situ MgAl Microstructural examination on the Al-4Mg-2H SEM analysis revealed uniform dispersion of MgAl MgAl 5–6 times reduction in grain size is observed in Al-4Mg alloy and 8–9 times reduction in grain size is observed in Al-4Mg alloy under UT. Constitutional undercooling established pressure-pulse melting and cavitation enhanced wetting are the proposed mechanism of ultrasonically assisted grain refinement. The second author thank the