The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of initial C/N ratio (15, 20, 25) and bulking agent on speciation of Zn and Cu and enzymatic activities (dehydrogenase, urease) during pig manure composting. Rice straw and maize straw were separately chosen as bulking agent. Results showed that maize straw addition greatly enhanced organic matter (OM) degradation. The final NH4
                     +–N/NO3
                     −–N ratio in composting mixture with initial C/N ratio of 25 did not exceed the limit of 0.16 to be considered the index of mature compost. The composting mixture with initial C/N ratio of 25 could reduce the mobility of Cu and Zn, and 90% of Cu belonged to residual fraction in the final compost, while total contents for Zn and Cu increased by 112.8–192.7% and 115.5–132.6%, respectively. In addition, the composting mixture with initial C/N ratio of 25 accelerated the decline of urease activity than those in composting mixtures of initial C/N ratio of 15 and 20, and C/N ratio could affect urease activity by influencing the content of metal ions. Therefore, the final compost with initial C/N ratio of 25 was of low risk and high quality for land application.The production of livestock manure is expected to reach approximately 0.23 billion tons nitrogen equivalents per year globally in 2030 due to rapidly developing intensive and industrial livestock production ( Composting is a competitive alternative for manure management prior to its land application ( Pig manure usually contains high concentrations of Zn and Cu, due to feed additives in livestock production ( Numerous studies have been carried out about the effects of C/N ratio and bulking agent on stability and quality of compost ( Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of C/N ratio and bulking agent on enzymatic activity, speciation of Zn and Cu and compost quality. We hypothesized that (1) speciation of Zn and Cu between the control and the treatment with bulking agent or different C/N ratio would differ considerably during composting, (2) there is a close relationship between C/N ratio, urease activity and heavy metal. These results would supplement information on the feasibility of composting technology in management of manure rich in Zn and Cu. The pig manure (PM) was collected from a local intensive pig farm (Changsha, China). Rice straw (RS) and maize straw (MS) used as bulking agents to increase the porosity and adjust the C/N ratio, were obtained from a local farmland. The main characteristics of the raw materials are presented in Pig manure and bulking agents were manually mixed to prepare the composting piles following, as shown in Each treatment was placed in trapezoidal pile (0.8 m high with 1.5 × 1 m base). The composting piles were manually turned on day 0, 3, 6, 19, 13, 16, 21, 26, 31, 38, 45 and 59. During composting, samples were taken by mixing five locations (30 cm from the top) to get a representative sample, and then they were subdivided into two parts: one part was stored at 4 °C; the second was dried and grounded to 0.25 mm and subsequently sealed in plastic containers. The pH was determined by using a pH meter (Shanghai, China) after mechanically shaking the samples with deionized water (1:10 w/v). Moisture content was measured by drying the sample at 105 °C to constant weight. OM was measured by K The dehydrogenase activity was measured by the reduction method of triphenyl tetrazolium chloride (TTC) to triphenyl formazan (TPF) as described by a modified method ( The urease activity was determined by using spectrophotometry according to Averages and standard deviations of data were calculated by using SPSS 17.0. ANOVA was carried out for each treatment to determine significant differences at level The temperature is strongly correlated with the rate of biological reactions, thus it is often used to reflect the microbial activity and determine the stability of composting ( The changes in pH during composting are shown in The OM of all treatments declined gradually except T5. It declined from 91.4% to 66.0% in T1 (F = 24.686, p < 0.001); from 91.6% to 63.8% in T2 (F = 40.282, p < 0.001); from 91.9% to 76.3% in T3 (F = 25.600, p < 0.001); and from 99.4% to 81.9% in T4 (F = 13.232, p = 0.500) ( Composting of organic wastes rich in nitrogen caused nitrogen loss into the atmosphere, notably through ammonia volatilization; thus it increased air pollution and decreased the agronomic value of end product ( Changes in NO The NH Zn and Cu have been reported as the most abundant heavy metals in all composted products, swine manure and sewage sludge ( As shown in The speciation of Cu was significantly different from that of Zn ( The mobility factor (MF) which calculated as the ratio of heavy metal in F1 fraction to the total content, could be applied to evaluate the potential mobility of heavy metal ( Dehydrogenase activity has been defined as a measure of microbial activity in composts, which was directly involved in the respiratory chain and provided information of compost maturity ( Urease is involved in the hydrolysis of urea into ammonium and carbon dioxide, which is closely linked to the decomposition of agricultural waste ( Compost product can be safely applied to soil as organic fertilizer or conditioner depending on products containing high content of organic matter and nutrients, being mature or stable and without toxicity to plant growth ( The widespread use of unsuitable and unsustainable production techniques in developing countries such as Asia, Africa and Latin America agricultural systems has resulted in extensive deterioration of soil quality, and reductions in soil organic matter content and crop production. Improving and maintaining soil quality and fertility in a sustainable way is an important challenge for modern agriculture ( On the basis of the results of this study, C/N ratio plays a key role in controlling the mobility of heavy metal in compost. In particular, the final compost with initial C/N ratio of 25 is of high quality and low toxicity for land application. Thus, it will achieve win-win for resource recycling and reduction in environmental burden of manure management. This study investigated the effects of C/N ratio (15, 20, 25) and bulking agent (maize straw, rice straw) on pig manure composting through evaluating their influence on speciation of Zn and Cu and enzymatic activities (dehydrogenase, urease). Maize straw addition as bulking agent greatly enhanced organic matter degradation. The composting mixture with initial C/N ratio of 25 reduced the mobility of Cu and Zn, while their total contents increased during pig manure composting. The residual fractions of Cu were dominant speciation in all treatments. In addition, C/N ratio could affect urease activity by influencing the content of metal ions. Therefore, the final compost with initial C/N ratio of 25 was of low risk and high quality for land application. Financial support from the