This paper provides an organic overview of the most interesting continuous freeze-drying concepts that have been proposed over the years. Attention has mainly been focused on the field of pharmaceuticals, but some background has also been given on the food industry. This work aims at providing a solid starting point for future research on continuous manufacturing for the freeze-drying of pharmaceuticals.Continuous pharmaceutical manufacturing is considered an emerging technology that will radically change the pharmaceutical industry. The adoption of continuous manufacturing could offer flexibility to the process, higher product quality and economic advantages that pharma companies need in order to face their future challenges: new markets and new players on the market, lower revenues, higher standards of quality, increasing complexity and a declining R&D productivity. Freeze-drying in the pharma industry, as a downstream operation in the pharmaceutical production chain, also needs to follow these tendencies. It is not easy to exactly quantify how many of the lyophilized products would require the improvement in process efficiency ensured by continuous manufacturing. However, the augmented efficiency is not the only, or main, reason that would make the shift to continuous manufacturing advantageous. For instance, all lyophilized products would certainly benefit from the improved quality control and greater flexibility guaranteed by a continuous process. It is our opinion that an organic overview of the continuous freeze drying concepts proposed so far, which have never been categorized before, would be beneficial for further developments in this field of study. Thus, the present work is aimed at covering this gap, and, in order to do so, lyophilization patents and papers published over the last seventy years have been analysed, in order to provide an as comprehensive as possible review of the work carried out so far and of the problems that have not yet been solved. To accomplish this goal, a classification criterion was chosen to obtain a clearer description of the progress achieved over the years. We decided to distinguish between two different categories of freeze-dryers: 1) freeze-dryers that are fed with bulk material, supplied either as frozen granules or in liquid form. In this case, the dosage of the final product into a suitable vessel is performed at the end of the drying process, and 2) freeze-dryers that work on and directly produce unit-doses. In the latter case, the dosage is carried out as the first step, and the product is dried after being introduced into a vial or another suitable container. Category 2 is the most suitable for pharmaceutical products, as it allows an easier control of sterility (the product is never in contact with the mechanical parts of the dryer, but only with the walls of the final container) as well as an accurate dosage of the APIs. However, category 2 equipment must be designed to take into account the huge variety of shapes and dimensions of containers commonly used in freeze-drying, which can be a challenge. This problem would not arise in the case of category 1, where a simple fluidized bed, or a vibrating system, may be used to handle the product through the different sections of the dryer. Because of this, most of the early concepts of continuous freeze-dryers proposed over the years fall into this first category. Therefore, the following sections deal with the aforementioned two categories of continuous freeze-dryers, and each class is analysed from a chronological point of view. The pharmaceutical industry is facing a period of significant change pertaining to: new drugs and dosage forms, the expiry of some high-profit drug patents, new competitors and markets, and the setting of more stringent standards by regulatory authorities. To respond to this wave of competing challenges and, at the same time, to a period of stagnant growth, many pharmaceutical companies are consolidating their position by demonstrating the clinical and economic value of their products, adopting new technologies, elevating their quality standards and, finally, rethinking their production and distribution structures From the processing point of view, the main challenge that has to be faced is the competition for cost-effective drugs and the increasing regulatory authority scrutiny The pharmaceutical industry generally adopts batch manufacturing, which consists of a series of separate unit operations. A batch process is constituted by a predefined sequence of discrete tasks, in which raw products are charged into the system at the beginning and discharged after a pre-set time. In continuous manufacturing, processes are integrated, on the basis of a systems approach that makes use of model-based control and flow The main advantages of continuous processes over batch ones are Operation flexibility Shortening the time to react to changes in market demand Reduced scale-up issues, or no scale-up at all Real-time quality assurance Reductions in footprint, investment and operative costs In spite of the superior efficiency of continuous processes, most drugs are at present almost exclusively manufactured using the batch technology. For example, it has recently been estimated that only 5% of pharmaceutical processes are carried out continuously Continuous manufacturing would not only result in increased productivity, but would also be more reliable and safer, eliminating breaks between steps and reducing opportunities for human errors during the typical stops and starts of batch processes. Moreover, a more efficient production of quality products can reduce manufacturing costs, possibly resulting in lower drug prices for consumers, and would allow manufacturers to respond more quickly to changes in demand. Finally, the equipment footprint would be smaller, thus decreasing the costs and introducing more flexibility The pharmaceutical industry has already made some progress in implementing stepwise continuous processes, in both the synthesis of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) and in the production of the final dosage forms In Europe, the Centre for Innovative Manufacturing for Continuous Manufacturing and Crystallisation (CMAC), at the University of Strathclyde, is working, in collaboration with industries, on developing new continuous processes, while GlaxoSmithKline is building a continuous manufacturing plant in Singapore for antibiotic production The benefits of continuous manufacturing have been investigated extensively However, some commercial drug processes have already been made continuous, such as the production of the cystic fibrosis Orkambi tablets by Vertex The progress towards continuous manufacturing has been facilitated, in recent years, by regulatory agencies For instance, in 2002, the FDA launched an initiative called The next step was the release of an additional guidance on manufacturing, entitled On December 2015, FDA released a draft guidance to industry Moreover, in 2014 Janet Woodcock, Head of CDER at the FDA, expressed the desire to set up a constructive dialogue about continuous pharmaceutical manufacturing with industries and academics During these symposiums, the discussions covered all the aspects involved in continuous manufacturing, including regulatory and quality considerations FDA is not the only agency to have promoted the shift towards continuous manufacturing. Among others, in 2016, the US government’s National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) defined continuous manufacturing of pharmaceuticals as a priority objective of US industry In spite of the increasing attention given to continuous manufacturing, there are still some pharmaceutical processes whose progress in this field is unsatisfactory, and freeze drying is certainly among them. This technique consists in a low-temperature drying process, which is particularly suitable for heat sensitive products, and is thus used widely for the production of pharmaceuticals. Freeze-drying allows a significant increase in the stability of pharmaceuticals and biopharmaceuticals, and, thanks to the mild conditions employed, can effectively preserve the activity of APIs. However, pharmaceutical freeze-drying is at present an expensive and time-consuming operation, and this is worsened by the fact that it is a batch process. Moreover, in batch freeze-dryers, the heat transfer provided to the product is uneven, and this leads to vial-to vial inhomogeneity, and, thus, to the impossibility of guaranteeing the same quality in each unit dose. Other drawback of the presently available system are the complicated handling of vials during loading and unloading, which increases the risk of contamination, the lack of versatility and the difficult scale-up. Thus, the shift from batch to continuous would allow a great saving of time, an increased productivity, a better quality and homogeneity of the final product, and improved flexibility to be achieved The modern history of freeze-drying started in 1890, when freeze-drying was successfully applied by the histologist Richard Altman to preserve tissues From the 1950s until the present day, an increasing number of products have been freeze-dried, i.e., antibiotics, vaccines, oncolytics, corticosteroids, as well as surgical and diagnostic products. The freeze-drying of pharmaceutical products is carried out using large equipment placed in sterile rooms. The process consists of three main steps: Freezing of a liquid solution until complete solidification of the product has occurred. Primary drying, which consists in removing ice by sublimation. The process variables, i.e., the chamber pressure, shelf temperature, and duration, are adjusted to avoid the collapse or the melting back of the product. Secondary drying, which consists in removing the residual water adsorbed in the solid cake. This step is performed in a vacuum condition and with an increasing shelf temperature to trigger water desorption. A typical freeze-drying cycle ranges from few hours to more than an entire week, depending on many variables, e.g., product formulation, filling volume and vessel type. The downtime between two consecutive cycles is usually long because some ancillary operations are required: vial filling, vial loading, vial unloading, vial stoppering venting/backfilling leak test cleaning-in-place (CIP) sterilization-in-place (SIP) condenser defrosting filter integrity test Vial filling, loading, and unloading in the drying chamber and vial stoppering is carried out in sterile conditions by mean of automatic systems that minimize human intervention. These systems are usually able to process 500 vials per minute, which means that these operations take from 6 to 10 h for industrial-scale batches. Moreover, condenser defrosting, CIP, SIP, a leak test and a water intrusion test take from 7 to 13 h Freezing is a fundamental step in lyophilization and an important cause of vial-to-vial and batch-to-batch non-uniformity. During this process, ice nucleation occurs stochastically in a supercooled solution, and crystals then start to grow. Finally, a multiphase system is formed with several domains, i.e., crystals of pure ice and other solid phases constituted by the drug, the excipients and the bound water. Therefore, the microscopic structure of the product, crystallinity and polymorphism, and the stability of the APIs are influenced to a great extent by the thermal history of the samples during freezing During drying, the main cause of non-uniformity is the differences in the heat transfer. These differences may be attributed to variations in: Vial geometry/shelf flatness Position of vials on the shelf Shelf surface temperature Chamber pressure Heat is supplied by contact between the vial and the shelf, gas conduction in the small gap between the shelf and vial, and by radiation from shelves and the surroundings. As each vial may be slightly different from the others, the heat supplied to the product changes. A second important effect is due to the position of the vials on the shelf; vials in the proximity of walls can receive up to 50% more heat than those in the centre. The extensive literature on the so-called ”edge-vial effects” shows how important their impact is in performing safe and reliable cycles. The non-uniformity of the temperature across the shelves and the pressure gradients in the apparatus represent a further source of non-uniformity in the heat supplied to the products Batch-to-batch variability is a typical problem of every batch process. Variations in product quality and in the characteristics from batch to batch are usually unpredictable, and even a perfect control of the process is not sufficient to avoid them. Any changes or deviation, such as changes in suppliers, different equipment or human errors, can seriously affect product quality and safety. A Quality by Design approach can partially mitigate this variability, thus assuring a quality target Scale-ups play a critical role in achieving reliable and efficient cycles. In fact, when moving from the laboratory to pilot equipment, and eventually to an industrial freeze-dryer, many variables have to be taken into account. The typical cycle scale-up and transfer issues are no GMP conditions of the pilot equipment vs GMP/particulate-free condition of the industrial equipment long loading times of industrial batches Differences in the heat transfers Variations in the cake resistance Variations in the shelf temperature Spatial variations in the chamber pressure Process control Continuous lyophilization has been carried out in the food industry since the 1960s, but in the pharmaceutical-freeze-drying world, research has mainly been focused on process monitoring and control This is the most common category of continuous freeze-dryers proposed over the years, mainly because of the relatively simple design of continuous systems working with bulk material, supplied either as frozen particles or in liquid form. Several freeze-dryers that work on granules have been proposed for the food industry, starting from the middle of the 20th century. A continuous freeze dryer pilot plant for drying orange juice was developed as early as 1945 For instance, Oetjen developed a continuous process for the production of powdered milk. According to this concept, freeze-dryer trays are filled with frozen products, in granular form, and driven through a drying tunnel while hanging from a monorail. The heat provided by heating plates, combined with vacuum conditions, promotes the removal of water from the product. The process is accomplished in successive steps and vacuum locks are used to connect the different sections of the apparatus Another possible solution, in the food industry, is represented by the Conrad freeze-dryer, developed by Atlas The Conrad technology works but it is still a semi-continuous process. However, in the mid-1970s, a fully continuous line was introduced for the production of instant coffee. The granulated product is loaded continuously onto a 20–30 m long vibrating tray placed inside a drying chamber. The product moves along the tray fluidized by its own water vapor, while heating devices provide the energy necessary for sublimation. Unavoidably, attrition between product and tray generates a dust that is made up of small particles, and a screen is used to prevent these particles from reaching the condenser and the pumps At present, continuous freeze-drying tunnels are manufactured for the food industry by, among others, GEA, ALD, BUCHER, DEVEX, SSP, SPX and CUDDON. Several patents regarding continuous freeze-dryers that work on granules, or on bulk material in general, have been registered over the years. Fuentevilla, for example, proposed a system in 1966 Although the apparatus by Fuentevilla works on already frozen particles, the equipment described by Vigano in 1966 Again in 1966, Togashi and Mercer Another piece of apparatus designed for foodstuff was proposed by Rockwell et al. An evolution of the concept introduced by Togashi and Mercer was proposed in a patent, dated 1972, by Mercer et al. A similar idea was presented in a patent registered in 1971 by Oetjen et al. Two patents were then proposed by Smith in 1971 and 1973, respectively In May 1973, Gottfried Although the previously mentioned concepts, despite their differences, all have similar features, a completely new idea was presented by Arsem in a patent dated 1986 However, a problem with the Arsem In 2013, Weisselberg registered a patent pertaining to a continuous freeze-dryer that operates at atmospheric pressure As previously discussed, it has been claimed that some of the apparatus proposed in the patents cited so far are also suitable for pharmaceuticals, but it is also true that they were not developed explicitly to perform this function. However, parallel to the improvements in the food industry and the variety of ideas proposed in the aforementioned patents, some concepts have also been suggested specifically for the processing of biologicals. A continuous dryer was constructed at Fort Detrick in 1952 to dry biological materials Some years later, Rey A recent concept related to continuous freeze-drying is the so-called Ulvac has recently developed a new freeze-drying process, the so-called Fine-Spray Freeze-Drying, in which a liquid is sprayed directly into a vacuum chamber through special nozzles, self-frozen and deposited on a heated shelf, where the drying process is carried out to generate micro-particles. In contrast with bulk lyophilization, where the extension of the sublimation interface is limited, the extremely larger surface-to-volume ratio of sprayed droplets results in remarkably faster freezing and drying rates, because of the enhanced heat and mass transfer. For instance, it was estimated that spraying 1 ml of solution in 0.5-mm droplets produces a surface area that is about 80 times larger than the corresponding liquid-gas interface in a 14- mm diameter vial. Another freeze drying technique, which is still not continuous, but very close to it, is the Dynamic Freeze-Drying technique Freeze-dryers that work directly on unit doses, as previously stated, allow an easy control of sterility to be achieved, as well as an accurate dosage of the APIs. These represent significant advantages from the viewpoint of pharmaceutical processes. In fact, most of the existing pharmaceutical freeze-dryers belong to this category, but they are, at present, operated in batch-wise mode, and their convertion into continuous mode is not straightforward. Thus, only a few concepts have been developed for continuous freeze-dryers working directly on unit doses. A series of patents which apply the so-called shell-freezing or spin-freezing method to the lyophilization process have been registered. During freezing, the vessel containing the liquid raw material is rotated, so that the resulting product forms a thin coat or shell on the inner surface of the vessel. Various technological solutions have been proposed as shown hereafter. In 1957, Becker Another continuous freeze dryer that uses the shell-freezing approach was suggested by Broadwin in 1965 In the process proposed by Becker A recent approach has been introduced by Corver in a patent dated 2012 Other pieces of apparatus that work with unit-doses and which do not use the spin-freezing approach have been proposed over the years. For example, in 1978, Braun Finally, our research group has recently proposed a new continuous freeze-drying concept, that works with unit-doses In this work, an organic overview of the continuous freeze-drying concepts proposed over the years has been provided. Although freeze-drying in the food industry is, in most cases, carried out continuously or semi-continuously, in the field of pharmaceuticals it still remains a batch process. This delay in the pharmaceutical industry is due to the difficulty of ensuring, during continuous operation, the strict requirement of sterility and the accurate dosage of the APIs that are necessary for pharmaceutical products. However, the shift towards continuous production would lead to several benefits, as summarized in  R. Pisano, L.C. Capozzi and B.L. Trout have developed one of the technologies described in the present work, for which a patent is also involved. However, the different technologies herein reviewed have been described on an objective basis, and our statements have rigorously been based on scientific data.