The presence of different apatite types is characteristic of igneous phosphate deposits. The flotation performances of primary and secondary apatites occurring in phoscorites, weathered phoscorites and pyroxenites were investigated. As a contribution towards the understanding of the behaviour of the flotation system, the major gangue minerals were also selected for the study: quartz, a pyroxene (augite), altered micas (vermiculite), calcite and dolomite. Zeta potential curves for all the above mentioned mineral species were determined as a function of pH, pCa and pMg. Microflotation experiments were performed in a modified Hallimond tube at different pH levels in the presence of sodium oleate as collector and corn starch as depressant.Flotation plant practice of igneous phosphate ores demonstrates that the performance is strongly influenced by the composition of the ore feeding the concentrator. The presence of different rocks (designated as ore types in the phosphate mining jargon) in the feed causes changes in the mineralogical composition. Besides the presence of distinct gangue minerals, several types of apatite are also observed, the major classification being primary and secondary apatite. Despite the efforts of the mine planning team and the use of homogenising piles, reagents schemes and operation conditions must be adapted to the feed. The present investigation addresses fundamental studies performed with mineral species selected from a large magmatic phosphate deposit in central Brazil, Salitre, aiming at contributing to enhanced mine planning and plant practice control of the concentrator that will be commissioned in the next two years. The mineralogical composition of the major rocks present in the deposit is illustrated in Apatitites present primary (magmatic origin) and secondary (hydrothermal origin) apatites. Primary apatites are clean and secondary apatites contain surface coatings and inclusions. Two alteration products of phoscorites are present in the deposit, namely weathered and silicified phoscorite. Both primary and secondary apatites are present in the phoscorite types, primary apatite being predominant in phoscorite and weathered phoscorite. Pyroxenite rocks contain primary apatite (magmatic origin) and secondary apatite (supergene origin). The correlations among SiO Samples collection was carried out at Salitre’s deposit by an experienced geology team. Individual mineral species were purified by physical methods (barrier field Frantz magnetic and heavy liquid separations). The apatites ore type, despite being extremely rich in the mineral apatite, was not included in the studies due to the fact that it is not abundant in the deposit. Primary apatites from phoscorite, weathered phoscorite and pyroxenite and secondary apatites from phoscorite and pyroxenite were selected for both sets of experiments (zeta potential and microflotation). The major gangue minerals present in the deposit were used in the tests, namely quartz, calcite, dolomite, a pyroxene (augite), and three kinds of altered mica (vermiculite). Zeta potential determinations were performed in a Rank Brothers Zetameter, the electrophoretic mobility figures being converted to zeta potential values with the help of the Smoluchowski equation ( Microflotation experiments were carried out in a conventional modified Hallimond tube under the operation conditions: 1 Distilled water was used in all experiments, to prevent contamination from sources other than the added ions and dissolved species from the minerals. The effect of interfering ions on the flotation of a magmatic phosphate ore was extensively investigated by Bench scale flotation experiments (rougher only) were also performed in laboratory mechanical cells to provide information on how mixed mineral systems affect the behaviour of the reagents. From tests with different concentrations of the collector saponified soy bean bran oil, at pH 10.0, a statistical projection was made for 35.5% P The results of zeta potential determinations of primary and secondary apatites from phoscorites and pyroxenites as a function of pH are presented in  The effect of the calcium and magnesium cations on the zeta potential of apatites was also assessed. The results were plotted as curves of zeta potential (determined at pH 10.5) as a function of pCa and pMg, respectively, illustrated in The effect of the presence of calcium cations on the zeta potential of gangue minerals, at pH 10.5, is illustrated in A comparison among The next set of results addresses microflotation experiments. There is no strong correlation between zeta potential ( The recoveries of apatite types as a function of the dosage of sodium oleate, at pH 10, are presented in Secondary apatites from phoscorite and pyroxenite require higher collector dosages to reach top recovery levels. The explanation probably relies on the degree of impregnation rather than on the zeta potential profile, for the zeta potential of both types is only slightly negative at pH 10.0. Primary apatite from pyroxenite is also strongly depressed by corn starch. Again the plausible explanation is impregnation with iron oxides. Corn starch is the conventional depressant of gangue minerals in magmatic phosphate ores flotation. Unfortunately starch also depresses apatite, at pH 10 and sodium oleate dosage Finally, the floatability of the gangue minerals was investigated. Curves of recovery as a function of pH (sodium oleate dosage  A comparison between zeta potential (  The floatability of the altered micas was low and unaffected by the starch dosage. Finally, results are presented of bench scale flotation experiments. The projected statistical results for 35.5% P The impregnation of primary apatite from phoscorite with iron oxide renders its zeta potential profile similar to that of hematite. Calcium and magnesium cations, at pH 10.5, add positive surface charges to apatite and gangue minerals, due to hydroxi-complexes specific adsorption. This effect is weaker in the case of altered micas than towards quartz and pyroxene. Corn starch is a more effective depressant for secondary apatites than for primary apatites, due to the presence of iron in the lattice of the former. Corn starch is a more effective depressant for calcite than for dolomite.