Plant effects on ecosystem processes are mediated through plant–microbial interactions belowground and soil enzyme assays are commonly used to directly relate microbial activity to ecosystem processes. Live plants influence microbial biomass and activity via differences in rhizosphere processes and detrital inputs. I utilized six grass species of varying litter chemistry in a factorial greenhouse experiment to evaluate the relative effect of live plants and detrital inputs on substrate-induced respiration (SIR, a measure of active microbial biomass), basal respiration, dissolved organic carbon (DOC), and the activities of β-glucosidase, β-glucosaminidase, and acid phosphatase. To minimize confounding variables, I used organic-free potting media, held soil moisture constant, and fertilized weekly. SIR and enzyme activities were 2–15 times greater in litter-addition than plant-addition treatments. Combining live plants with litter did not stimulate microbial biomass or activity above that in litter-only treatments, and β-glucosidase activity was significantly lower. Species-specific differences in litter N (%) and plant biomass were related to differences in β-glucosaminidase and acid phosphatase activity, respectively, but had no apparent effect on β-glucosidase, SIR, or basal respiration. DOC was negatively related to litter C:N, and positively related to plant biomass. Species identity and living plants were not as important as litter additions in stimulating microbial activity, suggesting that plant effects on soil enzymatic activity were driven primarily by detrital inputs, although the strength of litter effects may be moderated by the effect of growing plants.Plants alter soil processes in many ways, ranging from differences in detrital inputs and nutrient use, to alterations to microclimate or disturbance cycles ( Plant species identity also affects ecosystem processes ( In this study, I address one critical area of uncertainty in plant–microbe interactions: the relative effects of living plants, plant litter, and their interaction on microbial biomass and soil enzyme activity. I hypothesized, first, that both living plants and plant litter would stimulate microbial biomass and activity, and that the greatest enhancement of microbial biomass and activity would occur in treatments containing both live plants and added litter. Both microbial biomass ( This experiment was conducted from 31 May to 1 November 2003 (155 The six grass species used included three C Added litter (+L) was naturally senesced aboveground plant parts collected from monoculture-grass stands in central Iowa during fall 2002. Litter was maintained in single species collections, air dried, and ground on a Wiley Mill fitted with a 0.5-mm mesh screen. All 48 +L pots received 35 Potting medium moisture content was returned to field capacity daily for the first 14 Aboveground plant biomass was harvested at the end of the experiment (155 Sub-samples of sieved potting medium were air-dried, ground to a fine powder with a mortal and pestle, and analyzed for C and N as described above for biomass. Potting medium C and N from −L treatment pots were below detection limits, and were not considered further. Soil pH was determined using 1:2.5 solution of sieved potting medium and water, and sieved potting medium and 10 Within 24 The enzyme activity of All analyses were conducted using JMP version 5.1 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). Hypothesis one, which evaluated the effect of living plants and plant litter on SIR, basal respiration, DOC, and microbial enzyme activity, was tested using a two-way analysis of variance, followed by Tukey–Kramer HSD tests ( Plant species-identity effects (addressed by hypothesis two) on SIR, basal respiration, DOC, BGase, NAGase, and APase activity within each treatment (i.e. within +L+P, +L−P and −L+P individually) were tested with one-way analysis of variance. Significant species-identity effects were subsequently investigated for relationships with litter N concentration and plant biomass using analysis of covariance. Among-treatment differences in potting medium pH were compared using a two-way analysis of variance, followed by Tukey–Kramer HSD tests ( SIR was significantly affected by litter addition ( In general, the activity of all three soil enzymes was significantly affected by litter addition ( Species identity did not significantly influence SIR ( Species identity significantly affected NAGase activity in both +L+P and +L−P, but not in −L+P. As such, I reasoned that species-identity effects on NAGase were related to plant litter, not living plants. In agreement with hypothesis two, differences among species in NAGase activity were significantly and positively related to initial litter N (%) ( Total plant biomass was significantly greater ( Despite the relatively low litter concentration of the +L treatment potting medium, litter addition had the strongest effect on soil microbial biomass and activity ( Although live-plant effects were not as strong as litter-addition effects, live grasses did significantly influence SIR, basal respiration, DOC, and soil enzyme activities ( In agreement with my initial hypothesis, SIR, basal respiration, DOC, and soil enzyme activities were stimulated by the presence of both live grasses and litter. However, in contrast to my expectations, their combined effect was not additive, with all microbial measures in +L+P less than expected from the additive effect of −L+P and +L−P, and DOC, BGase, and NAGase activity were actually lower in +L+P than in +L−P ( Total grass biomass (g C) and N uptake (g N) were significantly lower in +L+P than in −L+P ( As hypothesized, species-identity significantly affected microbial measures within each experimental treatment (i.e. within +L−P, +L+P, and −L+P). However, and in contrast to my expectations, significant species-identity effects were not universal across all microbial measures. In fact, only NAGase activity in +L+P and +L−P, APase activity in +L+P and −L+P, and DOC levels in −L+P, +L−P, and +L+P were significantly affected by species-identity ( In this controlled greenhouse study, short-term plant-induced changes to SIR, basal respiration, DOC, and soil enzyme activities were strongly stimulated by litter inputs ( I thank Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Organismal Biology at Iowa State University and the Department of Natural and Applied Sciences at the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay for providing valuable logistical and technical support during this project. O. Valverde and L. Martin provided valuable physical assistance throughout the experiment. T. Loynachan, T. Parkin, A. Russell, A. Tabatabai, J. Raich, B. Wilsey, and two anonymous reviewers provided invaluable technical support and direction throughout. This work was funded by a 2003 Sigma Xi Grant-in-Aid of Research and the William Clark Graduate Student Award in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology from Iowa State University to M. Dornbush, and a NSF grant to J. Raich and G. Mora.