Introduction
                  In the treatment of avulsion fractures of the posterior calcaneal tuberosity, open reduction and internal fixation are prone to several complications. We describe a new treatment using an Ilizarov external fixator, which can minimise the complications and achieve sufficient stability of the displaced fragment.
               
                  Case presentation
                  A 55-year-old woman sustained an avulsion fracture of the calcaneus. Examination revealed the development of bruising with extremely taut skin over the posterior prominence of the displaced bone. Radiographs demonstrated grossly proximal displacement of the tuberosity fragment. Surgery was exclusively percutaneous using an Ilizarov external fixator. The displaced fragment was adequately reduced and stabilised. Progressive weight bearing in the equinus position was initiated at the third week after surgery and the external fixator was removed at the seventh week. There was no skin necrosis or loss of reduction while the fixator was maintained. Postoperative follow-up for 2 years revealed full recovery.
               
                  Discussion
                  Major postoperative complications after conventional open reduction and internal fixation include skin necrosis, skin irritation by metal implants and re-displacement of the reduced fragment. Our method of using an external fixator may decrease the incidence of these three complications.
                  Skin incision and the risk of skin necrosis are inevitable during internal fixation. On the other hand, the use of an external fixator reduces or eliminates skin necrosis, as it is applied percutaneously for reduction and stabilisation of the fragment. External fixation is mostly recommended in cases of poor vascularity or bruising. In addition, skin irritation can be avoided upon removal of the external fixator.
                  Re-displacement occurs occasionally as a serious complication in lag screw fixation, particularly in cases with poor purchase of the osteoporotic bone. Tension band wiring and application of an Ilizarov external fixator in avulsion fractures of the calcaneus can neutralise tension on the Achilles tendon during the healing process. Thus, both these methods are believed to provide sufficient mechanical stability to fix the fragment.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This new method, involving application of an Ilizarov external fixator, is recommended when the avulsion fragment is large enough to accommodate Ilizarov wires, especially in cases of circulatory problems or bruising.Avulsion fractures of the posterior calcaneal tuberosity are relatively rare, comprising only 1.3–2.7% of all calcaneal fractures. Surgeons should understand that ORIF for this type of fracture can lead to several complications such as skin necrosis, metal irritation and loss of reduction of the fragment. The purpose of this study is to introduce a new treatment method, involving Ilizarov external fixation with minimal skin incision, to achieve sufficient stability of the displaced fragment. This method decreases the incidence of complications, with satisfactory results. A 55-year-old woman sustained an injury to the left heel (in September 2009) when she tried to maintain her balance while holding a baby in her arms. She experienced immediate pain and sat down. Physical examination revealed tenderness and substantial swelling at the posterior aspect of the left heel. The skin was extremely taut over the prominence of the displaced bone. On calf compression, weakness of ankle plantar flexion and loss of function of the calcaneal tendon were observed. The following day, a blister developed on the left heel area, indicating impaired circulation. Radiographs demonstrated a substantial proximal displacement of the tuberosity fragment with extension of the fracture line into the subtalar joint ( Surgery was performed 4 days after the injury. Postoperatively, weight bearing was prohibited for the first 2 weeks, although non-strenuous range-of-motion exercises were allowed. Progressive weight bearing while maintaining the foot in the equinus position was initiated in the third week after surgery, with periodic radiographic evaluation. The external fixator was removed 7 weeks after surgery. During application of the external fixator, no cutaneous circulatory problems were observed. Full weight bearing was permitted after 10 weeks. Good recovery and resumption of normal function without pain after 3 months were achieved. The follow-up examination 2 years after the operation revealed neither pain in the heel nor scar formation in the hind foot. The range of movement was comparable to the normal contralateral side. The Thompson test was negative and heel raising was normal. Radiographs showed good fracture healing with no sign of reduction loss ( All procedures were conducted under general anaesthesia and control of an image intensifier. A closed reduction was initiated but was unsuccessful, as is often the case. The operative procedure was as follows: The patient was maintained in a right lateral decubitus position. Two crossed olive wires were inserted into the displaced calcaneus fragment and were fixed to a half ring under tension. The half ring with olive wires facilitated fracture reduction by applying a downward force. Lateral view using an image intensifier showed the extent of reduction ( With adequate reduction, a Kirschner wire (K-wire) was temporally inserted ( The body of the calcaneus was stabilised with three calcaneal wires. Two crossed calcaneal wires were placed and attached to the foot ring under tension. A third wire was positioned from the lateral to medial side to assist support of the posterior facet. Two wires were inserted in the forefoot and were both fixed to a foot ring. The proximally displaced fragment was fixed using an olive wire and foot ring. The fragment was then reduced to the pre-fracture position, and compression force was applied between the displaced fragment and the calcaneal body ( The K-wire, temporally stabilising the fragment, was then removed. To date, surgical options for displaced avulsion fractures of the calcaneus include a lag screw insertion, cerclage wire application and tension band wiring. The greatest merit of our method employing an external fixator is that the incidence of the above-mentioned complications could be decreased. First, regarding skin necrosis, the application of the Ilizarov external fixator is superior to ORIF. In the Ilizarov technique, all procedures, including fracture reduction and stabilisation of the fragment, can be performed with minimal skin incision. The skin is incised only for pin insertion. By contrast, a considerably lengthy skin incision is inevitable during an internal fixation procedure. Second, skin irritation induced by metal implants may occur. The method of tension band wiring described by Levi et al. Third, as calcaneal fractures occur more commonly in the elderly, osteoporotic, neuropathic and diabetic populations, re-displacement, depending on the extent of osteoporosis or comminution of the fragment, may be a serious complication. Ramanujam et al. Our method has three limitations. In general, the Ilizarov external fixator may not be able to provide sufficient stability for small fragments. Hence, cerclage or tension band wiring to control small avulsion fragments is suggested. As the tendon is usually stronger than the fragile bone, the wires are passed around the Achilles tendon originating from the calcaneus. Second, although the period of application was limited, minimal skin irritation was observed during application of the external fixator. Third, postoperative rehabilitation is case-dependent. Our patient could initiate early weight bearing in the equinus position without immobilisation of the ankle joint, as size and quality of the bone fragment were sufficient. This programme may not be applicable when the fragment is small. In conclusion, our method of using Ilizarov external fixation is recommended for avulsion fragments that are large enough to accommodate Ilizarov wires, and is especially beneficial in cases with circulatory problems or blister formation. However, in fracture cases involving osteoporotic bone, a robust rehabilitation programme will be necessary. All authors must disclose any financial and personal relationships with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence (bias) their work. Examples of potential conflicts of interest include employment, consultancies, stock ownership, honoraria, paid expert testimony, patent applications/registrations, and grants or other funding. The study sponsors had no such involvement. The work has been approved by the appropriate ethical committees related to the institution(s) in which it was performed and that subjects gave informed consent to the work.