The response of Cu-oxide and sulfide ores is studied by the leaching of sulfuric acid. Exotic and supergenic enrichment samples were contrasted by assaying three Chilean copper deposits in order to develop a predictive methodology of the industrial process. The mineralogical and chemical characteristics of the ores were described, including clay-size fraction X-ray diffraction, cation exchange capacity and hydraulic conductivity. Leaching experiments included the re-extraction of Cu remaining in the heap and were performed in stages of rinsing and elution in order to quantify the Cu physically or chemically retained in the residues. The integral characterization and the assays permit to predict the leaching behavior of the studied units and make possible the necessary blend of them in the industrial process. A relevant conclusion was to confirm that the removal of clay minerals from the rock framework during leaching is dependent of the rock texture which resulted as the limiting variable for the final copper liberation or retention.The world production of refined copper, estimated by the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics ( When metal prices are high, inexpensive leaching processes become economically more attractive, although these extractions are threatened when the price falls because only good management of critical variables is necessary to maintain this type mining project. To control leaching operation variables, the metallurgical behavior of ore and gangue need to be understood for diverse mining sectors. If the deposit is sectorized, more mineralogical, chemical and physical information is required to support decisions at the moment of introducing production changes, solving problems and incorporating (or eliminating) units from the production process for cost reasons. In some mining operations, the extraction process begins when the main ore minerals are identified and the production units are defined according to ore grade and the rock’s physical quality. Gangue mineralogy is only considered once the first production problems arise. These problems may be of considerable magnitude, limiting possible responses once production has started. This neglect could be due to the training of staff involved in extraction. The staff often has long standing experience in processes of primary ore concentration, but with little or no experience in gangue alteration relevant for leach operations. Gangue is mainly viewed for its hardness with direct incidence on comminution and the difficulties for a liquid–solid separation. Furthermore, there are analytical difficulties associated with an adequate characterization of alteration minerals and occluded phases, thus requiring the use X-ray diffraction and/or electron microprobe for basic mineralogy or mineral chemistry. The interactions within multidisciplinary groups does not make decision-making easy. Mineral leaching is a chemical process that affects the entire rock, and thus can be used to distinguish a rock’s acid resistant phases. Therefore, comprehensive knowledge of the ore and gangue mineralogy is vital due to the acid consumption recorded after prolonged acid exposure. Additionally, important volume changes and cation exchange occur with the leach solutions ( The present study builds on the authors’ previous experiments using synthetic ore–gangue aggregates ( Ten composite samples from one exotic Cu deposit (Deposit A) and two deposits from the supergene enrichment zone of porphyry Cu-ore bodies (Deposits B and C) were tested. All samples were characterized by qualitative mineralogy (semi-quantitative for Cu-ore and other oxide phases), X-ray diffraction (XRD) of the whole rock and For the leaching experiments, three parallel laboratory columns of 20 The following discussion of the mineralogical characteristics and physic-chemical properties of the samples will focus on the materials of andesitic origin (B and C), where a complete data set is available. Information from the conglomerates A will be used to highlight extreme geomechanical differences resulting from the same original rock type, such as was the case of the A samples, which sparked the development of the present assay routine/sequence.  The Cu For samples B and C, the ore is disseminated and bound to micro-veinlets ( The weight percent of the When comparing the increased release of the The highest CEC (>10 Cu recovery during the leach phase correlates well with the Cu For the C samples, the elution stage was incorporated based on the prior positive recovery of 3.08% of Cu in this stage for the earthy conglomerate A2, which has a CEC of 23.1 Moisture content ( Hydraulic conductivity ( With respect to clay mineralogy ( In order to qualitatively assay the potential disintegration of rock clasts prior to leach tests, rock clasts were exposed to diluted H In the laboratory column leach tests, dynamic humidity was reached in the materials B1, B2 and B3 after 40 The results obtained demonstrate that careful mineralogical analysis, including the rock texture, linked to simple observations of physical qualities such as crushed clast roundness and low complexity tests aimed at hydraulic conductivity and CEC significantly aid to understand the results of laboratory test leaches when these are accompanied by rigorous chemical control. Leaching of ore with complex physical quality requires the development of protocols for the mineralogical and chemical characterization of the head units of the extraction process and the resulting residues. When this information is available, all mine sectors will then be able to be effectively exploited and this tool can be used for process diagnosis and control. The protocols should include classical chemical and mineralogical characterization together with X-ray diffraction of the clay-size fraction, CEC and hydraulic conductivity as well as laboratory control leach tests. Leach tests should include both rinsing and electrolyte elution stages for the residues in order to evaluate physical retentions and cation exchange processes between the minerals and the leach solutions. In particular, the rock texture should be considered when ranking the influence of minerals – in particular phyllosilicates – in Cu retention or reduction of column/heap porosity. Easy removal of these minerals from their rock framework is directly proportional to their potential “to act” during leaching, thus the presence of a phyllosilicate should be viewed under the possible encasing support (or lack of it) provided by the host rock. This information is best obtained from transmitted light microscopic descriptions.