Acid Cu leaching from the European Kupferschiefer ore deposits is a challenge e.g. due to its high carbonate content. In this study, we investigated the transport behaviour of Cu under conditions related to a biohydrometallurgical leaching approach using neutrophil microorganisms in neutral to slightly alkaline solutions. We studied the effect of the microbial siderophore desferrioxamineB (DFOB) as a model leaching organic ligand on Cu mobility in column experiments with kaolinite. The results revealed that DFOB strongly enhances Cu mobility. The breakthrough of Cu occurs considerably earlier in the presence of DFOB than in the absence of the organic ligand. Furthermore, complete elution of Cu was observed at 5 pore volume exchanges faster compared to elution with deionized water. The established geochemical transport model shows good agreement with the experimental data and suggests a maximum efficiency at a Cu to DFOB molar ratio of 1:1. In addition, results of modelling revealed that in the absence of the ligand, a pH increase from 6.5 to 8.5 significantly retarded Cu breakthrough, whereas in the presence of DFOB, Cu breakthrough curves were nearly insensitive to pH changes and close to the breakthrough curve of a non-reactive tracer.Understanding the processes governing the fate and transport of copper as an environmental contaminant is essential in the context of industrial waste disposal, hydrometallurgy and metal recovery from ores. Sorption and desorption on mineral surfaces and complexation with organic ligands are major reactions controlling the Cu concentration level and affecting its mobility in soil. Natural organic molecules play an important role regarding the transport behaviour of copper in terrestrial ecosystems. Several studies have been conducted to investigate mobilization of metals by Low Molecular Weight Organic Acids (LMWOAs) ( In this work, mobility and transport of Cu influenced by DFOB as a complexing organic ligand in the presence of kaolinite as a sorbent was investigated in column experiments. Transport of Cu in the column was modelled using the numerical approach for multiple element transport contained in the software COMSOL Multiphysics Kaolinite was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH, Germany. It was washed three times with 1 M NaCl (Merck, Germany) and 3 times with deionized water to avoid possible interferences caused by impurities. The copper stock solution (1.5 mM) was prepared by dissolving Cu(NO Glass beads (<0.5 mm, Sigmund Lindner GmbH, Germany), which were used as a matrix for kaolinite in the column experiments, were washed with Na Column experiments were performed at ambient conditions using a glass column with an internal diameter of 1 cm and a bed length of 7.5 cm (Omnifit Labware, Diba Industries Three columns prepared as described above were used to investigate the influence of DFOB on copper mobility in the presence of kaolinite clay mineral. Two columns were charged with a 1.5 mM Cu solution, while the third was charged with a mixed solution of Cu and DFOB (1.5 mM each). Elution experiments were performed with columns 1 and 2 (loaded with Cu only). After the solute concentration in the outflow reached the initial concentration, the influent was switched to deionized water (DW) for one column and to 1.5 mM DFOB solution for the other column. The mass balance for multicomponent reactive transport of non-degradable solutes in homogenous non-sorbing porous media under steady-state flow conditions is described as Equation In this equation, Here, In this study, we applied a surface complexation model to predict sorption of copper on kaolinite. Results of the chemical speciation modelling are presented in The experimental and modelled results for breakthrough and elution of Cu in the absence and presence of DFOB are shown in The strong influence of DFOB on Cu mobility is also reflected in the elution experiments with deionized water (DW) and DFOB solution, passed through columns after loading with Cu ( The modelled breakthrough curves of Cu for pH values ranging between 6.5 and 8.5 are presented in In the presence of DFOB (dashed and dotted lines), modelled results show that the same increase in pH causes only very small changes in the breakthrough curves. High pH favours metal complexation with siderophores due to deprotonation of acidic groups, resulting in higher metal mobility and enhanced transport. Speciation modelling ( The influence of ligand concentration on copper transport was likewise investigated in the modelling. Calculated Cu breakthrough curves for different DFOB/metal ratios at pH 6.5 are displayed in Copper transport in porous media containing kaolinite is facilitated in the presence of the siderophore DFOB. We showed this by means of column experiments and respective numerical modelling results. The breakthrough of copper takes place considerably earlier in the presence of DFOB than in the absence of the organic ligand. DFOB forms mobile complexes with Cu in the column pore solution and decreases metal sorption on the surface sites of kaolinite, resulting in a decrease in Cu retardation. After loading, elution of Cu with DFOB solution is completed after exchange of a considerably lower number of pore volumes compared to elution with deionized water. Results of geochemical modelling showed that in the studied pH range, the mobilizing effect of DFOB is nearly independent of pH and is at maximum already at a molar ratio of 1:1. We gratefully acknowledge financial support by the