Purpose: This investigation arthroscopically assesses the frequency of soft tissue injury in tibial plateau fracture according to the severity of fracture patterns. We hypothesized that use of arthroscopy to evaluate soft tissue injury in tibial plateau fractures would reveal a greater number of associated injuries than have previously been reported. Methods: From March 1996 to December 2003, 98 patients with closed tibial plateau fractures were treated with arthroscopically assisted reduction and osteosynthesis, with precise diagnosis and management of associated soft tissue injuries. Arthroscopic findings for associated soft tissue injuries were recorded, and the relationship between fracture type and soft tissue injury was then analyzed. Results: The frequency of associated soft tissue injury in this series was 71% (70 of 98). The menisci were injured in 57% of subjects (56 in 98), the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) in 25% (24 of 98), the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) in 5% (5 of 98), the lateral collateral ligament (LCL) in 3% (3 of 98), the medial collateral ligament (MCL) in 3% (3 of 98), and the peroneal nerve in 1% (1 of 98); none of the 98 patients exhibited injury to the arteries. No significant association was noted between fracture type and incidence of meniscus, PCL, LCL, MCL, artery, and nerve injury. However, significantly higher injury rates for the ACL were observed in type IV and VI fractures. Conclusions: Soft tissue injury was associated with all types of tibial plateau fracture. Menisci (peripheral tear) and ACL (bony avulsion) were the most commonly injured sites. A variety of soft tissue injuries are common with tibial plateau fracture; these can be diagnosed with the use of an arthroscope. Level of Evidence: Level III, diagnostic study.Despite the fact that they account for just 1% of all fractures, tibial plateau fractures are associated with a diverse spectrum of injuries that can have severe consequences if not treated appropriately. Controversy continues regarding conservative versus surgical treatment methods. From March 1996 to December 2003, 98 consecutive patients with closed tibial plateau fracture who had undergone arthroscopically assisted reduction and osteosynthesis were enrolled in this study. The sample included 51 men and 47 women, with 54 left knee injuries and 44 right knee injuries. The average age at surgery was 49 years (range, 18 to 79 years), and the mean follow-up period was 4.8 years (range, 9 to 100 months). A total of 84 patients (86%) were injured by traffic accidents (63 motorcycle accidents and 21 motor vehicle accidents), and 14 patients (14%) were injured as the result of falling accidents. Tibial plateau fractures were organized according to the classification of Schatzker. In addition to neurovascular examination findings, study data were obtained through examination performed when the patient was under anesthesia and through arthroscopic recordings. Operative arthroscopy was used for knee examination following evacuation of the hematoma with the use of gravity only, without use of a pump, to avoid fluid extravasation and onset of compartment syndrome. Tibial plateau fractures and associated soft tissue injuries were assessed by arthroscopy so that optimal treatment could be planned. Patients with soft tissue injury were treated before or after fracture fixation was performed, according to the type of soft tissue injury that was observed. Investigators in this study prefer the opportunity to perform meniscal repair or meniscectomy before fracture fixation because fracture facilitates access to the meniscus. Patients with ligamentous injury were treated after arthroscopically assisted fixation of the fracture was completed to ensure bony stability; knee stability was examined after this had occurred. Following fracture fixation, the injured extremity was examined again by means of varus/valgus stress testing and a Lachman test. If the preoperative femoral/tibial axis was not reduced to an absolute angulation of 5°, and if this angulation differed by 5° from the contralateral side, a grade III collateral ligament injury was diagnosed. Plans for operative repair were made in cases of suspected lateral collateral ligament (LCL) injury. In cases of suspected medial collateral ligament (MCL) injury, no further surgery was performed to repair ligament damage, except in cases of avulsion tears. Statistical analysis was conducted with the use of a χ-square test for discrete variables ( Schatzker classification identified 2 type I (split), 45 type II (split and depression), 8 type III (depression), 19 type IV (medial plateau), 12 type V (bicondylar), and 12 type VI (bicondylar with diaphyseal extension) fractures ( The most common soft tissue injury was meniscal tear, which was noted in 56 (57%) of 98 tibial plateau fractures. These injuries always occurred on the same side as the fracture. The second most common injury was ACL injury; this occurred in 24 of the 98 cases (25%) and consisted of 10 cases of tibial avulsion, 10 cases of partial tear, and 4 cases of midsubstance rupture ( The study sample included 3 cases (3%) of MCL injury (1 case each of type II, IV, and VI fracture), 3 cases (3%) cases of LCL injury (1 case of type II and 2 cases of type VI fracture). No significant relationship was identified between fracture type and incidence of injury to the PCL ( No artery injuries were noted in this study. However, 1 case of injury to the peroneal nerve (type VI fracture) was recorded ( Of the 98 occurrences of fracture in this study, 16 had associated multiple soft tissue injury ( Tibial plateau fractures are complex intra-articular injuries that are associated with a variety of fracture patterns, including comminution, articular depression, and ligament and cartilage injuries. Associated soft tissue injuries with tibial plateau fracture have been reported in several previous studies; however, most of these trials included only small groups of patients, or they relied solely on data obtained from physical examination or arthroscopy. The reported incidence of associated soft tissue injury in tibial plateau fracture diagnosed by physical examination or operative findings was 7% to 50% The utility of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the diagnosis of soft tissue disease of the knee has been well described. The reported incidence of associated soft tissue injury in tibial plateau fractures diagnosed by MRI is 48% to 99%. Intra-articular soft tissue trauma has been widely reported in association with tibial plateau fracture. Although some cases are merely minor injuries, many others greatly impede final outcomes; concomitant treatment of these soft tissue injuries during fixation of the fracture site often causes major difficulties. Data indicated that the most common ligament injury involved the ACL; this occurred in 24 of the 98 cases (25%). Schatzker et al. Through arthroscopy, Scheerlinck et al. The present report serves as an assessment of arthroscopic treatment approaches and does not report on clinical outcomes of disorders treated with the assistance of an arthroscope. The scope of the present study is limited to tibial plateau fractures that were considered for operative treatment; soft tissue injury associated with nondisplaced fractures is not addressed here. Associated soft tissue injury should be suspected in all cases of tibial plateau fracture. Meniscal injury (peripheral tear) has been found to be the most common lesion in all 6 fracture types, regardless of severity of injury. Intermediate- to high-energy trauma in type IV, V, and VI fractures compromises most injuries to ligaments and soft tissue. A variety of soft tissue injuries are common in tibial plateau fracture; these can be diagnosed with the use of an arthroscope. The authors thank Song-Shu Lin for assistance with statistical analysis in this study.