Electronic structure calculations using the density functional theory (DFT) within the generalized-gradient approximation and ultra-soft pseudopotentials have been used to investigate the adsorption of water on the main cleavage planes of CaO and CaF2. The calculated structural parameters are found to be in good agreement with experiment. The unhydrated surfaces show negligible ionic relaxation from bulk termination due to the minimal distortion of the electron density in the surface layer. Electron density plots show both crystals to be strongly ionic. We found on both mineral surfaces that associative adsorption of water is energetically preferred. Water molecules which were initially dissociatively adsorbed, recombined to form associatively adsorbed species. The water molecules are adsorbed by their oxygen ion to surface calcium ions, but electron density plots show strong interactions between surface anions and hydrogen atoms. The calculated hydration energies of approximately 70kJmol−1 on the CaO {100} surface and 41–53kJmol−1 on the CaF2 {111} surface indicate physisorption on both surfaces.In this paper we consider the interaction of water with the dominant cleavage planes of the minerals calcium oxide (CaO) and fluorite (CaF Fluorite is a widely distributed mineral and often occurs in combination with a range of other ores, notably lead and tin ores and together with calcite and apatites The approach we have chosen to adopt is to use electronic structure calculations in an attempt to obtain reliable estimates of the hydration energy and to compare with previous results from atomistic simulations The total energy and structure of the CaO and CaF For surface calculations, where two energies are compared, it is important that the total energies are well converged. The degree of convergence depends on a number of factors, two of which are the plane-wave cutoff and the density of The optimisation of the atomic coordinates (and unit cell size/shape for the bulk materials) was performed via a conjugate gradients technique which utilises the total energy and the Hellmann–Feynman forces on the atoms (and stresses on the unit cell). We used the usual approach for modelling the surfaces using three-dimensional periodic boundary conditions by considering slabs of CaO and CaF The surface energy ( CaO has the rock-salt structure with space group  One possible explanation for the discrepancies is that the potential models used in the atomistic simulations do not allow for sufficient electronic polarisability. To test this hypothesis we performed electronic relaxations without ionic relaxations of the CaO {100} surfaces in both systems to asses the relative importance of the electronic and ionic relaxations to the surface energy. The surface energy calculated for the DFT system of the bulk-terminated CaO {100} surface keeping the nuclei fixed and allowing only electronic relaxation was The ionic relaxation of the CaO {100} surface is minimal, only a small rumpling of the surface layer. The CaO spacing from the surface calcium ions to the oxygen ions immediately below has dilated from the bulk value of 2.376 The ionic relaxation of the CaF From the contour plots of the electron density through planes of the CaO {100} and CaF We next investigated the adsorption of water on the CaO {100} and CaF For example, for CaO we find two converged configurations for a partial coverage of 50%. In one configuration the water molecules adsorb virtually flat onto the surface with a hydration energy of 56.0 None of the calculations showed the water molecules to dissociate, so in order to be certain that no lower energy configuration with dissociatively adsorbed water molecules existed, we also simulated a fully hydroxylated surface as a starting configuration. A hydroxyl group was placed above each surface calcium atom and a proton above each surface oxygen atom. However, the calculations showed the proton to desorb from the lattice oxygen atom and bond to the adsorbed hydroxyl group to form an associatively adsorbed water molecule. The final configuration was identical to the lowest energy configuration of upright associatively adsorbed water with the same hydration energy of −71.5 On fluorite we again started with associatively adsorbed water on the {111} surface at both full monolayer coverage and a partial coverage of 50%. We calculated the hydration energy per water molecule for the partial coverage of 50% to be 53.4 The DFT calculations did not show any dissociation of the water molecules to form a hydroxylated surface at either coverage. Thus, similar to the CaO {100} surface, we used a starting configuration with dissociatively adsorbed water molecules to ensure that we had found the lowest energy configuration. Again, the dissociatively adsorbed water molecules reassembled to form molecular water. The preference for associatively rather than dissociatively adsorbed water on the CaO {100} surface agrees qualitatively with atomistic simulations of dissociative adsorption of water Our calculations indicate that the binding of the water molecule's oxygen atom to a surface calcium atom is the main interaction. This suggests that increasing the coordination of the surface cation to the bulk value, from five- to six-coordinate in CaO and seven- to eight-coordinate in CaF The calculated hydration energies of approximately 70 We have used density functional theory simulations using the pseudopotential approach to investigate the hydration of the cleavage planes of CaO and CaF The experimental crystal structure parameters of CaO and CaF On adsorbing water onto these surfaces we find that associative adsorption of water is energetically preferred on both surfaces. The hydration energy remains constant with increasing coverage on the CaO {100} plane, but on the CaF The energetic preference for associatively adsorbed water is affirmed by performing simulations on dissociatively adsorbed water molecules on both mineral surfaces, which reassemble during the minimisation process, indicating that these surfaces are not amenable to hydroxylation. In addition there appears to be no significant energy barrier for reformation of the water molecules. Finally, comparison with our atomistic models for adsorption suggests that the hydrogen-bonding is slightly overbonded and that this approach provides a route for modifying the atomistic models. Future work will include investigating water adsorption at low-coordinated cation sites and dissolution of surface cations from sites of varying coordination. We thank EPSRC for financial support and Molecular Simulations Inc. for the provision of Insight II.