The copper–lead–zinc ores have an origin similar to copper–zinc and lead–zinc ores, the exception being those ores that contain copper, lead and zinc as the principal economic minerals. In addition, some of these ores contain significant amounts of precious metals and, more rarely, cobalt and nickel. The treatment processes for the beneficiation of copper–lead–zinc ores are the most complex of all ores processed. The flotation behavior of the individual minerals is different from that of either lead–zinc or copper–zinc ore and therefore the treatment process is tailored based on the processing characteristics of the individual ore types. The sequential copper–lead–zinc flotation practice utilizes several major reagent combinations in sequential copper–lead flotation, which include: bisulfide method, starch/lime method and soda ash/SO2 or lime/SO2 method. The bulk copper–lead flotation with depression of zinc followed by copper–lead separation and re-flotation of zinc is the most common practice in the treatment of copper–lead–zinc ores. About 90% of operating plants use this method. The bulk concentrate is usually contaminated with pyrite and zinc. Therefore, upgrading of the lead concentrate after copper–lead flotation is usually required.The copper–lead–zinc ores have an origin similar to copper–zinc and lead–zinc ores, the exception being those ores that contain copper, lead and zinc as the principal economic minerals. In addition, some of these ores contain significant amounts of precious metals and, more rarely, cobalt and nickel. Similar to copper–zinc and lead–zinc ores, copper–lead–zinc ores have several major geological formations, of which the most important are: Deposits that occur in hydrothermal vein fillings and replacement (usually of limestone) bodies, often associated with intermediate to acid intrusions. These ores contain silver and gold in addition to copper, lead and zinc. Such deposits are found in North America, Cordillera, Zacatecas (Mexico), Transbaikalia (erstwhile Soviet Union) and Caspalca –(Peru). Massive sulfide deposits of volcanogenic origin, similar to those found in New Brunswick (Canada), Aznalcollar (Spain), Iberian Pyrite Belt (Turkey), Kuroko (Japan) and Hellyer (Tasmania). In this group, massive strata-bound deposits can be included. Sedimentary deposits are mostly found in the Viburnum trend. The copper—lead–zinc vein deposits are usually characterized by coarse-grained banded to massive aggregates of pyrite, galena, sphalerite and chalcopyrite. The bulk mineralogy is quite similar to that of strata-bound sulfide deposits, except that galena tends to be much more abundant in the vein deposit. Pyrite, sphalerite and gangue minerals, such as quartz, calcite and fluorite, often tend to be euhedral with the development of well-formed faces. These deposits are formed as a result of the circulation of hydrothermal fluids that extract, transport and then precipitate sulfide minerals as open-space fillings and replacements. Often, near surface portions of these ores, it is revealed that there are moderate to extensive alterations by meteoric water. The oxidation of pyrite causes the formation of sulfuric acid and ferrous sulfate, which results in the breakdown of other The treatment of these ores varies from simple to extremely difficult, especially the ores with secondary enrichment of copper. Unlike the lead–zinc deposits from the Mississippi Valley, which are the simplest ore, the sedimentary copper–lead–zinc ores (e.g. the Viburnum trend) contain a diverse assemblage of minerals uncommon in most Mississippi Valley–type ore deposits [ A portion of this ore however is fine-grained or intricately inter-grown and represents varieties of recovery concentrate grade and deleterious constituent problem. Beneficiation problems that arise from the character of this ore texture include displacement of zinc in the lead concentrate, lead in the copper concentrate and lead, zinc and copper in the tailing. The principal sulfide minerals in the most sedimentary ores are galena, sphalerite, chalcopyrite, marcasite and pyrite. All the sulfide minerals were repetitively deposited and occur in a variety of forms. Galena occurs as a massive replacement of the host rock dolomite, as replacements of the earlier deposited sulfide minerals and as euhedral crystals deposited in vugs. Sphalerite occurs dominantly as relatively fine-grain replacements of host rock dolomite, but small subsequently deposited vug-lined crystals are also present. Chalcopyrite occurs commonly as massive to colloform replacement masses, but also as subhedral crystals disseminated in host rock dolomite and as euhedral crystals in vugs. The main gangue minerals, in addition to marcasite and pyrite are dolomite, quartz and calcite. The host rock Cambrian Bouneterre limestone has been dolomitized nearly all areas where it contains ore deposit. Cobalt and nickel are present in significant quantities in some area of the Viburnum trend deposits (e.g. 0.3% Co and 0.5% Ni). Cobalt primarily occurs as seigenite; nickel is present mainly in bravoite and to a lesser degree, in seigenite. Ores that contain cobalt and nickel also contain a substantial amount of clay minerals (illite, kaolinite group). Only recently, efforts have been put in place to the development of a process for the recovery of cobalt and nickel from these ores. Much like the lead–zinc massive sulfide deposits, the Cu–Pb–Zn massive sulfide ores are highly variable and can range from coarse-grained ore (Golden Grove, Australia) to finely disseminated massive sulfides (New Brunswick, Canada), refractory massive sulfides (Kuroco Hellyer), etc., altered massive sulfides (Tsumeb, Africa) and exclusively pyrrhotite ores (San Martin, Mexico). The mineralogy and texture of these ores varies significantly and the processing characteristics also vary widely, and usually the treatment processes for beneficiation of these ores is highly complex. Some of the major characteristics of the massive sulfide deposits relevant to the processing characteristics are described as follows: Coarse-grained massive sulfide ores are somewhat different in mineralogy than the coarse-grained massive sulfide lead–zinc ores. They usually contain alteration bands and partially oxidized sulfides. The principal minerals are chalcopyrite, galena and sphalerite with widely variable ratios, but in most cases sphalerite is the most abundant followed by galena and chalcopyrite. Pyrite occurs in different forms and varieties ranging from crystalline to sugar-like altered pyrite. Marcasite may be present only in the ore with a high amount of silver (Kidd Creek C ore, Canada). Chalcopyrite in some ores may be tarnished and partially oxidized (Thalanga Mine, Australia). The processing characteristics of these ores vary widely and range from easy-to-treat to difficult-to-treat ores.   Sphalerite in a number of deposits forms coarse patches, commonly full of very small (< 20 μm) inclusions of the other sulfides. Galena also forms coarse patches and veins, but these ores comparatively free from other sulfides that occur as Other sulfides that may occur in various orebodies include arsenopyrite, pyrrhotite and a variety of silver sulfosalts. The liberation profile varies significantly and ranges from 30 to 5 μm, respectively. Kuroko black ore also belongs to this ore type. Kuroko black ore is a general term for the complex fine-grained sulfide ores [    The treatment processes for the beneficiation of copper–lead–zinc ores are the most complex of all ores processed. The flotation behavior of the individual minerals is different from that of either lead–zinc or copper–zinc ore and therefore the treatment process is tailored based on the processing characteristics of the individual ore types. In general, there are three basic processing techniques commonly used in the treatment of copper–lead–zinc ore. These include A sequential copper–lead–zinc flotation method where the copper, lead and zinc are sequentially floated to produce separate copper, lead and zinc concentrates. The bulk copper–lead flotation method, followed by zinc flotation from the bulk tailing. The copper–lead separation is performed on the upgraded bulk concentrate. This method is the most commonly used in the treatment of copper–lead–zinc ores.  There is no general rule by which a treatment method is selected and these rules cannot be prescribed. In some operating plants that use a sequential flotation method, the same ore also responds well to bulk copper–lead flotation [ Some copper–lead–zinc ores that contain precious metals respond better to sequential copper–lead–zinc flotation than to bulk copper–lead flotation, specifically with respect to the recovery of gold and silver in the copper and lead concentrate. A typical example of such a case is the Silver Queen Mine in British Columbia (Canada) represented by copper–lead–zinc–silver–gold. The sequential flotation method gave better precious metal recovery along with better selectivity than the copper–lead bulk flotation method. In some cases, when using Cu–Pb bulk flotation, the separation of copper and lead from the bulk concentrate is either very difficult or impossible. An example of such a case is the Black Mountain (South Africa) ore [ For some finely disseminated massive sulfide ores that require fine primary grinding and regrinding of the concentrate (i.e. < 20 μm), sequential copper–lead flotation method performs much better than copper–lead bulk flotation method (Hellyer, Tasmania). For ores that contain pre-activated sphalerite The bulk copper–lead flotation method is the most economic and is used whenever possible. Using such a method, the copper–lead bulk concentrate is floated, followed by Cu–Pb upgrading and separation. Usually, the Cu–Pb separation tailing is the final lead or copper concentrate depending on the separation method used. However, there are cases where the upgrading of lead concentrate after separation is required and this makes the treatment process more complicated. The reagent schemes used in sequential copper–lead–zinc flotation and bulk copper–lead flotation differ significantly and these two flotation techniques are presented in separate sections. It should be remembered that the selection of a reagent scheme using either technique depends on the origin of the ore and its mineralogy. The characteristics of an ore deposit have a controlled influence on the selection of reagent scheme using either flotation technique. The sequential copper–lead–zinc flotation practice utilizes several major reagent combinations in sequential copper–lead flotation, which include: Bisulfide method Starch/lime method Soda Ash/SO Using this method, the principal lead depressant during copper flotation is sodium bisulfide (Na The use of Na Lead is re-activated more easily than when starch is used. With an increase in pH, lead re-activation occurs without any addition of modifying reagent. The cyanide consumption for sphalerite depression is reduced since Na In the lead circuit, most of the time soda ash and cyanide are used as the principal modifiers with dithiophosphate collector. When the pyrite depression is no problem, then small quantities of xanthate are used. The usual pH in the lead flotation circuit is between 9.0 and 9.5. Sphalerite is recovered using a conventional lime–CuSO This method is usually accompanied by aeration with collector for copper flotation. The ore is ground with soda ash followed by conditioning by SO The flotation pH, using the SO The higher lime additions resulted in higher SO The flotation of lead and zinc is performed in the same way as when Na This method has been applied in the treatment of ores that contain significant quantities of precious metals, specifically silver minerals in the form of sulfosalts and ores where sphalerite is pre-activated. The ore is ground with lime and starch to pH 10.5–11.2, followed by conditioning with SO  Dextrins, branched or modified, did not perform well when using this method. The use of ammonium Persulfate as a co-depressant for galena and sphalerite showed a substantial improvement in the selectivity between copper and lead–zinc. Lead flotation from the copper tailing is performed in a soda ash circuit using ZnO/NaCN as a zinc depressant. The lead flotation pH is about 7.0–7.5. A lower pH A number of operating plants that use sequential flotation of Cu–Pb–Zn are about 10% of all operating plants that process copper–lead–zinc ore. This is due to the fact that bulk copper-lead flotation is a much more cost-effective treatment route. However, the operating plants sequentially float Cu–Pb–Zn when either treating gold–silver-containing copper–lead–zinc ores where sequential flotation gives better precious metals recovery or when the bulk copper–lead flotation method does not work. The ore characteristics and reagent scheme of the operating plant that uses sequential Cu–Pb–Zn flotation methods are shown in According to the literature, the low-grade copper concentrate that was produced at Rozberg was due to a requirement for maintaining a high gold recovery. It has been In general, in most of the concentrators reasonably good metallurgical results were obtained, the exception being the Hellyer concentrator, which treats a very complex ore. This concentrator, in addition to producing copper, lead and zinc concentrates, also produces a lead–zinc concentrate. The bulk copper–lead flotation with depression of zinc followed by copper–lead separation and re-flotation of zinc is the most common practice in the treatment of copper–lead–zinc ores. About 90% of operating plants use this method. Separation of There are several types of flowsheet used in copper–lead bulk flotation. The type of flowsheet is dictated by the complexity of the ore, as well as the copper–lead separation being used. The flowsheet that treats complex copper–lead–zinc ore is shown in A final lead concentrate is not always obtained after copper–lead separation, and the upgrading of lead from the copper–lead separation tailing is required.  These flowsheets are generalized and there are slight variations in the flowsheet configuration from one plant to the other. The reagent schemes used in copper–lead bulk flotation differ from those used either in the copper circuit during treatment of copper–zinc ores, or the lead circuit during the treatment of lead–zinc ores, specifically in the selection and use of collectors. Depressant combinations may be similar in a number of cases, but with lower additions of cyanide where cyanide is used. The modifiers used in the operating plants also vary widely. A soda ash–SO In the treatment of finely disseminated ores, soda ash–SO During the treatment of copper–lead–zinc ores that contain precious metals, neither lime nor ZnSO In the case of partially altered ores, where copper is tarnished, lime/SO Depressant combinations in the treatment of copper–lead–zinc ores that contain pyrrhotite are quite unique in several plants. For example, in the San Martin concentrator (Mexico) depressants used in the copper–lead bulk flotation included NaCN, ammonium sulfate and zinc sulfate at natural pH. It is not known what role ammonium sulfate plays in this circuit, but it is observed that in the presence of ammonium sulfate copper flotation improves significantly.  Zinc flotation is conducted using the conventional lime–CuSO4 method with varieties of collectors, including xanthates, thionocarbamates and dithiophosphates. Combinations of xanthate and dithiophosphates are used in some cases. In general, there are two basic copper–lead separation methods commonly used during the treatment of copper–lead–zinc ores. These are described in the following sections. This method is known as the cyanide method. It is used when the amount of chalcopyrite in the Cu–Pb bulk concentrate is much greater than the amount of galena (i.e. ratio over 2:1). Other pre-requisites of the successful use of the cyanide method include: The concentrate must not contain secondary copper minerals. The bulk concentrate must be sufficiently clean, so that after copper–lead separation, a marketable-grade copper concentrate is obtained. This is because the re-treatment of the copper concentrate for further upgrading after cyanide depression may not be either possible or economical. The disadvantage of this method is two-fold: The cyanide consumption is relatively high and amounts up to 300 g/t of ore in some cases. If native gold is present in the concentrate, cyanide dissolves free gold and substantial losses of gold may occur. To avoid gold losses during Cu–Pb separation using the cyanide method, a complexed cyanide is used. The cyanide can be complexed by ZnSO There are several reagent combinations using cyanide separation method that have been practiced in operating plants.  This is the most widely used method in copper–lead separation and is normally employed when the amount of lead in the bulk concentrate is greater than copper or when the bulk concentrate is not sufficiently clean to produce a final copper and lead concentrate after separation, so that upgrading of the lead concentrate after copper–lead separation is required. Over the past several decades, numerous copper–lead separation methods have been examined [13–15] but only a few of these have found industrial application. There are three major sub-groups of copper–lead separation methods commonly used: Use of oxidizing reagents (i.e. bichromates, hypochlorites, etc.). Use of sulfoxy compounds with or without oxidants, or with starch derivatives. Use of SO Each of these methods is specifically tailored to fit the nature and composition of the bulk concentrate involved in the separation. Dichromates are normally used in the separation of chalcopyrite and galena at a pH between 5.0 and 8.5. A lower pH is used to improve desorption of the collector from galena where dithiophosphates are used as primary collectors during bulk flotation. Dichromates can also be used together with starch or activated carbon. In some operating Sulfoxy compounds, together with sulfosalts have been used in some Russian plants for the separation of low-grade Cu–Pb concentrate, where lead upgrading or de–zincing of the lead concentrate is required (Lenningradskaja). It is not known, however, whether this method is applicable to high-grade Cu–Pb bulk concentrate. The SO The use of phosphate compounds is rare but they can be effective lead depressants when secondary copper minerals are present in the ore. Sodium hypochlorite is also used for the de-leading of a copper concentrate after Cu–Pb separation using other separation methods. In the separation of copper–lead bulk concentrate, the conditioning time and other pretreatment methods are quite important. When using dichromate in the Cu–Pb separation, the conditioning time is highly important and ranges from 10 min to about 4 h. For example, the Kasapalka plant (Peru) uses a dichromate method where the conditioning time with Na In copper–lead separation practice, there are several other separation methods used, which are not common. These methods are used in cases where neither a cyanide method nor a lead depression method is effective. Such methods involve (a) cyanide–dichromate method and (b) SO The metallurgical results obtained using a two-stage process are shown in Most of the zinc was retained in the lead concentrate. An unusual copper–lead separation method, involving lead depression and copper flotation, was practiced at the San The metallurgical results obtained in the concentrator are shown in During the development of a treatment process for the beneficiation of copper–lead–zinc ores, emphasis was usually placed on the development of an effective copper–lead separation method. This requires a very detailed evaluation of the number of separation methods suitable for a particular ore. Often, variables other than the reagent scheme are very important. These include pH, conditioning time, concentrate pre-treatment method, etc. Each of these parameters is an important part of the copper–lead separation method. This method is used when copper is represented by secondary copper minerals, namely, tennantite, chalcocite, bornite and covellite. In this case, the sphalerite is pre-activated and cannot be selectively depressed during copper–lead bulk flotation. The high-clay ores also employ the bulk flotation method because in the presence of clay, the depressants are not effective.  An interesting feature of the Tsumeb metallurgical practice was the development of a method for the separation of copper and lead from zinc using a two-stage separation technique. The reagent scheme and flowsheet are illustrated in Using this method, tennantite is selectively floated from the bulk concentrate followed by zinc flotation and lead depression using dichromate and Cytec's depressant R610. The R610 depressant is a complexed ammonium cyanide with zinc sulfate. Another method of copper–lead–zinc separation from the bulk sulfide concentrate involves the copper–lead–zinc scarn ore with high clay content [ These metallurgical results were obtained in a continuous laboratory locked cycle test. The bulk flotation method may be an effective method for treatment of low-grade refractory copper–lead–zinc ores. During the flotation of massive sulfide copper–lead–zinc ores, a low-grade copper–lead bulk concentrate is produced where, after copper–lead separation, a final lead concentrate Direct flotation of impurities from the Cu–Pb separation tailing, a practice adopted by Brunswick Mining and Smelting operation. Lead flotation from the Cu–Pb separation tailing, a process developed for the treatment of Vermillion (Canada), Woodlawn Mine (Australia) and Crandon (USA) ores. This method is similar to the method developed for de–zincing of the lead concentrate, discussed in The bulk flotation concentrate contained lead and zinc and is sold as a bulk Cu–Pb concentrate. The lead concentrate averages 42–48% at about 70% lead recovery. This method is used when pyrite is the main contaminant of the Cu–Pb bulk concentrate. Selection of a lead upgrading method depends on the copper–lead separation method used. If a starch–SO If the copper–lead separation involves dichromate, then removal of dichromate is required before the lead is floated. This method usually involves pre-conditioning the Cu–Pb separation tailing with acid, followed by thickening and re-pulping of the thickened tailing with fresh water. The lead is then floated with dithiophosphate in the presence of soda ash and cyanide in slightly acidic pH (i.e. 6.8) or alkaline pH (8.5–9.0). A schematic outline of the flowsheet and reagent scheme is shown in The lead concentrate grade using this method is somewhat higher than that obtained using the reverse flotation method. Using this method, the lead tailing is also recycled to the subsequent zinc circuit together with Cu–Pb bulk flotation tailing. The reagent schemes of operating plants that use copper–lead bulk flotation method vary considerably, especially in the selection of copper–lead separation technique. The reagent scheme used depends primarily on the origin of the ore and the ore mineralogy. However, there are regional variations, which means that in some regions, the reagent schemes are different although the ores are similar. For example, the majority of Russian plants use different reagent schemes than South African plants treating similar ores. Some of the operating plants have used the most unusual reagent scheme where, for some modifiers used, For a number of these plants, the exact mineralogical composition is not reported in the literature. In a fairly large portion of these plants, the bulk copper–zinc flotation does not vary much. Most of the differences are associated with the choice of the copper–lead separation method used in the various plants. The plant metallurgical results obtained in these operating plants are shown in In general, the gold and silver recoveries in these plants are somewhat lower than those achieved during the treatment of copper–zinc or lead–zinc ore. One of the reasons for this In a large majority of plants, the copper and lead recoveries in corresponding plants are lower than those obtained treating copper–zinc ore (copper) and lead–zinc ores (lead).