The commercial technologies for aluminium production include production of alumina from bauxite and smelting of alumina to produce aluminium. The current technology is energy intensive, and a major source of greenhouse gas emissions and harmful fluoride emissions. Carbothermal reduction of bauxite is a promising alternative technology for aluminium and aluminoalloy production. Western Australia and Queensland bauxite ores were carbothermally reduced in steps in argon. Experiments were performed in a high temperature vertical tube furnace, and the off-gas composition was monitored using an infra-red gas analyser. The phase composition of reduced samples was characterised by XRD. Oxygen and carbon contents in reduced samples were determined by LECO analysers. The morphology of the surface and intersections was observed by SEM. The chemical compositions of the phases in the reduced samples were detected by EDS. The results of this study have proved the concept of stepwise reduction of bauxite ores in solid state by appropriate control of reduction temperature. Below 1100°C, only iron oxides were reduced to metallic iron. A ferroalloy phase was formed at 1200°C and above. The products in the bauxites reduced to 1600°C include a ferroalloy of silicon and aluminium, carbides of titanium, silicon and aluminium, and unreacted alumina.The commercial technologies for aluminium production include production of alumina from bauxite and smelting of alumina to produce aluminium. The current technology is energy intensive, and a major source of greenhouse gas emissions and harmful fluoride emissions. Carbothermal reduction of alumina is a promising alternative technology for aluminium and aluminoalloy production. Compared with the Hall–Heroult process, carbothermal reduction of alumina offers advantages of a simpler process, lower cost and a lower requirement for raw materials. Previous assessments showed that carbothermal reduction has the potential to reduce energy consumption by up to 38%, capital costs by more than 60% and decrease CO In most works on development of carbothermal reduction of alumina, the strategy of two stage reactors was adopted (  Production of alumina from bauxite ores consumes a large amount of caustic soda, and generates a large amount of “red mud” slurry waste. A desirable process for aluminium production is to start from bauxite in which the impurities, oxides of iron, silicon and titanium can be converted into useful products. Investigations on direct reduction of bauxite are limited in literature.  The present research investigates carbothermal reduction of bauxite with the major aim of demonstrating the feasibility of reducing bauxite ores at solid state. Both temperature programmed reduction (temperature is ramped continuously with time) and stepwise reduction (where temperature is changed in steps) procedures are used in this work. The major compositions of Western Australia and Queensland bauxite ores are presented in Both bauxite ores were reduced carbothermally in flowing argon at 1000 Temperature programmed reduction experiments were carried out from 850 Western Australia and Queensland bauxite ores were reduced using two reduction procedures. Temperature programmed reduction was followed by sample characterisation to identify the stages of reduction of different metal oxides and their temperature ranges of reduction. Further reduction experiments were carried out in different steps with each step being at constant temperature. This was to further demonstrate the feasibility of stepwise reduction of metal oxides from bauxite ores. Temperature programmed reduction was carried out under a flowing argon gas atmosphere. The rate of reduction was monitored by detection of CO released from the reactions using a CO/CO  Based on the major compositions ( In the step by step reduction experiments, reduction temperatures were decided making reference to the peak temperatures of reduction curves in During the first step in the step by step reduction experiments, although the furnace temperature was heated to the designated temperatures in advance, the sample temperature took about 20–30 Bauxite samples reduced to different temperatures were tested by LECO analysers, and the final extents of reduction, that is removal of oxygen combined with metals as oxides during reduction (percentage), were calculated. The contribution of each major oxide to the extent of reduction when fully reduced in the two bauxite ores is listed in Comparing At 1600 The temperature programmed reduction experiment of Western Australia bauxite ( As shown in the figure, original Western Australia bauxite contains hydrated alumina and hematite. Weak peaks of silica were also detected, but not those of titania due to its low content. When the reduction temperature was increased to 1100 Peaks of SiC were detected in the reduced samples of which the final reduction temperature was 1360 Reduction of Queensland bauxite went through a similar route to that of Western Australia bauxite. Raw Queensland bauxite also possesses much hydrated alumina and hematite with small amounts of silica and a trace of titania. Hydrated alumina and hematite converted to alumina and an iron metal phase when the temperature rose to 1100 In step by step reduction shown in When Queensland bauxite ore was reduced at 1051 Al In the case of Western Australia bauxite, the first step was at 980  From the morphology of the bauxite particle, the oxide phase was not melted at the final temperature of reduction up to 1600   Al The chemical reactions and their standard Gibbs free energy changes are presented in Eqs. The Standard Gibbs free energy of the above reaction in relation to temperature is presented in Solid iron was considered in Eqs. According to Compared to corresponding carbides, the formation of titanium, silicon and aluminium is more difficult under standard conditions. However, actually formed metallic titanium, silicon and aluminium were dissolved in the iron melt, which reduced their activities. As a result, the formation of metals as a solution with molten iron can be assumed. Simultaneously, carbon was also dissolved in the molten iron; due to a large amount of graphite in the system, it can be considered that the iron phase was saturated with carbon resulting in a unity activity of carbon in the iron melt. When the activity of a metal in iron melt reached a value such that it was in equilibrium with a corresponding carbide, such carbide will start to form. Currently, it is not clear whether the carbides were formed during the reduction process or during the cooling of the reduced samples. Due to the significant difference between the stability of metal and carbide, TiC is expected to have the least solubility in the melt and has the highest possibility to be segregated from the molten iron. This also explains why the alloy phase formed in reduction contained little titanium, although the silicon and aluminium contents were significant. In solid–solid carbothermal reduction of stable metal oxides in inert gas atmosphere, reduction carries on through gas phases. In such a case of carbothermal reduction of bauxite ores as in this investigation, the presence of molten metallic iron promotes the reduction kinetics because the molten phase dissolves carbon reductant from graphite particles and transfers it to the oxides of stable metal oxides. In combination with a low CO partial pressure, these conditions favoured the reduction of silica, titania and alumina at relatively lower temperatures than those used in the reduction of these pure oxides. In the carbothermal reduction of silica, SiO gas species works as a reaction intermediate transferring silicon from oxide particles to the carbon particles. While in the carbothermal reduction of alumina, Al and Al The carbothermal reduction of bauxite ores from Western Australia and Queensland was carried out in Ar atmosphere, using temperature programmed reduction and step by step reduction procedures. The major conclusions of this research are: Bauxite ore can be directly reduced carbothermally by temperature programmed reduction or a stepwise reduction process. Appropriate control of the reaction temperature may maintain the residual oxide phases in solid state. The reduction sequence of the metal oxides in the bauxite ores is iron oxides then silica and titania and then alumina. Metallic iron is formed at temperatures below 1100 Carbides of titanium, silicon and aluminium were formed by carbothermal reduction. The metals were formed and dissolved in the ferroalloy phase, which upon saturation, was segregated as metal carbides distributed inside the alloy phase as inclusions or around the alloy particles. The XRD and SEM analyses were carried out in the Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre at the University of New South Wales, Australia.