Slow bending forces created by rollers of rotating machines and acting on forearm bones can result in traumatic bowing even in adults. Four patients having this peculiar injury pattern in industrial accidents have been reported in this paper. Three of these had concomitant fractures of ipsilateral humerus. There were problems in appropriate reduction of the deformity due to the presence of associated overlying soft tissue injury. The literature has also been reviewed for this injury and 13 reports defining the injury profile, problems in realigning forearm bones and their subsequent maintenance have been described. The eventual outcome of such machine injuries has not been good due to persistence of some degrees of bowing and associated restriction of forearm rotation.Acute plastic deformation of long bones is rare in adults with few case reports published in literature. A 25-year-old male was working on a slow moving roller machine, when a bracelet on his right forearm entangled around one of the bolts and the limb was subsequently dragged over to the roller. The second bolt pressed the volar aspect of proximal forearm and third bolt pressed against humerus. The machine was stopped after about a minute, following which the patient could remove his limb from the roller. On clinical examination, there was skin avulsion over right upper limb at two sites. The right forearm showed bowing deformity with painful restriction of pronation–supination. There was an associated ipsilateral fracture of the humeral shaft which was further complicated by a high radial nerve palsy. Radiograph of the forearm confirmed dorsal bowing of forearm bones ( A 17-year-old male labourer sustained trauma on a mixer machine in a pharmaceutical factory. While trying to retrieve a bag entrapped on a rolling machine, his right forearm also got pulled on and twisted around the roller. He could extricate his limb only after he stopped the machine by forcing the conveyer belt to slip off the roller which took about 30 An 18-year-old male got his hand entrapped in the roller of a printing machine. His right forearm and subsequently his arm were also bent over it, till the machine was stopped. His hand was crushed and traumatically amputated at wrist level. On examination, there was significant dorsal bowing deformity in forearm bones and fracture of the ipsilateral humerus. After emergency disarticulation of the crushed hand at radiocarpal level, the forearm stump was debrided and the wound closed. The attempted manipulation proved inadequate in reducing the forearm bowing. Further, the forearm could not be immobilised to maintain the achieved reduction as a result of the amputation at the wrist. The humerus fracture was however stabilised on a POP U-slab. At 10 weeks follow-up, the forearm movements were restricted between 10° pronation and 50° supination and the radiograph at that time revealed relatively less bowing of the forearm bones. A 16-year-old male met with an industrial accident when the cuff of his unbuttoned shirt sleeve got caught in a roller machine, pulling his right upper limb on to it. The limb could be taken out only after the machine was stopped in about 30 Chamay studied the effect of compressive longitudinal forces in causing bowing deformity in dog bones. One characteristic feature in all these reports has been the typical age distribution. With increasing maturation of bone, greater mineralisation stiffens the collagen and hydroxyapatite complex, thereby decreasing the amount of deformity All cases except one, In acute clinical presentations, restriction of forearm rotation, especially pronation, has been a uniform observation. In suspected cases, complete radiographic evaluation consists of anteroposterior, lateral and sometimes oblique films to confirm and grade the bowing deformity. In the forearm, if a single bone shows bowing deformity, the other bone is either fractured or subluxated/dislocated at the radioulnar joints. The deformity spectrum in forearm bowing of the mature skeleton is typical. In 11 of the reported 17 patients including the present 4, both the bones of the forearm were bowed. In three patients, the radius alone had the bowing deformity and two of these had an associated ulnar fracture. The presence of simultaneous injury to the humerus has been reported only once Reduction difficulty can be anticipated in this pattern of deformity. Sanders and Heckman In most of these patients, an above elbow POP cast has been used for a period of 6–8 weeks for maintenance of reduction. There have been reports of the use of Rush pins Only five patients had return of full rotational movements of forearm. In four other patients, even though the reduction was said to be achieved, there persisted some restriction usually of pronation. Among three documented failed reductions, late osteotomy brought back full rotational movement in two. In conclusion, forearm bowing occurring as a result of injuries from machine rollers should be defined as an occupational hazard with need for early and appropriate diagnosis. Association of overlying soft tissue or hand injury or ipsilateral humerus fracture, though uncommon, adds significant problems in deformity correction. Careful manipulation is required to realign forearm bones and at a late stage osteotomy may have to be performed to regain appropriate limb function.