Microalgae can potentially be used as a food ingredient due to its biochemical composition that can enrich the bioactive compound content of the food products. In the present study, spray-dried Nannochloropsis oculata, Porphyridium cruentum and Diacronema vlkianum microalgae species were added to ice cream formulation at different concentrations (0.10, 0.20 and 0.30 g 100 g−
                     1). The effect of microalgae usage on the color, melting, sensory, flow behaviour and functional properties of ice creams was investigated. Ostwal de Waele model described the flow behaviour of the ice cream mixes well and the consistency index increased with P. cruentum biomass concentration, whereas this value decreased by using N. oculata and D. vlkianum biomasses. Generally, the color of ice creams was remarkably affected by both microalgae type and concentration, and N. oculata and D. vlkianum species had a more pronounced effect. Regarding sensory characteristics, ice cream samples produced with P. cruentum were preferred more than the other samples. The phenolic contents of the ice cream samples increased with microalgae usage. It can be concluded that microalgae can be used in ice cream to improve color and functional properties; however, usage level should be optimized carefully to overcome disadvantages of the microalgae in terms of sensory characteristics.Ice cream is a widely consumed dairy product due to its nutritional value and cooling effect, especially in summer periods. It is mainly composed of milk, sweeteners, hydrocolloids, emulsifiers, flavoring and coloring agents. After the relation between diet and health is realized, researchers have exerted an effort to investigate natural coloring agents. Natural food colorants have gained importance in recent years due to consumers' attitudes and preferences. Also, using natural coloring agents may limit health concerns of consumers due to synthetic constituents of ice cream. In this respect, it is of interest to explore the addition of natural colorants with health benefits in the ice cream formulation [ Microalgae are valuable natural products due to their nutrient and bioactive compound contents and used as animal and human food sources [ The products from microalgae have been widely used as a high-protein supplement in human nutrition, aquaculture and nutraceutical purposes [ Using dried or encapsulated whole microalgae biomasses may ensure multi-functional effects [ Ultra-high temperature-treated (UHT) milk (Birşah, Istanbul, Turkey) and vanillin (Pakmaya, Izmit, Turkey) were purchased from a local market in Istanbul, Turkey. Two different stabilizers as local salep and emulsifier (mono and diglyceride) and granulated sugar (Orion, Konya, Turkey) was used as a sweetener in the ice cream formulations.  Protein, fat and dry matter content of spray-dried microalgae species were performed according to modified procedure of AOAC [ Total carotenoid and chlorophyll-a analysis of samples were determined according to the method described by Gouveia et al. [ Total anthocyanin content of the spray-dried microalgae samples according to the pH differential method [ Ice cream formulation and sample preparation method were adapted from Kurt et al. [ The spray-dried microalgae were added to the ice cream mix with the concentration of 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 g 100 g The rheological properties of the ice cream mixes were determined using a method performed by Dertli et al. [ It measured the colors of the ice cream samples according to Akalin, Karagözlü, & Ünal [ Differential Calorimetry Scanning (DSC) (TA Instrument Q100, New Castle, USA) technique was used to determine the melting behaviour of ice cream samples. 10–15 mg of samples were put into hermetically sealed aluminum pans and scanned at 10 °C/min over from −40 to 20 °C [ Hedonic evaluation of ice cream samples was determined based on protocols described previously by Soukoulis et al. [ Five grams of each sample was weighed and put into a 100 mL glass bottle. 45 mL acetone solution (99%) as extraction solvent was added to the bottle and homogenization was performed by using Ultra-Turrax (Daihan, HG-15D, Gang-Won-Do, South Korea) at 1200 rpm for 2 min. The mixtures were shaken for 24 h at room temperature in the darkness for efficient extraction of bioactive compounds. After that, extracts were centrifuged (Hettich, Universal 320R, Germany) at 8000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was filtered with filter paper through (Whatman No. 1) and put into a 50 mL falcon tubes. Then, centrifugation and filtering processes of samples were performed. Total phenolic contents of samples prepared according to The quantitative data were expressed as the mean ± standard deviation in the tables. The results were analyzed using analysis of variance (ANOVA). Tukey's test was applied to determine if the differences between the parameters of the samples were significant. The statistical analyses were performed using the MINITAB-Express (Minitab Inc., State College, PA, USA) and MSTAT statistical packages (Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA). Differences with Dry matter, fat, protein, total carotenoid, and chlorophyll-a contents of the spray-dried microalgae samples were presented in As in this study, pigment levels should be taken into consideration when investigating the potentials of microalgae as colorants. Carotenoid, chlorophyll-a, and anthocyanin contents of the dried microalgae samples were presented in Flow behaviour of ice cream mixes was shown in In recent years, usage possibilities of microalgae as a natural colorant in different food materials including biscuits, mayonnaises, puddings, chewing gum, yogurt, bread, and pasta were investigated by several researchers [ Melting behaviour of ice cream samples can affect both shelf-life stability of the sample and consumer perception such as mouthfeel and flavor release. Effect of usage of microalgae in formulation on melting characteristics ( The total phenolic content (TPC) of ice cream samples is shown in In this study sensory properties (color, texture, taste, odor, resistance to melting, mouthfeel, strange taste, overall acceptability) of ice cream samples including various spray-dried microalgae were investigated ( In this study, usage possibility of various microalgae as a natural colorant in ice cream formulation was investigated and it can be concluded that species and concentration levels should be considered during usage of microalgae in the food formulations. In addition, when the results of this study are taken into consideration, the direct use of microalgae biomasses rich in pigment contents without separating the related pigments has been found to cause changes in sensory and technological properties. Significant differences were found in these changes. Because the biochemical compositions of microalgae have significant differences on a species basis. The importance of biomass variety on flow and melting behaviour, which is important on ice cream quality characteristics, was found remarkable. Therefore, in microalgae culture, it may be beneficial to reach different biochemical compositions for target foodstuff by creating different stress and growing conditions. In addition, it can be concluded that bioactive compounds from biomasses other than pigments may have the potential to be used as natural food additives in food production to control technological properties. Aquatic food sources are generally disadvantageous for sensory properties due to some flavor and odor characteristics. In the present study, similar findings were observed for some species. These negative effects can be eliminated/reduced by encapsulation and post-harvest processes (e.g. deodorization). In this study, the potential of using spray-dried microalgae as a natural colorant was investigated. Spray drying technique is a common drying technique that is suitable for multi-purposes usage due to its relatively low cost and high efficiency. However, it may be possible to improve the level and stability of microalgae colorants with the application of different drying techniques and/or the development of encapsulation techniques. No conflicts, informed consent, human or animal rights applicable. All sensory research procedures followed were in accordance with the ethical standards of the committee responsible for human experimentation (institutional and national), and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2013.  The authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors thank Ege University; Fisheries Faculty, where culture of algae have been carried out. The authors would like to thank the technical staff at the Yildiz Technical University; Food Engineering Department Laboratory for some analyses of ice-cream.