In presence of water, cracks of reinforced concrete structures can heal naturally or with the help of admixtures. The project aimed to measure the water permeability and self-healing of a high-performance concrete (HPC), a HPC with fibers (HPFRC) and a HPC with fibers and crystalline admixture (HPFRC-CA). Under monotonic loading, HPFRC and HPFRC-CA showed maximal crack widths 39% lower and water permeability 3.1 times inferior than HPC. Under a 7-day constant loading and a continuous water flow, cracks of HPFRC and HPFRC-CA were completely healed in comparison to 60% for those of the HPC. The self-healing kinetics was slower for the HPFRC-CA than for the HPFRC, but a higher load had to be applied in the HPFRC-CA to reach again the initial permeability. SEM observations of self-healed products allowed identification of calcite and ettringite in the HPFRC in comparison to aragonite in the HPFRC-CA.Reinforced concrete structures deteriorate due to various stresses and deformations from internal, mechanical or environmental loadings. This deterioration enhances different transport properties of concrete, such as permeability, diffusion and capillarity suction, resulting in higher water, gas and aggressive agents ingress through concrete In addition to reducing the crack opening, permeability can also decrease with time due to the self-healing potential of concrete in presence of water. Different physico-chemical phenomena can explain cracks self-healing, as formation of calcium carbonate CaCO In recent years, researchers tried to enhance the healing capacity of concrete through different ways as mineral additions (fly ash, silica fume, limestone powder) Crystalline admixture is a powder made of active chemicals provided in a carrier of cement and sand, it is added in the concrete mix like other components. The ACI Committee 212 indicated that the active chemicals react with water and cement to generally produce modified calcium silicate hydrates and/or pore-blocking precipitates in the concrete porosity and cracks No consensus exists presently on the benefit of CA on the self-healing of cracked concrete. It is probably explained by the variety of composition of concretes studied with CA, the difference of composition of the CA itself, the differences of CA content introduced in the concrete, and the various testing periods and methods considered in projects (mechanical or durability tests). These parameters can influence the type of self-healing product, its growth rate and thus the efficiency of the CA to seal cracks. Self-healing of cracks in presence of CA is better or similar to the concrete without CA. It was generally found that presence of water is critical for the self-healing process in presence of CA or not Until now, the healing potential of concrete with crystalline admixture was evaluated with different methods as observation of the effective crack opening evolution This project aims to determine the effect of the inclusion of fibers and crystalline admixture on the mechanical behaviour, permeability and healing potential of reinforced concrete tie-specimens in service condition. Standard flexural tests were first performed to better understand the mechanical behaviour of concrete containing crystalline admixture. Then a permeability device developed at Polytechnique Montreal Three concrete mixtures were used to study the mechanical behaviour, permeability and self-healing capability of reinforced concrete ( The workability and mechanical properties measured for each material are summarized in Before evaluating the permeability and self-healing capability of concretes under load, a preliminary program was performed on six unreinforced notched prisms specimens (550 × 150 × 150 mm These prisms were submitted at 28 days to three points bending test to obtain a residual crack opening displacement ( The principal experimental program was completed with the same mixes tested in the preliminary program (HPFRC, HPFRC-CA) and a reference HPC mix. Tie-specimens were used for this program. They represent a rebar and the surrounding concrete found in the tensile zone of beams, thick slabs or walls subjected to bending loads Two tie-specimens per condition (HPC, HPFRC, HPFRC-CA) were submitted at 50 days to permeability tests under monotonic tensile loading until the rebar yielding. Three additional tie-specimens were submitted to similar permeability tests under monotonic loading including a 7 day-constant loading to assess their self-healing capability. The constant loading corresponds to a stress in the rebar of around 250 MPa which represents service condition. The three points EN14651 notched beam test ( The prisms were loaded at 28 days at a rate of 0.2 mm/min until a The instrumentation installed on prisms allowed direct correlations between the applied force, displacement, The testing device ( Prior to a test, thirteen PI displacements transducers with measurement lengths of 50 or 100 mm were glued in staggered rows directly on two opposite longitudinal faces of the tie-specimen. These two faces as well as the two faces at the extremity of the specimen were sealed with a low stiffness watertight membrane ( Once the installation was completed, a pressure was applied to the water in the inlet tank while the outlet tank remained at the atmospheric pressure. This initiated a water flow in the water-saturated tubing from the inlet to the outlet tank going through the tie-specimen. The effective pressure gradient on the tie-specimen generated a unidirectional water flow through it. This pressure gradient was fixed to 50 kPa (corresponding to a water depth of 5 m) and was measured by pressure sensors installed at the inlet and outlet aluminum boxes clamped to the tie-specimen ( The permeability coefficient was calculated with Darcy’s law (Eq. The permeability device allows an accuracy of 10 The The instrumentation installed on the tie-specimens allowed direct correlations between the applied force, displacement, permeability, crack widths and average stress in the rebar. The loading procedure for the permeability test under monotonic loading consisted of applying a tensile loading rate of 0.05 mm/min until the rebar yielding was achieved in the specimen ( The loading procedure for the permeability test under constant loading ( In practice, the threshold value of 250 MPa is difficult to obtain experimentally since it is back calculated after the test with the PI transducers data. Moreover, formation of each crack in the tie-specimen causes sudden variations of load and displacement, which sometimes impeded to stop the loading at 250 MPa in the rebar. Accuracies of about ±50 MPa and ±20 MPa for HPC and HPFRC/HPFRC-CA respectively were obtained when starting the constant loading of the permeability test. Besides, it would have been interesting to study self-healing of materials (  The HPFRC and HPFRC-CA specimens showed similar stiffness in the elastic phase until the initiation of cracking ( After 28 days of air or water exposure following their unloading, the prisms were reloaded until failure. Once again, the HPFRC and HPFRC-CA mechanical behaviours were quite similar for a same exposure until reaching the maximal stresses ( The mechanical recovery was calculated for each prism as the ratio between the tensile stresses at 56 days (including 28 days of exposure) and at 28 days, for a The mechanical behaviour of the HPC, HPFRC and HPFRC-CA tie-specimens under a monotonic tensile loading are presented by their load versus displacement curves in The load-displacement curves ( The HPFRC and HPFRC-CA globally showed similar mechanical load-displacement and load- The evolution of the water permeability coefficient ( For all concretes, As for the mechanical behaviour ( The observations made on the mechanical behaviour and water penetration of the tie-specimens submitted to the monotonic loading also apply for the first monotonic loading phase of the constant loading permeability tests. During the constant loading, the tie-specimen displacement was kept constant once the target loading of 250 MPa was reached to study the effect of self-healing on a stable cracking pattern. At that time, the tie-specimens generally included 2 and 3 cracks in the HPC and HPFRC/HPFRC-CA respectively. During the constant loading, the PI transducers recorded an average variation of +5.6% of  The  Once the constant loading was finished, the monotonic loading of the tie-specimens was finalized until reaching the rebar yielding. A typical evolution of the permeability during all the loading process (first monotonic loading, constant loading and reloading) is plotted in function of the average stress in reinforcement in  During the flexural tests of the preliminary program, the HPFRC and HPFRC-CA showed similar elastic stiffness ( Concerning the mechanical recovery (ratio between the reloading stress after exposure and the loading stress for a same COD of 0.4 mm), the HPFRC-CA and HPFRC specimens exposed to air presented similar values with good reproducibility (maximal variation of ±1.8% for both conditions) indicating that the crystalline admixture does not enhance self-healing for air exposure as already observed by Roig-Flores et al. As in the tensile tests ( Moreover, the HPFRC and HPFRC-CA presented a lower increase of Under monotonic tensile loading, the HPFRC and HPFRC-CA presented quite similar behaviours in the cracked stage and the crystalline admixture did not influence significantly the water permeability in short duration test (2h). The permeability measurement on mature cracked tie-specimens submitted to a 7-day constant tensile loading allowed the estimation of the decrease of The HPC tie-specimens, with cracks widths between 0.1 and 0.24 mm, were sealed only at 60% after 7 days. Two or three days were required to completely seal crack widths of 0.1 to 0.2 mm in HPFRC tie-specimens, whereas it took 6 days to completely seal similar crack widths in the HPFRC-CA tie-specimen. The self-healing was significantly greater for the fiber reinforced concretes than for the HPC. This is explained by the faster self-healing of thinner cracks as already shown in several works Besides, an important reloading was required to reopen cracks after self-healing occurred in all materials to reach again Although the impact of the crystalline admixture did not clearly emerge from the results of the bending test (mechanical recovery tests) and the permeability test under monotonic tensile loading, the permeability tests under constant loading showed that the HPFRC-CA distinguished from the HPFRC by a slower self-healing kinetics. Despite this lower rate of self-healing, the healing products in the HPFRC-CA provided a greater mechanical recovery of the tie-specimen, as a higher tensile reloading ( Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) observations of the healed products were performed parallel and perpendicularly to healed cracks of the HPFRC-CA and HPFRC tie-specimens. These healed cracks were kept in desiccators containing dierite and lime between the end of the constant permeability tests and the SEM analysis to prevent carbonation. The HPFRC healed cracks showed presence of calcium carbonate (CaCO The different morphologies of the self-healed products in the HPFRC and HPFRC-CA can be explained by the fact that calcium carbonate can exist in six different forms: calcite, aragonite, vaterite, monohydrocalcite, ikaite and amorphous CaCO A slower self-healing was observed for the HPFRC-CA in comparison to the HPFRC ( The objectives of this research project were to evaluate the mechanical behaviour, water permeability and potential of self-healing of cracked concrete. The materials studied were a reference HPC, a HPC with fibers (HPFRC) and a HPC with fibers and crystalline admixture (HPFRC-CA). They were submitted to bending tests on prisms and water permeability tests on tie-specimens. The results of the experimental programs led to the following conclusions. For a same exposure condition (air or water), the HPFRC and HPFRC-CA cracked prisms showed similar mechanical behaviour until a Water exposure favored self-healing of the HPFRC and HPFRC-CA cracked prisms in comparison to air exposure by increasing by 10–20% their mechanical recovery after 28 days of exposure. Considering the variability of bending test results, this observation is however not statistically significant; Fiber content of HPFRC and HPFRC-CA increased the ultimate capacity of the tie-specimens by 38% and decreased the maximal and average The addition of crystalline admixture did not change significantly the mechanical and water permeability behaviours of the HPFRC tie-specimens when submitted to a monotonic tensile loading; When submitted to a constant tensile loading related to service conditions and a continuous water flow, self-healing of tie-specimens occurred for the three tested conditions (HPFRC, HPFRC-CA and HPC). After 7 days, self-healing of tie-specimens was equal to 100% for the HPFRC and HPFRC-CA in comparison to 60% for the HPC; The self-healing kinetics during the 7-day constant loading was slower for the HPFRC-CA than for the HPFRC. However, the HPFRC-CA presented less scattered results and a higher tensile stress had to be applied to the HPFRC-CA tie-specimens (21% higher than HPFRC ones) after the self-healing period to reach again the initial permeability; This last observation could result from a mechanical synergistic combination of fibers and CA such as a higher fiber-matrix bond or a “chemical pre-stressing” of the fibers due to self-healing product formed in presence of the studied CA. More investigation is needed to better understand this phenomenon; SEM observations showed the presence of calcite and ettringite in healed cracks of the HPFRC, whereas the healed product of the HPFRC-CA is aragonite whose formation was probably favored by the presence of Mg in the CA studied; The difference of self-healing kinetics between the HPFRC and HPFRC-CA tie-specimens could be explain by a slower growth rate of aragonite in comparison to calcite. However, more investigation is needed to well understand the chemical reaction kinetics into the healed cracks considering the numerous parameters which could influence this process; As a summary, the Mg-based crystalline admixture has favored aragonite formation in cracks of the high-performance fiber reinforced concrete, which has slowed down the self-healing process measured by water permeability, but provided a greater mechanical recovery under tension to the material. The authors declare that the research work complies with ethical standards of the journal. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. This research project has been financially supported by the Québec Research Fund on Nature and Technologies (