This reconstruction of grinding, pounding, hammering and abrading activities in the Early Neolithic of north-western Europe (Linearbandkeramik and Villeneuve-Saint-Germain cultures, 5100–4700 BC) is based on the study of 1289 sandstone tools from 17 sites located in the main Paris basin river valleys (Aisne, Eure, Marne, Oise, Seine, Yonne). An original method of functional identification was elaborated, relying on observation of use-wear with a stereoscopic microscope (under120×). Identification of traces of use relied on an experimental referential of 92 samples. These include (1) grinding cereals, (2) pounding temper, colourants and various plants, (3) shaping mineral, vegetal and animal objects by polishing (schist, limestones, bone, antler, wood), (4) softening skin. A significant observation concerns the use of small handstones for grain dehusking and larger handstones for grain grinding. Recycling is a widespread feature, with multipurpose handstones and frequent reuse of lower grinding tools for obtaining colourants. A change in the function of tools can also be observed between the Linearbandkeramik and the Villeneuve-Saint-Germain.The Linearbandkeramik culture, which arose in central Europe in the middle of the 6th millennium BC, reached the northern half of France between 5100 BC and 4900 BC. The introduction of a neolithic economy in north-western Europe was accompanied by important technical innovations that impacted both dietary habits and material culture. Dietary habits were changed by cereal grinding, which became increasingly important among domestic activities. Material culture changes affected stone tools, bone tools and ornaments made from shell, limestone and schist that were abraded or polished during their manufacture and included ceramic manufacturing requirements for pounding or grinding tempering material of bone, flint, and crushed pottery. These grinding, pounding and abrading activities required technological developments of the stone equipment that archaeologists have traditionally referred to as “ground stone tools” and more recently are considering them “macro-lithic tools” ( The first systematic studies of macrolithic tools were with Near Eastern collections, where grinding stones were considered key in the emergence of agriculture. These studies developed the first real typologies ( The research reported upon here is intended to place early neolithic sandstone tools from north-western Europe in their technological and socio-economic context. The database consists of 1289 stone tools from 17 Linearbandkeramik (5100–4900 BC) and Villeneuve-Saint-Germain (4900–4700 BC) sites in the Paris Basin and the Belgian regions of Hainaut and Hesbaye ( The terminologies used for stone tool classification (also labelled “macrolithic tools”, “grinding stones”, “ground stone implements” or “non-flaked tools”) are as numerous as their geographical and cultural contexts of discovery ( The 1170 stone tools from the Paris basin included in this study are typically classified as grinding tools such as querns and grinders, multifunctional tools such as netherstones, crushing tools such as anvils, hammerstones and “broyons” (definition below) and abrading and polishing tools. Interestingly, so far neither pestles nor mortars have been found in the Paris Basin ( Linearbandkeramik grinders are loaf-shaped and manipulated with two hands in reciprocal strokes. They are compatible with large square or oval querns that have varyingly concave working surfaces. Three categories of dimensions coexist. Hammerstones include tools with obvious impact fractures from forceful strokes on their ends and faces. Similar impact fractures can occur on the upper surfaces of netherstones, along with cuts, incisions and polished areas. One type of tool has to be considered separately and is labelled here by the term “broyon”. Linearbandkeramik abrading and polishing tools have been sorted into three main categories including polishers, hand-abraders, and grooved abraders. Polishers served as working surfaces for shaping objects ( Some grooved abraders have narrow grooves with v-shaped cross sections, and others have wider grooves with deep u-shaped cross sections. Within the groove, the rock grains are levelled. Another category of handstones manipulated with only one hand is particularly interesting for understanding Linearbandkeramik technological development. Despite having standardized dimensions and shapes, they were clearly used in a wide variety of tasks and made from a variety of rock types. They were used with multidirectional strokes, circular and linear, to grind, pound or soften all kind of materials. They complete the general stone toolkit found in the lateral pits of the Linearbandkeramik longhouses. This proposed classification constitutes a first and necessary step for the understanding of the use of macrolithic tools from the Early Neolithic of the Paris Basin. However, the development of use-wear analysis techniques based on petrographic determinations and on experimental comparative collections is essential to determine the exact function and role of macro-lithic tools in the activities that took place in Linearbandkeramik houses and villages. The methods chosen for functional analysis of macrolithic tools are based on macroscopic and microscopic observations of use-wear traces on working surfaces and of patterns that indicate motor habits involved with tool use ( Grinding and abrading tools are made of different types of sandstones. Sandstones are sedimentary rocks composed of quartz grains, together with rock fragments and feldspar grains. Grain morphology and roundness are key to determining a rock's geologic origin, transportation distance and transportation conditions ( A petrographic analysis of the sandstones used by neolithic people throughout the Paris Basin was conducted in collaboration with the Geological Department of the University of Reims and Lyon (see Sandstone blocks were chosen for experimentation based on petrographic distinctions and by comparisons between the natural blocks from alluvial deposits and stone tools from archaeological sites in the Aisne Valley. Considering the important vertical and lateral variations that affect the texture and cementation of different types of sandstones, this comparison could not rely entirely on the accuracy of source identification. The physical properties (texture and cohesion) of each sandstone were also taken into account when choosing the proper blocks for experimental tools. Ultimately, several qualities of sandstone were recognized as functional. Fine-grained, well-cemented and quartzitic sandstone was preferred for cereal grinding because they are characterized by a high proportion of durable quartz grains and bonded by well-developed siliceous cement (arkoses or sub-arkoses) which inhibits flour contamination by loosened rock grains. Poorly cemented, porous and coarse sandstone rocks were suitable for abrading tasks and were mainly glauconious sandstone although some ferruginous sandstone rocks (graywacke) were also used. Consequently, a range of sandstone rocks, with varying degrees of cohesiveness and porosity, were used for grinding, pounding, abrading and softening tasks by Neolithic people. Following a macroscopic level of analysis and according to previous experimental and archaeological observations, use-wear on macrolithic tools consists of striations, percussion impacts and sheen or polish. The use-wear analysis discussed here on sandstone is based on three main types of traces visible with low magnification ( Levelling of the microtopography is caused by abrasion of the grains and removal of loosely cemented grains. Such damage is visible at very low magnifications (less than 10×). The more the levelling, the more melted or contiguous the rock grains appear. Modifications of the interstitial spaces between grains can be observed with magnifications between 10× and 40×. On porous rocks, grains are detached from the rock during work. On well-cemented rocks, the interstitial space can become filled with a specific type of residue, or “reaction product” ( Modifications of the angles, edges, profiles and faces of the grains can be observed at magnifications above 60× and are described as fractures, edge rounding and abrasion. How can the formation of use-wear traces be explained ( The visibility of such traces entirely depends first on the intensity and duration of use and second on the properties and structure of the different categories of sandstone. However, optical observations alone, even magnified, do not recognize all the variables needed to understand all the tribological mechanisms impacting stone working surfaces. They should be combined with petrographic and chemical analyses. Having said that, observations of experimental tools enabled us to begin to establish a list of diagnostic motor habits for each activity and identify use-wear traces diagnostic of each processed substance. Several experiments were designed to test functional hypotheses related to stone tools. Two main issues have guided the experimental programme. The first issue is an understanding of cereal processing techniques. Were the cereal grains dehusked before they were ground and were there specific stone tools used for processing particular cereal species? Two main species of wheat are found in Early Neolithic contexts of north-western Europe: The second issue is an understanding of how and which stone tools were involved in the processing of a wide range of substances and the manufacture of specific objects. Early Neolithic artefacts include schist bracelets ( Other experiments were designed to evaluate how pounding, crushing or hammering tools were useful for dietary purposes and technical or aesthetic activities. Such tools could have been used to soften dry meat or fish, to extract marrow from bone or to reduce food resources such as lentils, hazelnuts and grasses or herbs for medicines, all of which are represented in Linearbandkeramik contexts. Linearband pottery making required the crushing of tempering material such as limestone, grog or bone. Clay mixing and purification could have been accomplished by crushing the material with stone tools as exemplified by ethnographic data ( Some Linearbandkeramik small handstones have localized use-wear traces such as polished edges and transversal striations that could have been the result of processing supple or abrasive substances. Therefore, experiments were designed to test the hypothesis that some macro-lithic tools were used to work hides or burnish clay. In order to recognize the function of each category of macro-lithic tool and considering that no previous experimental type collection of use-wear traces has been generated for the Linearbandkeramik, a systematic use-wear database was built. The experimental type collection contains 92 surfaces that were worked in various processing tasks. The sandstone blocs were selected for their morphology, size and quality as previously described in order to replicate as closely as possible the archaeological grinders and querns. Stones and boulders were collected in the alluvial deposits of the main valleys, following the choices made by Linearbandkeramik populations. The qualities of the chosen sandstone rocks are described in The sides of grinders and querns were shaped by flaking and pecking. Particular attention was paid to pecking the edges and the backs of grinders for easy handling ( Pounding and crushing strokes were tested to compare the morphology and development of polish and impact fractures on experimental hammerstones and anvils. A well-cemented sandstone block was broken into several pieces and the pieces were used as crushing tools. Two moderately cemented sandstone blocks were chosen to make the anvils. Other than slightly pecking them to create areas for comfortable holding, the tools were not specifically shaped. For all pounding and crushing experiments, only the strokes and processed substances were varied. In keeping with their archaeological models, the experimental abraders, polishers and handstones were minimally shaped. The same person conducted all the experiments so as to avoid personal variations. Each experiment was recorded following five main parameters ( tool size and weight rock quality: two qualities of sandstone were generally compared during the experiments in terms of efficiency and use-wear development the processed substances were evaluated in terms of their nature (animal, vegetal, mineral), texture (hard, supple), and state (fresh, dry). Each processed substance was chosen to be as close as possible to those processed by the Early Neolithic inhabitants of the Paris Basin, including wheat and barley (unfortunately not ancient species), armorican schists, Parisian chalky limestone, Alsacian oolithic limestone, the stroke (grinding, abrading, crushing), posture (sitting, standing), handling (active or passive) and position of the tool (on the ground, in the hand) the duration of use included sequences of 280 This systematic programme aimed at comparing use-wear while varying only one or two parameters (generally raw material and processed material). This allowed for the definition of characteristic use-wear for each activity. To test dehusking operations, cereals were soaked for at least 60 The two milling sets were then used for the experimental grinding of wheat ( The speed of use-wear formation varied with the type of sandstone chosen so that well-cemented sandstone became smooth faster than poorly cemented sandstone. Apparently, the concentration of silica in the glumes influenced use-wear formation, making it possible to distinguish naked cereals or germ grinding from cereal dehusking. However, this distinction is visible only after at least 180 For example, the use-wear on tools used to grind dehusked wheat, appears as levelled rock grains with contiguous edges. Dehusked cereal grinding is further distinguished by a translucid residue covering the entire surface that thickens with increased use. With the processing of hulled cereals ( Lentils, hazelnuts and grasses were pounded for 60 Burnt bone and ochre were easily prepared, and were reduced by alternating strokes of perpendicular crushing and circular grinding. Burnt flint and grog required more violent crushing strokes, which created deep impacts on the anvil In contrast, clay crushing produced the fewest impact fractures on either the hammerstone or the anvil because the clay absorbed most of the impact The morphology, depth, density and location of the impact fractures on the working surfaces contributed to their functional identifications. Additionally, use-wear on pounding and crushing implements is affected by the texture of the processed materials. For example, fractured grains seem indicative of processing hard substances such as mineral grinding. Slight rounding of rock grains seems more indicative of processing animal substances yet it is very difficult to distinguish the crushing of minerals and animal bones. The first experiments abraded various materials with a coarse grained, poorly-cemented sandstone for 30 Square fragments from a fresh femur, and bone awls fractured from fresh and dry sheep metapodials were abraded and polished. After bone abrasion, the rock grains are still clearly distinguishable even though the surface is levelled. The grain's faces are modified, more by residue deposition than by fractures. Two antler tips, one dry, one fresh were also worked. Antler abrasion is more difficult to define than bone abrasion with only a modification of the grain's faces and a partial levelling of the surface clearly visible on antler working tools. One green stick and one dry stick were cleaned of their bark before abrading and polishing. The traces created on the stone surface by woodworking are very similar to those created by bone working. The grains remain distinct, but they appear contiguous. One chalky limestone pendant, one oolithic limestone pendant and one disc of armorican schist were abraded. The experiments were run with and without the sequential addition of sand and water. Surprisingly, the use-wear created by mineral abrasion differs from the use-wear created by mineral pounding. In the case of mineral pounding, the crushing and fracturing of the grains levelled the entire surface. Mineral abrasion removed the grains before their faces were damaged. Mineral abrasion does not alter the grain's faces yet both pounding and abrading level the entire surface. Limestone abrasion removes grains from the stone's surface. Schist abrasion smoothes the edges of the grains but leaves their faces unmodified while levelling the entire abrader surface. The nature and texture of the abraded surface together with added water and sand were major contributors to the formation of use-wear on the surface of the abrader. Shell modification experiments were conducted with a different procedure ( The upper valve of one The third set of abrading and polishing experiments used a small handstone to polish the sides of a quern for 30 The fourth set of polishing and abrading experiments tested the polishing of a flint adze. After roughly shaping the adze by flaking and pecking, it was partially polished on both sides. Two sandstone netherstones, one poorly and the other well-cemented, were used for 480 According to the preceding experiments, abrasion produces specific use-wear traces. The grains remain separate and their faces undamaged. Surfaces generally remain consistently level. Polishing produces different traces. The grains lose their distinctiveness as the surface becomes levelled. The addition of water or sand, as well as the wet or dry state of the substances or surfaces affects the nature and development of these diagnostic use-wear traces. Sand enhances the removal of rock grains and the formation of a translucid fluid residue, that occurs only on the faces of the grains and does not fill all the interstices. Water tends to cushion the faces and edges of quartz grains and slows surface levelling. The processing of wet substances considerably accelerates the formation of residues. Hide working experiments were conducted to test the usefulness of sandstone tools efficiently softening a hide. A cow hide was defleshed and then softened with sandstone tools, working with both reciprocal strokes and circular strokes ( The hide was then smoked for 2.5 The surfaces of the small handstones were observed after each sequence of softening. The first observations was that overall, the surface of the hide-processing stones were levelled faster than the surfaces of stones used in other organic material processing. Hide softening can be identified by two characteristic features: a macroscopically visible, lustrous sheen and a distinctive smoothing of the edges of the rock grains (see also In conclusion, macroscopic and microscopic examinations of experimental used surfaces allow the differentiation of specific patterns for vegetal, animal and mineral processing, with particular accuracy for cereal processing ( The 271 archaeological sandstone tools from three Linearbandkeramik and four Villeneuve-Saint-Germain sites located in the Aisne and Marne valleys were analysed with a new understanding of use-wear gained through the above described experiments. Tool morphology and use-wear attributes including direction of abrasive striations, and locations of impact fractures and sheen on archaeological tools are key variables for recognizing the motor habits of the user as well as tool function (grinding, abrading, etc.). The methods for identifying use-wear on archaeological samples are similar to those for observing use-wear on experimental tools. The identified function of the tools corresponds to their last use, meaning that the interpretation must take into account probable secondary use ( While a large majority of the 271 grinding stones were used, as expected, for cereal processing (72.3%), use-wear patterns were also indicative of animal (8.%) and mineral (13.4%) grinding. A large number of grinding tools were reused. Grinders were reused for processing bone temper for pottery and querns were reused for the production of ochre powder. Half of the tools involved in cereal processing were used for hulled or naked cereal grinding. The other half were used to work hulled cereals, with their glumes and possibly spikelets. Dehusking may of course have been done with these stone tools, but we must also consider the possibility that there was no or only partial dehusking of the cereals for human consumption ( Only one-third of the broyons have identifiable use-wear traces. Broyons are characterized by two different use-wear patterns on the same tool. The ends were used for crushing and the sides for grinding. Mainly used for plant grinding (3 examples), they also have traces of bone pounding (1 example) and even soft mineral crushing (1 example). Some hammerstones have evidence of bone crushing (3 examples). Considering all categories of polishers and abraders together, bone tool manufacture is represented on 45% of the artefacts and mineral abrasion on 28%. The function of some abraders made on very coarse and porous sandstones remains difficult to determine. Handstones were certainly multifunctional: 27.8% are linked to bone processing, 18% to soft mineral grinding and a similar proportion to cereal processing. This supports different techniques of cereals processing in tandem with the traditional mill. Only one tool seems to have been used in hide preparation. The proportion of grinding tools used for cereal processing appears constant between the Linearbandkeramik and the Villeneuve-Saint-Germain, although the actual number increases significantly ( Stone tools also seem more frequently used for processing animal substances during the Villeneuve-Saint-Germain. While this can be easily explained, as far as grinding is concerned, by the higher frequency of bone temper in Villeneuve-Saint-Germain pottery, the use of about 70% of hand polishers for the shaping of bone tools by abrasion is noteworthy. Furthermore, all categories of tool were used for grinding animal matter in the Villeneuve-Saint-Germain, whereas only grinders and querns are used for this activity in the Linearbandkeramik. This paper presents the first results of a functional study on grinding and abrading tools from the earliest neolithic of north-western Europe. Low magnification observations enable us to determine the motion of a tool, the kind of processed matter (vegetal, animal, mineral) and its texture. In the future, accuracy could certainly be improved by defining new microscopic diagnostic criteria at higher magnifications, together with tribological modelling and the multiplication of experimental type collections. This method will certainly provide much more knowledge about cereal processing and food production, but also on technical activities and handicraft of the first neolithic populations of north-western Europe. I would like to acknowledge Jenny Adams (Desert Archaeology Center, Arizona) for her invaluable advice and work in the correction of this paper and to Michael Ilett (Paris I – Panthéon-Sorbonne University) for his great help in the translation. My sincere thanks also go to Sandrine Bonnardin, Nicolas Cayol and Adrienne Lo Carmine (UMR 7041 ArScan, Protohistoire européenne, CNRS) for their help in designing and carrying out the experimental tests on shell ornaments, hide, and stone axes, respectively.