Fuels of Opportunity: Characteristics and uses in combustion systems presents “detailed updated information on fuel characterisation approaches and fuel utilisation technologies”. It will be “essential reading for professional mechanical and chemical engineers involved in energy generation/energy use, along with fuel specialists and operations managers”. When I read this I thought, “Yes, this is going to be good!” Unfortunately the deeper I examined the book; the more disappointed I became with it. I really wanted to like it but kept finding things which I was not happy with. It's not that such a book is not needed. As the authors rightly say, the scope for using opportunity fuels is large and getting larger. I guess I was hoping for more and better. Potential users of opportunity fuels really need a much more comprehensive account. They need to know what has been used, and what were the benefits and pitfalls. They need to know what might be used in the future and, most importantly, what are the crucial issues arising from their use. In my opinion, this book only goes part way towards meeting these requirements. The book is based almost entirely on US practice, which is not surprising since the authors are eminent, US-based professionals, and much work on these types of fuels has been, and continues to be, carried out in the US. However, if the authors are hoping for significant sales in other parts of the world I suggest it is too heavily focussed on what is going on, or perhaps more correctly, what has gone on, in the US. Although the authors recognise that the scope of opportunity fuels is very large I still feel that the selection of what has been discussed is too limited and there is too little critical comment offered concerning plant operational issues. It is the likely overall technical and economic impacts of non-design fuels which are vital to plant operators. There also seems to be some confusion over what constitutes an opportunity fuel. The use of woody biomass in boilers specifically designed for this material cannot possibly be described as the use of an opportunity fuel, (see 4.3 Page 156). Likewise, the use of spent pulping liquors and pulp mill sludge is described in plant designed specifically to burn it. A further important omission, certainly from the European standpoint, is that in the chapter on the use of woody biomass no reference is made to its carbon-neutral nature or to the impact on electricity generation of the Large Combustion Plant Directive now in force in Europe. One of the main uses of biomass in Western Europe is to address greenhouse gas emissions but this is not mentioned. Even if the jury is still out in parts of the USA on global warming, surely some mention of it should be made if sales outside the US are contemplated. The Conclusions sections are, in many cases, too general and can be in fact misleading. For example to state that “Orimulsion has no operational disadvantages relative to coal or oil, and can be fired within environmental regulations” (page 81) is misleading to say the least for a number of reasons. The high sulphur and vanadium levels are cause for concern and no mention is made of the possible environmental effects of Orimulsion spills especially at sea. And which regulations do the authors refer to? A similar lack of clarity is found on page 260, where for tyre-derived fuels it is stated that “Zinc emissions are higher with the TDF blends, but are not above regulated limits”. What are the limits and where are they in force? The format of the book is reminiscent of a series of technical reports which have been ‘cut and pasted’ and re-issued as a hardback book. This view is reinforced on page 259 (chapter 6) where the conclusions are listed as bullet points here but nowhere else. Chapter and headings descriptions are overly long and lack consistency. It is not really necessary to repeat the phrase ‘opportunity fuel’ in almost every title or heading. Space could have been saved if the references were shown in a smaller font size. The quality of reproduction and some of the scenes depicted in the photographs are rather poor, there are four shots of lorries loading or unloading something—it is not clear what!—see Figs. 1.3 (page 9); 4.10 (page 163); 4-15 (page 176); 6-7 (page 253). Fig. 4-13 (page 172) is a CFD plot which is reproduced in black and white and is thus rendered virtually meaningless. In truth, the plots look as if they have been copied from files in Excel spread sheets. Table 2.18 (page 71) the unit (°F) is missing from the right hand column. Other typos were identified but are not listed. Despite suggestions by the authors, my overall concern remains that it is not very clear for whom this book is intended. If it is to guide operations managers then it could be misleading and some of the extensive correlation plots and equations seem unnecessary. However, if it is for the technical specialist, then the information seems to me to be too broad-brush. I suspect much of the information contained in the book could be obtained either from the internet, the technical press or by attending conferences. Priced at £92, I cannot see too many takers for this book—which is a shame as the authors have, I am sure, put a lot of effort into it. However, more is needed; it appears to have been rushed into print and needs expanding, further critical editing and proof reading in order to make it as good as I had hoped it would be.