The solvent extraction of copper(II) from hydrochloric acid solution has been investigated using the commercial extractant, Cyanex 921 in kerosene. The effect of hydrochloric acid concentration, extractant concentration, chloride concentration on the extraction of copper has been studied and a model has been developed for the extraction of copper(II) chloride in order to calculate the concentration of Cu2+ in the extracted organic phase. The distribution ratios of Cu(II) were determined for various concentrations of hydrogen ion, chloride ion and Cyanex 921(L) using the model and were in good agreement with the experimental data for the di-solvated species. The proposed complex formed in the organic phase is H2CuCl4.2L. A negative value of ∆H obtained from temperature variation studies show that the extraction process is exothermic. Almost 99.7% copper was recovered from the loaded organic phase using 0.2M H2SO4 or 0.5M HCl.The metals of first row transition series are extensively used for various commercial purposes. Demand for non-ferrous metals like cobalt, nickel and copper has resulted in depletion of their ores. Hence it is required to develop methods for their recovery from other possible sources. The polymetallic manganese sea nodules constitute a major resource and reservoir of copper, cobalt and nickel ( Solvent extraction offers a convenient method for the extraction and separation of copper(II) and can be efficiently applied for its recovery from leach liquors and waste solutions using a variety of reagents. Extraction of copper(II) anionic complexes from concentrated chloride solutions with pyridine based extractants has been studied by In the present study, an investigation of the selectivity of Cyanex 921 for Cu(II) in hydrochloric acid media has been carried out. The effect of equilibration time, extractant concentration, aqueous phase acid concentration, chloride ion concentration and temperature on the extraction has been investigated. The extraction model has been proposed to calculate the concentration of the extracted complex in organic phase. The stoichiometry of the extracted species in the organic phase has been predicted from the slope analysis as well as extraction equilibrium modelling. The stripping of copper from the loaded organic phase has been performed in order to know the best stripping agent. A stock solution of copper(II) chloride, (Merck, AR grade) was prepared by dissolving the required amount in double distilled water together with 1 Equal aliquots (10 The temperature variation experiment was carried out by mixing equal volumes of aqueous and organic phases in a flat-bottomed water-jacketed equilibration tube with the help of a magnetic stirring bar. The temperature was maintained constant (± 0.1 The effect of equilibration time on the extraction of 0.085 The extraction behavior of copper(II) was studied with 0.1 As expected, the extraction of copper(II) with 0.05–0.5 In order to understand the stoichiometry of the extracted complex in the organic phase, the chloride concentration was varied by adding different amounts of NaCl (0.2–2.0 The effect of H Clearly, the solvating reagent can extract metal ions present in chloride media in the form of a neutral chlorocomplex. In order to determine the composition of extracted species as well as its concentration, numerical calculations have been performed by using the following equations. Since it is desired to keep the model simple, the assumed equilibria do not necessarily involve all species which may exist in the solution. A relatively simple mathematical model may be used to describe solvent extraction equilibria over wide range of concentration of extractant, acid and chloride ions. In hydrochloric acid medium copper forms a yellow coloured complex ion, CuCl Case-I: If the extraction process is described by Eq. From Eq. Putting Eq. Case-II: Putting n Substituting Eq. The model proposed above has been used to calculate the concentration of the extracted species and therefore distribution ratios for varying concentrations of Cyanex 921, H Equilibrium constant for the system. Equilibrium concentration of copper(II) in the aqueous phase. Concentration of hydrogen ions and chloride ions (initial concentration). Concentration of extractant (initial concentration). The results obtained in the present investigation concerning the metal distribution and the speciation in the organic phase are given in The effect of temperature on the extraction of 0.085 The enthalpy change (∆H) and entropy change (∆S) have been calculated by plotting log K From the plot ∆H was found to be −12.7 The copper loaded organic phase (0.064 The distribution data for the extraction of 0.085 The authors are thankful to Cytec Inc., Canada for providing the gift sample of Cyanex 921. The authors are grateful to Prof.(Dr.) M. Nayak, President, Siksha'O'Anusandhan University for his inspiration throughout the course of this work. The authors are also thankful to Mr. S. Sahoo, Technical Assistant, Dept. of Chemistry, ITER and Ms. N. Panda for their help in the experimental work.