With the described technique, two bioabsorbable suture anchors are inserted to create a medial row through the intact cuff for fixation of the fragment of the greater tuberosity. The medial row is repaired with a sliding knot. After confirmation of the fracture site, pilot holes for a PushLock anchor (Arthrex, Naples, FL) are prepared directly in line with the medial anchors and approximately 5 to 10 mm distal to the lateral edge of the fragment of the greater tuberosity. A suture strand from each anchor in the medial row is retrieved. Both suture strands are threaded through the PushLock eyelet on the distal end of the driver. The anchor is advanced completely into the pilot hole. These steps are repeated for a second anchor. If a dog-ear deformity is observed at the margin after complete reduction of the greater tuberosity, a stitch is made by use of a suture hook and one strand of the uncut suture from the lateral row of the joint via the modified suture-bridge technique. Arthroscopic reduction and internal fixation of displaced greater tuberosity fractures with the suture-bridge technique described by us provide adequate fixation with improvement of the pressurized contact area of the fracture and can be used as an additional modality of arthroscopic treatment.Minimally invasive techniques for greater tuberosity reduction and fixation have been developed to minimize dissection and associated morbidity. During intra-articular examination, an articular-side rotator cuff tear and superior displacement of the bone fragment are confirmed ( If a dog-ear deformity is observed at the margin after complete reduction of the greater tuberosity, a stitch is made with a curved suture hook (Linvatec, Largo, FL) and one strand of the uncut suture from the lateral row of the joint via the modified suture-bridge technique ( Studies have shown that standard arthroscopic repair via a single row of anchors does not adequately restore the footprint contact area. Several open techniques using screws, wires, or sutures with nonabsorbable suture materials through bone have been described for the reduction and internal fixation of the greater tuberosity to the proximal humerus. These are often inadequate in the presence of comminution and may prevent accurate restoration of the tuberosity-head relation. Recently, minimally invasive techniques for greater tuberosity reduction and fixation have been developed to minimize dissection and associated morbidity. Arthroscopic techniques emphasize percutaneous reduction of the greater tuberosity fragment with cannulated screw fixation.