In many industrial applications, the most important parameter in material selection is specific strength. For example, it is the critical design criterion in rotating machinery components. Aluminum is a natural candidate for this type of application because of its low density. However, compared to titanium alloys, the strength of conventional commercial aluminum alloys is too low for aluminum to be a better solution. Owing to the many difficulties encountered in the production and use of titanium alloys, the drive to develop stronger aluminum alloys is very high. Earlier studies on the Al-Ti system showed that a very high strength could be achieved through cryomilling The investigated material was produced by powder metallurgy (P/M). The starting powders were attritor-milled in a liquid nitrogen atmosphere, decreasing the grain size and introducing very fine dispersed oxy-nitride particles. These two factors increase the material strength and the fine grain size stability, respectively. Two ternary aluminum alloys (Al-10%Ti-2%Cu and Al-10%Ti-2%Ni) were investigated. The cryomilling procedure, described in earlier publications Friction stir processing was performed at the Rockwell Science Center using conventional friction stir weld tools and weld parameters. Details of friction stir welding procedures and parameters have been described by many authors and can be found in the proceedings of the First International Symposium on Friction Stir Welding Tensile tests were performed on both the as-HIPed and as-FSPed material. Preliminary tests were performed using a mini-tensile testing machine, with additional testing performed on full size TR-090 ASTM specimens. Mini tensile specimens with 1mm gage length were machined in the transverse direction with the gage length centered in the fully mixed FSP nugget. The specimens were ground and polished to a thickness of ∼0.5 mm. All the tensile tests were performed using a custom-built, computer-controlled bench-top tensile testing machine at a constant strain rate of 1×10  In contrast, The room temperature tensile properties of the material after extrusion at different temperatures are detailed in  Using the FS processing method, it was possible to create a relatively homogeneous microstructure in the cryomilled Al-Ti-Cu alloy. The homogenized microstructure significantly improved the tensile ductility of this very high strength P/M Al-Ti-Cu material compared to both as-HIPed and as-extruded materials. The strength of FS processed material was lower compared to the extruded materialbecause of the higher temperature achieved during the FS processing passes. The estimates of the temperature achieved during FS processing tend to situate it well above 300°C, therefore expecting an ultimate strength below 740 MPa from Friction Stir processing of nanophase aluminum alloys led to high strength, ∼650 MPa with good ductility above 10%. Improvements in ductility were due to a significantly improved homogenization of the microstructure during FS processing. The FSP technique is amenable to produce ductile, very high specific strength aluminum alloys, such as the Al-Ti-Cu and Al-Ti-Ni investigated in this study. The sponsorship of Boeing IR&D program through Drs. Cliff Bampton and Dan Matejczyk is greatly appreciated. RSM gratefully acknowledges the support of Air Force Office of Scientific Research through grant no. F49620-00-1-0022.