To maximize coalbed methane recovery, the reservoir is often stimulated because of its low permeability. An exploratory study on improving coal porosity and permeability by microwave treatment was proposed. Pore size distribution of four unconstrained coals (lignite, subbituminous, bituminous, and anthracite), before and after microwave treatment, were evaluated using the nuclear magnetic resonance. With continuous exposure to microwaves, the pore size distribution of coals (especially the lignite coal) extends, and the pore volume and connectivity increase. In addition, coal porosity and permeability evaluated based on the Schlumberger Doll Research model increase by 33–72% and 73–181%, respectively. The mechanism was revealed by combining P-wave tests, thermal imaging and X-ray computed tomography scanner. The moisture and minerals bounded in pores are selectively heated and then detached, and, as a result, the pore structure is opened. Continued exposure to microwaves rapidly converts the mobilized moisture into super-heated steam. Under the steam pressure, pores and fractures generally expand. Borrowing from microwave-assist oil recovery, we presented a conceptual design of a CBM extraction borehole with microwave irradiation.During the past 20 Unlike sandstones and shales, coal reservoir is a network of pores and fractures, and the vast majority of gas is stored in the microporosity system ( Microwave energy is commonly used in a variety of industrial, scientific, and medical applications for processing, drying, and heating ( Only a few articles have been published on the microwave modification or fracturing of coal to date. Petrophysical properties of coal include the size, connectivity, and distribution of pores and fractures ( For coals, Four coal samples of various ranks (lignite, subbituminous, bituminous, and anthracite) were collected from three main coal-bearing basins in China. All samples were cut into cylindrical cores of 50 A cyclic microwave experiment was designed, as illustrated in To avoid interference within the telecommunication devices, Federal Communications Commission regulates the microwave frequencies for industrial processing: 0.915 P-wave velocity tests were conducted outside the microwave chamber using a HS-YS4 Ultrasonic analyzer (see NMR tests were conducted using a Meso MR23-060H-I NMR spectrometer. The parameters were: echo time, 0.3 The maceral composition and proximate analysis of the four samples are presented in  To measure coal porosity, a CuSO  To obtain Coal permeability is closely related to the pore size distribution and connectivity (  The For the anthracite coal ( Moisture evaporation, mineral removal, and macromolecular decomposition caused by microwave treatment can have profound impact on the pore structures and connectivity and then affect the porosity of coals (  Perhaps, the most important property of the coal reservoir is permeability as expressed by cleat development and direction. A number of researchers (  For better analyzing the fracturing effect/mechanism results from microwave treatment, the thermal data of the coals were extracted at a time interval of 30 Compared to conventional heating, which is transferred by conduction, microwave heating is realized by the conversion of electromagnetic energy to thermal energy. The conversion is mainly due to the dipolar polarization effect ( The microwave-material interaction is controlled by the dielectric property ( An industrial X-ray computed tomography scanner was used to observe internal minerals and fractures of a coal, as shown in The moisture and minerals bounded in pores or pore throats are first heated and then detached, and, as a result, the pore structure is opened ( As microwave penetrates into a material, its amplitude diminishes. This attenuation can be expressed by the penetration depth, Patents ( a cross-measure borehole (which is designed to host microwave components and a CBM extraction tube); a microwave applicator (composed by a microwave generator, rectangular and coaxial waveguides and an antenna); a Teflon tube (a perforated microwave-transparent structure interposed to safeguard the borehole). Once combined with coal fracturing methods such as hydro-fracturing, microwave can heat the coal matrix and the residual water in the fractures, resulting in an enhanced effect and an expanded range. Pores and fractures will be opened, enlarged, and connected. As a result, the CBM production will be greatly enhanced. The primary objective of our current research is to assess the effect of microwave irradiation on the petrophysical characterization of coals. NMR tests have been conducted on four rank coals before and after microwave treatment to determine the effect of microwave irradiation on the petrophysical properties. Micropores show a decrease followed by an increase while meso- and macropores as well as microfractures show a steady decrease with coal rank. With microwave irradiation, the pore size distribution of coals (especially the lignite coal) extends, and the total pore volume and the pore connectivity increase. In addition, coal porosity has increased by 33–72%, and coal permeability has increased by 73–181%. The mechanism was revealed by combining P-wave tests, thermal imaging and X-ray computed tomography scanner. The moisture and minerals bounded in pores are selectively heated and then detached, and, as a result, the pore structure is opened. Continued exposure to microwaves rapidly converts the mobilized moisture into super-heated steam. Under the steam pressure, the pores generally expand. The differential heating causes fractures to extend and increase in aperture. Borrowing from microwave-assist oil recovery, we presented a conceptual design of a CBM extraction borehole with microwave irradiation. We are grateful to the