Introduction
                  Leg length discrepancy (LLD) following intramedullary nailing of femoral fractures is not uncommon. We designed a prospective study to evaluate the efficacy of routine postoperative computed tomography (CT) scanograms for evaluation of limb length discrepancy in patients with comminuted Winquist III or IV femoral shaft fractures treated with intramedullary nailing.
               
                  Methods
                  The study consisted of 15 patients with Winquist III and 13 with a Winquist IV femoral shaft fracture pattern with an average age of 37 years. The mechanisms of injury were motor vehicle collision (13), gunshot wound (12) and falls (three). All patients were treated with a statically locked intramedullary femoral nail (18 antegrade and 10 retrograde). A CT scanogram evaluated limb length in all patients. A discrepancy of greater than 20mm was considered for correction during the same admission. An LLD of 15–20mm was discussed with the patient extensively for correction.
               
                  Results
                  In the 28 patients included in our study, the average limb length discrepancy was 9.1mm with a range of −43.5mm short to 10.3mm long. The LLD was less than 10mm in 18 patients (64%), 10–15mm in four patients (14%), 15–20mm in three patients (11%) and more than 20mm in three patients (11%). Measurement of discrepancy as small as 0.5mm showed that 18 patients were fixed with shortening and in 10 patients the operated femur was longer. Tibia lengths were also evaluated separately. Though none of the tibiae had a previous fracture, only three patients (10%) had tibiae of equal length. In 13 patients, an unequal tibia partially corrected the LLD whilst in 12 it added to the discrepancy. Five patients with LLD of greater than 15mm underwent correction.
               
                  Conclusions
                  A postoperative scanogram in patients with comminuted femoral shaft fractures treated with intramedullary nailing is useful to evaluate LLD and allows for early intervention. The ideal length where correction is necessary remains unclear.Locked intramedullary nailing (IMN) is the preferred method for treating femoral shaft fractures. LLD may cause unsightly gait abnormalities, lead to degenerative arthritis of the lower extremity or lumbar spine and may become a source of litigation after surgery. Numerous methods have been described to assess limb length including a clinical examination and imaging modalities that comprise plain radiography, computed radiography, micro-dose digital radiography, ultrasonography, computerised tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance and imaging (MRI). The purpose of this study was to investigate the suitability of routinely obtaining a CT scanogram postoperatively on patients with comminuted Winquist III and Winquist IV (AO/OTA type C1, C2 and C3) femoral shaft fractures treated with IMN and to evaluate the role of immediate correction of limb length inequality if indicated. A secondary aim was to evaluate if we needed to measure the femur, the femur and tibia or overall leg length. Reliability of measurements between observers was also evaluated. This is an Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved prospective review of patients with comminuted femoral shaft fracture that reported to our hospital. Between June 2005 and August 2009, 598 patients with femur fractures located in the neck and trochanter (284), shaft (178) and supra/intercondylar (136) regions were treated at our hospital. Amongst the 178 patients with a femoral shaft fracture, 57 patients had an ipsilateral or contralateral associated fracture in the lower extremity and were excluded from the study leaving 121 patients of which 28 patients had a Winquist III or IV (AO/OTA type C1, C2 and C3) femoral shaft fracture pattern ( All patients were subjected to a CT scanogram ( Patients that opted for revision surgery for leg length equalisation underwent the procedure during the same admission. During surgery, a femoral distractor was applied and the nails were unlocked distally for antegrade nails and proximally for retrograde nails. Leg length was restored and static locking reapplied. All patients were rescanned following leg length correction. Follow-up ranged from 18 to 45 months with an average of 22 months. All patients were asked at their latest follow-up if they perceived an LLD. Inter-observer reliability was determined using Pearson's correlation co-efficient which measures pair-wise correlation amongst observers using a scale that is ordered. It is assumed that the rating scale is continuous. An average level of agreement for the group was calculated as the mean of the In the 28 patients included in our study, the average limb length discrepancy was 9.1 Eighteen patients were fixed with shortening and in 10 patients the operated femur was distracted. Eighteen patients (64%) had LLD of less than 10 Tibia lengths were also evaluated separately. Though none of the tibiae had a previous fracture, only three patients (10%) had tibiae of equal length. A tibial length discrepancy less than 5 The LLD was less than 10 We recommended correction in LLD of more than 20 The Pearson's correlation co-efficient Leg length inequality is very common, occurring in up to 65–70% of the general population. Currently, a CT scanogram is the standard for measuring postoperative femur length. The degree of LLD that requires correction remains undefined. A discrepancy of 10 Although surgeons generally agree that greater LLD is associated with greater risk of sequelae, no consensus exists regarding the exact number at which LLD should be corrected. Winquist and Hansen As stated above in the Winquist and Hansen series LLD was usually due to shortening in contrast to reports on LLD following hip replacement where lengthening is the problem. Intra-operative measurement of correction following recognition of LLD in patients treated with locked femoral IMN requires precise methods. We often use the nail diameter as a reference gauge on the fluoroscopic image and lengthen or shorten the distracter as needed. Two other techniques have proved useful during the corrective procedure. One is to leave a locking screw partially removed on the outer cortex to help determine the change in length that has been achieved. The surgeon can then measure the distance from the screw to the locking hole or the distal tip of the nail. Another option is to place a k-wire or the distracter pin in line with the tip of nail and lengthen or shorten relative to this mark. Despite these techniques, it is still not an easy or perfectly accurate endeavour. In the five patients who underwent leg length correction following recognition of LLD, we were able to correct every patient to within 5 It is our view that following detection of LLD if correction is indicated, it should be undertaken at the same admission and this is what we did in the present study. It is well known that the cost of a CT scanogram and acute correction of LLD following femur fracture fixation is lesser than the cost of delayed correction involving a limb-lengthening procedure. Further, a delayed procedure increases morbidity with an increased incidence of delayed/nonunion. In this study, we were able to determine that tibial lengths in a majority of individuals are unequal. An analysis of the results showed that only three patients had tibiae of equal length. The presence of tibial length discrepancy may increase or decrease an overall LLD. Three patients had a 10-mm or greater inequality of tibial length. In all the three patients, the tibia added to the LLD and in one patient crossed the threshold from supervised neglect to one maybe requiring active intervention. After observing this phenomenon, we recommend that all patients should undergo measurements for femoral, tibial and combined leg lengths which on a CT scanogram are fairly easy. We used the total LLD to determine the need for corrective surgery. In this study, inter-observer reliability was determined using Pearson's correlation co-efficient as 0.9973118. This denotes strong correlation between observers. It has been recommended that the scan technique and the reported measurements are double-checked by the operating surgeon, before surgical decision making, to minimise interpretation error. An obvious but unavoidable limitation of this study was that we were unable to ascertain the leg lengths of patients prior to their injury. We have observed, as many other surgeons may have, that there are individuals with inherent LLD of up to 20 LLD was the second-most cited source of medical malpractice litigation amongst the members of the American Association of Hip and Knee Surgeons. Due to a high proportion of leg length discrepancies following IMN of Winquist III and IV fractures, and the previously described advantages of CT scanogram over orthoroentgenography and physical examination, we encourage the use of CT scanogram in all patients with Winquist III and IV fractures treated with femoral IMN. Our study has not solved the dilemma of LLD after femoral nailing of Winquist III and IV fractures, but has brought some insight into the incidence of this problem and supported a good way to measure the defect. We feel that early recognition of the discrepancy and a discussion with the patient is important so that a collective decision can be made. How much discrepancy requires correction is still not resolved but it is our premise that more than 20 All authors disclose that they have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that could inappropriately influence (bias) the work titled “Limb Length Discrepancy in Comminuted Femoral Shaft Fractures Following IM Nailing”. This includes employment, consultancies, stock ownership, honoraria, paid expert testimony, patent applications/registrations, and grants or other funding.