Research on the low-potential hydrophobic state of pyrite, with potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) as collector, is reported to help explain and understand the fundamental aspects of the N2TEC flotation process, which was originally developed for the improved recovery of gold from refractory auriferous sulfide ores. Typically in the N2TEC process, air is replaced by nitrogen as the flotation gas, and potassium amyl xanthate is used as collector for the reactive auriferous pyrite particles. The first N2TEC flotation process was commissioned at Lone Tree in Nevada in March 1997 and has been in operation since that time. On the basis of electrochemically controlled contact angle measurements, the low-potential, low-pH hydrophobic state of pyrite has been examined as a function of flotation variables such as pH, gas-phase composition, collector concentration and pyrite potential.The Lone Tree Mine complex, owned and operated by Newmont Mining Corporation, was originally developed as a high-grade oxide heap leach. The Lone Tree mill was capable of economically processing refractory sulfide ores down to 3.1 g/t Au (with addition of the whole-ore autoclave plant), but a significant portion of the lower grade sulfide resource could not be economically processed. This led to the development of the patented N In the N The traditional theory regarding xanthate flotation of pyrite considers xanthate adsorption as an electrochemical process, which involves the formation of dixanthogen Electrochemical considerations for the amyl xanthate/di-amyl dixanthogen couple has shown the standard half-cell potential to be The hydrophobic state at the pyrite surface in 1×10 Combining electrochemical techniques with wetting methods, such as contact angle measurements, has certain advantages The PAX collector used in all experiments was purified three times by dissolution in acetone, filtration and recrystallization with ethyl ether. Supporting electrolytes of 0.5 M acetic acid and 0.5 M anhydrous sodium acetate, or 0.05 M sodium tetraborate, which provided buffered solutions of pH 4.68 and 9.20, respectively, were used. The pH values in some experiments were adjusted with solutions of sodium hydroxide and/or hydrochloric acid. Deionized water (18 MΩ cm) was used in all of the experimental work. All other reagents used were of analytical reagent grade. For each test involving a nitrogen atmosphere, the electrolyte was purged with nitrogen for at least 2 h prior to the test being performed. The pyrite electrodes were prepared from a massive crystalline specimen obtained from Ward's Natural Science Establishment. A selected sample was sealed in a nonconducting epoxy with one surface, 1.0 cm A three-compartment electrochemical cell having parallel plate windows in the working compartment was used for contact angle measurements under potentiostatic control. The cell included a movable pyrite electrode, a platinum counter electrode and a reference saturated calomel electrode (SCE) or Ag/AgCl electrode connected via a Luggin capillary. The electrochemical cell was placed on the optical bench of a Rame–Hart goniometer. An EG&G PAR 173 Potentiostat/Galvanostat programmed with an IBM PC-XT computer, implementing Model 250 Electrochemical Analysis System software, was used to control the potential of the pyrite electrode at room temperature (∼22 °C). The procedure involved setting the voltage at the desired level for at least 1 min. Typically, collector was then added and the electrode surface was allowed to react further at the desired potential for 4 min, after which the contact angle was measured at this potential. The tests were performed in the potential range of −1.0 to 0.1 V vs. SCE. The XPS spectra of cathodically treated pyrite (−0.3 V vs. SCE) in air and nitrogen were obtained with a V6 Scientific 220i XL Electron Spectrometer with a monochromatized Al K The Nanoscope III Electrochemical Atomic Force Microscope (ECAFM) allows for the combination of an AFM fluid cell with the surface to be examined under the control of a potentiostat. The ECAFM operates as a three-electrode system with working (sample), reference and counter (auxiliary) electrodes. A number of electrochemical techniques can be performed with this instrument, including potential control and cyclic voltammetry. In this work, pyrite was used as the working electrode and platinum wires were implemented as reference and counter electrodes. The pyrite sample was polished to expose a fresh surface before starting the experiment. Cyclic voltammetry was used to determine the potential for pyrite oxidation to ferric hydroxide. The potential was determined as 125 mV vs. platinum reference electrode. After the potential was set, images were taken for different time intervals (i.e. after 0 s, between 0 and 20 min, after 20 min), with the scan rate set at 5 Hz. It took approximately 40 s to capture a 10×10-μm image. At the Lone Tree Mine complex in Nevada, processing (grinding through flotation) is carried out in a nitrogen atmosphere, using PAX as collector (0.18 kg/t) in the potential range of −0.1 to −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl (pH∼4.5–5.5) One of the first steps taken by researchers at Newmont Mining Corporation in the development of the N It is clear from To study the low-potential hydrophobic state of pyrite with PAX as collector, electrochemically controlled contact angle measurements were made comparing the effect of nitrogen vs. air. Initial measurements revealed that the hydrophobicity of untreated pyrite in the presence of 1×10 The effect of PAX concentration is presented in In bench-scale flotation investigations of pretreatment methods for the Lone Tree subgrade ores performed by researchers at Hazen Research, an examination of the effect of pH for air and nitrogen was undertaken. To complement these results, the low-potential hydrophobic state of pyrite was examined at different pH values (in nitrogen). From the data presented in From the experimental results presented in To further investigate the nitrogen vs. air effect, chronoamperometric measurements were made To further investigate this notion of a “clean” pyrite surface established in a nitrogen atmosphere, XPS surface analysis (25 °C) was performed for the following treatments: under ambient conditions (the surface was wet polished); after pyrite treatment at −0.3 V vs. SCE, pH 4.68 for 2 h in air; after pyrite treatment at −0.3 V vs. SCE, pH 4.68 for 3 h in nitrogen. These results are summarized in The XPS results reveal that a “clean” pyrite surface (a surface containing pyrite and iron-deficient sulfides) is only produced for the case of pyrite treated in a nitrogen atmosphere. It is thus clear that the presence of oxygen at a pyrite surface is an important aspect to be considered and that the extent of oxidation and pretreatment procedures will have a profound influence on pyrite surface properties An important aspect to be considered is the hydrophilic state of pyrite at high pH. Hydrophilicity of the pyrite surface state is thought to be related to hydrophilic oxidation products on the surface. To be able to create an “artificial” hydrophilic pyrite surface state, a closer look at the oxidation of pyrite should be taken. As established by Peak 1: Peak 2: Peak 3 (oxidation of FeS If we consider these reactions, it is expected that the formation of iron hydroxide will contribute to the hydrophilic state of pyrite. This state can then be controlled by applying a potential close to the potential at peak 2, under which condition, Following several preconditioning (or anodization) experiments at 0.2, 0.3 and 0.4 V vs. SCE, a preconditioning potential of 0.3 V vs. SCE was chosen. By choosing this anodization potential, ferric hydroxide formation was ensured, while the formation of a polysulfide surface layer was restricted. The next step was considering the effect of anodization time on the pyrite electrode reactions. For an anodization time of 5 min, the peaks are much larger than for an anodization time of 1 min. This is the expected outcome because if the potential is applied for a longer time period, this means that more charge will have passed, which in turn means that a larger amount of the ferric hydroxide will have formed on the surface. In the literature, authors Ferric hydroxide islands as small as 0.5 μm in diameter are clearly visible after the potential had been applied for a few minutes The existence of the hydrophilic surface state formed by the creation of these ferric hydroxide islands was confirmed with contact angle measurements. The effect of anodization on the creation of a hydrophobic pyrite surface state with PAX in air is revealed by the results presented in It is clear from In this way, an artificially created hydrophilic pyrite surface state can be used to evaluate the effectiveness of collectors and activators when the initial state of pyrite is more extensively altered and is more difficult to float such as the pyrite found in the Lone Tree deposit. Additional research is now in progress regarding the effect of cyanide and activation phenomena on the low-potential, low-pH hydrophobic state of pyrite and will be presented in a subsequent publication On the basis of this study, the following conclusions were made. (1) Electrochemically controlled contact angle measurements illustrated the success of the N (2) The hydrophobicity of untreated pyrite at sufficiently high concentrations of PAX (1×10 (3) It is evident that gas-phase composition plays an important role. Nitrogen inhibits the formation of hydrophilic oxidation products at the pyrite surface. (4) Anodization of the pyrite surface creates a more hydrophilic surface state and under these circumstances at high pH and in air, even at potentials where dixanthogen formation occurs, a hydrophobic pyrite surface state could not be created. (5) The effects of gas-phase composition as well as pH were shown to be important contributing factors which determine the hydrophobicity of the pyrite surface state. The nature of amyl xanthate adsorption under these low-potential, low-pH experimental conditions has yet to be resolved. The authors would like to recognize the support given by Newmont Mining Corporation and the National Science Foundation, NSF Grant Number INT-9819852. Discussions with and data provided by Mr. John Gathje contributed significantly to the research progress that has been made. Dr. Jakub Nalaskowski and Mr. Vamsi Paruchuri are acknowledged for their contribution of the electrochemical AFM images.