A bis-cationic (+ +) diallyl monomer [(H2C=CHCH2)2NH+(CH2)2NH+(CH2CO2H)2 •2Cl−] (I) was prepared by a one-pot, two-step reaction of 2-bromoethylamine hydrobromide, ethyl bromoacetate and diallylamine to generate [(H2C = CHCH2)2N(CH2)2N(CH2CO2Et)2] followed by ester hydrolysis. I underwent cyclopolymerization to afford a unique poly(bis-zwitterion) (PBZ) (± ±) II, containing repeating unit embedded with chelating motifs of N-(2-aminoethyl)iminodiacetic acid in bis-zwitterionic form NH+(CH2)2NH+(CH2CO2
                     –)2. Electroneutral II was found to be water-insoluble, while salts like NaCl imparted water-solubility. The polymer was soluble outside a pH window of 1.5–3.5 owing to the equilibration of pH-responsive II to charge-imbalanced polymer chain. The ‘apparent’ pK
                     as of the two NH+ centers were determined to be 5.89 and 10.57. At 2.5 ppm concentration, antiscalant PBZ II imparted 100% inhibition of CaSO4 scale formation for 30 min from its supersaturated solution, while at 20ppm concentration aided by KI, it demonstrated an outstanding synergistic 99% inhibition of mild steel corrosion in 1 M HCl.The industrially important Butler’s cyclopolymerization protocol involves cyclopolymerization of a plethora of diallylamine salts Iminodicetic acid [NH(CH The high density of chelating ligands in PBZ The excellent chelating properties of adsorbents functionalized with aminocarboxylic acid of IDA and EDTA make them highly efficient in removing toxic metal ions from waste waters The antiscalants are extensively used to mitigate CaCO Corrosion of metals is a costly problem. Annually, the global cost due to corrosion in 2016 is estimated to be 2.5 trillion US dollars The above discussion attempted to shed some light on the importance of aminoacetate chelating motifs. Herein we describe the synthesis, solution properties, antiscalant behavior, and corrosion inhibition activity of the newly synthesized PBZ Diallylamine, tertiary butyl hydroperoxide (TBHP) from Fluka Chemie AG were used. 2-Bromoethylamine hydrobromide salt A Perkin Elmer Elemental Analyzer Series 11/2400 (Waltham, Massachusetts) was utilized to find atomic compositions. An FTIR spectrometer (Nicolet 6700, Thermo Electron Corporation) was utilized to record IR spectra. Thermogravimetric analyses (TGA) were performed under a flow of N Size Exclusion chromatography (SEC) was performed on an Agilent Technologoies 1260 infinity II high performance liquid chromatograph equipped with a Refractive index detector and two columns (PL aquagel-OH MIXED – H 8 μm) in series. A 0.5 M NaCl containing 0.05 M NaNO 2-Bromoethylamine hydrobromide salt Under N An The polymerization was carried out as described in Water-solubility of PBZ The determination of basicity or protonation constant ( Conductivity measurements were carried out as described Gravimetric weight-loss measurements were performed as described where A one-pot, two-step synthesis of diester The pH at point of zero charge (pHPZC) was determined by a pH-drift method. The pHs of a series of a 0.1 M NaNO The TGA curve revealed that PBZ The Polymers containing amine and carboxyl functionalities tend to stick to the GPC columns strongly PBZ CSC required to promote water-solubility of 1 wt% PBZ pH-dependent dynamic equilibria involving polymers The solubility in 0.0173 M HCl (pH 1.76) has to be dealt within the context of PBZ The pH versus log[(1-α)/α] gave the intercept value (where α = 0.5) as log For the polymer, log Viscosity plots of PBZ Membrane fouling in a RO plant, in which an inlet feed produces pure water (30%) and reject brine (70%), results from the deposition of CaSO The results of the corrosion inhibition tests by gravimetric weight-loss method are given in where Note that, at 10 ppm concentration, PBZ The surface coverage ( The While Δ Commercially available, 2-bromoethylamine hydrobromide PBZ  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The facilities provided by King Fahd University of Petroleum & Minerals, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia are gratefully acknowledged.