Full-time bibliographers are not common in smaller and medium sized academic libraries. In this setting, reference librarians typically serve as selectors of books and other library material. However, reference librarians for the most part are hired to perform public service duties revolving around a busy reference desk. In the past few years, additional responsibilities have been added to the reference librarians’ workload, making it difficult to perform collection development duties. Acquisitions and collection development librarians are frequently frustrated at how reference librarians seemingly put off or defer their collection development responsibilities. However, there are ways to utilize reference librarians in a collection development team and help them become effective part-time bibliographers.An event that occurred almost nine years ago, was the impetus for this presentation. In 1991, as the new Collection Development Librarian, Robert Sorgenfrei walked into a situation where a great deal of unspent money had been allowed to roll over for a couple of years. In addition, the library collection was in desperate need of updating and enhancing. So, soon after starting work, he announced to the head of reference that she could have a virtual carte blanche to buy what she needed to get the reference collection up to speed. He assumed her reaction would be one of elation. To his surprise, the opposite occurred. She threw up her arms in despair over how she or the other librarians in reference would ever find the time to determine what should be ordered. This was a shock, but then the author thought back to when he had worked as an acquisitions librarian. It had been hard enough to get some of the selectors who were reference librarians to come in on a regular basis and to make simple decisions about which approval plan books to keep. This was no different. It was just that as a collection development librarian he was facing this problem from a new perspective. Even though he faced some problems on his new job, the author was fortunate in many ways. Book selectors had not been given much guidance or leadership in collection development. Indeed, hardly a new book title had been ordered for a number of years. Faced with this situation, the author that he had to get books and other material coming into the library as soon as possible. To accomplish this goal, he put together a collection development team with reference librarians who have a number of responsibilities, only one of which was collection development. This presentation will examine how implementing an approval contributed to this goal. The response given by the head of reference is not at all surprising for those who work behind a busy reference desk. Although utilizing reference librarians for collection development activities is quite common Few would disagree that the central concern is simply the lack of time. Going back a decade or so, reference librarians were involved with four or five distinct tasks such as staffing the reference desk, bibliographic instruction, online searching, and preparing instructional materials and handouts. However, the inception and rise of the Internet along with decreases in library budgets and staff sizes have resulted in an expansion (not evolution) of responsibilities handled by a reference librarian. Many new tasks have been added in addition to the ones we traditionally perform. Some of those new tasks are converting instructional and informational materials into web documents, developing and managing access to electronic resources (e-journals and databases), serving as webmasters for part or all of the library website, and maintaining lines of communication with academic departments (liaison). In addition, many reference librarians are asked to contribute in other areas of the library. An example of this can be found at our library, where two of the three professional staff in the reference department also head other library sections (circulation and ILL). Naturally, this quantity and diversity of responsibilities can leave little room for collection development. The consequence of the widening scope of reference librarianship is summed up succinctly by David Null in a recent article, “What almost always happens in such situations is that when push comes to shove, collection development gets shoved” There seems to be some disagreement on whether intelligent selecting requires subject expertise Another major problem results from the general lack of administrative support and supervision in the area of collection development. Jasper Schad suggests that library administrators may send mixed messages about the importance of collection development because they often do not understand the complexities of collection development The final source of frustration among reference librarians stems from an expectation or maybe simply a hope that any librarian will have the background and tools to succeed at selecting. Perhaps we should. However, very few library schools offer adequate classes or training in collection development. Nevertheless, because many times there is no one else to turn to, we are assigned collection development duties. Faced with the need to have collection development covered, it is often forgotten that first and foremost we are reference librarians, and for many of us, our only formal training came in a single collection development class in library school. These factors have led many reference librarians to feel a bit stressed at the thought of being responsible for developing a collection. Schad described this process:  Certainly, at times, all multi-responsibility librarians will feel overwhelmed. The points brought up by the reference librarian are certainly valid. While fully acknowledging that these problems exist, there are ways to set up a workable system where busy reference librarians can fulfill collection development responsibilities. At the Colorado School of Mines (CSM), collection development is centered around the thirteen academic departments on campus. Librarians act as liaisons to the departments, maintaining lines of communications between the departments and the library. Since most of the departments are fairly distinct in what they teach and research, being a liaison to a department also means that you are responsible for a particular subject. In cases where subjects may be interdepartmental, a librarian usually has liaison responsibilities with both of those departments, for example both Chemistry and Chemical Engineering. When setting up a program using multi-tasked reference librarians, we had a clean slate on which to map out a strategy and wanted to take advantage of that. We envisioned a team approach to collection development with clearly defined responsibilities and policies. The first thing we did was start an approval plan with the idea of using the plan’s profile as the centerpiece for later writing a collection development policy. It would also be the basis for forming the selectors into a team. As a way of starting a team approach to collection development, the selectors would take part in the selection of an approval plan vendor and be responsible for helping write sub-profiles for each department where they had liaison responsibilities. We felt it was important to have the selectors invest time and effort in the approval plan so that they would take some ownership of it, and go the extra mile to make it work. At the 1999 Feather River Conference, Martin Cohen and James Galbraith gave a presentation describing the differing perceptions at McGill University over starting an approval plan and the initial resistance they encountered in the beginning among bibliographers A committee composed of selectors and the author chose Blackwell North America for their approval plan vendor. As soon as the plan was in operation, they made the overall collection development expectations clear: Look at the new book shelves weekly. Monitor approval plan sub-profiles to be sure that the appropriate books are being sent. Monitor sub-profile form selections electronically. Understand the limits of the approval plan (i.e., it cannot bring in everything). Make sure the books that the approval plan cannot bring in are acquired. Maintain lines of communication with departments. Spend time keeping current with subject areas by perusing major review sources weekly. Some of the expectations such as “look at the new book shelves weekly” seem obvious, but it is sometimes difficult to get people out of reference areas and down to technical services even once a week. Efforts to aid reference librarians in their collection development duties were enhanced by new technical innovations such as Blackwell North America’s It made requesting and ordering of books easier. The extensive bibliographic database gave selectors a better idea of what had been and was being published in their subject areas. It took some of the guesswork out of whether a book would come on approval or not since books could now be “forced” to come to using Selectors could now gain easy access to their profiles and understand them better. It gave selectors a broader understanding of the approval process as a whole. When Blackwell offered the option of shifting from getting form selections in paper format, and instead receiving them electronically via Based on the literature and our experiences from opposite sides of this issue, we have agreed on seven recommendations (or implementations) to ensure a successful collection development program using part-time selectors: Implement a matrix organizational structure, that is, the traditional library hierarchy overlaid by a lateral authority Develop a clearly written collection development policy that states the library’s overall vision with a broad general foundation and a definite plan, including selecting criteria with examples of materials that should be collected. Center collection development responsibilities around a well-designed approval plan. The voluminous amount of literature published in any one subject makes it improbable, if not impossible, for the part-time selector to keep on top of the literature in a subject. For example, there are 700,000 documents published annually in the field of chemistry alone. Approval plans, by and large, take a large weight off the selector’s shoulders by systematically and automatically providing books from the major publishers in any one field. The selector can then focus on the more peripheral material such as conference proceedings, interdisciplinary materials, popular titles, and gray literature. Create an atmosphere in which the selectors take ownership in the approval plan. Spend time formally and informally training the part-time selectors thoroughly on the techniques of collection development and the procedures specific to the library and the approval plan. Periodically evaluate the work of the selectors, not necessarily to grade their performance, but to provide a formal platform for discussion or guidance. The evaluation process will also act to give the reference librarian a degree of accountability as part of the collection development team. Give selectors the time to do their work. Library administrators and heads of reference, in this case, need to realize that collection development activities cannot always be completed while staffing the reference desk. Selectors need to set aside routinely at least weekly a sufficient amount of time designated to collection development. Many have argued that putting collection development in the hands of the reference librarians is quite beneficial. Elizabeth Futas states that public services librarians are particularly suited to this task because they have the closest ties to the clientele and are, therefore, able to attain “knowledge of the trends, goals, and objectives of the users” The above reasons along with the obvious cost savings of not hiring full-time bibliographers make this model very attractive to library administrators. However, do the benefits recompense the extra burden put on reference librarians? Many of us who work in organizations that implement the suggestions described above and in the literature believe it does. Having collection development in our position descriptions in many ways makes us better reference librarians by: Strengthening our grasp of a given field by allowing (or forcing) routine perusal of the literature, which is essential when communicating with the faculty and students and in our never-ending efforts to gain respect. Heightening our understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of the collection, while providing a way to do something about the weaknesses. Providing insight into material costs and value to the collection. Strengthening the lines of communication between the disparate sections within the library and reducing or eliminating the isolated department syndrome. And finally, giving us a sense of pride in the library collection. So, in the end, we both agree with conclusion offered by Jasper Schad: 