Site characterization is the process of understanding the geologic framework in the context of engineering benefit. It involves activities like assessment of data adequacy and accuracy, data interpretation and integration, and formulation of a coherent conceptual model It is generally known that rock weathering increases the degree of geological complexity in rock masses. Weathering profiles are highly variable and complicated, and sometimes surface characteristics on which the engineer or geologist has to rely for basic mapping are not always reliable indicators of what lies below. Studying the spatial influence of weathering on rock masses through some rock parameters is, therefore, useful and payoff in standardizing the scheme of description. This would allow us to have an even more refined rock classification based on actual ground conditions. Spatial variability is dealt with geostatistics where the process of prediction is related to the interpreted geologic framework. Geostatistics is an interpolation method developed for estimating values of a parameter of interest using a limited set of data. It assumes that a spatial relationship exists within the data set. Geostatistical methods are more popular in mining engineering since the 1970s, and currently they are applied in many fields of earth science, particularly in the hydrologic and environmental studies. Cromer In this study, geostatistics is employed first to determine the spatial variability of rock quality designation (RQD) which has a straightforward relationship with weathering; then, used to carry out estimation of RQD values based on ordinary kriging and to divide the powerhouse locality of the Gilgel Gibe hydropower project into five different weathering zones. The data used in this study were obtained from the Gilgel Gibe hydropower project located in the western part of Ethiopia. The project consists of the construction of a rock fill dam, a 9 The exploration work in the powerhouse area included geophysical investigation, several vertical pits and six vertical boreholes, which were sunk in 1997 with the aim of selecting the exact location of the powerhouse cavern. Four of these boreholes (BPH1, BPH2, BPH3 and BSS1) are as deep as 286 The project area and its surroundings is covered by a series of volcanic rocks which are products of fissure eruption poured out from long fractures and accumulated in the form of thick deposits The first step ahead of the main geostatistical analysis was the selection of a rock parameter, which has a strong physical relationship with weathering in the study area. Among the various parameters, RQD was found to be the best regionalized variable to study how weathering had penetrated through the rock masses. Strength was another alternative, but data were too limited and erratic. The simple procedure given in The geostatistical analysis in this study was based on 264 RQD values. Samples were taken at irregular intervals along the six vertical boreholes in a single survey program, and data values were recorded using gravity centers. There are no missing values, no outliers, and no duplicates in the data set. The entire geostatistical analysis was carried out using Isatis 3.3, a commercially available computer program developed by Geovariances and the Center of Geostatistics of the Paris School of Mines at Fontainebleau, France. A 2D sample map (290 In order to see the vertical variability, a graphic lithological log along the six boreholes and a 3D perspective view of the variation in RQD values are given in In order to deal with the issue of “trend” in the study area, there was a need to see how weathering had affected the physical and mechanical properties of rock masses. Three important factors (depth, structure and lithology) played almost identical roles in controlling weathering profiles in the project site as it was witnessed by the presence of more advanced weathering products (like the regolith and paleosoils) intermingled with slightly weathered basaltic and trachytic lava flows, even at the depth of the powerhouse cavern In the database itself, it was hard to find any systematic change in data values from top to bottom of individual boreholes. There are some local increments or decrements of RQD at specific depths ( In Once the data set was checked and problems identified, the next step was generating the histogram and calculating summary descriptive statistics. This allowed us to study the symmetry and pattern of the frequency distribution and to determine how much percent of the samples are far from the central value. The histogram of the 264 RQD values is displayed in The fact that the histogram is positively skewed is confirmed by the summary statistics given in From The experimental variogram is a statistic that assesses the average decrease in similarity between random variables as the distance between them increases, leading to some applications in exploratory data analysis One typically begins the analysis of spatial continuity with an omni-directional experimental variogram for which the directional tolerance is large enough that the direction of any particular separation vector, In the study area, samples were taken at irregular intervals along the six vertical boreholes. Regularization was, therefore, necessary before any meaningful variogram was computed in order to maintain the same “support” throughout. Considering the thickness of individual layers of weak rocks, regularization was carried out at 1 Earlier, it is stated that rock layers in the project site dip 15° dominantly to the south. This tells us that there is higher degree of correlation, and hence anisotropy, along this direction than in any other orientation. In such kind of circumstances where an anisotropy is suspected in a different direction other than the horizontal and vertical reference axes, the way out is to introduce a global rotation during the computation of variograms The two experimental variograms (D1 and D2) computed parallel and perpendicular to the dip direction are shown in In geostatistical analyses, the direct use of experimental variograms can lead to singular matrices, multiple solutions, or negative mean square errors in the kriging system of equations because a tabulation of points plus its derived interpolated values may not be negative definite A combination of two spherical structures together with a nugget effect was fitted to the experimental variograms given before (  In In the direction parallel to the rock layers, however, the minimum distance at which spatial correlation ceases is about 70 After directional variograms have been fitted to theoretical models, the next main step in this study was to perform the final estimation using kriging. But, before kriging there was a need to assess the quality of the estimation by running a series of cross-validation tests. Isaaks and Srivastava Having put the ellipsoid along the anisotropy direction, it was also necessary to decide its size in order to have an optimal search during each run. There are no simple and quick tests for fixing the size of appropriate neighborhood. It is largely determined by the geometry of the data set After fixing all the neighborhood parameters, a cross-validation test was conducted using the variogram models given earlier. Two diagnostic diagrams were then developed and given in There are many diagnostic statistics in cross-validation which are derived when a value The diagram in Once cross-validation has been carried out and all the parameters are set, the next step was to create a grid and estimate RQD values using ordinary block kriging. A 10 The kriged map generated using the variogram models given in In During ground investigation and site selection, the geologists and engineers of the project were able to find appropriate location for the powerhouse cavern. But their success was largely based on experience and intuition since the information available at that time was quite limited. Now after geostatistical analyses, it is easy to justify their decision of putting the powerhouse at the depth of approximately 250 In order to see how much kriging estimates are different from true values, the histogram of estimated values and its counterpart for the original data are given in One of the advantages of geostatistics is that for any kind of estimation process, it is possible to attach a measure of reliability. This measure of reliability is usually expressed in the form of a kriging standard deviation map. For this study, the map given in As it is shown on this map, the kriging standard deviation values in most part of the study area are lower than the standard deviation of the raw data (25.6). Exception to this is the western sector where available boreholes are short and estimation was rather rough. Despite the short scale variability along the vertical, which was thought to have an influence on the accuracy of estimates, it is not clear on the map if direction has a role on the distribution of standard deviation values. Rather, minimum standard deviation values are obtained in the vicinity of boreholes and the need for more hard data across most part of the area is well justified. To sum up, although the distinction between weathered and fresh rocks in the kriged map given in Geostatistical methods were used in this paper to study the spatial influence of weathering on rock masses in Gilgel Gibe hydropower project in Ethiopia. Analysis was based on RQD values obtained from six vertical boreholes. Two directional experimental variograms were developed: a horizontal component parallel to the dip direction of rock layers and a vertical component along the perpendicular. A variogram model which was made up of a nugget effect and two spherical structures was later fitted to the experimental variograms. On the basis of these structures, the shortest range perpendicular to the dip direction of rock layers was 10 Ordinary block kriging was used to generate a map of estimated RQD values and to divide the study area into five weathering zones. The map in general captured the reality on the ground, with relatively fresh rocks found at a depth of about 150