Salbutamol sulphate (SS) used in dry powder inhalers requires drug particles in the respirable size range of 1–5μm to achieve a suitable therapeutic effect. The aim of this study was therefore to determine strategies for controlling drug substance characteristics pre and post-crystallisation to facilitate the production of micronised SS with desirable particle attributes for optimal delivery as an inhaled aerosol. SS batches were crystallised using an antisolvent method to produce a range of crystal morphologies. Air jet milling was then used to reduce the size of crystallised SS particles. Starting materials and micronised batches of SS were characterised in the solid state using a range of techniques with subsequent assessment of aerosol properties.
                  Assessment of the aerodynamic characteristics of micronised SS delivered by DPI (without any carrier) indicated that fine particle fraction and emitted dose as a percentage of the total recovered dose were dependent on the quality attributes of the micronised SS, which were directly linked to the degree of imperfections and the morphology of the crystalline feedstock used in micronisation.
                  Aerosolization performance of micronised SS can be optimised by manipulation of feedstock characteristics through crystal engineering and through definition of optimal processing conditions for micronisation.centigrade gram litre metre mole second temperature kilo milli micro minutes angle of X-ray beam diffraction chloroform salbutamol sulphate dry powder inhaler fine particle fraction fine particle dose emitted dose recovered dose active pharmaceutical ingredients iso-propyl alcohol rotation per minute injector pressure grinding pressure feed rate relative humidity scanning electron microscopy differential scanning calorimetry powder X-ray diffractometry dynamic vapour sorption inverse gas chromatography twin stage liquid impinger hydroxy propyl methyl cellulose ultraviolet Barton, Cabrera and Frank crystal growth model volume mean diameter polydispersity index magnification United Kingdom Salbutamol sulphate is a β   Though jet-milling demonstrates notable advantages over other milling process including limited metal contamination, easy cleaning and facilitating processing of temperature sensitive materials, previous research in this area has revealed a number of limitations to its use. In studies undertaken by The aim of this work detailed in this paper was to determine strategies for controlling the feedstock characteristics of a model API to facilitate the production of a micronised drug with desirable particle attributes for optimal delivery as an inhaled aerosol. Owing to its wide use as a bronchodilator, salbutamol sulphate (SS) was chosen as a model compound in this study. The principal aim was to generate an understanding of the impact of the crystallisation conditions on the morphology of SS crystals and their influence on the quality attributes of micronised powders. Salbutamol sulphate was supplied by Cipla, India (Batch No. H80142). Two batches of micronised salbutamol sulphate were supplied by two generic suppliers (A and B). All solvents used in this study were of analytical grade and were supplied by Sigma–Aldrich, UK except for tetrahydrofuran which was supplied by Rathburn Chemicals Ltd., UK. All compressed gases were supplied by BOC Ltd., Surrey, UK. Three batches of salbutamol sulphate (SS1, SS2 and SS3) were crystallised using a cosolvent mixture of water and isopropyl alcohol (IPA). Salbutamol sulphate (SS1 and SS2) was dissolved in water (1:5 w/v) at 25 Crystallised samples were filtered using Whatman qualitative 1 filter paper (55 Dried SS samples with different morphology were then classified into sieve fractions (<20 Following controlled crystallisation and sieving of the samples, the micronisation behaviour for the different batches (SS1, SS2 and SS3) of salbutamol sulphate was evaluated using the FPS Spiral Jetmill (FPS, Italy). The influence of IP For SS1, SS2 and SS3, two different sieve fractions (50–250 Injector pressure, grinding pressure and feed rate were adjusted to provide the conditions stated in The single crystal structure data for salbutamol sulphate was acquired from the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD, UK) (Allen, 2002). Materials Studio 4.1 (Accelrys, Inc.) was then used for molecular modelling. Geometry optimisations on the crystal structure were performed using the CVFF (with force field assigned charges) and Dreiding (with Qeq and Gasteiger charges) force fields. Morphology calculations were carried out using the BFDH method and the growth morphology method. The BFDH method was used to generate a list of possible growth faces, associated d-spacings and relative facet areas. The growth morphology method was used to calculate the attachment energies of different faces. Scanning electron microscopy analysis was carried out for starting and micronised samples using the Quanta 400 SEM (FEI Company, Cambridge, UK). Samples were analysed at a variety of magnifications with direct data capture of the images onto a personal computer. Calibration of the SEM was performed using a gold grid standard supplied with the instrumentation. The particle size distribution was determined for the starting material and processed samples using a laser diffraction particle size analyser (HELOS & RODOS, Sympatec Instruments, UK). 15–20 Thermal properties of the starting material and processed samples were determined using the DSC module of the TA Instruments Q2000 series thermal analysis system (TA Instruments, West Sussex, UK). Samples (1–5 Powder X-ray diffraction was used to characterise the solid form of samples. Analysis of samples was carried out using a Bruker D-8 powder diffractometer (Bruker, Kahlsruhl, Germany) at room temperature. Samples were placed into plastic sample holder with zero background and levelled using a glass cover slide. Samples were scanned over 5–50° 2 Moisture sorption isotherms were determined using a microprocessor controlled automated IGAsorp moisture sorption analyser (IGA IGC measurements were carried out using the automated Perkin Elmer gas chromatograph (Perkin Elmer, USA) equipped with a flame ionization detector (FID). Nitrogen was used as carrier gas with hydrogen and compressed air employed for the FID. The flow rate of carrier gas at column outlet (N A coarse classification of aerodynamic particle size for salbutamol sulphate was determined using a twin stage liquid impinger at 90 The capsule to be tested was placed in the inhaler device, which had been fitted into a moulded rubber mouthpiece attached to the throat of the impinger. Once the assembly had been checked and found to be airtight and vertical, the pump was switched on and the dose released by activating the device. The impinge pump was allowed to run for 2.7 Salbutamol sulphate samples collected from each stage of twin stage impinger, ACI, device and emptied capsule shell were analysed using UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Jasco V-530, Jasco Ltd., UK) at 276 The SEM photomicrographs ( At slower cooling rates, the level of supersaturation is low, where smooth surfaces with sequential layer growth occur ( This is attributed to the initiation of secondary nucleation and decreased size of the diffusion layer at high stirring rates ( IGC and DVS data obtained are consistent with the observations of the morphological differences for crystallised SS samples with similar particle size distributions ( IGC data ( DSC data, with an endothermic transition for all samples at ∼200 No polymorphic or solid state conversions were revealed by PXRD between starting and micronised batches of SS1 and SS3. The theoretical PXRD pattern of SS generated from single crystal data (Cambridge Structural Database, UK) using Mercury (version 2.3) (Mercury software package, CCDC, Cambridge, UK) shown in Particle size distribution data, shown in The particle size of the feedstock has a marked effect on comminution and suggests that batches micronised from finer sized starting material (SS1-2, SS2-2 and SS3-2) typically exhibit lower VMD ( This finding is explained by referring to the high aspect ratio of SS3 crystals, which have the propensity to reorient along the long axis and so may pass through the 20 Evaluation of the impact of process conditions on the micronisation of the SS powder with different morphologies has revealed a number of important effects. The feed rate at which the feedstock is delivered to the microniser has been shown to have marked effect on particle size reduction ( Injector pressure was shown to have limited influence on the particle size achieved for the different starting materials of salbutamol sulphate, with constant grinding pressure (GP). This variable was kept constant in this study since Degree of crystallinity data determined by DVS ( This finding is thought to be due to the greater density of defects and dislocations observed for SS2 crystals, which were apparent in the starting material (see In contrast, processing conditions (FR and IP) showed no notable effect on the relative percentage crystallinity for the micronised batches of SS1, SS2 and SS3. In previous studies This interesting phenomenon is thought to be due to the presence of both bulk and surface amorphous content in the micronised SS2-1. SS2-1 initially showed double recrystallisation events immediately after micronisation ( These findings also indicate that micronised drug powder may contain a mixture of crystalline, surface disorder and bulk disorder domains, for which the starting material characteristics and processing conditions have a great influence. IGC data ( Batches micronised from the distorted plate like crystals (SS2) however showed higher dispersive and specific surface free energy than the batches micronised from SS1 and SS3 ( The morphology of the starting material showed a marked impact on the dispersive surface free energy for the micronised batches of SS1, SS2 and SS3 ( The particle size of the starting material was shown to have a marked effect on the dispersive surface free energy for the batches micronised from SS1 and SS2, whilst having no marked effect for the micronised batches of SS3 ( Feed rate and injector pressure showed no marked effect on the dispersive surface free energy for the micronised batches of SS1, SS2 and SS3. In contrast from In vitro data (  The high value of FPF for SS2-1 is related to the marked cohesion and consequent aggregation of micronised powder produced for SS2 (  The findings detailed in the chapter indicate that crystallographic quality (cracks, defects and dislocations) and the morphology of crystals influence the micronisation behaviour of salbutamol sulphate, which can be linked to the crystallisation conditions used in their production. Further work however needs to be undertaken to understand the influence of crystallisation conditions on the morphology of SS. Results suggest that larger sized starting materials have a greater density of crystal cracks and dislocations compared to small sized starting material with similar morphology. This phenomenon has influenced the micronisation behaviour of SS crystals and subsequent quality of micronised drug particles. It was also observed that the level of processing conditions used during micronisation has a marked impact on the quality of micronised product. More specifically results indicate that batches micronised from SS3 needle like crystals demonstrate lower VMD values compared to batches micronised from SS1 and SS2. Batches micronised from SS2 exhibit reduced crystallinity and had higher surface free energy than batches micronised from SS1 and SS3, which is attributed to the greater degree of defects and dislocations of the SS2 starting material. IGC data suggest that starting SS1 materials were more basic compared to starting SS2 and SS3, which was determined using the acidic probe CHCl