We report on hydrogen sensing studies of palladium and Pd thin film-coated magnesium thin films, which were prepared by pulsed laser deposition. Pd film shows the hydrogenation and dehydrogenation at room temperature leading to a reversible process. While Pd thin film-coated Mg film shows hydrogenation at room temperature and dehydrogenation at 100°C. Electrical resistance measurements were carried out in situ by a two-probe technique in a known pressure of hydrogen gas and air. The change in electrical resistance during hydrogenation/dehydrogenation process is found to be reversible. The film response time is typically 22s for Pd film and 60s for Pd thin film-coated Mg film. All films are found to be stable after hydrogenation and dehydrogenation cycle. These studies prove that Pd and Pd thin film-coated Mg thin films also can be used as low-cost and low temperature hydrogen sensor.Hydrogen is expected to replace conventional energy sources as a pollution-free alternative. It is known that hydrogen (H In this paper, we introduce the basic sensing property of Pd and Pd thin film-coated Mg thin films prepared by pulsed laser deposition as a room temperature hydrogen sensor. We carried out the structural and morphological studies on Pd and Pd/Mg films. We have also studied their characteristics of electrical resistance and related structural changes after hydrogenation/dehydrogenation process. Pd and Pd thin film-coated Mg films were prepared on Si (1 The XRD analysis was carried out using Cu K Electrical resistance measurements were carried out in situ by a two probe technique using a source meter (Keithley 6221) and nano voltmeter (Keithley 2182A). All data acquisitions were carried out using Keithley (KI 6220) software through a General Purpose Interface Bus (GPIB) interface card. The test chamber has separate inlet and outlet lines for the different gases. A check valve was used at the outlet line to maintain the predefined gas pressure in the chamber. Mechanical rotary vacuum pump has been used to create necessary vacuum (10   The dominant peak of tetragonal α-MgH The 2D AFM images of the top surface of as-deposited samples are shown in Considerable variation in electrical resistance upon hydrogenation/dehydrogenation was observed in Pd film. The hydrogenation of the Pd film with hydrogen was carried out by keeping it in 2  The exact measurements for water vapour content of the atmosphere were not done, although, the absolute humidity of the atmosphere on the day of measurement was 10.50 The presence of water vapors strongly affects the H The literature available on Pd and Pd/Mg films prepared by other methods and comparison with the data obtained in the present work is mentioned here: Hydrogen concentration dependence of optical properties of polymeric film (PVDF) coated with a Pd thin-film was reported by Mandelis et al. Hydrogen sensing properties of electrochemically grown palladium particles and sputter deposited Pd thin films at room temperature has been studied by Joshi et al. Fedtke et al. Kiefer et al. Lee et al. Gupta et al. Palmisano et al. The previous studies on Pd films as mentioned above show the response time to in the range of ∼50–120 In the present study considerable resistance change in Pd and Pd thin film-coated Mg thin films upon hydrogenation suggests that these films have the potential to be used as H One of the authors, Yogendra K. Gautam is thankful to