A new cationic flocculant was synthesized by graft copolymerization of acrylamide (AM) and 3-(methacryloylamino)propyl]trimethylammonium chloride (MAPTAC) onto salep using free radical polymerization initiated by ammonium persulfate (APS) to produce cationic salep [S-g-P(AM-co-MAPTAC)]. Reaction parameters (monomers/salep ratio, concentration of reactants, MAPTAC/AM ratio, and APS) were optimized using a full factorial experimental design to obtain the highest settling rate for cement suspensions. The best performing product was characterized by gel permeation chromatography (GPC), FTIR, 1H NMR spectroscopy, and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The resulted cationic flocculant may be introduced as a promising candidate for the green production of asbestos-free fiber cement products by Hatschek process.Flocculants play an indispensable role in many industries such as wastewater treatment, mineral processing, sludge dewatering, etc. ( A somewhat different application of flocculants, which has recently attracted the attention of many researchers, is the manufacture of eco-friendly fiber cement products by the Hatschek process ( Organic flocculants, such as polyacrylamide, poly (acrylic acid), and poly (styrene sulfonic acid) ( Recently, many researches have focused on the usage of natural polymers such as polysaccharides as biodegradable, renewable, and cost effective materials for the synthesis of flocculants. Numerous reports describe the preparation of flocculants by introducing functional groups or by grafting polymers onto starch ( Salep is mostly known for its thickening, stabilizing, and flavoring effects in foods and drinks and has been the subject of a great deal of research ( In this study, cationic salep [S-g-P(AM-co-MAPTAC)] was synthesized for the first time as a new and efficient flocculant. It was demonstrated that the new flocculant is very efficient in settling cement particles and can be successfully applied in the production of green fiber cement composites. The palmate-tuber salep was purchased from a local supplier. Acrylamide and ammonium persulfate (both from Merck) were used without further purification. [3-(methacryloylamino) propyl] trimethylammonium chloride 50% solution in water (Sigma–Aldrich) was extracted with diethyl ether 5 times to remove inhibitor. Double distilled water was used in the synthesis of flocculant, and tap water used for the flocculation experiments. Tehran Portland Cement Type I (  The reactions were carried out in a 250 The GPC instrument was equipped with a PL Aquagel-OH Mixed-H 8 The extent of incorporation of the cationic monomer in the graft copolymer was measured by Mohr titration. A 100  FTIR spectra were obtained from KBr pellets with a resolution of 4 Samples of about 50 The efficiency of flocculants was evaluated on the basis of settling rates. A 100 Salep has a higher molecular weight ( The analysis of results is represented in Therefore, the first two important synthesis parameters were the weight ratio of total monomers/salep (B) and the salep/water wt.% respectively (A), regardless of the concentration of flocculant. The reason behind these observations is that increasing the ratio of total monomers/salep results in higher grafting levels and lengths, thus a higher molecular weight flocculant. Increasing the salep/water ratio enhances the meeting chances between salep and monomers, which results in more successful grafting of monomers onto salep. The third important synthesis parameter which controls the efficiency of the flocculant at lower concentrations (10 On the other hand, if the usage of flocculant at higher concentrations (50  The cationic charge density of the flocculant was determined by Mohr titration. The average of three titrations indicated that 97% of the cationic monomer was grafted, which corresponds to a cationic charge density of 0.564 Thermogravimetric analysis curves are shown in FTIR spectra of native salep, salep-g-PAM and salep-g-P(AM-co-MAPTAC) are shown in In the spectrum of salep-g-P(AM-co-MAPTAC), the peaks at 1542 and 1517 The characteristic peaks in the Therefore, all characterization data, confirmed the successful grafting of the monomers onto the salep and formation of the cationic graft copolymer. The settling rate of cement suspensions were investigated as a function of concentrations of cement and flocculant and the results were demonstrated in It was evident from the slopes of main effect plots, that the positive effect of concentration of flocculant on settling rate was much higher than the negative effect of cement concentration, and suggested that higher concentrations of cement could be simply settled by moderate addition in flocculant dosage. The interaction plots for cement concentrations of 2–4 In addition to the settling rate, we also tried to evaluate the efficiency of flocculants by means of visual comparison of the residual turbidity after 3 Evidently, under the above mentioned conditions, many of the cationic flocculants (156, 158, 160, 162, 164, 166, 167, 168) were as efficient as the best performing sample (170). A few samples (157, 159, 163, 165, 171) left more turbidity in the solutions and others (161,169) were completely ineffective. The neutral (N) and anionic (A) samples were clearly dispersants rather than flocculants, since they left a more turbid solution compared with the blank sample. The qualitative analysis of these results proposed that the same synthesis parameters which control settling rate were again at work, albeit with a different order of importance: A It is useful to compare the flocculation efficacy of salep-g-P(AM-co-MAPTAC) with other flocculants in settling of cement suspensions. However, this is not easy and straightforward because of the variety of techniques, instruments and conditions. For example, anionic, cationic, and neutral polyacrylamide were used in cement slurries with 5–10 A novel high molecular weight salep-g-P(AM-co-MAPTAC) was conveniently obtained by free radical polymerization in aqueous medium and successfully used as a cationic flocculant. Setting a combination of reaction parameters including salep/water, total monomer/salep, and MAPTAC/total monomer at their higher levels not only increased the settling rate at lower addition levels of flocculant but also improved the clarity of the solution at higher levels of addition. The importance of cationic charge for the performance of the flocculant at lower dosages suggested an electrostatic mechanism of flocculation rather than the bridging effect. Compared with other cationic flocculants, the new salep-g-P(AM-co-MAPTAC) was more efficient and easier to prepare and it could be successfully used in Hatschek process for production of eco-friendly fiber-cement products. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is the Supplementary data to this article: