In this work, we investigated the role of bacteria from the genera Bacillus and Pseudomonas and fungi from the genera Aspergillus and Penicillium in the leaching process of two different silicates (calamine and garnierite). Since the results obtained with A. niger were better than those with different bacteria, a more detailed investigation of the leaching process with this microorganism was conducted. Moreover, although it is clear that the citric acid generated by fungi could be an important leaching agent acting in the solubilization of the used silicates, other products of metabolism could be involved. Related to this, the results obtained with chemical leaching using low concentrations of citric acid (lower than 10 mM) showed, for both calamine and garnierite, that the respective dissolution of zinc and nickel was much lower when compared to those processes in which cultures or supernatant liquor of A. niger cultures were used and in which the maximum concentration of citric acid was 8 mM. The results obtained also suggest that the type of mineral (and/or the metal present in it) presents a different susceptibility to the bioleaching process and also demonstrate that depending of the situation, the presence of the fungi cells seem to improve the leaching process. From a practical point of view, the high yield rate of extracting metals from silicates obtained by using for example, supernatant liquors of A. niger cultures, is noteworthy. This bioleaching process present two advantages as compared to conventional chemical leaching processes: (a) the very low concentrations of organic compounds present in such a situation represent a lower ecological risk; and (b) even with a lower final yield, the economical cost of a such process. Both characteristics could facilitate its industrial application.The world's nickel and zinc reserves are about 71 million and 90 million tons, respectively. Despite this apparent abundancy, the treatment of silicate minerals will become increasingly important because the escalating depletion of high-grade ores will make it necessary to obtain metals from the abundant low-grade silicate minerals. Microorganisms may contribute to the extraction of metals from carbonaceous low-grade ores and mining wastes, as well as from metals containing secondary raw materials and industrial intermediate products like slags Three groups of microorganisms are used for the leaching process: autotrophic bacteria Besides bacteria, fungi from genus The purpose of this investigation was to determine the ability of a number of microorganisms, specially The strains used throughout the present work are: The standard medium for The Zn silicate (calamine-SiO The chemical analysis of the silicates used in this work showed the following compositions: calamine — 40.7% SiO Two different types of experiments were carried out. In one of them (direct process), the leaching has carried out in 250-ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing 5 g of ore and 100 ml of the growth medium inoculated with microbial culture. Prior to leaching, media and ore samples were sterilized at 121°C for 20 min. The flasks were incubated on a rotary shaker at 30°C at an operating speed of 200 rpm. At regular intervals, samples were withdrawn for pH measurements and filtered through 0.45-μm-pore-size membrane filter for elemental analysis. Subsequently, the volume was made up by sterile culture medium. In a second set of experiments, the supernatant liquor of a microbial culture was collected after the cellular growth and used as the leaching agent (indirect process). To determine the effect of organic acids (intermediate or final products of the microbial metabolism) as well as of inorganic acids on the extraction of nickel and zinc from silicates, experiments were carried out using citric acid, oxalic acid, H Zinc and nickel were measured by atomic absorption spectrophotometry using standard conditions, after the filtration of the medium through a 0.45-μm-pore-size membrane filter to remove biomass. Organic acids were determined by two different methods. (a) High-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC): The separation of citric acid and oxalic acid was carried out in an Aminex HPX 87 H cation exchanger column and an Aminex Micro Guard Cation H precolumn; mobile phase, 5 mM H All experiments were performed at least three times. The representative results are shown in this paper. Before testing the ability of selected microorganisms to solubilize zinc and nickel from the respective silicates, attempts were made to isolate bacteria and fungi from the ore samples. Since the screening that was carried out did not lead to the discovery of any microorganism usually used for the leaching process, we focused on the knowledge of biohydrometallurgy accumulated up to date, viz., the ability of a number of bacteria and fungi to solubilize large amounts of metals from solid materials. Since bacteria from the genera  Analyzed altogether, the results expressed in Since the results obtained with  Since the efficiency of the dissolution of both metals was higher when the sucrose concentration reached 10–15%, we decided to study in more detail some parameters of cellular growth of Our results demonstrated that high concentrations of carbon sources are required for the fast growth and high citrate yields, raising the hypothesis that one of the leaching agents present in the fungi cultures is citric acid. However, since these cultures were carried out in the absence of ores, there is no evidence of the possible influence of the minerals on the organic acid production by In the leaching of zinc from calamine, using supernatant liquors, the situation is quite similar to the one observed for nickel dissolution from garnierite, reinforcing the idea that the intensity of metal dissolution is proportional to the amount of citric acid produced (see Considering that the organisms of the However, when lower concentrations of citric (10 mM) and oxalic (5 mM) acids were tested (data not shown), the solubilization of zinc and nickel was drastically reduced when compared with the results presented in Thus, if we compare the effectiveness of extracting zinc from calamine expressed on In this way, our results seem to be in disagreement with those reported by Sukla and Panchanadikar In order to understand the leaching process, one has to consider in the first place that the external pH variation shows opposite tendencies, alkalinization in the indirect process and acidification in the direct one. Considering that the amount of organic acids present in both cases is the same, one can conclude that the pH increase in the indirect process is due to proton consumption while converting the oxides in each mineral into soluble metal salts, while the pH decrease in the direct process reveals that the amount of protons produced in this case exceeds the demand for this reaction. At the same time, even though the production of organic acids (citric or oxalic) increased as a function of sucrose concentration, sometimes the number of moles of metal ions dissolved exceeds the number of moles of organic acids produced. Therefore, the leaching process is mainly the reaction of an oxide with protons, even though citrate, which is an important metal coordinating agent, is certainly instrumental in keeping the metal ions soluble, once they have been leached from the respective mineral. This can be understood, if it is considered that in aqueous media, the equilibria involving the metal ions Zn We have calculated the chemical species distribution at different citrate and oxalate concentrations as a function of pH as well as metal ion concentrations. An example is shown in Finally, it should be mentioned that the supernatant liquors of Supported by a grant CBS1058/96 from Fundação de Amparo a Pesquisa de Minas Gerais (FAPEMIG ) Minas Gerais, Brazil.