The process of froth flotation for upgrading the quality of coal by removing mineral matter (ash and pyrite) has received increased attention since the 1960s. The froth flotation process is typically used for treating <0.5-mm size coal and is currently the only technique both effective and economical to clean coal on a commercial scale. In the USA, the majority of coal preparation plants discard the <0.5-mm coal owing to the high cost of processing of the fine coal. Recovering fine coal offers important economic and environmental functions. In economy terms, the plant recovers an extra amount of clean coal that would have otherwise been discarded to the impoundment. Recovering the clean coal reduces the amount of fines to the ponds, and improves the quality of recycled water. The basic coal flotation technology has been derived from ore flotation, where the technology has been extensively used. The first froth flotation plant for coal was established in the United Kingdom in 1920 and the first US plant was established in 1930. Froth flotation technology has made substantial progress over the last fifty years. Coal is a solid combustible material and exists in the ground along with impurities. Coal, being composed of carbon elements, is hydrophobic in nature and thus is a good candidate for the froth flotation technique. The impurities present in coal basically consist of clays, quartz, calcite, dolomite, pyrite, chlorite, etc. which are hydrophilic in nature and thus, can be eaily removed in an aqueous medium. Pyrite minerals present in coal have an ambivalent character and are sometimes difficult to remove by the flotation technique. The hydrophobicity of coal varies with the rank of the coal and oxygen functional group present in the coal. The high volatile bituminous coals are the most hydrophobic, whereas lignite is the least hydrophobic. One technique to quantify the hydrophobicity of coal is through measuring contact angles of water on coal surfaces. The zeta potential of various coals with respect to pH is shown in The purpose of flotation reagents is to provide a strong hydrophobic surface and to create small relatively stable bubbles. For coal flotation, in general, only the collector and frother reagents are used. Theoretically speaking, the highly hydrophobic coals (containing 85–90%C) should not require any collector. In practice, a small amount of either No. 2 fuel oil or kerosene is used as collector. The amount of a collector required varies from a low (0.11–0.2 The primary function of the frother is to produce a large quantity of fine size bubbles. The bubbles should be able to carry the coal to the surface without breaking, and once out of the flotation machine, it should break down. The most commonly used frothers for coal flotation are either pure alcohol, e.g. MIBC (methyl isobutyl carbinol) or a mixture of various alcohols and the polypropylene glycol-based frothers. The amount of frother required varies from 0.2 to 0.5 The function of depressant is to suppress the flotation of one component of the mixture of solids by adding a specific chemical. In coal flotation, pyrite usually floats along with the coal. Many papers have been published on the subject; however, Chaudhari and Aplan, and Xu and Aplan, have conducted a detailed investigation of various reagents for depressing flotation of pyrite. They concluded that there is no universal reagent for depressing pyrite. In the coal industry, pyrite depression is not practised; however, in the future this might become an important step for the coal industry to survive. There are some other variables for flotation, such as pH, dispersing reagents, percentage solids, particle size, etc. However, in the coal industry, very little or no attention is given to these factors. Readers interested should refer to Aplan's work. The coal industry uses either mechanical or column cells. The most commonly used flotation machine is one in which a mechanically driven impeller agitates in the pulp and disperses air into it. The major development in mechanical flotation cells has been in the design of larger volume machines (3000 The column flotation cell which has achieved success in the mineral industry was introduced to the coal industry in the 1990s. The machine consists of a long (∼6 The ‘Mocrocel’ column flotation developed at the Virginia Polytechnique and State University uses an inline mixture to generate fine bubbles in the column. In this column, a part of the reject stream is passed through the inline mixture along with the frother and air to generate fine bubbles. The Static Tube flotation system developed at the Michigan Technology University uses corrugated plates packed inside the column to break up large bubbles into a smaller size bubble. The machine does not utilize any special bubble-generating device. The Jamison cell is a column cell that is much shorter than any of the columns described earlier. As shown in Mohanty and Honaker published a comparative evaluation of the three leading column flotation technologies. According to them, the packed column produced the best separation performance owing to its ability to support a deep froth zone. However, because of the absence of an air-sparging system and consequently larger bubbles, the solids-carrying capacity of the froth was minimal. On the other hand, the solids-carrying capacity or solids throughput achieved with the Jameson cell, was found to be maximal. The Microcell™ achieved maximum carrying capacity while providing a high energy recovery with a reasonably low amount of reagents. In all work on coal flotation, a high ash rejection has been reported using column flotation technology. However, removal of pyritic sulfur has been marginal. The main reason for this is attributed to the ambivalent nature of coal pyrite; some pyrites are hydrophobic and some are hydrophilic in nature. In the case of coal, pyrite is always associated with some carbon which affords it hydrophobic and makes it float with coal. Luttrell Coal flotation is a manually operated process. Recently, process optimization has been achieved through more efficient circuit designs and innovative sensor development. Some new approaches have been developed in the sensor area, which help in designing a controlled reagent delivery system. The Consol Co. has developed an inexpensive optical-based system shown in A machine-vision or ‘video-based’ analyser system has also been successfully tested by Virginia Polytechnique Institute and State University. The video-based system could detect changes in slurries over an operating range of 60–90% ash. In summary, coal flotation, column flotation has shown significant advantages from the technical and economic points of view. A combination of column with advanced gravity separators provides a much cleaner coal with low ash and pyritic sulfur contents. In the future, all new coal preparation plants will utilize column technology along with process optimization and sensors for the economic recovery of ultra-fine coal particles.