This study proposes a deinking selectivity concept that considers both ink removal and fiber yield in determining the performance of deinking operations. The defined deinking selectivity, or Z-factor, is expressed by the ratio of ink removal expressed by the International Standards Organization (ISO) brightness gain or the reduction in relative effective residual ink concentration (ERIC) and the relative fiber (oven-dry basis) rejection loss. For most flotation processes, typical brightness Z-factor is on the order of unit value and ERIC Z-factor is on the order of 10 units. Therefore, the Z-factor weighted brightness gain and ERIC reduction have relevance to ISO brightness and ordinary ERIC reduction. Pilot-scale flotation deinking experiments showed that Z-factor weighted brightness gain and ERIC reduction are good indicators of deinking process efficiency. The period or stage Z-factors are good indicators of the efficiency of the periods or stages of a deinking process. The ERIC Z-factor can be directly related to the separation factor defined in chemical engineering science. A simple criterion developed using the stage Z-factor concept was applied to both pilot-scale experiments and an industrial recycling mill operation for determining the economics of a given period or stage in a flotation deinking operation.Since its introduction in the 1980s, flotation deinking has been adopted as a standard practice for removing ink from wastepaper in paper recycling operations. Inks are detached from fibers through the pulping process before flotation. The objective of the flotation process is to remove the detached inks from the fiber suspension by injecting air bubbles, with the assumption that the hydrophobic ink particles will stick to air bubbles on collision. Ink is removed when the ink-attached bubble froth floats to the top of a flotation cell and is rejected. An increase in froth rejection rate results in an increase in ink removal. Unfortunately, the bubble froth rejection process also rejects fibers, primarily as a result of the entrainment of fiber into the bubble network Because the primary concerns in most paper recycling mill operations are machine or process runnability and meeting the ink removal specifications of mill customers without additional processing (e.g., bleaching or washing), most studies on flotation deinking have primarily focused on removal of contaminants. These studies include understanding pulping chemistry and process A frothing agent spray concept was proposed to obtain separate control of froth stability to increase fiber yield and optimize ink removal in deinking of toner printed papers in a laboratory column flotation cell The objective of our study was to define a deinking selectivity concept that takes into consideration both ink removal and fiber yield loss in a deinking process. The deinking selectivity concept was then applied to a set of flotation deinking experiments conducted in a laboratory pilot-scale facility to demonstrate its usefulness in evaluating the performance of the flotation process under various experimental conditions. Note that deinking selectivity is completely different from the flotation selectivity used in mineral flotation. It is a measure of the effectiveness of a deinking process to selectively remove ink. The selectivity used in mineral flotation is to measure the selective separation of various grades of minerals. The goal of the present study was to develop a balanced evaluation technique to assess the performance of industrial deinking operations. In chemical engineering science, the degree of any separation process is defined by the separation factor In a previous study Instantaneous deinking selectivity, Eq. In practical deinking operations, it is not possible to evaluate the operation in an infinitesimal period. The definitions in Eqs. The importance of time-averaged period deinking selectivities is their application in various stages of flotation in mill operations. When the relative changes of ink removal parameters, i.e., brightness gain or ERIC reduction, and relative fiber loss are evaluated for an individual flotation stage (with typical residence time of 1–2 Accumulative deinking selectivity or Selectivity or An advantage of the Eq. ERIC is a measure of the ink on paper through calibration. The separation factor in a given period Δ Experiments were conducted in the pilot plant flotation deinking facility at the USDA Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory, to illustrate the practicality of the The pulping conditions were as follows: 11% consistency; temperature increase from 40 To obtain good mixing, suspension stock was drawn from the bottom of the outer chamber, then recirculated tangentially through three jets to the bottom of the outer chamber. Air was also injected through the three recirculating jets using venturi devices. The air recirculation pressure was maintained at 62 Old newsprint (ONP) was obtained from London, England ( Handsheets made from wet samples (TAPPI method T205 sp–95) were used for ERIC measurements, using TAPPI method T567 pm–97 It is well known that increasing the deinking surfactant charge initially increases ink removal as a result of the increase in froth stability To further investigate the performance of the two flotation processes conducted at chemical charges of 0.4% and 0.8%, we plotted time-dependent ISO brightness gain and ERIC reduction. As shown in This discussion indicates that it is insufficient to judge deinking performance from ink removal data only and that deinking To illustrate the period We applied the stage Handsheets were prepared from the sampled pulps to measure the brightness and ERIC of the deinked fibers. From the brightness and ERIC data along with the estimated fiber loss through each stage, we determined the deinking selectivity or To further illustrate how  To validate the determined best flotation (experiments 7 and 14), we plotted the corresponding ISO brightness gain, ordinary ERIC reduction, and fiber loss after 15 Eqs. We also found that the ERIC This study defined a new parameter for determining deinking performance: deinking selectivity. The study demonstrates that the defined deinking selectivity, the ratio of pulp ISO brightness gain or relative ERIC reduction and relative fiber loss, also called the This work was supported by the United States Department of Energy (grant no. DE–FC07–00ID13879) and the USDA Forest Service. The authors would like to acknowledge Gerald Cook, Lisa Davie, Grant Gleisner, Robert Kelly, and Gregg Sauve for their contributions in conducting the pilot-scale flotation experiments and the Analytical Chemistry and Microscopy Laboratory of the USDA Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory, for conducting the ash content analysis. Valuable discussions with Dr. Mahendra Doshi are greatly appreciated.