For vanadium extraction from stone coal, roasting is usually a necessary procedure to liberate vanadium from crystal structure. In the roasting process, the characterizations of phase transformation and temperature of onset of sintering are very important. A new method for calculating the mineral phase and liquid phase formation temperature (LPFT) using FactSage software is described in this study. The mineral phases of roasted stone coal with different chemical components calculated by FactSage were consistent with those analyzed by XRD. The change trends of the LPFTs calculated by FactSage also agreed well with those of the temperatures of onset of sintering measured by apparent density method. This new method is less labor-intensive and less costly compared with XRD and apparent density method. Moreover, it also can provide prediction of roasting temperature range, additive species and dosage for vanadium extraction from stone coal.In China, stone coal is an important vanadium-bearing resource. The gross reserve of vanadium in terms of V However, most vanadium in stone coal exists as isomorphism state in mica group minerals ( FactSage is the fusion of two well-known software packages in the computational thermo-chemistry, viz. Fact-Win and ChemSage. A typical vanadium-bearing stone coal was collected from Teng-da Mining and Metallurgy Co. Ltd., Hubei, China. The stone coal was first decarbonized at 700 The decarbonized samples were mixed with 6% NaCl and 10% Na The mineral phase analysis of the roasted samples was conducted by D/Max-IIIA XRD with Cu-Kα radiation, voltage 40 FactSage was used to calculate the mineral phase and LPFT during roasting of stone coal with different chemical components. Calculation parameters were set at 1 For stone coal in China, the main chemical components are SiO The XRD patterns of roasted samples with different addition contents of CaO, SiO The LPFT of roasted samples with different CaO, SiO Through calculations of mineral phase and LPFT during roasting of stone coal with different chemical components of CaO, SiO This research was supported by the