In seeking to gain insights on the performance of long chain water-soluble polymer flocculants when conducting mineral processing in highly saline liquors, molecular dynamic simulation was used to study the effect of NaCl concentration on the conformation of an anionic polyelectrolyte and its adsorption on a quartz surface at pH values above its isoelectric point. Increased salinity led to two competing effects on the overall flocculation process: (i) increased polyelectrolyte adsorption on the quartz surface favours the initial aggregate-forming collisions, but (ii) the radius-of-gyration of the polyelectrolyte is reduced, which then may limit the aggregate size achieved. Such results support reported experimental trends and show the advantages of computational methodologies to describe complex systems.Mineral processing to separate and concentrate valuable phases involves large volumes of water and the generation of tailings, i.e. fine gangue phases in dilute suspensions. The tailings are treated in gravity thickeners, large settling tanks in which water is recovered for upstream reuse and solid phases are concentrated for deposition or disposal, ideally over a low area footprint. High volumetric throughputs require particles to settle at rates well in excess of what they would on the basis of their size. This is achieved by adding The physical characteristics of aggregates on a microscopic scale govern flocculation responses, which can in part be manipulated through knowledge of the flocculant’s solution and adsorption properties. Mineral processing flocculants are based on hydrolysed polyacrylamide (HPAM), typically acrylamide and acrylate copolymerised at varying ratios, the latter’s charged functionality favouring chain extension in aqueous solutions. Adsorption of a single functionality to a surface is weak, but adsorption of multiple functionalities from one chain (a “train”) is effectively irreversible, with unadsorbed “tails” then able to offer bridging. While tailings composition varies widely in mineralogy and size, in general the fines fraction (<20 µm) determining solid-liquid separation and flocculation behaviour is dominated by clays and fine quartz phases. Quartz surfaces consist of silanol groups (Si-OH), but clay surface chemistry is complicated by their plate-like structures. The major basal faces consist of silanol groups which are negatively charged over most pH values and effectively control the bulk particle charge, while the minor edge faces have a higher proportion of aluminol groups (Al-OH) with a greater prospect of providing neutral sites for flocculant adsorption at most slurry pH values ( There is strong interest (and a need in some cases) to use highly saline liquors and even seawater in mineral processing ( Techniques such as viscometry, carbon analysis, x-ray spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy have been applied to probe the state of flocculants both in solution and adsorbed on surfaces ( The interaction of biological molecules with mineral surfaces has been studied by MD (e.g. Molecular dynamics simulations were carried out for: (i) a model polymer in the presence of salts for prediction of the radius-of-gyration in solution and (ii) a quartz surface in the presence of the polymer and salts for prediction of subsequent adsorption. The HPAM flocculant is represented by a 25% anionic polymer formed from 54 acrylamide and 18 acrylate evenly distributed monomers, the functionalities of the latter in deprotonated form ( The predicted radius-of-gyration (r Simulation of the polyelectrolyte interactions with a quartz surface (  The MD simulation results are consistent with published experimental observations (e.g. The polyelectrolye simulated is clearly much smaller in length and solution size than the flocculants used industrially, for which the relative proportion of adsorbed trains and bridging tails may differ. It is therefore not expected that MD simulations will approach quantitative predictions that represent full-scale behaviour. However, such simulations can still offer invaluable insights on how variations in monomer chemistry, liquor composition and surface structures impact on particle-particle collision efficiencies and even aggregate structures ( The potential value of MD simulations in gaining insights on how salinity promotes the HPAM flocculant adsorption process on a quartz surface has been demonstrated. The simulated polyelectrolyte consisted of 72 monomers (a mixture of acrylamide and acrylate), some three orders of magnitude smaller than flocculants used in mineral processing, but the interactions with surfaces are expected to be the same. While simulations of how increasing salt concentrations affect polyelectrolytes in solution and quartz surfaces are known, we believe this is the first study to capture in detail how adsorption of a bridging flocculant’s surrogate on such surfaces will respond under these conditions. Increased salinity favoured the polyelectrolyte’s adsorption, but this is balanced by a reduction in its solution dimensions, which may limit bridging capacity. RIJ acknowledges support