Flocs were produced by adding three cationic polymers (10% charge density, 3.0×105
                     g/mol molecular weight; 40% charge density, 1.1×105
                     g/mol molecular weight; and 100% charge density, 1.2×105
                     g/mol molecular weight) to 90nm diameter silica particles. The compressive yield stresses of the consolidated sediment beds from settled and centrifuged flocs were determined using the volume fraction profile method. The polymer charge density plays an important role in influencing the compressive yield stresses of sediment beds. The compressive yield stresses of sediment beds from flocs induced by the 10% charged polymer were observed to increase with an increase in polymer dose, initial solids concentration, and background electrolyte concentration at all volume fraction. In comparison, polymer dose has marginal effect on the compressive yield stresses of sediment beds from flocs induced by 40% and 100% charged polymers. Initial solids concentration has no influence on the compressive yield stresses of sediment beds from flocs induced by either 40% or 100% charged polymers at the polymer doses used. The compressive yield stresses of sediments from flocs induced by the 40% charged polymer are independent of salt concentration whereas the addition of salt decreases the compressive yield stresses of sediments from flocs induced by the 100% charged polymer. It is found that the shear intensity during aggregation only affects the compressive yield stresses of sediments from flocs induced by the 10% charged polymer. When flocculated at the optimum dose for each polymer (12mg/g silica for the 10% charged polymer at 0.03M NaCl, 12mg/g for 40% and 2mg/g for 100%), compressive yield stress increases as polymer charge increases. The effects observed are related to the flocculation mechanism (bridging, patch attraction or charge neutralisation) and the magnitude of the attractive force.Solid–liquid separation plays an integral role in many industries, including for example, minerals processing, pharmaceuticals, pulp and paper, as well as the sewage treatment industry. The recovery of valuable process liquor or water and densification of solids, either for further processing or disposal, can be achieved by a variety of processes, including gravity settling, pressure filtration and centrifugation. Polymeric flocculants are commonly utilised to hasten the solid–liquid separation step and provide supernatant clarity. The process of polymer addition is known as flocculation and leads to the formation of loose aggregates referred to as flocs The term “compressive yield stress” also known as “the compressive strength” is a relatively recent term used to describe the behaviour of a two-phase system of, typically solid particles in liquid under the influence of compressive force where the liquid can drain from the solid particle network. Compressive rheology formally emerged from the work of Buscall and White In many cases, for example in thickeners, aggregation processes are performed at relatively low solids contents, say from about one tenth to a few volume percent solids. If these aggregates are allowed to settle, they will produce a sediment bed of a higher solids volume fraction. The density of the sediments will vary from the top of the sediment bed to the bottom It is well known that sediments of strongly attractive particles produce sediment beds of lower density than weakly attractive or dispersed particles The strength of an attractive particle network depends on the strength of bonds between particles and the number of bonds that need to be broken. The number of bonds that need to be broken depends on the network structural factors and particle parameters such as size, shape and volume fraction Although these earlier studies identify some chemical and physical factors that affect the yield stress, there is very little information available in the literature, which systematically describes how polymer charge densities influence both aggregate properties and dewatering behaviour. A previous report To elucidate the effect of polymer type and dose on the compressive yield stress of the sediments from aggregates induced by the three polymers, it is useful to understand the conformation the polymer adopts on the particle surface and the dominant flocculation mechanism. Polyelectrolytes with a low fraction of charge have a coiled conformation in solution characterised by a random walk much the same as non-charged polymers in good solvent Our previous investigation In the present study, a series of flocs were produced by adding the same three cationic polymers with various charge densities (used in ref. Details of the materials used in this study, the size and structure of the aggregates and the effect of polymer charge on flocculation mechanism have been described elsewhere Details of the mini-thickener fabricated for the production of aggregates have been presented elsewhere All flocculation experiments were conducted at 25 Compressive yield stress measurements were performed in the Perspex cup containing the sediment from the mini-thickener. To allow for equilibrium consolidation under the influence of gravity the sediments were allowed to sit undisturbed for 96 The volume fraction profile method was used in the current work to determine the compressive yield stress although other methods are available which produce equivalent results The volume fraction ( The optimum polymer doses in terms of the best supernatant clarity for the 10% charged polymer at 0.03 The large increase in the compressive yield stresses of sediments from aggregates induced by the 10% charged polymer at 0.03  The marginal increase in the compressive yield stress of sediments from aggregates induced by the 40% charged polymer with increased polymer dose is likely the result of an increase in particle bond strength. A shift of flocculation mechanism from a combination of charge neutralisation and bridging to predominantly bridging, only slightly increases the compressive yield stress. So it is not difficult to comprehend that the bond strength just marginally increases as the trend to bridging increases. For the 40% charged polymer (D6040), The negligible increase in the compressive yield stress of sediments from aggregates induced by the 100% charged polymer (D6099) at different polymer doses is likely due to the similar magnitude of the attractive bond strength.  Green and Boger The effect of the initial solids concentration on the compressive yield stresses of the silica sediments from flocs induced by the 10% charged polymer at polymer doses of 4 and 12 The observed increase in the compressive yield stress of the silica sediments from flocs induced by the 10% charged polymer at 0.03  There is little influence of initial particle concentration on the compressibility of the sediments formed from the 40% and the 100% charged polymers. Perhaps this is because the aggregate properties shown in Process water in most industrial applications typically contains electrolyte concentrations between that of household tap water (about 0.01 The effect of background electrolyte concentration on the compressive yield stresses of the silica sediments from flocs induced by the 10% charged polymer at the polymer dose of 4 and 12 The observed increase in the compressive yield stresses of the silica sediments from flocs induced by the 10% charged polymer at the low and optimum polymer doses with increasing background electrolyte concentration is caused by enhanced bridging. The addition of NaCl both compresses the electric double layer and screens the particle's and polymer's charge. Although the polymer molecules adopt a tighter coiled configuration, the dramatic reduction in the Debye length allows more loops and tails to protrude away from the particle surface. Thus, more polymer segments extend beyond the relatively narrow double layer to more strongly bond the silica particles. Although the screening of both the particle surface charge and polymer charge will reduce the electrostatic attraction between silica particles and the polymer segments, the greater number of polymer segments interacting with silica particles effectively offsets the adverse effect of charge screening on the particle–polymer attractive force. In addition, for such low charged polymers, the addition of NaCl should effectively reduce the electrostatic double layer repulsion between particles. So the total attraction increases with the increased background NaCl.  As shown in The observed decrease in the compressive yield stress of the silica sediments from flocs induced by the 100% charged polymer at the low and optimum polymer doses when salt is added is attributed to diminished patch attraction. The relatively constant compressive yield stress with further increases in NaCl concentration likely results from increased bridging flocculation. The addition of background electrolyte leads to a reduction in both the mean extension of polymer molecule and the charges on the patches. Such reduction can result in the polymer patch with decreased size and charge In nearly all applications, flocs are formed under conditions where the suspension is subjected to shear. It is widely acknowledged that for a given system, significant differences arise in the flocculation state (i.e. aggregate properties) when flocculation is conducted under different shear condition. Farrow et al. The effect of shear intensity during aggregation on the compressive yield stresses of the silica sediments from flocs induced by the 10% charged polymer at 0.03  The increased compressibility of sediment bed from flocs induced by the 10% charged polymer is consistent with the findings of Farrow et al. Flocs were formed by the addition of three differently charged cationic polymers to 90 The compressive yield stresses of sediment beds from flocs induced by the lower charged polymer depend more strongly on the polymer dose than higher charged polymers over the range of polymer doses investigated. This is possibly due to the fact that for the 10% charged polymer the bridging mechanism dominates and the bridging bond strength is increased with polymer dose. The changeover of the flocculation mechanism from bridging to charge neutralisation and patch attraction as dose is increased for the 40% and 100% charged polymers, especially the 100% charged one, do not markedly alter the compressive yield stress of the sediment beds. When the three polymers are compared, each at their respective optimum dose, the compressive yield stress of the suspensions increases with increasing charge on the polymer. The compressive yield stresses of sediment beds from flocs induced by the 10% charged polymer increase with initial suspension solid concentration at all volume fraction, while the compressive yield stresses of sediment beds from flocs induced by either the 40% or 100% charged polymers are independent of initial suspension solid concentration. The increase in background electrolyte concentration increases the compressive yield stresses of sediment beds from flocs induced by the 10% charged polymer and this is attributed to the enhanced bridging force due primarily to double layer compression. In contrast, the addition of background electrolyte decreases the compressive yield stress of sediment beds from flocs induced by the 100% charged polymer at the doses used and this results from diminished patch attraction. More interestingly, the addition of background electrolyte has no effect on the compressive yield stresses of sediment beds from flocs induced by the 40% charged polymer. The increase in shear intensity only affect the compressive yield stress of sediment bed induced by the 10% charged polymer whereas there is no effect of shear intensity on the compressive yield stress of sediment bed induced by the 40% and 100% charged polymers. Ying Zhou would like to thank the Australian government for the award of an IPRS scholarship and the University of Newcastle, Australia, for the award of UNRS Central scholarship. Thanks also to SNF Floerger for the donation of cationic polymers. The authors wish to acknowledge financial support from the Australian Research Council (in particular, Discovery Grant 0209669 and the Special Research Centre for Multiphase Processes).