Bioleaching studies were carried out on a commercial nickel-based reforming catalyst using two acidophilic bacteria (Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans) under several types of bioleaching mode (one-step, two-step and spent medium-step) and catalyst pretreatment (with and without reduction). The highest percentage of nickel extraction was achieved using A. thiooxidans under spent medium-step (94.4 ± 0.1%). The percentage of nickel extracted was constant (85.6 ± 3.9%) up to a pulp density of 5% w v−1, and it decreased at higher pulp densities due to acid depletion. In order to assess the potential reuse of the recovered metal, the nickel solution obtained by bioleaching was recycled by using it to prepare a new Ni/Al2O3 catalyst by impregnation of a commercial alumina support. Characterization of the catalyst prepared from recycled nickel showed that it had a high purity along with a suitable texture and metallic dispersion. Indeed, the activity of the new catalyst in the dry reforming of methane provided a high conversion of methane (99%) with good stability over time under the experimental conditions employed.Spent catalysts are hazardous waste products that are commonly disposed of in landfill sites and they occasionally produce ground water contamination. In countries of the European Union, Directive 2008/98/EC on waste (Waste Framework Directive) sets the legislative framework for waste handling, including the regeneration, recovery and disposal of spent catalysts. In an effort to reduce the generation of hazardous wastes, the spent catalysts can be treated by physicochemical or biological methods to recover the constituent metals ( The two main physicochemical methods for catalyst recycling are hydrometallurgical processes (recovery of metals with aqueous solutions) and pyrometallurgical processes (by heat). These methods have the main disadvantages of high energy consumption and significant environmental pollution ( Bioleaching has been applied to spent catalysts from refineries ( There are several important factors in this process that can be studied and these include substrate concentration, pulp density, particle size, initial leaching pH, type of strain, contact time and temperature. However, in most studies the metal recovery options are not considered. In general, metals present in reduced matrices are more easily leached by oxidizing compounds (for an example Fe Nickel is a transition metal that has many applications in heterogeneous catalysis. For example, nickel is one of the most common catalysts used in both steam and dry reforming reactions ( Moreover, nickel-based catalysts are suitable for related reactions such as oxidative methane reforming, ethanol steam reforming, and the production of carbon materials ( The main disadvantage of nickel-supported catalysts is their short life, which is caused by rapid deactivation due to sintering, oxidation or coke deposition. The average selling price of nickel on the London Metal Exchange was 13,670 US$ per ton (contract cash on January 14, 2020) ( The work described herein explores the possibility of nickel recovery from a commercial reforming catalyst by a bioleaching process. In addition, the synthesis of a new reforming catalyst using the recovered nickel was carried out to demonstrate the potential for recycling. The use of two acidophilic bacteria ( The bacterial strains used in this study were A commercial catalyst (Katalco 23-4MQ R110, Johnson Matthey, UK) employed for methane reforming was used. According to the supplier's analysis, this system consisted of a nickel catalyst supported on alpha-alumina. The weight composition of NiO, the precursor by ICP technique of the active phase, was 16% (12.8% Ni wt). According to X-ray diffraction, four phases were identified in the commercial catalyst: the alpha phase of alumina (ɑ-Al For this study, the catalyst was crushed and submitted to a size reduction using a cryogenic mill (4 h, 1200 rpm). The metal phase in the commercial catalyst was in an oxidized state according to the data supplied by the manufacturer but a reduced sample was prepared for the bioleaching studies. The latter was obtained by submitting the starting material to a treatment with H As indicated above, three types of experiments were carried out on two different microorganisms ( In the two-step experiment, The spent medium-step experiment was carried out by a two-stage process. Firstly, All of the bioleaching tests were carried out using 50 mL of medium in a 250 mL Erlenmeyer flask with pulp density of 5% (w v In addition, three control leaching tests were performed under the same conditions as the bioleaching test, one chemical (Exp. G, The bioleaching process produced a bioleached residue and a lixiviant in which the nickel was solubilized. Therefore, once the solid was separated from the liquid medium by filtration (0.22 μm), a treatment with hydrogen sulfide (H The nickel sulfide (solid) was separated from the medium by centrifugation (1700 × The nickel sulfide was mixed with the nickel nitrate and a green suspension and a yellow solid were obtained. The suspension was centrifuged at a speed of 2700 × A nickel catalyst supported on alpha alumina was prepared by incipient wet impregnation of the support with an aqueous solution of nickel nitrate derived from the nickel sulfide obtained in the recycling process. Three impregnation-drying cycles were carried out in order to obtain a nickel content of 25% wt. The weight content was consistent with the literature value ( Catalytic activity tests were performed in a quartz fixed-bed reactor at 750 °C and atmospheric pressure. Silicon carbide was used as diluent in a mass ratio of 50 mg of catalyst per 100 mg of SiC. Prior to each test, the catalyst was reduced in 5% H Analysis of both inlet and outlet reaction mixtures was accomplished by gas chromatography (Bruker 450-GC). The CH The chemical composition of the prepared catalyst was determined by X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (Bruker S4 Pioneer Spectrophotometer). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded using a Bruker D8 Advance 500 diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation in the 2Ɵ range from 10° to 75°, using a step size of 0.05° and a step time of 10 s. The crystalline structures of the samples were analyzed using the JCPDS Database. Each phase was identified by comparing the experimental diagram with the XRD patterns (JCPDS files) using the EVA and PowderCell 2.4 software packages. The nickel and aluminum concentrations were determined by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) (Iris Intrepid, Thermo Scientific, USA). The nitrate concentration was measured by ion chromatography (IC) (Metrohm 930 Compact IC Flex, Switzerland) with a pulse amperometric detector with a gold electrode as the working electrode. The elution was carried out in isocratic mode at a flow rate of 0.7 mL min The specific surface area of the catalyst was measured on a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 system and calculated by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method. Prior to the measurement, the sample was degassed under vacuum for 2 h at 200 °C. The pore volume was estimated from the adsorption branch of the isotherms by the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) method. The particle size distribution of the prepared catalyst was obtained by High-Angle Annular Dark-Field Scanning-Transmission (HAADF-STEM) on a Talos F200x instrument. The microanalysis was carried out with an EDX Super-X system fitted with four X-ray detectors and an X-FEG beam. The particle size distribution corresponding to the reduced catalyst employed for the bioleaching experiments (after the grinding described in It can be seen that the particle size was below 850 μm for 99% of the particles and the major fraction was between 80 and 250 μm (38%). It is known that a decrease in the particle size increases the leaching kinetics ( The Ni extraction percentages achieved using the commercial catalyst with and without reduction pretreatment, under the experimental conditions summarized in As can be seen in  Experiment G was the chemical control experiment with H The catalyst therefore had a strong alkaline effect on the 0K medium with S One of the most important parameters in the bioleaching processes is the pulp density, because this affects the volume of the bioreactor and the volume of the medium that must be treated in the downstream process. Therefore, the pulp density has a great influence on the cost of the process ( The consumption of acid could therefore be responsible for the decrease in Ni extraction. The results reported herein are consistent with those reported by The effect of pulp density has been studied by numerous authors. For instance, As indicated in The nitrate concentration was higher than the nickel concentration because an excess of nitric acid was employed. Furthermore, in the composition of the bioleached residue, around 9% by weight was nickel – i.e., the yield was not 100% – and this would also explain the higher amount of nitrates. In the bioleached residue, apart from sulfur which is the major element, the other elements are part of the starting catalyst, as discussed in the following section. The yield in the production of nickel from biological nickel sulfide was 35%. The recycled nickel obtained by bioleaching was used to prepare a new nickel/alumina catalyst. Although the production of a reproducible catalyst with respect to the starting one was not the aim of this work, the prepared catalyst was characterized and its catalytic activity evaluated. The aim was to verify that the nickel nitrate prepared from the recovered nickel sulfide by bioleaching could be used to prepare a new catalytic material with appropriate performance. However, other uses could also be envisaged for the recovered metal ( In the commercial catalyst the main elements are nickel, aluminum and calcium. The percentages of other elements are less than or equal to 0.5%, with iron and magnesium being the major minority components ( According to The presence of crystalline phases in the catalyst was studied by XRD ( The Sherrer equation was applied to determine the average size of the NiO crystal. The size of the nickel particles was 13 nm. The isotherms obtained in the N The application of the BJH method to obtain the pore size distribution curve indicated the presence of mainly mesopores in the sample, with a pore volume of 0.271 cm Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was carried out to explore the distribution of elements in the prepared catalysts. EDS-mappings are presented in The results of catalytic tests in the dry reforming of methane are presented in Despite the fact that the catalyst had not been prepared in an effort to optimize its behavior, the result obtained does confirm that nickel recycling can provide efficient catalytic systems. These results allow us to propose the bioleaching procedure as a valuable methodology for the recuperation and recycling of Ni in conventional reforming catalysts. The use of a commercial catalyst without reduction pretreatment was not suitable for nickel extraction by bioleaching. By contrast, the reduced catalyst showed good activity and stability in the DRM reaction. Hence, the highest percentage of nickel extraction was achieved in a spent medium-step experiment using The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the Spanish Government (