Dry coal beneficiation has been examined by tribo-electrostatic method using Indian thermal coal sample from Ramagundam coal mines. The process of tribo-electric coal/ash cleaning is carried out with a newly built cylindrical fluidised bed tribo-charger with internal baffles, made up of copper metal. The charge transfer in coal maceral and mineral particles after repeated contact with copper plate tribo-charger is measured. Separation of particles in an electrostatic separator according to the polarity of particle charge generated during tribo-electrification is discussed with respect to gas flow rate and residence time in fluidised bed tribo-charger and the applied electric field.
                  The coal and mineral particles charge with positive and negative polarities respectively. The magnitude of particles charge found to be relatively high illustrating greater efficiency of contact electrification in fluidised bed tribo-charger. The separation results with −300μm size fraction of coal containing 43% ash showed that the ash content can be reduced to 18% and 33% with an yield of about 30% and 67%, respectively. These results are comparable to the maximum separation efficiency curve of washability studies on this coal sample. Since the ash percentage of coal particles collected in the bins close to positive and negative electrodes are about 70% and 20%, a better yield with low ash content can be accomplished on recycling the material.Coal is the single largest fossil energy source used world-wide and accounts for more than 60% of the total commercial energy consumed. Between 60% and 80% of this coal is used for electric power generation and most of which through a system of pulverised coal combustion ( Recently, the literature on dry beneficiation methods for coals with specific reference to high-ash Indian coals has been summarised by us ( Tribo-electric separation involves charging of particles by contact or friction with other particles or with a third material, usually the walls of a container or pipe, followed by transport or free-fall through an electric field that deflects the particles according to the magnitude and sign of their charge. When two dissimilar particles are in contact or rub against each other, there is a transfer of electrons (charge) from the surface of one particle to the other until the energy of electrons in each material at the interface is equalised. In general, there are three maceral classes of coal with several sub-classes. The predominant maceral is vitrinite formed by carbonisation of cellulose. The other two general classes are liptinite, formed from noncellulose materials such as resins and seeds, and inertinite materialised from charred plant remains. In late 1970 and early 1980s, High-ash non-coking coal sample from Ramagundam coal mines was used in the present tribo-electrostatic separation tests. The coal sample was ground, screened to −300 Tribo-electrification was carried out with individual mineral phases of quartz, kaolinite and illite in fluidized bed tribo-charger and the magnitude of charge acquisition by the mineral particles was measured by Keithley electrometer. A 20 The experimental set-up for tribo-electrostatic separation of ash forming minerals from coal maceral is shown in The bottom conical end of fluidised bed tribo-charger is connected to the nitrogen gas cylinder. The volumetric gas flow rate of nitrogen through the pipe can be regulated by the rotameter (RM) and gate valve V The rectangular Perspex box has the dimensions of 1 The electrode A was connected to the positive terminal of the supply source, while electrode B was connected to the negative terminal. The electrodes were charged with a high DC voltage power supply. There were six collecting bins in the form of Faraday cups below the electrode plates to collect the material after passing through the electric field and the polarity and charge magnitude of the particles collected in each bin can be measured. All the Faraday cups were placed on a Teflon surface. The dimensions of the outer shield of Faraday cup are 0.365 In the present beneficiation tests, a coal sample of −300 The effect of gas flow rate and residence time on charge acquisition by the ash forming inorganic particles in tribo-charger was initially studied. The results obtained after tribo-charging of the individual mineral phases of quartz, kaolinite and illite in fluidised bed tribo-charger with internal baffle system are shown in The effect of applied voltage on the particles charge collected at different bins at three different tribo-charging times of 30, 60 and 90  The positive charge of the material in all the bins could be due to the contact of the particles to the electrode plates immediately after entering into the electric field. The electrode plates are diverged progressively from top of the feed point to the bin position as shown in The effect of applied voltage on the weight percentage of material and size distribution of particles collected at different bins at 60 The proximate analysis of Ramagundam bulk coal shows that it contains 5.8% moisture, 23.5% volatile matter, 43.2% ash and 33.3% fixed carbon. The washability studies carried out with this coal reveal that 25% ash clean coal can be achieved with 65% yield ( High-ash thermal coal beneficiation was studied by tribo-electrostatic method. The separation process involves tribo-electrification with a fluidised bed tribo-charger and separation in an electrostatic field. The following conclusions are derived: The build-up of charge on the ash forming quartz, kaolinite and illite minerals in a new fluidised bed tribo-charger found to be greater when compared to other tribo-charging systems. The minerals acquired negative charge upon contacts with copper and the charge measurements of coal particles collected in the bins showed that the carbon rich particles are charged positively. The effect of gas flow rate and residence time of fluidisation and applied voltage showed that these parameters have strong dependence on particles charging and therefore on coal beneficiation. The increase in gas flow rate and residence time increases the magnitude of charge acquisition by the particles. The optimum conditions for coal separation found to be 60 At optimum conditions, the −300 Since the coal particles collected in the bins adjacent to positive and negative electrodes contain about 70% and 20% ash, respectively, a better separation results could be accomplished by recycling the material. Thus, the electrostatic separation with fluidised bed tribo-charging system realised to be a potential technique for non-coking coal beneficiation. It is possible to treat fine coal material with the vapours of acidic and/or basic organic solvents in the fluidised bed tribo-charger for altering the surface energetic structure of particles and thereby enlarging the work function difference between the contacting surfaces for efficient tribo-electrification and separation. The results of these studies will be presented in a future publication. The financial support for the project on ‘Electrostatic Beneficiation of Indian Thermal Coals’ by the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA/SAREC), Stockholm, Sweden, is gratefully acknowledged.