The degradation of 100mL of 2.08mM oxalic acid (OXL) and oxamic acid (OXM) solutions in 0.10M Na2SO4 at pH 3.0 has been studied by solar photolysis (SP), electro-Fenton (EF) and solar photoelectro-Fenton (SPEF). EF and SPEF experiments were performed with a stirred electrochemical cell containing a 3cm2 boron-doped diamond (BDD) anode and a 3cm2 air-diffusion cathode that generates H2O2. Natural sunlight was directly exposed to the solution in SP and SPEF. Catalytic contents of 0.50mM Fe3+, 0.50mM Cu2+ or mixtures up to 0.50mM of both metallic ions were added to the solution and a current density of 33.3mAcm−2 was applied in EF and SPEF. OXM presented a remarkable slower decay than OXL by SP due to the lower photoactivity of metallic-oxamate complexes. OXL concentration decayed 90% in the presence of Fe3+ and Fe3+/Cu2+ mixtures, whereas the OXM drop decreased directly with increasing Cu2+ concentration. In EF, OXL was more slowly removed than OXM due to higher recalcitrant character of the Fe(III)-oxalate complexes which can only be mineralized by 
                        
                     OH formed at the anode surface but not by those generated from Fenton’s reaction in the bulk. Upon Cu2+ addition, higher removal percentages were found because Cu(II)-carboxylate complexes are attacked by 
                        
                     OH, thus accelerating the mineralization. In contrast, OXL destruction was largely enhanced in SPEF using the mixture of catalysts as a result of the photolysis of Fe(III)-oxalate complexes and the parallel mineralization of Cu(II)-carboxylate complexes by the high quantity of oxidant 
                        
                     OH induced from photolysis of Fe(III)-aquo species. In all cases, the decay of OXL and OXM concentration obeyed a pseudo-first-order reaction, with an apparent rate constant dependent on the applied current in EF and SPEF.Oxalic and oxamic acids (OXL and OXM, respectively) are present in a wide range of effluents. The presence of OXL in textile and metallurgical wastewaters, as well as in wastewaters with organic compounds processed by catalytic treatments and advanced oxidation processes (AOPs), evidences its high refractory character to conventional removal processes ( The electrochemical technologies are promising green alternatives for the remediation of wastewaters based on the separation and degradation of organic and inorganic pollutants ( One of the most promising EAOP is the so-called solar photoelectro-Fenton (SPEF) which improves its mineralization efficiency by photochemical processes promoted by the simultaneous irradiation with inexpensive and renewable sunlight over treated solutions by conventional electro-Fenton (EF) process ( If the electrochemical treatment is carried out with an undivided cell, the use of a high overpotential O BDD( When the EF system described above is irradiated with UV light, an increase in the mineralization rate is obtained due to: (i) the photoreduction of Fe(OH) Recently, our groups have checked the synergistic effect of Fe Oxalic and oxamic acids were of analytical grade purchased from Avocado and were used as received. Anhydrous sodium sulfate, ferric sulfate heptahydrate and cupric sulfate pentahydrate were of analytical grade supplied by Fluka and Sigma. Solutions were prepared with high-purity water obtained from a Millipore Milli-Q system with resistivity CV was made with an Ecochemie Autolab PGSTAT100 potentiostat–galvanostat controlled by an Autolab Nova 1.5 software. Electrolyses were performed under galvanostatic conditions with an Amel 2053 potentiostat–galvanostat. The solution pH was measured with a Crison GLP 22 pH-meter. Total organic carbon (TOC) of solutions was measured with a Shimadzu VCSN TOC analyzer. Total nitrogen (TN) was determined with a Shimadzu TNM-1 unit coupled with the above TOC analyzer. The concentration of OXL and OXM was quantified by ion-exclusion HPLC using a Waters 600 liquid chromatograph fitted with a Bio-Rad Aminex HPX 87H, 300 All photolytic and electrolytic experiments were conducted in an undivided and thermostated cylindrical cell of 150 Comparative SP, EF and SPEF degradations of 100 For the CV trials, a BDD electrode of 0.40 Before analysis, aliquots withdrawn from treated solutions were filtered with 0.45 The ion-exclusion HPLC measurements were made after injection of 20 Each experiment was performed in triplicate. In figures and tables, the average value obtained with the corresponding associated error is showed. The solar photodegradation of 100  As can be seen in Note that CO   The concentration decay for the above experiments was analyzed considering kinetic equations with simple reaction orders and excellent linear correlations were obtained for a pseudo-first-order reaction. The pseudo-first-order rate constant ( The EF process of the same OXL and OXM solution as treated by SP was studied using a BDD/air-diffusion cell in the dark at 33.3 The above trends related to the effect of Fe To better understand the influence of the Fe    The data reported in The current density is the most influencing parameter of EAOPs because it controls the electrochemical kinetics and the extension of electrodic reactions. Then, the effect of current density up to 66.66 At current densities >33.3   The combination of SP of the Fe(III)-oxalate complexes, their oxidation with BDD( Ion chromatography revealed the formation of NO The data of  The effect of current density on the distribution of It has been found that the Fe The authors thank the financial support of