The challenge for lithium extraction from brine has been the separation of Mg and Li. Because they are located in diagonal positions within the periodic table, they exhibit many chemical similarities. But since Mg2+ has a high charge density and is easily hydrated, we explored a new separation method from an electrochemical perspective using LiFePO4/FePO4 as electrode materials. Through CV tests and technical experiments in a different electrolyte, this approach was verified. Our results show that lithium exhibits good reversibility in LiFePO4/FePO4 structures, and the redox peak separation is 0.592V while that of Mg2+ is 1.403V, indicating its more serious polarization. Technical studies using a voltage of 1.0V show that, in pure lithium solution, the inserted capacity of lithium can reach 41.26mg·(1g LiFePO4)−1, which is 93.78% of its theoretical value (44mg), and the subsequent extracted capacity can attain 38.93mg·(1g LiFePO4)−1, which is 94.3% of its inserted capacity. But the extracted capacity of Mg2+ from a solution containing magnesium is only 5.5mg·(1g LiFePO4)−1. Furthermore, the experimental data at different voltages prove that a lower voltage is beneficial for separating Mg and Li, and this method also works well in brine since the Mg/Li ratio can be reduced to 0.45 from 60. All these results indicate that this method, while simple, is quite promising for separating Mg and Li from a high Mg/Li ratio brine.Since the lithium rechargeable battery was commercialized by Sony in 1990, lithium has become more and more important in modern industry and has been regarded as a “future and strategic metal”, widely used in various portable electronic devices due to its high energy density and long cycling ability. Consequently, lithium extraction has become a high priority. Lithium resources exist naturally in two forms: as a mineral and as a liquid. The limited availability of lithium in minerals, along with its high extraction costs, has steered the industry towards its liquid state resources, which are estimated to contain more than 85% of the world's recoverable lithium ( Extracting lithium economically from brine with a high Mg/Li ratio has been a worldwide problem, seriously restricting its extraction and application. Researchers developed various methods to deal with this difficulty ( Any technique used for the separation of similar elements must take advantage of any small differences between them. Mg In recent years, olivine LiFePO As we know, the essence of deintercalated (or extracted) lithium from LiFePO 90 The synthetic brine was similar to the chemical compositions from West Taijnar Salt Lake in Qinghai of China, listed in Cyclic voltammograms were obtained using a three-electrode cell with or without N  Each technical experiment includes two steps: Cathode: LiFePO anode: FePO reaction time: 600 Place the LiFePO Cathode: MeFePO anode: FePO reaction time: 600 After running step 1 for 10 In each experiment, 1 The inserted capacity or extracted capacity of Li The Mg/Li ratio was calculated as follows. In lithium rechargeable battery with LiFePO Because Mg and Li have many chemical similarities, we assumed the insertion of magnesium into FePO   A plot of I In addition, we integrate each inserted peak or extracted peak vs. the scan voltage into From the integral values in Firstly, the diffusion of Li-ion in LiFePO Therefore, a low voltage and a long time electrolysis process are required in our experiments to obtain a high extraction capacity. Because magnesium plays a major role in the lithium extraction from high Mg/Li ratio it was necessary to verify whether Mg For this, CV curves of LiFePO To further compare the electrochemical differences between Li To confirm that the separation of Mg/Li can be realized by controlling the potential, CV was carried out within the narrower scan potential range from − For traditional lithium extraction technique, a mother brine is seldom directly used to extract lithium due to its weak lithium concentration and the rigid processing conditions. The usual methods involve evaporation, concentration and crystallization to obtain a higher lithium solution, called In  In this experiment, a 15 From We have proved that lithium can be effectively extracted from low lithium concentration in 60 In West China, there are multiple salt lake brines. The abundance is around 220  Our idea of this study originated from the electrochemical differences between Li  Previously, the electrochemical behavior of Li In this experiment, we first deintercalated LiFePO In order to further compare with the electrochemical behavior of Li Nowadays, some studies report that lithium carbonate obtained from salt lake brine at high Mg/Li ratios is meeting a technical bottleneck. They think that lithium can only be extracted from the industrial-specific lithium carbonate. Once it is further purified to battery grade, the production cost and process steps will increase greatly. But from above investigation, our method only needs simply processing steps to reduce the amount of magnesium that can effectively meet the requirement of the battery grade lithium carbonate. In the final discussion, some data are listed to compare the lithium extracted capacity from brine by different ionic sieves at home and abroad. The result is 14.5 Based on the electrochemical difference between Li