The authors investigated statistical distributions for concentrations of chemical elements from the National Geochemical Survey (NGS) database of the U.S. Geological Survey. At the time of this study, the NGS data set encompasses 48,544 stream sediment and soil samples from the conterminous United States analyzed by ICP-AES following a 4-acid near-total digestion. This report includes 27 elements: Al, Ca, Fe, K, Mg, Na, P, Ti, Ba, Ce, Co, Cr, Cu, Ga, La, Li, Mn, Nb, Nd, Ni, Pb, Sc, Sr, Th, V, Y and Zn. The goal and challenge for the statistical overview was to delineate chemical distributions in a complex, heterogeneous data set spanning a large geographic range (the conterminous United States), and many different geological provinces and rock types. After declustering to create a uniform spatial sample distribution with 16,511 samples, histograms and quantile–quantile (Q–Q) plots were employed to delineate subpopulations that have coherent chemical and mineral affinities.
                  Probability groupings are discerned by changes in slope (kinks) on the plots. Major rock-forming elements, e.g., Al, Ca, K and Na, tend to display linear segments on normal Q–Q plots. These segments can commonly be linked to petrologic or mineralogical associations. For example, linear segments on K and Na plots reflect dilution of clay minerals by quartz sand (low in K and Na). Minor and trace element relationships are best displayed on lognormal Q–Q plots. These sensitively reflect discrete relationships in subpopulations within the wide range of the data. For example, small but distinctly log-linear subpopulations for Pb, Cu, Zn and Ag are interpreted to represent ore-grade enrichment of naturally occurring minerals such as sulfides.
                  None of the 27 chemical elements could pass the test for either normal or lognormal distribution on the declustered data set. Part of the reasons relate to the presence of mixtures of subpopulations and outliers. Random samples of the data set with successively smaller numbers of data points showed that few elements passed standard statistical tests for normality or log-normality until sample size decreased to a few hundred data points. Large sample size enhances the power of statistical tests, and leads to rejection of most statistical hypotheses for real data sets. For large sample sizes (e.g., n
                     >1000), graphical methods such as histogram, stem-and-leaf, and probability plots are recommended for rough judgement of probability distribution if needed.Like other geochemical survey projects of large scope (e.g., The purposes of this study were to: (1) create a uniformly gridded set of the NGS database; (2) provide a brief overview of the elemental distribution and descriptive statistics for the latter set; and (3) attempt to delineate the presence of normal and lognormal subpopulations by display of probability plots. A challenge for a concise statistical overview lies in the fact that the NGS spans the entire conterminous United States and reflects many different geological substrates, as well as transport and depositional processes. It includes elemental enrichments from both mineralized areas as well as sites reflecting anthropogenic influences. Because of the severe deviation from normality to be expected in data from such spatially extended, heterogeneous data ( Major elements in rocks were already well analyzed and linked to their mineral associations by the early 20th century ( In the 1960s and 70s the advent of mainframe computers stimulated more elaborate analyses of statistical relationships in the chemical composition of sediment and rock samples. These analyses included use of probability plots that facilitated visualization of normal and lognormal distributions as straight-line segments ( Major advances were made possible since the 1980s by availability of ever more powerful desktop computers and statistical and mapping software. These tools made working with and displaying larger data populations much easier than in earlier periods. Additional stimuli for the compilation of large regional data sets were interest in toxic elements in surface sediment and water, as mentioned previously, and advent of powerful new analytical tools for trace element analyses. Recently, the probability distribution of trace elements in very large numbers of ground-water samples in the STORET database ( The NGS program of the U.S. Geological Survey ( Because the NGS was assembled from multiple sources and covers the diverse terrains and sample media (stream sediments, lake sediments, soils, etc.) present in the US, sample collection protocols were not the same for all samples. The majority of samples, about 80%, represent stream sediments sieved to below 100 mesh (<150 The NGS sampling density (samples/km All NGS samples were analyzed by a consistent set of techniques, mostly at a single laboratory facility, XRAL Laboratories (Canada). Among these methods is one using inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) after acid digestion for which statistics are calculated in this report. Sample aliquots of 200  The NGS data set encompasses much of the conterminous United States and many heterogeneous rock and sediment distributions. Besides heterogeneity in the NGS data set, potential sources of variability that affect probability distribution include sampling methods, the precision and accuracy of analytical methods, and samples below detection limits. Approximations can be used to estimate means in the presence of values below detection limit ( Due to the uneven spatial distribution of the sampling locations, the dataset were subsampled to create a more uniform distribution across the whole conterminous US. Since the majority of the areas were sampled at a density of one sample per 17 Histograms are time-tested tools for displaying frequency distributions and rely on dividing the data into classes (or bins). The data following a normal distribution will show a symmetric bell-shaped histogram, whereas a tail towards high values implies that the data are positively skewed. Offsetting their popularity and value in providing visual approximations to distributions like the bell shape of a normal distribution, histograms have limitations. The number of bins affects the shape of the curve. Too few bins may conceal important subpopulations or create apparent truncation of the low end of the distribution. Too many bins may create ragged plots. In this study, histograms for the raw datasets were plotted using about 20–30 bins, a compromise range chosen for effectiveness in displaying the major features of the data and revealing skewness. A curve representing the normal distribution corresponding to the mean and standard deviation of the data set is superimposed on the histogram for the purpose of comparison. Separated extreme values frequently occur at the high end and may be identified as outliers. In this study, due to the wide range of the raw data, the extremely high values were truncated in order to show the majority of the data better. The limitations of the histograms are offset by probability plots described below. Normal quantile–quantile (Q–Q) plots, familiar to physical scientists as cumulative probability plots, are created by plotting observed values of a variable against the corresponding normal quantiles. A popular way to display such a plot is to plot the normal quantiles (or scores) of the standard normal distribution on the The steps in constructing the normal Q–Q plot used in this study are as follows: First, the raw data were ranked in ascending order (duplicated values were assigned with different ranks as their expected values are different in this plot). The expected normal values are calculated by taking the  In this study, the normal Q–Q plot is used for both raw and logarithmically transformed data. In the raw data plot normal distributions will follow a straight-line behavior, whereas log-transformed data will display straight-line segments for lognormal distributions. In order to permit comparisons, the normal Q–Q plots for all the elements were plotted on one page. The effect of changing sample size on standard hypothesis tests for normality were studied, using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov (K–S) test ( The K–S test is chosen over others because it is widely applied and considered conservative. The Anderson–Darling test ( The raw data were stored in a dBASE file (dbf format), and basic calculations were performed using Microsoft Excel The number of samples re-sampled from the NGS database was 16,511.  The uppermost ranges of concentration for several elements, including Fe, Cu, Zn, Pb, Ag, Ti, and rare earths, approach ore grade or byproduct metal extraction grade, although high concentrations of elements like Cu, Pb, and Zn can also be influenced by pollution. Histograms for the raw data of the elements are shown in None of the elements show the bell-shaped distribution expected of a normal distribution pattern, but many approach a lognormal distribution as illustrated in Except for Al, the frequency distributions of most of the other 26 elements under study are positively skewed and include some very high values. Mixed populations, that are expected to be prevalent in the current dataset, are likewise not well displayed on histograms, and are discussed under the other graphical methods later. Some extreme values appear separated from the majority of the samples, i.e., do not appear to be part of a continuous distribution (e.g., On normal Q–Q plots ( The plots provide useful information for outlier detection. For example, single samples of Fe and K are separated from the distribution curve. Similar outliers can be identified for other elements. The plots for log-transformed data sets ( The logarithmic transformation “overtransforms” some elements, changing the overall curve shape from convex to concave, especially for major elements such as Al, K, Mg and Na. This feature is expected where the elements in question have significant populations that tend towards normal distributions, such as elements that are the major components of common rock-forming minerals. The curves for Ca, Ba, and Fe depart from those of other major constituents as discussed later. A tendency to approach the modeled slope on the left side of the plot may be associated with dilution effects likewise detailed in the Discussion section. This feature may be observed for Cu, Pb, P, Ga, Sc, Th, and the rare earth elements, Ce, La, Y, and Nd. The plots reveal a number of consistent and interesting slope segments. Elements like Cu, Zn and Pb show a sharp reduction in slope (a “fat tail”) at high concentration values. The “ferrides”, Co, Cr, Ni, Co and V, show the most consistent tendencies toward lognormality throughout their concentration range. To quantify the probability features of the data sets, the shape parameters of skewness and kurtosis were calculated and are listed in The results from the K–S test show that none of the 27 elements pass the test for either normality or log-normality, in line with previous expectations. However, in this study, raw data for Al and Ga seem to approach a normal distribution as both their skewnesses and kurtoses are close to “0”. Some of the log-transformed data also approach lognormality based on their shape parameters. Widely recognized factors related to the non-normality and non-lognormality, such as mixture of populations, outliers, analytical precision and detection limits, can all be identified in this study. However, another problem, large sample size, may also be a factor affecting statistical treatment. To investigate the effect of sample size on probability distribution, 100 randomly chosen independent selections of 50, 100, 200, 500, 1000, 2000, and 5000 samples were taken from the declustered sample set (16,511 samples). The K–S test for normality and log-normality was applied to all these re-sampled data sets. For each sample number and element, a total of 100 significance values of K–S The results show that when the sample size is 50, departure from normality is seldom detected, and it is easy for a data set to pass the test for normality at the 0.05 significance level. With increase in sample size, the statistical test gains power. When the sample size reaches 2000, only one experiment (for Al) passes the K–S test for normality, and none of the other elements pass. This result is in agreement with the results shown in Similar results for the effect of sample size on probability distribution are observed for the log-transformed data. With smaller sample sizes of 100 or less many elements tend to pass the test for lognormality. However, when the sample size reaches 1000, only one experiment, for Ti, passes the K–S test. When the sample size is larger than 2000, none of the elements under study pass the test for lognormality. The results also show that most of the major elements (Al–Ti) tend toward a normal distribution, whereas trace elements (Ba–Zn) tend to follow a lognormal distribution when the sample size is smaller than 100. When the sample size is larger than 1000 few samples pass the K–S test for normality or lognormality. The above results show that sample size heightens the effect of minor deviations from normal or lognormal distribution. To provide a much more lenient measure of the threshold of deviation, a significance level 0.0001 was chosen, and the results are shown in The results from Lilliefors correction are generally in line with the K–S test without the correction. The difference is that without Lilliefors correction, the K–S test tends to be conservative, resulting in more datasets passing the test. The effect of sample size does not apply to the perfectly normal distribution. Almost all the experiments for the normally distributed data set pass the tests within all the sample size ranges. The very small proportion of experiments that does not pass the Lilliefors test is assumed to reflect artifacts of the random re-sampling and testing processes. Skewness measures the presence of a tail deviating from normal distribution (0) toward lower values (negative skewness) or higher values (positive skewness). For the raw data sets, only the skewness for Al is negative, and those of K and Ga are close to “0”. The skewnesses for all the other elements are positive, many of which are very high, with the maximum value of 75.4 for Pb. This confirms the strongly skewed distributions displayed in the histograms and normal Q–Q plots. Kurtosis refers to “fatness” of the tails in statistical plots, with positive kurtosis denoting peakedness, whereas negative kurtosis denotes a “flat” distribution. The kurtoses for most elements are very high, with the highest value of 6883 for Pb caused by the large number of low value samples compared with the wide data range associated with high outliers. The high positive kurtoses show that very high values in the data are rare, presumably associated with rare processes such as mineralization. Only Al, Na and Ga have fairly small kurtoses, showing that these values are more evenly distributed within the data ranges, and that special concentration of these elements is rare. Logarithmic transformation tends to move both skewness and kurtosis for most elements towards normality, i.e., closer to 0. However, for the elements Al, K, Na and Ga, the logarithmic transformation moves them further away from normality, i.e., skewness and kurtosis for the transformed data sets diverge further from 0. Another feature of the logarithmic transformation is that most of the transformed data sets have negative skewness values showing that the log-transformation has over-transformed the data. It should be pointed out that the detection limits have some negative effects on these shape parameters. Probabilistic display delineates discrete populations that have genetic or other affinities as line segments showing changes in slope (i.e., “kinks”). The observed distributions differ significantly from the synthetic distributions modeled by Flat segments on normal Q–Q plots are most prominent for Al, Na, K, Ga and Sc. An approximate normal distribution is expected for major chemical constituents (i.e., Al in aluminosilicates) or elements that are essential components in rock-forming minerals (e.g., K and Na in feldspars and their weathering products, and Fe in oxides and with Mg in mafic rocks). Straight (normal) segments for Ga (and to a lesser extent, Sc) are explained by the diadochic geochemical behavior of this trace element with Al, e.g., Ga has similar ionic radius and chemical properties as Al ( The lognormal Q–Q plots demonstrate that many trace metals tend to approach an S-shape where the lower (left) part is slightly curved, whereas the right part of the curve bends over to form a flatter and often linear slope. If analytical sensitivity is low enough, dispersal in or dilution of an enriched phase by a more common phase or phases can produce a lognormal distribution (flatness) on the left side of log plots. Contaminated sediments enriched in Cu, Zn, Cr, Ag, and other trace metals, and variably diluted with clays and sand in harbours or estuaries demonstrate this kind of relationship ( Even though multiple kinks can be attributed to multiple populations on these Q–Q plots, it may still be a challenge to properly identify them. One way to do this is to identify samples that belong to a distinct line segment using plotting software that allows identification of individual samples on the slope by brushing with the mouse. Related chemical or other properties of samples associated with the points can then be identified. For example, selecting point data on high-concentration segments on the right side of either the Cu, Pb or Zn curves demonstrates that these points are enriched in all three of these elements, but not in Cr. This pattern suggests sulfide mineralization. Copper, Pb and Zn can be enriched in soils highly contaminated with sewage sludge, but municipal sewage sludge normally contains enhanced Cr as well and does not reach such high metal values. Therefore, the authors suggest sulfide ore mineralization over pollution as the principle source of the metal-enriched samples. Logarithmic transformation “overtransforms” plots for major and other elements that display flatness in normal Q–Q plots, changing their skewnesses (deviation from the straight line delineating normality) from positive to negative values. Finally, lognormal Q–Q plots delineate detection limits especially sharply in the form of vertical overlapping segments separated from the major body of analyses. Although the present sample set has been reanalyzed to minimize systematic error, another capability of probability plotting, which will not be discussed in this paper, is to suggest both the presence and nature of analytical errors. The total data set used here would not be expected to show normal distributions because of its heterogeneity as mentioned earlier. However, a pattern of K–S test values signifying significant tendencies toward normality or lognormality emerges rapidly as the number of data points in random re-samplings decreases toward 200 samples or less. At 200 samples the normal sample data set has 4 elements, Al, Ga, Ba, and K, for which 50% of data sets pass the K–S test. At 100 samples, 9 elements pass, and at 50 samples, 22 elements pass. Comparable numbers for the lognormal computations are 2, 12, and 24, respectively. The large sample size issue may not have received enough attention. Many if not most statistical studies have focused on small sample sizes. However, studies by The effect of sample size on statistical tests provides an explanation for Differences between real datasets and theoretical distributions always exist. When the sample size is large, such differences can be more easily detected by statistical tests. They lead to rejection of most statistical hypotheses. The hypothesis testing framework is essentially designed for inference from small samples. With large datasets one needs a different mindset: extensive data can be used to explore complex relationships and delineate interesting features. The probability plot approach is recommended for preliminary analysis of such data sets. Meanwhile, probabilistic approaches combined with random sampling such as was utilized in these studies, or employing other partial data selection based on specific criteria, may offer experimental approaches for larger geochemical data sets in the future. Re-sampling of the NGS database ( Histograms show widely distributed skewness in minor and trace elements in the data set. This skewness is partly due to mixed populations and some highly enriched phases, such as near ore-grade enrichment in Cu, Zn, Pb, Ag, and rare earth elements. High maximum concentrations and lack of association of the latter elements with elements often related to pollutants (e.g., Cr) suggest that these enrichments are due to sulfide mineralization rather than contaminated sediments. Major chemical constituents of rocks and chemical building blocks of major mineralogical components of rocks (e.g., Na and K in clay minerals) tend to display straight-line segments on normal Q–Q plots. Except for values below detection, Al concentrations conformed most closely to normal, straight-line distribution. Dispersal and dilution of enriched chemical constituents by phases like quartz sand produces lognormal distributions and straight-line segments on lognormal Q–Q plots. Elements that show flat segments attributed to mineralization processes include Cu, Zn and Pb as sulfides, and rare earth elements, especially Ce. Relatively high detection limits curtailed detailed observations of contaminant metals and elements. Elements whose curves show more complex kinks include Ca, Fe and Ba, attributable to enrichment in multiple mineral phases. Randomly selected samples ranging in size from 50 to 5000 were taken from the parent population of 16,511 used in this study. At small sample sizes all elements showed test scores indicating either normal or lognormal behavior, whereas at sample sizes exceeding 1000 few elements passed the K–S and Lilliefors tests for statistical normality at the 0.05 significance level. Statistical tests are designed for relatively small sample sizes. With large sample sizes alternative graphical methods are recommended. The probability plots permitted useful characterization of outlier populations, allowing visual comparison among elemental groups, as well as quick assessment of quantitative relationships for element-rock associations. The combination of concentration and cumulative frequency in the form of normal Q–Q plots offer useful features for displaying large data sets encompassing complex mixtures and a wide range of concentrations. Extremes, both on the low concentration side, as well as on the high side, as in heavy metals, are well displayed. Outlier subpopulations and their genetic affinities can be identified, and analytical factors and limitations like detection limits are conveniently observable without distorting the display. The authors are grateful for valuable comments and suggestions provided by reviewers Gilpin R. Robinson, Bob Garrett, Nils Gustavsson, Suzanne Nicholson, Larry Drew and one anonymous reviewer. Helpful discussions with Jerome Seahan, John Newell, Ruben Roa Ureta, Jeffrey D. Blume, Isobel Clark, Ned Levine, Thies Dose, Chris Hlavka and Donald Myers concerning effect of sample size are acknowledged. This study is partly supported by the International Collaboration Program from Enterprise Ireland (No. IC/2002/026).