Geomaterials inherently contain many discontinuous, multi-scale, geometrically irregular pores, forming a complex porous structure that governs their mechanical and transport properties. The development of an efficient reconstruction method for representing porous structures can significantly contribute toward providing a better understanding of the governing effects of porous structures on the properties of porous materials. In order to improve the efficiency of reconstructing large-scale porous structures, a multi-thread parallel scheme was incorporated into the simulated annealing reconstruction method. In the method, four correlation functions, which include the two-point probability function, the linear-path functions for the pore phase and the solid phase, and the fractal system function for the solid phase, were employed for better reproduction of the complex well-connected porous structures. In addition, a random sphere packing method and a self-developed pre-conditioning method were incorporated to cast the initial reconstructed model and select independent interchanging pairs for parallel multi-thread calculation, respectively. The accuracy of the proposed algorithm was evaluated by examining the similarity between the reconstructed structure and a prototype in terms of their geometrical, topological, and mechanical properties. Comparisons of the reconstruction efficiency of porous models with various scales indicated that the parallel multi-thread scheme significantly shortened the execution time for reconstruction of a large-scale well-connected porous model compared to a sequential single-thread procedure.Geomaterials inherently contain many discontinuous, multi-scale, geometrically irregular pores, forming a complex porous structure that governs their mechanical properties and transport behavior. For example, in the fields of geoscience and environmental engineering, the porous structures of geomaterials significantly influence the pressure accumulation and evolution in the earth's crust and are thus important for understanding tectonic processes such as earthquakes ( In geoscience as well as geotechnical and mining engineering, experimental methods such as in-situ detection and laboratory investigation are usually employed to determine the specifications of porous geomaterials ( In order to overcome these experimental limitations, scientists and engineers have been seeking alternative specification and prediction methods, such as digital rock models to characterize the effects of porous structures on the properties of geomaterials. Such research has attracted considerable attention because it could enable one to probe and elucidate the physical properties of porous materials and their intrinsic mechanisms. A reliable 3D digital porous rock model would be a prerequisite for such studies. Many numerical reconstruction models are based on data from porous systems that are extracted using innovative techniques, such as an integrated focused ion beam and high-resolution scanning electron microscopy (FIB-SEM) ( As supplementary methods for experimentally obtaining the porous structure, several computer reconstruction methods have been proposed, such as statistical information-based methods ( Our preliminary study had indicated that incorporating fractal system correlation functions in the Y-T method could improve the reconstruction accuracy of well-connected 3D porous structures having a size of 352×352×70 voxels ( In this study, we aim to improve the reconstruction efficiency of the Y-T method by using a parallel computing scheme. In the Y-T method, numerous interchanges of voxel pairs are performed sequentially to evolve the reconstructed model. Whether the interchanging of a pair of voxels is accepted is determined by its influence on the statistical correlation function values. The most time-consuming part in the reconstruction is the determination of the correlation function values. In most previous model reconstructions, the correlation function values have been calculated in certain directions for simplicity ( The computational efficiency of the newly developed parallel algorithm is compared with that of the program using the standard sequential algorithm. Moreover, the reliability of the reconstructed model is evaluated by comparing it with a prototype model obtained from CT scanning, in terms of their statistical properties, geometrical parameters, and mechanical properties. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The reconstruction method adopted in this work is a voxel-based algorithm ( To evolve The correlation functions form the core of the reconstruction algorithm because they determine the type of statistical information to be matched. In past decades, several statistical functions have been proposed for accurately representing the complex pore space, among which As highlighted in In the general procedure of RSPM, prescribed white spheres with different radii are randomly put into a predefined black box having a side length equal to 2 times the maximum sphere radius plus the side length of the reference model. The spheres are allowed to overlap with each other under the condition that the overlap length As discussed in our previous work ( In addition, the pre-conditioning algorithm was extended in this work to select not only the isolated voxels or interface voxels as described above, but also the “independent voxels,” which will be defined in the next section. The Y-T method ( In the Y-T method, whether interchanging of a pair of voxels is accepted is determined by the Metropolis algorithm ( However, if the correlation functions are calculated in certain directions, such as orthogonal directions ( The general reconstruction procedure is the same as that in our previous work ( The proposed method was used to reconstruct 3D porous structures based on the statistical information extracted from the reference 3D porous model of sandstone ( The comparison of the reconstructed microstructures with the reference 3D porous rock model provides a quantitative description of the effectiveness of the reconstruction ( Here, one of the reconstructed models reproduced by the parallel reconstruction scheme was compared with the reference model. By comparing the statistical functions of the reconstructed (REC) model and the reference (REF) model, we find that REC exhibits nearly the same correlation function value as REF, except for the value of One of the objectives of the model reconstruction is to be able to use the geometrical model for rock properties analysis ( The topological parameters, i.e., number of relatively large pores, number of throats (narrow pores that connect large pores), and average coordination number of pores (average number of throats that a large pore connects), of the REF and REC models were compared. The calculation was executed using the software previously presented in ( The finite element method was employed to analyze the mechanical properties of the porous rock models. First, the REF and REC models were meshed using MIMICS. The self-developed finite element analysis software (SciFEM) ( In the calculation, when the stress of an element exceeds the D-P criterion, the stress of the element would be set to decrease rather than increase along with increasing strain, and it would finally decrease to the residual strength. It should be noted that the pore elements were considered as a bonding material having very low mechanical strength rather than a real void space in the simulations.  This section analyzes the influence of the parallel scheme on the reconstruction efficiency. Specifically, the reconstructions were conducted with exactly the same parameters except for different thread counts in the parallel scheme. The time taken for each reconstruction with different thread counts is shown in It should be noted that the reconstruction efficiency does not increase linearly with the number of threads used. As the thread count increases, the reconstruction time will first decrease rapidly and then decrease slowly. In the reconstruction of the model measuring 300×300×300 voxels Moreover, the proposed parallel scheme was employed to reconstruct a large-scale well-connected porous model measuring 600×600×600 voxels In this paper, a multi-thread parallel scheme was proposed to improve the efficiency of 3D large-scale porous structure reconstruction. In the reconstruction procedure, the random sphere packing model was employed to form an appropriate initial model. Then, this initial model evolved into the final reconstructed model under the framework of the Y-T method. In this process, four correlation functions were used to ensure reconstruction accuracy. In particular, the multi-thread parallel scheme was used to simultaneously calculate the influence of several independent interchanging pairs. The comparison between the reconstructed models and the reference model showed good agreement in terms of their statistical information, geometry, topological parameters, and mechanical properties. Multi-thread parallel computing, which exploits modern multi-core computing capabilities, increases the reconstruction efficiency considerably. Compared with the sequential single-thread reconstruction scheme, the parallel scheme performed on our workstation significantly shortened the reconstruction time of a large-scale well-connected porous rock model. The proposed method could benefit from the rapid development of multi-core hardware. The authors are grateful to the