About (400–450) m3/h of wastewater is discarded by Eshydia Phosphate Mine/south of Jordan. These effluents consist of 14% solids assaying 18% P2O5; which means that 9600m3 of fresh water and 200tons of valuable P2O5 are discarded daily. Therefore, recycling of these effluents will have a significant economical and environmental impact on Jordanian phosphate industry.
                  In this contribution we used a combined column and Dissolved Air Flotation (DAF) to recover phosphate particles. Flotation experiments were conducted in bench scale column and DAF flotation cells. Commercial fatty acid (DSR) was used as phosphate collector while Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol (MIBC) and sodium silicate were used as frother, and depressor, respectively.
                  Maximum phosphate recovery obtained by column flotation was (20%) with 20% P2O5 at the following flotation parameters: 1kg/t collector dosage, 8L/min air flow rate, and 40ppm frother dosage. while, 83% recovery with 20.75% P2O5 was achieved by DAF at the following operating parameters: 100rpm mixing speed, 1000ppm collector dosage, 5ppm frother dosage 500ppm depressor dosage, pulp pH 9, and 12% recycle ratio. Therefore the overall recovery by combined column-DAF flotation was 86.4% with 20.6%, P2O5.Jordanian phosphate industry uses a huge amount of fresh water; approximately 500 Recycling of these effluents will have a significant economical and environmental effect on Jordanian phosphate industry. This contribution is part of a research project titled “ Flotation can be classified according to their bubble generation mechanism into three categories; firstly, mechanical flotation where bubbles are generated through the shear force of a rotational impeller. The second type is column flotation or dispersed air flotation in which bubbles are created by forcing air through a porous media usually located at the bottom of the flotation cell. Bubble size of mechanical flotation cells is usually larger than 600 Using column flotation in the beneficiation of fine phosphate is reported by several researchers ( Recently, DAF became an important water treatment process for clarifying different types of wastewater effluents. Its fundamentals and applications in water treatment were investigated by several researchers. However, DAF has limited applications in minerals processing industry. A comprehensive review of using DAF in processing of mine wastewater is given by According to literature, DAF hasn't been used to recover phosphate particles from its slime. Therefore, this contribution aimed at applying DAF technology in phosphate slime beneficiation. Using anionic collector (DSR), DAF was used in scavenging flotation of column flotation tailings used to recover the coarser particles in the slime feed. Wastewater samples used in this work were collected from Eshydia phosphate beneficiation plant located in south of Jordan in the period from June 2009 to March 2010. Sample of these effluents were filtered using 5  Column flotation was conducted at pH 9 using commercial fatty acid collector (DSR). The collector was used as 10% emulsion prepared by mixing with diesel oil and sodium hydroxide as shown in Flotation experiments were conducted in 1.5 A 33 A required amount of diluted sodium hydroxide solution was added to the feed tank in order to adjust pulp pH (pH 9). The required amount of collector emulsion was then added to the feed tank. The pulp was then conditioned (agitated) at 1200 Then, the conditioned slurry was pumped into the column cell while the tailing pump was partially opened in order to prevent solid precipitation. The feed was reticulated for about 2 The required amount of frother was added to flotation tank and recalculated in column cell for 2 Compressed air was introduced at the bottom of the cell through air sparger for 3 A representative sample of flotation tailing (slime remained in the flotation cell) was filter and dried in oven with similar procedure used for concentrate. The dried concentrate and tailing was weighted and ground. Their phosphate (P Column tailings were subjected to scavenging flotation by DAF. One litre of column tailings at the maximum recovery and concentrate grade were collected and used as DAF feed. Feed conditioning was conducted in Denver flotation cell at the following parameters; pH 9, conditioning time 10 The conditioned pulp (1 Saturated water was prepared in 5 After setting the mixing speed to the required value, saturated air was then injected into the DAF cell. The air was injected twice; firstly the air was injected for 10 150 Both concentrate and tailing were filtered, dried, weighed and sent to chemical analyses. Column flotation performance was evaluated at three important operating parameters; collector dosage, frother dosage, and gas flow rate. The effect of collector dosage on concentrate grade and flotation recovery is shown in However, it seems that more quartz particles were activated with increasing collector dosage which reduces the selectivity. This is clear from almost constant concentrate grade obtained at the collector dosage range studied. The figure also shows that there is a collector dosage (1.5  Increasing superficial gas velocity will increase the swarm of rising air bubbles which increases the surface area available for particles. This enables more particles to rise to the froth phase. However, increasing superficial gas velocity above a certain level increases pulp turbulence which affects the bubble-particle attachment and hence reduces flotation recovery. The change in flotation recovery shown in The effect of frother dosage is shown in From previous results, maximum flotation recovery (20%) and concentrate grade (20% P Wastewater was conditioned and floated as received since dewatering and drying of slurry before flotation is not practical for large amounts of effluents. In phosphate flotation it is very difficult to obtain high grade and recovery using fatty acid as collector at diluted flotation pulp. Instead phosphate is usually conditioned and floated at 70% and 20% solids, respectively. The presence of Ca The presence of slime in flotation feed is very critical due to high consumption of collector and low bubble-particle collection efficiency. So in phosphate flotation, fine particle i.e. slime (< Therefore it seems that most of phosphate recovered by column flotation was due to entrainment not by true flotation which may explain the non significant change in phosphate recovery and grade with varying flotation operating parameters. DAF flotation performance was evaluated at the following operating parameters: collector, frother and depressor dosages, recycling ratio, and pulp pH. Collector emulsion previously used in column flotation was used in DAF part while sodium silicate and MIBC was used as depressor and frother, respectively.  The effect of frother dosage on DAF performance is shown in  The effect of depressor dosage on flotation recovery and concentrate grade is shown in Recycle ratio is the volumetric percentage of saturated air introduced into the DAF cell compared to its initial volume. As shown in On the other hand, concentrate grade hasn't been affected by increasing recycle ratio which means that flotation selectivity hasn't been affected by the increasing of fine bubbles. The effect of mixing speed on flotation recovery and concentrate grade is shown in Based on the results shown previously, the following conclusions can be drawn: Using combined column and DAF flotation to recycle Eshydia phosphate mine effluents showed that the overall recovery and concentrate was 86.4% and 20.6%, respectively. 20% phosphate recovery and concentrate grade (20% P This work is based on the final report of a research project titled “ The authors would like to sincerely thank the following organizations for their fund and support which makes this work possible: Scientific Research Fund, Ministry of higher education research fund,