Effect of the purity of montmorillonite (Mt) on its modification with hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (HDTMA) was evaluated. Montmorillonite with different grades of purity were prepared using two strategies: size fractionation (physical purification) and combination of chemical dissolution of some impurities and size fractionation (chemical–physical purification). It was found that the physical purification separated some impurities while chemical–physical purification separated almost all impurities from the montmorillonite. The cation exchange capacity (CEC) of the montmorillonite was increased after purification; this increase was much higher for samples that underwent chemical–physical purification, in comparison to those purified only with size fractionation. After modification of the montmorillonite with different grades of purity at the same ratio of HDTMA/CEC, different XRD patterns were obtained. For the modified raw and physically purified montmorillonite the 001 reflection of the XRD spectra were broad ranging between 15 and 18Ǻ, and for the purer montmorillonite, after the modification with HDTMA the XRD spectra showed very much sharper diffraction peaks at d values of 14.7 and 17.4Ǻ. The DTG results showed that the HDTMA was adsorbed in the interlayer spaces as HDTMA-Br molecules or HDTMA+ cations. It was concluded that the form of adsorption of HDTMA either as HDTMA-Br molecules or HDTMA+ cations is related to the arrangement of charges on the montmorillonite layers which can be altered during its chemical purification process.During recent decades montmorillonite has found advanced applications in clay polymer nanocomposites (CPN) ( The surface of montmorillonite has been modified using different species in order to achieve the desired characteristics. Prior to the surface modification process, the montmorillonite is initially separated from other minerals and then modified using different organic or inorganic species ( Different methods have been proposed to purify montmorillonite ( In the present research, montmorillonite was purified using physical and chemical pathway in order to prepare montmorillonite with different grades of purity. The characteristics of the purified montmorillonite were analyzed using X-ray diffraction (XRD), thermogravimetric (TG) and differential thermogravimetry (DTG) analysis, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), and cation exchange capacity (CEC). Montmorillonite with different grades of purity were then modified with quaternary ammonium salt (HDTMA-Br) and the results were compared to analyze the effect of purity of the montmorillonite on its surface modification. NaOH (analytical reagent; Merck), HCl (37% w/w, analytical reagent; Merck), and hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (HDTMA-Br, > For the physical purification the size fractions < The centrifugation time was calculated based on the Stokes' law as described previously ( with: t: centrifuge time (s) R: distance from the deposit surface to the axis of the centrifuge rotor (13.1 S: distance from the liquid surface to the axis of the centrifuge rotor (4.5 N: rotation speed (in order to achieve montmorillonite particles smaller than a specific size this number was changed) r: maximum radius of the desired particles in cm ΔS: specific gravity difference between the particles and the liquid dispersion (0.00528 η: viscosity of the fluid (0.00748 In the second method, raw bentonite was treated with NaOH and then with HCl prior to the size fractionation step. Typically the bentonite was initially dried at 110 Different samples, which were purified with physical or chemical–physical method, were modified and the results were compared. For the first set of experiment the mass ratio of HDTMA/samples and, in the second run, the ratio of HDTMA/CEC of samples were kept the same for all samples in order to achieve the best comparison of the changes after modification (the ratio of HDTMA/CEC of each samples is summarized in XRD analysis was carried out using a Philips PW1800. For low angle XRD analysis, the samples were tested with X'Pert Pro MPD (PANalytical) in the range of 2θ from 1° to 10°. SEM analysis was used to analyze the structure of the montmorillonite using a Zeiss Sigma model in which the samples were gold sputtered before SEM analysis. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy analysis (EDS) of the samples was done using the same Zeiss Sigma model. The cation exchange capacities of the samples were measured using ammonium acetate method (  When comparison was made between the XRD patterns of the < It was interesting to find that the yield of samples was very low, showing that a very small amount of samples was obtained after purification. It could be partly due to the low amount of montmorillonite present in bentonite samples and the aggregation of montmorillonite particles which would be rejected during the particle size fractionation. CEC is a key parameter for the preparation of organically-modified montmorillonite ( In order to prepare very pure montmorillonite, the chemical dissolution of cristobalite and calcite (chemical purification) was done prior to the size fractionation (physical purification) using NaOH and HCl, respectively. Initially a moderate condition was tested. The intensity of 001 reflection of the montmorillonite was increased after moderate chemical treatment with HCl and NaOH, which was followed by particle size fractionation ( These results ( Initially, the montmorillonite was purified by the chemical dissolution of cristobalite in 0.23 Increasing the reaction time with 0.23 The CEC of the samples started to increase as the duration of treatment with NaOH was increased up to 30 NaOH concentration can affect the dissolution rate of the cristobalite as well ( The CEC of the purified samples was compared, as shown in In order to distinguish montmorillonite from other minerals, especially the cristobalite, the EDS analysis was used. In order to analyze the effect of the purity of the montmorillonite on its organic modification, six samples with different grades of purity were selected for the modification: the raw sample 2 and samples 2-1, 2-3, 2-4, 2-5, and 2-6. These samples were surface modified using HDTMA. The modification was done in two different conditions. In the first set of experiments, samples were modified using the same mass ratio of “HDTMA/sample” (0.177  The patterns of samples M-2-6-a, M-2-5-a, and M-2-4-a with clear diffraction peaks at ~ Sample M-2-1-a underwent only physical treatment and showed a broad diffraction peak from 15.5 to 19 To analyze if the purity of the montmorillonite affected the modification with organic materials, the selected samples were modified by keeping the HDTMA/CEC ratio constant for all samples at 0.62 ( The modified montmorillonite which had been just purified with size fractionation showed the same broad diffraction peak as the modified raw bentonite in the range 15 to 18 This demonstrated that the system was a mixture of monolayer and the bilayer formation of HDTMA for all samples. For the purer montmorillonite, after modification (M-2-3-b, M-2-4-b, M-2-5-b, and M-2-6-b in In order to clarify the arrangement of HDTMA and to understand the changes in the formation of HDTMA when the purity of the montmorillonite was changed loading of HDTMA was measured using thermal gravimetric analysis. Although the initial amount of HDTMA/CEC for all samples at the beginning of the modification step was 0.62, the loading of HDTMA compared to the CEC was close to 0.5 ( Initially, in the reaction with NaOH, negative charges were created at the edges of the montmorillonite layers due to the dissociation of silanols, after reaction with HCl, positive charges on the edges were created because of excess of protons. Hence, after the chemical purification of the montmorillonite the edges were positively charged and a lower amount of HDTMA These results indicated that the structure of modified montmorillonite was not only dependent on the “surfactant packing density” ( Bentonite samples underwent physical and chemical treatments in order to purify the montmorillonite and their characteristics were analyzed using different methods. The results showed that size fractionation did not separate all impurities from the montmorillonite. Using chemical dissolution of impurities with NaOH and HCl prior to the size fractionation produces much purer montmorillonite with higher CEC. After modification with HDTMA it was revealed that the purity of the montmorillonite affected its final characteristics. When highly pure montmorillonite was modified, a regular monolayer or bilayer arrangements of alkylammonium cations was formed. The presence of impurities resulted in the formation of an unstable arrangement of HDTMA molecules which was similar to the raw bentonite. In addition, formation of HDTMA either in the form of molecules or cations in the interlayer spaces was different for samples with different grades of purity. It was ascribed to the changes in the arrangement of charges on the montmorillonite layers during the purification process. More positive charges on the edges of the montmorillonite would result in increasing the adsorption of the surfactant in the form of HDTMA-Br molecule. However, when the montmorillonite is purified only using physical procedure lower amount of surfactant was adsorbed in the form of HDTMA-Br molecules and much more in the form of HDTMA The authors acknowledge access to infrastructure from the Mining Engineering Department of the Isfahan University of Technology.