Although theoretical models have already been proposed, experimental data is still lacking to quantify the influence of grain size upon coercivity of electrical steels. Some authors consider a linear inverse proportionality, while others suggest a square root inverse proportionality. Results also differ with regard to the slope of the reciprocal of grain size–coercive field relation for a given material. This paper discusses two aspects of the problem: the maximum induction used for determining coercive force and the possible effect of lurking variables such as the grain size distribution breadth and crystallographic texture. Electrical steel sheets containing 0.7% Si, 0.3% Al and 24ppm C were cold-rolled and annealed in order to produce different grain sizes (ranging from 20 to 150μm). Coercive field was measured along the rolling direction and found to depend linearly on reciprocal of grain size with a slope of approximately 0.9(A/m)mm at 1.0T induction. A general relation for coercive field as a function of grain size and maximum induction was established, yielding an average absolute error below 4%. Through measurement of B
                     50 and image analysis of micrographs, the effects of crystallographic texture and grain size distribution breadth were qualitatively discussed.The effect of grain size ( On the other hand Bozorth Degauque et al. We reinvestigate this relation, promoting the largest possible variation in grain size while keeping all the other microstructural variables as constant as possible. The minimum grain size that can be obtained through recrystallization is around 10 Furthermore, grain size is not a uniquely defined parameter. Presently most grain size measurements are made through the intercept method, which is the mean free path between two grain boundaries. Nonetheless other definitions of grain size are possible, as, for instance, the equivalent diameter pondered by area fraction. Number of faces, grain aspect ratio and size distribution breadth are all parameters that describe grain structure with greater detail. In this paper, in order to be able to compare results with previous works, grain size shall refer exclusively to values obtained with the intercept method. However, grain size distribution breadth values have been added to deepen the analysis. As for other variables, chemical composition was kept constant by using samples from a single coil of electrical steel. Dislocation density changes were kept to a minimum by using only annealed samples. Subsurface oxidation was controlled by choosing the annealing atmosphere conditions. Also, samples were cold-rolled to different extents but annealed at the same temperature and for the same amount of time to prevent changes in inclusion size distribution. (It is assumed that sample thickness changes do not affect coercive force measured at quasi-static excitation). Since it is not possible to maintain a constant crystallographic texture while changing grain size, this variation has to be taken into account. Texture measurement results are prone to a large uncertainty, so an indirect texture parameter was used—the 50 The purpose of this article is to present a consistent quantitative description of the concerned phenomena, whose ultimate goal is determining whether the slope of the relation between grain size and coercive force is valid for a broad range of electrical steels. Commercially available NO USIcore U260 electrical steel from Usiminas-Cubatao (BR), whose chemical composition can be found in Some sheets were cold-rolled up to different levels of plastic deformation, cut parallel to the rolling direction into Epstein strips and annealed at 760 Others were cut without cold-rolling and annealed at varying temperatures for certain time-frames so as to obtain different grain sizes through grain growth. A complete report of the amount of cold-work, annealing temperature/time and resulting grain size for each set can be seen in Magnetization curves up to 5800 These measurements were made in an Epstein frame, using a ﬂuxmeter Walker MF-3D connected to the secondary coil. The primary current was supplied by a power ampliﬁer KEPCO BOP50-80 with a waveform generator HP33120A/dc-15 After magnetic measurements, 1 Grain size measurements were carried out through the traditional intercept method Coercive field at maximum inductions of 0.6 and 1.5 The results demonstrate that the Finally the Coercive field For small grain sizes, with Variations in chemical composition also affect the slope of such relation. Mager's model proposes that coercive force is proportional to the domain wall energy, so that one can estimate the effect of chemical composition through its effects on the material's magnetic anisotropy constant, exchange constant and saturation magnetization: Using previously established relations More significant compositional changes can still be explained through the effect on domain wall energy, as shown by Fernengel Therefore, the observed differences in slope must be due to the process used to obtain large grains. It could have yielded very wide-ranged grain size distributions or unwanted crystallographic texture. Also, when grain size approaches sheet thickness, surface effects may become dominant over grain size influence. The slope and This allows for a general relation between coercive field, maximum induction and grain size (in mm) to be derived: The difference between experimental values for coercive field and those calculated through Eq. The total mean deviation (with regard to both grain size and maximum induction) lies below 4%. The greatest absolute value is that of specimen E-858, whose behavior shall be explained through consideration of The influence of crystallographic texture was assessed through measurement of There is little variation of The grain size distributions follow a somewhat similar pattern, as their breadth revolves around 0.15 for the recrystallized specimens and tends to get higher with increasing annealing time/temperature except for sample E-8512. In We can now go back to As to the recrystallized specimens, no conclusion can be drawn on the basis of In this paper we show that a linear inverse proportionality between coercive field and grain size (measured through the intercept method) is a better choice than a square root inverse proportionality, regardless of the maximum induction used. By applying a power law dependence with maximum induction to both parameters of the For the domain considered, the mean error of such an approximation stays below 4%. It is shown that, assuming Mager's equation for the relation between coercive force and the inverse of grain size, the effect of chemical composition on the slope coefficient for electrical steels should be small. Both grain size distribution breadth and crystallographic texture play a role in determining the coercive field of the material. Generally the higher the values of