This is a communication on the removal of copper(II) ions from a residual mine water using an emulsified liquid membrane (ELM). The membrane was prepared by dissolving the extractant LIX-860 (a salicylaldoxime), used as a mobile carrier, and Span-80, a surfactant, in kerosene. The ELM allowed an efficient metal transport from the feed solution towards the strip liquor, in experiments carried out in a batch-type stirred tank at 30 °C. A screening factor-type experimental statistical design was developed, which established the variables and their interrelation affecting the studied process. The experimental results and the variance analysis indicated that the statistically significant variables on copper transport through the membrane were the extractant concentration, the stirring time and the stirring speed of the double emulsion. The surfactant concentration range employed in this study adequately stabilized the membrane. However, it did not produce any positive effect on metal extraction. It was observed that the use of an excessively high content of surfactant produced lower metal transport extraction since it gave rise to a higher interfacial resistance. The experimental results reported show the potential for removal of valuable or toxic metals from dilute mine solutions using an extractor based on emulsified liquid membranes.Most mining activities are potential sources of water pollution, such as acid mine waters and the generation of waste solutions from process such as leaching and flotation. Acid mine drainage affects ground and superficial water during the operation of the mine, and even after the mine closes. In addition to being acidic, these waters normally contain dissolved heavy metals, such that this water has become the most significant source of aqueous waste solution in nonferrous metal mining. These types of acid mine waters are especially found at the border of the ore deposit operation and the phreatic water-bearing stratum, where several sulfurous compounds are often present, particularly iron, copper and zinc sulfides. Bacterial ( In addition to the intrinsic value that some of these metals have, which would justify their recovery, they present, under certain concentrations, a degree of toxicity that affects aquatic life and, in extreme cases, human life. These mine waters are a potential source of these valuable and scarce metals, since some of them are in a critical state due to the expensive costs of mining. The removal and recovery of these metallic ions from mine waters is difficult because the conventional methods available are expensive, and normally the concentrations of metals in these acid aqueous solutions are low which makes their recovery uneconomical. Among the current available extraction technologies for metallic ions, are chemical precipitation ( Modern mining faces an environmental challenge to generate an answer, in as much as possible using clean technologies. The mining sector of Chile, as in all the countries of great metallurgical production, has had to accept a set of regulations related to the emission and discharge of liquid industrial wastes. Of all the more promising technological alternatives that are feasible to use to this purpose in hydrometallurgy, emulsion liquid membranes (henceforth abbreviated as ELM) could be mentioned. They are double water-in-oil-in-water emulsions (W/O/W) stabilized by the employment of suitable surfactant substances, as shown by In previous work our research group has studied the application of solid supported liquid membranes in extractive metallurgy as well as in decontamination treatment of industrial waste liquids ( For the success of the ELM process, it is necessary to establish the influence of all the parameters involved in the design of the treatment, so that the most suitable conditions to produce the removal of metals can be defined. Experimental design is a very powerful tool for the search of the variables that predominantly affect the extraction process. It is a method based on systematic and coherent study, which allows identification of the factors that significantly affect the transport of metals through the membrane system, as well as determination of the optimal levels of each of these variables. The advantage in employing an experimental design method in a study such as this is that by using a reduced number of experiments it is possible to obtain very useful data, it having the potential to identify the interactions between the different factors that affect the process, and to model mathematically the metal transport system. In this paper, we present a study of copper removal from a residual mine water, by means of emulsified liquid membranes, using an experimental design method which allows the variables and their interrelations to be established.  Cupric ion-donor solution was used as feed, a waste water of El Teniente Mine of Codelco-Chile, a natural solution produced by chemical lixiviation and bioleaching by rainfall and snowmelting of copper ores located in The Andes Mountains. The sample employed in this work, as the outer aqueous phase, was an acid solution, of average pH 2.5. Normally, when this solution contains over 1.0 g/l Cu(II), it is fed into a mixer–settler (SX) plant, but when its metal concentration is lower, it is discarded. The initial concentrations of metals in the waste solution used in this study were 1.0 g/l Cu(II), 0.15 g/l Fe, 0.20 g/l Al(III) and minor quantities of other metals. Concentrated sulfuric acid solutions were used in the internal aqueous phase as metal–acceptor stripping agents. The experimental apparatus was a batch-type stirred tank immersed in a water bath at a constant-temperature of 30 °C. The vessel had an inner volume of about 292 ml. The inner diameter and the depth of the tank were 6.81 and 8.0 cm, respectively. The fluids were stirred by a turbine impeller, which had eight flat blades and which was connected to a speed regulator. The first emulsion was prepared by vigorous mechanical agitation of the stripping aqueous phase with the organic phase, composed of the extractant and the surfactant, dissolved in kerosene. In order to disperse the internal aqueous stripping solution in the organic phase an Ultraturrax Janke Kunkel ultrasonic agitator was used. This high shear-agitator produced high speeds, generating emulsions with small size droplets, and producing drops of the stripping phase around 0.5–100 μm. Measured volumes of the prepared emulsion were added to the feed phase in the extractor tank and stirred smoothly with a conventional IKA-Ruhrwerke RW20 type stirrer at a fixed impeller speed controlled by a IKA-Tron DZM 1 digital speed counter. Samples were taken at specified intervals. The formation of the emulsion globules was observed by a Zeiss microscope model St 20. Once the extraction step was finished, and in order to break the primary emulsion (stripping/organic), an Elma Ultrasonic Bath (model Transsonic T 460/H) was used to accelerate the phase separation process by enhancing the coalescence of the small droplets. After separation from the emulsion, the raffinate concentration profile was traced by analyzing the samples of the external aqueous phase withdrawn from the extractor. The concentrations of the metals were determined spectrophotometrically with a Perkin Elmer, Model 3110, atomic absorption spectrophotometer. The main experimental conditions are listed in A The surfactant liquid membrane corresponds to a double emulsion W/O/W. In the first stage, the metal receiving solution, at a high acidity, was dispersed by vigorous stirring inside an organic liquid phase (the membrane)––the “primary emulsion”. This organic phase was prepared by dissolving the carrier extractant and a surfactant in an appropriate diluent. The extractant must be able to selectively transport the metal and the surfactant was added in low concentrations to stabilize the system. In the next step the primary emulsion formed was mixed with a third phase corresponding to the external aqueous phase (the feed), which contained the metallic ions to be removed. In this way a double emulsion was generated, as shown in The copper ions were then transported from the external aqueous phase, across the membrane, towards the inner strip aqueous phase where they were concentrated. Subsequent stripping of the metal–extractant complex occurred at the opposite side of the membrane, and hydrogen ions provided by the acid carrier were transported in a coupled form in a reverse direction. The mechanism was based on two simultaneous reactions, those of extraction and back-extraction steps, occurring at different sides of the organic liquid membrane. The selective extraction reaction of the bivalent metal (M The liquid membrane behaves like a chemical pump, transporting Cu(II) ions through it, from the feed solution to the stripping solution. The driving force regulating the process is the pH difference at both sides of the membrane, in a process where the carrier extractant acts through a cation exchange mechanism. Both simultaneous reactions, extraction (Eq. Summarizing the results of metal extraction from the experimental design, it is clearly seen that the oximic carrier strongly extracts the metal, measured in the raffinate solution, levels of copper signifying a degree of metal removal from 64.32% to 99.45%, with an average extraction of 92.4. The results were analyzed by variance analysis (ANOVA), using specialized statistical software, allowing the description of the system by means of a regression equation. As a consequence, fitting the experimental results into a linear statistical model showed the relationship between the metal removal extent (%) (extraction) and the eight independent variables of the design. This relation is expressed as follows: The variance analysis evaluated the statistical significance of the tested variables at the given confidence level. This was verified by comparing the The results show that to obtain a higher percentage copper removal from the feed solution it is necessary to increase the concentration of extractant in the organic solution. However, it is not possible to improve the metal permeation through the membrane by increasing in an unlimited way the content of carrier molecule in the organic solution. An excessive increase in extractant concentration produces an increase in the absolute viscosity of the liquid membrane, which generates a lower diffusion speed of the species, which affects the mass transference process. Moreover, too high a concentration of carrier produces some emulsion breakdown, since the extractant, and its complex with the metal, present interfacial characteristics that provoke loss of internal aqueous solution, as a result of emulsion breakdown. An increase in stirring time of the double emulsion increased the metal extraction by allowing the participant species a longer time to react, such that the diffusion of the complex species through the membrane was enhanced. This caused carrier regeneration by contact with the acid inner strip solution, in continuous cycles of coupled transport, which are constantly repeated, favoring the process. However, increase in stirring speed of the double emulsion generates smaller emulsion droplets, therefore increasing the interface area for the extractant/metal reaction, by increasing the reaction sites. Nevertheless, it was observed that there is a limit to increasing this variable. An excessive stirring speed produced coalescence and finally breakdown of globules, making the primary emulsion unstable. It was clear that the smaller the size of the droplet, the longer the time taken to move vertically for coalescence and final rupture. It was important to use a minimum stirring speed to counter the natural metal–mass transference resistance of the outer feed phase. Under the experimental conditions employed in this study, this resistance would be the rate determining step. The upper value of stirring speed utilized in this work produced a high metal removal. The ELM system is basically unstable, since the dispersed drops coalesce producing rupture of the emulsion, a fact that makes a dispersant necessary. With this purpose a surfactant or emulsifying agent was required, which decreases the interfacial tension of the system, producing droplets of smaller size, which allow the emulsion to remain stable. The surfactant used in hydrometallurgical applications must have a low HLB value, i.e., the emulsifying agent must be soluble in the organic phase, since its recovery from the aqueous raffinate is not possible. In a system of two immiscible liquid phases, it was observed that the molecules in a The oximic carrier extractant employed in this study also produced interfacial activity. Its structure contains a hydrocarbon chain and a polar head, like the surfactant, such that this molecule also contributes to the stabilization of the primary emulsion, so that high amounts of surfactant are not necessary for stabilizing the system. In some experiments, entrainment of the outer aqueous phase towards the inner one, generating a metal dilution effect in this phase were observed. This swelling phenomenon is probably due to the osmotic pressure between the external and internal aqueous phases. The greater the difference at opposite sides of the membrane of the chemical activity of species that are transported, the larger is the swelling effect. The content of 200 g/l sulfuric acid employed in the stripping solution permitted fairly good metal transport to this phase. It would not be necessary to greatly increase the acid concentration in the strip liquor because the extent of metal transported is normally independent of this variable. This indicates that the effect of the back-extraction rate on the overall extraction rate of metal is negligible under the experimental conditions utilized. Furthermore, an excessively high acid content in the stripping solution would cause a faster degradation of both extractant and surfactant compounds. The ELM methodology is especially attractive for the treatment of natural and industrial dilute solutions, since a considerable degree of metal enrichment in the strip liquor can be obtained by reducing the volume ratio between the strip acceptor phase and the external feed solution. This requires only a tiny solvent inventory, which is advantageous as they are expensive compounds. Copper removal from a residual mine water by means of an emulsified liquid membrane has been studied. An experimental design method was used, which allowed evaluation of the main variables, and their interrelations influencing the process. The liquid membrane was prepared by dissolving LIX-860 (a salicylaldoxime) as extractant carrier and Span-80 as surfactant. The membrane permitted very efficient metal removal from the feed solution towards the strip liquor, in experiments carried out in a batch-type stirred tank at 30 °C. From the experimental results and the variance analysis it was deduced that the statistically significant terms for copper transport through the membrane are the extractant concentration, the stirring time and the stirring speed of the double emulsion. However, it is not possible to increase the extractant concentration in the membrane in an unlimited way since an increase in the absolute viscosity of the organic solvent occurs, producing a lower diffusion speed of the species, which affects the metal mass transference process and favors a certain grade of emulsion breakdown. The higher the stirring speed of the double emulsion, the smaller the size of the emulsion droplets, therefore increasing the interface area of the extractant/metal reaction. Nevertheless, a maximum limit to raise this variable must be considered. An excessively high stirring speed produced coalescence, and finally breakdown of globules, turning the primary emulsion unstable. The concentration range of surfactant used in this experimental design produced an efficiently stabilized membrane. However, it did not have an effect on the metal transport. The use of an unnecessarily high content of the surfactant produces lower metal extraction due to the generation of higher interfacial resistance. The feasibility of removing low contents of metal in an extractor, using an emulsified liquid membrane, has been demonstrated in this work. The authors express their gratefulness to The National Fund of Science and Technology of Chile, FONDECYT, for the financial assistance given to this work through the research project no. 1011021. The authors also wish to thank Cognis Chile Ltd. by the provision of the extractant LIX-860 N-IC.