Recent research on mineral carbonation has focused attention on multi-step processes which appear more attractive than single-step processes due to the higher purity of the final products. Recent studies on mineral carbonation have indicated that industrial wastes can require a lower degree of pre-treatment and less energy-intensive carbonation conditions, in comparison to mineral rocks. In light of this, a closed-loop, multi-step process which allows precipitation of calcium carbonate (CaCO3) from Ca-rich waste streams has been developed. The main objective of this work is to focus on mineral dissolution kinetics for steel slag and recycled concrete aggregate, to confirm the formation of CaSO4(s) for the following carbonation reaction. Dissolution studies using ammonium bisulphate (NH4HSO4) solutions were carried out at three different temperatures (25–50–90°C). For the steel slag sample, solid crystals of CaSO4 were produced on the surface of the reacted particles of the starting material. Mg and Fe, instead, dissolved into solution and their efficiencies of dissolution, after 3h at 90°C, were 85% and 90% respectively. Kinetic analyses found that the Avrami model, which explains the diffusion process for systems in which crystallization occurs on the sample surface, can accurately represent the kinetics of steel slag dissolution. The calculated activation energy was 42kJ/mol. Dissolution of recycled concrete aggregate into an NH4HSO4 solution, as for steel slag, produced precipitated CaSO4, while aluminium, the other main metal present, dissolved partially (40% at 25°C) into solution. For the recycled concrete aggregate, the Avrami model fitted best the results from dissolution experiments. However, because of the low values of R2 at 25°C and 90°C, the Avrami model cannot be considered valid in terms of the kinetic of the reaction and further investigations are needed to corroborate precipitation of crystals of CaSO4 on the surface of RCA samples.Despite the development of renewable energy sources, CO Mineral carbonation technologies can be divided into two main groups: direct carbonation (also called single-step processes) and indirect carbonation (known also as multi-step processes). Single-step processes involve the reaction of feedstock material with CO Feedstock materials for mineral carbonation can have highly variable chemical composition ranging from mineral rocks A closed-loop, multi-step process has recently been developed to extract magnesium from serpentine and produce separated streams of pure by-products at ambient pressure This multi-step mineralization process includes four main steps: i) mineral dissolution, ii) pH adjustment and precipitation of impurities, iii) carbonation reaction, and iv) regeneration of additives. The complete chemical reaction list and thermodynamic data, performed using Chemical Reaction and Equilibrium Software HSC Chemistry 5.1, are reported in In this process, during mineral dissolution, metal cations (e.g. Ca The aim of the carbonation process is to produce calcium carbonate as the final product, instead of magnesium carbonate In this paper the dissolution step of the overall multi-step process is investigated at three different temperatures (25, 50 and 90 The two samples (SS and RCA) employed for this study were produced in the UK and results presented in this paper can only be referred to them. In fact, because of the compositional variability and other factors which may affect waste material behaviour (e.g. storage, weathering conditions, age of the sample etc.) a general conclusion cannot be made. Characterisation of the crystalline mineral phases present in SS and RCA was achieved using a Hiltonbrooks X-Ray Diffractometer (XRD) using a Hiltonbrooks 3 The loss on ignition (LOI) was determined gravimetrically by taking ~ Following the procedure developed by Wang and Maroto-Valer and employing the same experimental set-up at ambient pressure The solutions used were 1.3 The extraction (e.g. dissolution) efficiency of a specific metal (e.g. Fe, Mg, Ca) in a solution sample at time After the experiments, the solution was filtered and the solid residue dried in an oven at 105 In order to determine the kinetic parameters of the dissolution of SS and RCA, the experimental data was analysed according to the standard integral analysis method According to the shrinking-core model, reactions take place at the outer surface of the un-reacted particle and heterogeneous reactions are controlled by one of the following mechanisms Film diffusion control: diffusion of the fluid reactant from the main body of the fluid film to the surface of the solid, represented by: Reaction control: reaction on the surface between the fluid reactant and the solid, represented by: Product layer diffusion: diffusion of the products of reaction from the surface of the solid through the fluid film back into the main body of the fluid (without ash layer), represented by: In addition to the heterogeneous models considered, pseudo-homogeneous models can also be employed to calculate the rate equations for the heterogeneous reactions first-order pseudo-homogenous. The kinetic of the reaction depends only on the concentration of one reactant (other reactants can be present but they have no influence on the reaction), represented by: second-order pseudo-homogenous. The kinetic of the reaction if affected by two reactants, represented by: Furthermore, the Avrami model can also be considered because the investigated mineral dissolution step foresees the extraction of calcium followed by its precipitation as CaSO The main metals present in SS are Fe, Mg and Ca ( As expected Trends of dissolution for SS can be compared with the ones from serpentine; 85% of magnesium and 80% of iron from serpentine were dissolved into NH Calcium mainly precipitated due to the low concentration in solution (~ Experimental data from dissolution experiments can be fitted into the kinetic models introduced in Eqs. Instead, when experimental data were fitted into the Avrami model, the almost linear plot of ln(− Avrami model explains the diffusion process for systems in which crystallization occurs on the sample surface The activation energy can be calculated from the plot of lnk versus 1/T ( The main metals present in RCA are Al and Ca ( For RCA, temperature does not appear to have a significant influence on the dissolution of Ca and Al. As discussed for SS ( The presence of solid calcium sulphate was confirmed by the results from XRD, SEM and XRF analyses of the solid residue after dissolution at 50 The concentration of Al into solution is indicative of the reaction progress, because Al is the most abundant element ( In the kinetic models considered, Because of low levels of Ca into solution ( Investigation of the dissolution step of an overall carbonation process for the analysed samples of steel slag and recycled concrete aggregate was carried out to confirm the precipitation of CaSO Similar to SS, RCA dissolved into NH All findings and results are those solely of the author. Caterpillar Inc. does not warrant the accuracy, adequacy or completeness of the information and materials contained herein and expressly disclaims liability for any errors or omissions in the information and materials. The authors acknowledge