A partial interaction procedure is developed for obtaining analytical solutions for the global load-slip behaviour of fibre-reinforced polymer plates adhesively bonded and mechanically anchored to brittle substrates. This is performed by adopting a matrix approach where the slip and slip strain at any point is given by the product of a solution matrix which is a function of: the position; the zone of solution - whether it is elastic, softening or debonding; and a coefficient vector. It is shown that the procedure can be used as a convenient research tool for extracting the material bond properties from standard experimental pull-push tests, or for use in advanced numerical simulations to develop anchorage systems for structures retrofitted with fibre-reinforced polymer (FRP) composites.The practice of retrofitting structures with fibre-reinforced polymers (FRPs) is becoming increasingly common due to the significant financial and environmental benefits over replacement. These retrofits commonly consist of an FRP plate externally bonded to the tensile face of reinforced concrete beams [ It has been demonstrated that supplementing bonded plates with mechanical anchors can be an effective means for increasing the interaction between the FRP and brittle substrate and therefore utilising the strain capacity of the FRP plate. Significant empirical research has led to the development of a wide range of anchor types which have been extensively detailed and reviewed in Refs. [ The most basic form of testing used to assess the efficiency systems with or without anchorage is the single- or double-lap push-pull test [ To help address this limitation, in the paper a procedure is developed for obtaining analytical solutions for the global load-slip behaviour of FRP plates adhesively bonded and anchored to brittle substrates. This is performed by adopting a matrix approach where the slip and slip strain at any point is given by the product of a solution matrix, which is a function of the position and the zone of solution (elastic, softening or debonding), and a coefficient vector. Importantly, this solution can allow for any number of anchors with any given load-slip relationship. The primary advantage of this solution over conventional finite difference based methods is that no iterative root finding is required, thus improving the computational efficiency of the implementation. It will be shown that the procedure can be used as a convenient research tool for extracting the material bond properties from standard experimental pull-push tests for use in advanced numerical simulations to develop effective FRP anchorage systems. In the following, analytical solutions for the global load-slip behaviour of FRP plates adhesively bonded and anchored to brittle substrates are first derived. This is followed by a validation of the approach to an accepted finite difference model and a parametric study to investigate the influence of anchor location and number. It is then shown how the approach can be used as a research tool for extracting the bond stress-slip behaviour of the adhesive FRP to concrete interface as well as the load-slip behaviour of the anchor. Finally, a worked example is presented in In this section, a matrix-based formulation will be developed for the analysis of an externally bonded (EB) FRP plate bonded to a brittle substrate with or without anchors. First, the case without anchors will be considered. Variables in bold and upper case are 2 × 2 matrices while variables in bold and lower case represent 2 × 1 column vectors. Consider an externally bonded FRP plate as illustrated in If a load P is applied to the end of the plate as illustrated in Equation It should be noted that Eq. In this paper, the τ-δ relationship of the interface of an externally bonded plate is assumed to be bilinear without friction, as has been done by Refs. [ In the next section, it will be shown how the governing equation (Eq Substituting Eq. Solving Eq. The above can be expressed more compactly in matrix form Substituting Eq. The particular solution is found by assuming that δ Combining the homogenous and particular solutions yields the full solution as Differentiating gives the slip strain as Hence in matrix form, the slip and slip strain can be represented as Substituting Eq. Integrating Eq. Integrating Eq. In matrix representation, Eqs. In the previous section, it was shown how the slip and slip strain can be represented by a matrix that is a function of position multiplied by a vector of constants. In this section, it will be shown how the initial value of the coefficient vector at the free end can be determined using the boundary condition at this point. It will then be shown with the second boundary condition how the coefficient vector at the loaded end can be related to the slip and load at this point. Note that the load is zero at the end of the plate and the substrate, hence the strains are also zero. As the slip strain is equal to the difference in strain between the plate ε Hence the slip and slip strain at the free end can be represented as Equation From Eq. Note that at the loaded end, since the loads in the plate and the concrete are equal and opposite and equal to the applied load P, the slip strain is known at this position and given by The slip and slip strain at the loaded end can then be represented as If multiple zones of solution are present along the bonded length, additional boundary conditions are obtained as the slip and slip strain are continuous across these boundaries. Hence in the next section, it will be shown how to determine the location of these transitions as well as the change in the coefficient vector The first transition that is considered is the transition from Zone I (linear elastic) to Zone II (softening). This occurs at the point where the slip δ(x) = δ Using the definition of the hyperbolic function in terms of exponential functions, Eq. Multiplying through by exp(λ Equation Hence the transition point x At the boundary, the slip and slip strains from each zone are equal. Hence from Eqs. Rearranging gives The second transition that is considered is the transition from Zone II (softening) to Zone III (debonding) and this occurs when δ(x) = δ Note that x Using the half-angle tangent substitution, this can be rewritten as Using the quadratic formula, this is solved to yield Rearranging this for x Equating Eqs. The arrangement in It is considered that the slip is continuous over the anchor, however due to the discrete transfer of load between the plate and the substrate, there is a discontinuity in slip strain. To determine the value of this discontinuity, consider that the load in the plate to the right of the anchor is given as Similarly, the load in the substrate to the right of the anchor is given as From this, the change in slip strain is given as Equation From Eqs. From Eqs. From Eqs. The expressions derived in the previous section can be used to parametrically define the global load-slip (P-Δ) relationship in terms of the free end slip δ Note that if the approach were to be applied to a linear descending bond stress-slip relationship instead of a bilinear relationship a slight modification is required. That is the case as full interaction (δ = 0, dδ/dx = 0) can be obtained at some point for a finite length prism which is not the case for bilinear relationships with a finite initial stiffness. Hence in this case initially the position of full interaction is incremented moving from the loaded to the free end. When the free end is reached then free end slips are incremented as usual. To validate the proposed mathematical formulation, its predictions are compared to the numerical solution produced by Ref. [ In A notable feature of the proposed method is that it has the capability to capture snapback; that is, a reversal in Δ with continued increase to δ As the solution methodology has been validated, parametric studies are performed to investigate the load-slip behaviour of FRP plated sections with anchors. In  The slip at debonding is also investigated in The effect of adding an additional anchor is investigated using the configuration shown in In The model developed in this paper can also be used to determine the variation in shear stress τ and slip δ along the plate. This is illustrated in To analyse the systems in It is also assumed that the effective axial stiffness of the system EA First consider the single anchor case from the validation. The cross-section is shown in In After IC debonding, the shear stress and slip distributions are illustrated for the maximum load in the plate, as shown in This is the same value as the 50.3 mm observed between the point of debonding and the anchor shown in The next situation that is considered in Next consider the double anchor case from the validation. The cross-section is shown in In In It can be seen from the above analyses that the strengths obtained from pull tests are unlikely to give the bond properties directly but depend to a large extent on the geometry of the plate and anchors. However they do indicate that the bond properties can be extracted from the test data with the use of the model developed in this paper as will be illustrated in the next section. Determination of the model-defining parameters in the interface bond-slip model and the anchor load-slip model using experimental pull-push tests can be of considerable research value, as the established local behaviour may be subsequently used to predict the general behaviour of retrofits. By adopting the three-parameter bilinear model for the bond-slip behaviour at the interface ( For the following approach to be applicable, the bonded length must exceed L For an unanchored bonded joint, the maximum load is P In order to apply the following approach for an anchored bonded joint the anchor must be located a distance greater than L Note that the debonding slip δ Equation As an example of this process the bond-slip relationship of the interface and the load-slip relationship of the anchor will be calibrated for the test results produced by Ref. [ From The single anchor specimen test will now be used to determine the load-slip properties of the anchor. Note that because there is a short plateau at the maximum load the simplified analysis can be applied. The maximum load in the anchored plate in A relatively straightforward matrix-based formulation has been developed that simulates the partial interaction behaviour of FRP plates that are adhesively bonded and anchored to brittle substrates. Though as the primary focus has been on concrete more research maybe required for the specific application to masonry. In the matrix formulation, the slip and slip strain at any point is given by the product of a solution matrix, which is itself a function of the position and the zone of solution (elastic, softening or debonding) and a coefficient vector. The procedure has been used to simulate push-pull tests to explain their behaviour. From these analyses, it has been shown that the behaviour of push-pull tests is complex because of the influence and interaction of the bond properties of the adhesive interface and the mechanical anchorage. Because of this, it is extremely difficult to extract the bond properties of the adhesive bond and the anchor directly through tests alone. However, it has been shown with examples that the use of this partial interaction procedure in conjunction with tests allows these bond properties to be extracted directly and accurately. This should assist in the development of mechanical anchors and provide accurate bond properties for the simulation of FRP retrofitted beams for use in design. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at To demonstrate the application of the developed solution method, a worked example is now provided. The geometry of the assumed arrangement is illustrated in First calculate the effective axial rigidity of the system. So from Eq. From Eq. The slope of the ascending portion of the bond-slip relationship is given as Therefore from Eq. The slope of the linear descending portion is given by Therefore from Eq. Now impose a free end slip δ The next step is to calculate the distance x Since the projected location of x Hence from Eq. So now calculate the distance to the next transition point. From Eq. The projected location of x As the slip is less than 0.53 mm (δ The change in the coefficient vector is given by Eq. The distance to the next transition can again be calculated using Eq. From this, x So from Eq. As Zone III is now achieved, the next change in the coefficient vector is achieved at the second anchor. So the slip at the next anchor is given by Eq. This slip is between 0.53 mm (δ After this anchor, the end of the plate is then reached. At this point the load and slip are given by the boundary condition in Eq. Therefore, at the imposed δ  cross-sectional area of plate and substrate, respectively 2 × 1 coefficient vector; note the subscript i is a label that is used to distinguish between the coefficient vector along different portions of the bonded length elements of coefficient vector [c slip strain elastic modulus of plate and substrate, respectively standard basis vectors of 2D space effective axial rigidity of system fracture energy magnitude of the slope of the bond-slip relationship for the ascending and descending portions, respectively bonded length critical length: length required to obtain P bonded perimeter of interface between plate and substrate load applied to end of plate load in anchor; ultimate load in anchor load in substrate at left and right side of the anchor, respectively load in plate at left and right side of the anchor, respectively Load at IC debonding maximum load plastic load in anchor spacing between anchors 2 × 2 solution matrix; the subscript indicates the zone 2 × 2 transition matrix position along plate position of anchor distance from free end to debond anchor distance from the free end to yield the anchor location of transition between zone I and II, and zones II and III, respectively ratio of the effective axial rigidity to the bonded perimeter loaded end slip; slip; slip at anchor; ultimate slip of anchor; yielding slip of anchor homogeneous solution particular solution free end slip; slip at peak bond stress slip at debonding axial strain in plate and substrate, respectively bond parameter for Zones I and II interface shear stress; bond stress peak bond stress