A new process to remove iron from metallurgical process streams using solvent extraction techniques has been developed. The unique aspect of the process is the use of solid metal reductants directly in the organic phase, such as D2EHPA, as a means of selectively separating the undesired metal cation impurities. The process, called galvanic stripping, has been demonstrated on both beaker and bench scale continuous levels. Previous research focussed on using zinc or iron powders as the reducing agents. A recent study evaluated the use of steel scrap as a possible alternative that might enhance the process economics and product purity. A TBP modifier to the D2EHPA was also tested to determine the effect on process efficiency. The operating variables chosen for the study included reductant surface area, reaction time, diluents and ferric ion concentration in the organic. Once the pertinent parameters were identified by feasibility tests, an experimental design with statistical analysis was utilized to optimize overall process efficiency and iron removal.Iron is frequently encountered in significant quantities in various leach solutions and its removal and disposal constitutes a major problem in many hydrometallurgical operations. A number of processes have been developed or proposed for the removal of Fe(III) from process streams using solvent extraction techniques ( Galvanic stripping ( In conventional solvent extraction the metal ion distribution between the organic and aqueous phases can be expressed in a simple equilibrium expression such as If an electrochemical potential difference exists between two metal/ion couples in the organic solvent, a reaction is theoretically possible. A more active metal will reduce the more noble metal ion in the solution. Though each of the metal/ion potentials is unique to the specific organic and metal/ion in question, the ordering for values measured to date are similar to the aqueous electromotive force series ( For iron reduction with iron or steel scrap, the driving force comes from the potential difference between metallic iron and the two different oxidation states for iron, 2 Previous studies on the effects of various operating parameters for iron removal focussed on the use of metallic zinc or iron powders as the reductant for galvanic stripping ( An experimental design method was used for planning the experiments and to statistically analyze and model the results. The influence of reaction time, iron concentration in the loaded organic and the reductant surface area on percent iron removal, the stoichiometry number, and the iron reduction rate were determined. Using the experimental data, a model for the quantitative identification of the operating parameters necessary to optimize iron removal was constructed. Iron is a common impurity associated with a number of mineral and waste materials and is very detrimental because of the high concentrations encountered and difficulty in its selective separation. One promising method is the use of solvent extraction. Most of the extractant types, such as solvating, chelating, anionic or cationic, have a high affinity for Fe(III), but recovering the iron in an environmentally acceptable or even saleable form has proven to be a major challenge (  One method, hydrolytic stripping, was developed to separate iron from Versatic acid ( The solvent extraction separation of Fe(III) and Zn(II) with Primene 81R (a primary amine, Rohm & Hass) has been studied by Spanish researches ( At low pH, iron(III) is preferentially extracted into many organic phases relative to most metals. However, stripping iron(III) from the organic phases has been a major problem for practically every extractant. As a result, considerable effort has been made to identify methods for Fe(III) stripping.  The galvanic stripping process can be operated at near ambient pressure and temperature and uses a solid metal as the reductant ( The aqueous ferric ion solution used to load the organic was prepared by dissolving Fe(III) sulfate in deionized water. Sulfuric acid was used to adjust the pH to about 1 for the aqueous ferric ion feed and to maintain the stripping solution at the desired value. Low carbon steel scrap chunks, provided by an industrial collaborator, were used as the reductant for the most of the experiments. The individual pieces were approximately cubic and had a volume of about 0.25 cm Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) was used as the extractant with tributyl phosphate (TBP) as a modifier and either SX-11 or SX-12 as the diluents. D2EHPA and TBP were supplied by Rhodia and the SX11 and SX12 were obtained from Phillips 66 Mining Chemicals. All other chemicals and reagents used were of analytical reagent grade. Both galvanic stripping mode options, simultaneous and separate, were used for the experiments. For simultaneous galvanic stripping, the loaded organic phase, the aqueous stripping solution and the desired amount of steel reductant were mixed at the desired ratios in the same reactor. This allowed the reduction and stripping reactions to occur at the same time. Then the phases were separated by conventional means. Separate galvanic stripping consisted of a reduction stage in which only the organic phase was contacted and reacted with metal. After a suitable time for reduction the organic phase went to an aqueous stripping stage that contacted the organic containing the reduced iron and aqueous phases. In the reduction stage of the separate galvanic stripping experiments, loaded organic containing 0.8 vol% of deionized water, which helps to initiate or catalyze the reduction reaction, was contacted with the metal. After reduction the organic containing the ferrous ion was then contacted with an equal volume of sulfuric acid solution at the desired pH. The stripped organic was then recycled for loading with ferric ion. All the reduction and stripping reactions were conducted under an inert atmosphere. The reactor was agitated using a Burrell wrist-action shaker, usually at a medium setting, for all the experiments. A water bath controlled the temperature at 55 °C. Iron concentrations in the aqueous and organic phases were analyzed using atomic absorption spectroscopy (AA) and a portaspec X-ray fluorescent analyzer (XRF). Simultaneous galvanic stripping is conducted in one step, where the electrochemical reduction and chemical stripping occur simultaneously. Screening tests were conducted using this mode of operation to determine the effect of process parameters. The experiments were studied by changing one parameter at a time while keeping other parameters constant. The effect of reductant surface area on iron removal was investigated by reacting aqueous-organic mixtures containing 3.3 g/l Fe The effect of reaction time on iron removal and stoichiometry number is shown in Using SX11 as a diluent gave relatively fast kinetics but a higher stoichiometry number with the simultaneous galvanic stripping mode. The effect of adding 4% TBP as a modifier to the DEHPA-SX-11 organic system on iron removal and efficiency was examined using both simultaneous and separate stripping. The results are shown in For separate stripping using SX11 there was an increase in iron removal from 50% to nearly 80% as seen in The design of experiments method was used to study the separate galvanic stripping mode for iron removal. Previous studies showed that certain operating parameters, such as reductant type, reductant surface area, water content, diluent, organic concentration, and iron ion concentration could considerably affect the iron removal and process efficiency of the separate galvanic stripping process. Generally the effect of process parameters has been studied by changing one parameter (factor) at a time while keeping other parameters constant. This approach, however, is not necessarily the best way to optimize the process, and in some cases it may even give misleading implications, depending on the sets of parameters chosen. In particular, such testing provides no information about what happens when the factors are varied simultaneously, i.e. the interactions between factors are not identified. The method also requires an unnecessarily high number of experiments. Experimental design provides an organized approach for identifying the optimum conditions for iron removal and gives a better estimate of the variability and noise of the system, thus increasing the reliability of the results. When combined with thorough statistical analysis and modeling, experimental results can be correlated thus yielding more useful and precise information on the process. The DESIGN-EASE version 6, Stat-Ease was utilized to set up a three factor, two level factorial test (2 A general rule is to set the levels as far apart as possible so an effect will be more likely to occur, but the operating boundaries must not be exceeded. The high and low values of the factor levels chosen for this analysis are based on prescreening tests and conditions appropriate to possible industrial practice. The responses are iron removal (%), the stoichiometry number (a ratio of actual to theoretical amount of iron required), and reduction rate which was defined as the amount of iron reduced per minute by a square centimeter of reductant surface area. The factors, with low and high levels, are shown in The half-normal plot for iron removal, shown in The statistical analysis results for the stoichiometry number is given in The analysis of variance for reduction rate is shown in For statistical purposes it is assumed that residuals are normally distributed and independent with constant variance. A residual is the difference between the predicted value and the actual (observed) value. Two plots of normal plot of residuals and residuals versus predicted level were made to check the statistical assumptions.  The residuals versus predicted response plot for iron removal is shown in The results obtained in this study show that steel scrap can be an effective reductant for ferric ion removal from DEHPA using the galvanic stripping process. Either the simultaneous or separate stripping modes were effective. Steel scrap may be beneficial in some applications not only for economic reasons, but also for producing a purer final iron product. The reductant surface area is a very important parameter in determining the process efficiency. The greater the surface area, the higher the iron stripping percent for a given reaction time. Thus, increasing the surface area in the system provides a major means of increasing the rate of the process. The selection of diluent may also be an important variable in determining the efficiency of the galvanic stripping process. The results of this study indicated that SX11 as a diluent was favored for faster kinetics but SX12 gave the better stoichiometry numbers. Adding 4% TBP to the DEHPA-SX11 mixture increases the initial ferric ion reduction rate for both simultaneous and separate stripping and significantly lowers the stoichiometry number for simultaneous stripping. The reason for this effect is currently unknown, further studies are needed to understand the mechanism of modifiers such as TBP in altering the electrochemical reactions. In this work it was shown that by utilizing design of experiments the iron removal percentage, stoichiometry number, and ferric ion reduction rate could be described by statistical models. For the separate stripping mode, the initial ferric ion concentration, reductant surface area, and reaction time significantly affected the process according to the model derived. High iron concentration solutions always have high reduction rates, while longer reaction time and high iron concentration gave the best stoichiometry numbers. The best stoichiometry number achieved in this study is 1.75. Longer reaction time and high reductant surface area were favored for increasing the percentage of iron removal. The highest iron removal attained in this study was in the range of 75–82% for reaction times between 10 and 20 min. In general, the process has been demonstrated to be reasonably effective in removing dissolved iron from a variety of waste streams. One of the more important features of galvanic stripping is that the iron can be recovered in a relatively pure and saleable form.