The modulation of solid surface properties via surfactants has a wide application in surface engineering. In this study, a novel S,O,O-ligand surfactant N-[(4-hydroxyamino)-4-butoxyl]-S-hexyl-dithiocarbamate (HABHTC) was first introduced to hydrophobize malachite surface. AFM morphology image clearly displayed that the dense HABHTC aggregates adsorbed on the whole surface of malachite, which increased its contact angle, decreased its surface energy, hydrophilicity index and interaction free energy with bubble. HABHTC exhibited stronger hydrophobization to malachite than calcite and quartz. FTIR and XPS recommended that HABHTC acted as a S,O,O-ligand to bond surface Cu atoms of malachite via building CuS and CuO bonds. The S,O,O-coordination enhanced the stability of Cu-HABHTC surface species on malachite and rendered HABHTC to possess better flotation specificity toward malachite versus calcite than octyl-hydroxamic acid (OHA). The C6H13
                     SCNC3H6
                      configuration of HABHTC dramatically strengthened its hydrophobization toward malachite surface, resulted in a preferable hydrophobic flotation of malachite particles by using HABHTC as a collector.Surface properties of materials play an essential role in the interface science and technology. The crystal growth Froth flotation, an indispensable separation technique based on the wettability difference of material surfaces, is widely applied in protein purification In this paper, HABHTC and OHA were prepared in our lab For the three minerals with/without HABHTC treatment, their surface energies were determined by the three-probe-liquid method. The freshly-polished mineral slices were immersed in 30 mL 1.5 × 10 For each surface, its surface energy γ is related with its liquid contact angle θ as presented in Eq. After measuring the contact angles of three probe liquids on a surface, its surface energy including various components (i.e., The free energy ( The aggregation behavior of surfactant and particle on the air/water interface is correlated to the variation of air/water surface tension which is measured through the pendant drop shape method with a goniometer (Rame-hart Instrument Company, USA) A Dimension Icon AFM (Bruker, CA, USA) was applied to capture the images of mineral (i.e., malachite, calcite and quartz) surfaces before and after HABHTC adsorption under ScanAsyst air mode. The zeta potential of mineral particles was measured on a Zetasizer Nano (Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK) in 1 mM KCl solutions. The 740 FTIR spectrometer (Nicolet, USA) was used to record the IR adsorption bands of HABHTC and its interaction products with Cu A custom-made Hallimond cell with a volume of 220 mL was used to evaluate HABHTC’s flotation performances. The flotation procedure was similar with our previous approach The schematic route for synthesis of HABHTC was illustrated in HABHTC’s structure was characterized by NMR (Bruker AVANCE III 400 spectrometer) and FTIR, respectively. The chemical shift data of  As shown in  The free energy of bubble-mineral interaction in water was also presented in As shown in After addition of calcite particles, the water/air surface tension of HABHTC solutions slightly decreased and reached an equilibrium value of ~60.3 mN/m, being slightly lower than that of HABHTC initial solutions, which might be due to the arrangement of HABHTC-hydrophobized calcite particles or HABHTC-Ca  With 1.5 × 10  The FTIR for HABHTC, Cu-HABHTC precipitate, HABHTC-treated/untreated malachite were illustrated in Compared to malachite, there appeared several new IR peaks at ~2956, 2924, 2854 and 2069 cm The survey XPS in The fine XPS of Cu 2p The O 1 s XPS of HABHTC molecule were consisted of two characteristic bands at ~531.88 and 533.38 eV separately for the carbonyl and hydroxylamine O atoms as shown in  As shown from AFM images showed that the dense HABHTC aggregates adsorbed on the whole surface of malachite, and malachite exhibited the strongest adsorption affinity toward HABHTC, followed by calcite, and quartz hardly adsorbed HABHTC, which was coincided with the increasing WCA of the three minerals treated by HABHTC. HABHTC adsorption decreased the surface energy, hydrophilicity index and free energy of bubble-mineral interaction, and malachite became much more hydrophobic for attaching bubble than calcite and quartz. The addition of malachite particles significantly reduced the surface tension of HABHTC solutions, suggesting a co-arrangement of HABHTC with its hydrophobized malachite particles on the water/air interface. The selective modulation of HABHTC to malachite’s surface energy, morphology and wettability improved the flotation recovery of malachite particles. HABHTC exhibited stronger flotation affinity toward malachite against calcite and quartz than OHA. The predicted pKa of HABHTC was around 9.35 by SciFinder of American Chemical Society, closed to the pKa of alkyl hydroxamic acid The Cu 2p According to the analyses mentioned above, a potential bonding model of Cu-HABHTC complexes was suggested as outlined in The Cu-HABHTC surface species on malachite exhibited the similar XPS and FTIR adsorption bands with those of Cu-HABHTC complexes, recommending that HABHTC acted as a S,O,O-ligand to bind surface Cu atoms in formation of Cu A novel S,O,O-ligand surfactant HABHTC was synthesized and employed to modify the surface properties of malachite, calcite and quartz for the first time. AFM and zeta potential demonstrated that HABHTC preferred to adsorb on malachite rather than calcite and quartz. HABHTC adsorption decreased the surface energy, hydrophilicity index and free energy of bubble-mineral interaction, and malachite became much more hydrophobic for attaching bubble than calcite and quartz. HABHTC returned stronger flotation affinity toward malachite against calcite and quartz than OHA. The addition of malachite particles significantly reduced the surface tension of HABHTC solutions, suggesting a co-arrangement of HABHTC with its hydrophobized malachite particles on the water/air interface. XPS and FTIR recommended that HABHTC acted as a S,O,O-ligand to bond surface Cu atoms of malachite in formation of Cu The authors would like to thank the The authors declare no competing financial interest. Details on NMR spectra and their assignments, sample preparation for XPS and FTIR detection, contact angle measurements and results, probe-liquid parameters, and XPS experiments and analyses were summarized as supplemental materials in the supporting information. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 