Experiments were conducted to study the behavior of guided waves in free and grouted rock bolts. Ultrasonic waves with frequencies from 25 to 100kHz were used as excitation inputs. Tests were first conducted on free bolts to help understand the behavior of guided waves in non-grouted bolts. The effects of wave frequency and grouted length on the group velocity and attenuation of the guided ultrasonic waves were then evaluated. The test results indicated clear but different trends for the group velocity in the free and the grouted bolts. The attenuation in free bolts was not affected by bolt length and frequency. However, in grouted bolts it increased with frequency and grouted length. It was also found that the two main sources of attenuation are the setup energy loss, which has a fixed quantity for a specific type of test setup, and the dispersive and spreading energy loss which varies with frequency and bolt length.Rock bolts are widely used in underground and surface excavations in mining and civil engineering for ground reinforcement and stabilization. In many applications, rock bolts are grouted in the ground with cement or resin. Testing of the grout quality and monitoring of the bolt tension of rock bolts has long been a challenge in the field. Conventionally, grout quality is assessed by pull-out test and over-coring. Both methods are destructive and time consuming. The usefulness of pull-out test results as a measure of the grout quality can be limited by the critical length of grout beyond which the steel bolt will fail first Although the guided ultrasonic wave seems to be a promising method for monitoring rock bolts, research in this area is still in the early stage and many technical problems remain to be solved. In a grouted bolt, wave behavior is not only related to the grout quality but also to the wave frequency. The grouted length and the properties of materials surrounding the bolt may all play an important role. One of the important characteristics of a guided wave is that its velocity not only depends on the material properties but also on the thickness of the material and the wave frequency Attenuation is another important characteristic of a guided wave. In general, attenuation refers to the total reduction in the signal strength. Attenuation occurs as a natural consequence of signal transmission over a distance due to wave energy loss. There have been extensive research and experiments on attenuation of bulk waves However, there has been little research on attenuation of guided waves, especially in grouted rock bolts. Wave attenuation in grouted rock bolts is very complicated and is often affected by many factors including the grouting material and the grout quality. Each of these factors may cause some attenuation. In general, the observed wave attenuation may have several components, some of which may be frequency-dependent and some frequency-independent. The total attenuation is the sum of the contributions of all influencing factors According to the cause, attenuation may be grouped into the following categories:    Therefore, it can be reasonably assumed that attenuation in grouted rock bolts consists of two major components; dispersive and spreading attenuation, both of which are frequency-dependent. The total attenuation in grouted rock bolts should thus be the sum of the two components and in future will be referred to as DISP attenuation. It should be pointed out however, that as observed during our laboratory tests, the amplitude decay and the energy loss of guided waves recorded during tests of rock bolts in laboratory are not solely from the DISP attenuation. Another important component is the energy loss due to refraction at the contact surfaces between the bolt sample and the equipment. Theoretically, when a wave reaches an interface adjoining a medium which does not transmit mechanical waves (e.g., vacuum or air), no refraction occurs and all energy is reflected back An ongoing research program at Dalhousie University is aimed at studying the characteristics of guided waves in grouted rock bolts. Effects of wave frequency and grouted length on the behavior of guided ultrasonic waves in free bolts and grouted bolts have been studied. The achieved results are strikingly convincing. The details are given below. An understanding of the ultrasonic wave characteristics in free bolts (non-grouted bolts) is essential to the study of the behavior of guided ultrasonic waves in grouted bolts. In this research, both free bolts and grouted bolts were tested. The test samples included two free bolts and three grouted bolts of various lengths. The free bolts were bare steel bars. The grouted bolts were made by casting a cylindrical concrete block around a steel bar to simulate the grouted rock bolts in the field ( The instruments used in the study included a Handyscope HS-3 (a data acquisition device with a wave generator), an amplifier, two transducers, and a computer. The equipment setup is illustrated in The transducers used were piezo-electric, types R6 and R15, from Physical Acoustics Corporation. Both ends of the test bolts were smoothed and vacuum grease was used to provide good contact with the transducers. The experiments were conducted by exciting a transmitter (R6) with input signals at different frequencies into the non-grouted end of a bolt sample. The signal arriving at the other end was picked up by a transducer (R15) and the whole waveform was recorded digitally. During each test, the input frequency ranged from 25 to 100 In the following, ‘first arrival’ refers to the first wave packet that arrived at the receiving end and ‘echo’ refers to the same wave packet that reached the receiving end for a second time after it was reflected back from the input end. The attenuation was estimated by assessing the wave amplitude ratio of the echo over the first arrival. As explained earlier, wave attenuation is not only related to the grout quality but also to the frequency and other factors. The amplitude ratio of a wave packet that has traveled some distance has an inverse logarithm relationship, as shown in Eq. It is understood that good grout quality results in higher energy loss along the rock bolt due to energy leakage and dispersion. It is therefore very difficult to study wave attenuation in grouted bolts because the recorded waveform is often very weak and is affected by a lot of noises. The received waveform sometimes may not be very clear, making it difficult to identify the boundary between the first arrival and the echo. This becomes more problematic when the bolt is short or when dispersion is serious. The maximum wave amplitude in this case may be affected by such noises. It is therefore critical to develop a suitable analysis method to analyze the attenuation of ultrasonic waves and to get meaningful results. In this paper, a method to calculate the amplitude ratio using the average amplitude over a time interval is suggested as follows: The parameters To evaluate the effects of the time interval length Δ In the following, Δ The wave travel time in the rock bolt is defined as the time lapse from the beginning of the excitation signal, which was recorded from the input end of the bolt, to the first arrival, which was recorded from the other end of the bolt. However, determination of the beginning of the first arrival and the echo is often complicated by the dispersion character of the guided wave. Dispersion increases with frequency. The recorded raw waveforms therefore need to be filtered first by a band filter to narrow the frequency band around each testing frequency With the bolt length and the travel time determined using this method, the group velocity of guided ultrasonic waves can be calculated. The calculated group velocity is found to follow different trends in the free and the grouted bolts, as explained later. For partially grouted bolts, the group velocity in the free segment is considered the same as that in the free bolts. Experiments were conducted on free bolts using frequencies from 25 to 100 The measured amplitude ratio, The energy loss for both free bolts was nearly constant and did not change with frequency or bolt length. As discussed earlier, this part of the energy loss has a fixed amount, and is mainly caused by setup loss, mostly from refraction at the contact surfaces of the bolt samples with other objects. The setup loss is however expected to change for different test setups. If the amplitude ratio after the DISP attenuation is assumed as As can be seen, the attenuation relationship defined in Eq. For a free bolt As indicated above, before estimating the arrival time, the raw waveforms were filtered with a band filter. A typical filtered waveform of sample 1 is illustrated in Experiments were also conducted on the grouted rock bolts using frequencies from 25 to 100 The results of the measured amplitude ratio, The results of For the grouted bolts, the results of group velocity calculated from the raw waveform data were totally meaningless. Only after filtering could meaningful results be obtained. The filtering method and the arrival time estimation method are the same as those previously discussed for the free bolts. The group velocity in the grouted length of a partially grouted rock bolt was calculated using the travel time in the grouted length only. The travel time in the grouted length was determined by subtracting the travel time in the free length, which is assumed to have the same velocity as the free bolt, from the total travel time. The measured group velocity in the grouted length for samples 3–5 are shown in It can be seen from This research examined the attenuation and group velocity of the guided ultrasonic waves in rock bolts. The test results showed variations with frequency and grouted length. It was determined that due to the short length of rock bolts used in the field, the dissipative attenuation can be ignored. In free bolts, the dispersive and spreading attenuation along the bolt is negligible and the main source of attenuation is from the setup loss of energy, which reduced the amplitude by 20% in one round trip for the equipment setup in this research. The setup loss is considered to be independent from frequency and bolt length, but dependent upon the specific equipment setup. The group velocity in the free bolts decreased by about 10% as the frequency increased from 25 to 100 In grouted bolts, the setup loss is assumed to be the same as that in the free bolts because the test setup was the same. However, the dispersive and spreading (DISP) attenuation increased with frequency and grouted length, and it was more severe than that from the setup loss. The amplitude ratio due to the DISP attenuation decreased as the frequency and grouted length increased. The group wave velocity in the grouted length of the test bolts increased steadily as the frequency increased to 75 As indicated earlier, the experiments in this study were conducted using a transmission-through setup (i.e., with sensors on both ends of the tested bolts). This type of setup is not applicable to the field where only one end of a rock bolt is accessible. The next step of this research will be to conduct similar tests using a transmission-echo setup (i.e., with a sensor at one end only). This will require a different testing device, which is being custom-built for the specific testing requirements. During the next stage of research, tension will also be applied to the bolt samples to study the tension effects. The ultimate goal of this research will be to develop a non-destructive testing device using guided ultrasonic waves for field monitoring of grouted rock bolts, particularly the grout quality, grouted length, bolt failure, and bolt tension. This research was supported by a research grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.