The aerial parts of Satureja hortensis, cultivated in Iran (Research Station of Alborz, Karaj), were collected at the full-flowering stage and dried by three different drying methods (sun-drying, shade-drying and oven-drying at 45°C). The essential oils of every treatment were obtained by hydro-distillation of the aerial parts. In addition, the essential oil of shade-dried sample was obtained by two other distillation methods (water- and steam-distillation and direct steam-distillation). The oils were analyzed by capillary GC and GC–MS. Statistical analysis showed no significant difference between oil yield (w/w) of the oven-dried sample (1.06%) compared to shade-dried (0.94%) and sun-dried (0.87%). The oil content of the shade-dried sample, obtained by hydro-distillation, was higher (0.94%) than that of the steam-distilled (0.27%). Twenty-three components were identified in the oil of S. hortensis in the different drying methods, including carvacrol (46.0–48.1%) and γ-terpinene (37.7–39.4%) as main components. Seventeen compounds were characterized in the oils of different distillation methods, including carvacrol (12.3–46%) and γ-terpinene (37.7–70.4%). Although the drying methods had no significant effect on oil composition of S. hortensis, the distillation changed the percentage of main components sharply (significant at 1%). The steam-distillation method produced the lowest amount of carvacrol and highest amount of γ-terpinene. The results showed that extraction by hydro-distillation gave the best results for S. hortensis, based on oil yield and carvacrol percentage. The green leaves and herbaceous parts of stems of As a medicinal plant, The aim of this study was to test the effect of drying method (sunshine, shade and oven-drying at 45 A literature search was undertaken on effects of different methods of drying on essential oil content and chemical composition of the essential oil plants. The results showed that drying method had a significant effect on oil content and composition of aromatic plants ( The effects of different distillation methods on oil content and composition of aromatic plants have also been previously reported. The rose-scented geranium ( The effects of distillation method and stage of plant growth on the essential oil content and composition of The aerial parts of To study the effect of drying method, three methods of drying, (sun-drying, shade-drying and oven-drying at 45 Dried aerial parts of every treatment (40 For investigation of the effect of distillation method on oil content And composition of GC analyses were performed, using a Shimadzu GC-9A gas chromatograph equipped with a DB-5 fused silica column (30 GC–MS analyses were carried out on a Varian 3400 GC-MS system equipped with a DB-5 fused silica column (30 The components of the oils were identified by comparison of their mass spectra with those of a computer library or with authentic compounds and confirmed by comparison of their retention indices, either with those of authentic compounds or with data published in the literature ( The data were compared with SAS software by using Duncan’s test. The oil isolated by different methods of distillation from the aerial parts of The analysis of variance ( The different drying methods had no significant effect on oil yield of Twenty-three components were identified in the essential oil of By hydro-distillation, the main components of the oil of shade-dried aerial parts were carvacrol (46.0%), γ-terpinene (37.7%), The drying method caused some variation of the relative proportions of the components. The major compounds, carvacrol and γ-terpinene, showed no sharp difference among the three drying methods, but a higher amount of carvacrol was obtained by oven-drying. This result is in agreement with results of studies on other aromatic plants ( Eighteen components were identified in the essential oil of The main components of the oil extracted by water and steam-distillation were carvacrol (44.0%), γ-terpinene (41.8%), The major constituents of the oil obtained by steam-distillation were γ-terpinene (70.4%), carvacrol (12.3%), Comparison of the results shows that the different drying methods had a significant effect on the percentage of main components. The results showed that by hydro-distillation a higher amount of carvacrol (46.0%) was obtained, while, by steam-distillation, the lowest amount of carvacrol (12.3%) and the largest amount of γ-terpinene (70.4%) were obtained. Finally, it could be concluded that drying of aerial parts of