Background
                  Short-segment posterior spinal instrumentation for thoracolumbar burst fracture provides superior correction of kyphosis by an indirect reduction technique, but it has a high failure rate. We investigated the clinical and radiological results of temporary short-segment pedicle screw fixation without augmentation performed for thoracolumbar burst fractures with the goal of avoiding treatment failure by waiting to see if anterior reconstruction was necessary.
               
                  Methods
                  We studied 27 consecutive patients with thoracolumbar burst fracture who underwent short-segment posterior instrumentation using ligamentotaxis with Schanz screws and without augmentation. Implants were removed approximately 1 year after surgery. Neurological function, kyphotic deformity, canal compromise, fracture severity, and back pain were evaluated prospectively.
               
                  Results
                  After surgery, all patients with neurological deficit had improvement equivalent to at least 1 grade on the American Spinal Injury Association impairment scale and had fracture union. Kyphotic deformity was reduced significantly, and maintenance of the reduced vertebra was successful even without vertebroplasty, regardless of load-sharing classification. Therefore, no patients required additional anterior reconstruction. Postoperative correction loss occurred because of disc degeneration, especially after implant removal. Ten patients had increasing back pain, and there are some correlations between the progression of kyphosis and back pain aggravation.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Temporary short-segment fixation without augmentation yielded satisfactory results in reduction and maintenance of fractured vertebrae, and maintenance was independent of load-sharing classification. Kyphotic change was caused by loss of disc height mostly after implant removal. Such change might have been inevitable because adjacent endplates can be injured during the original spinal trauma. Kyphotic change after implant removal may thus be a limitation of this surgical procedure.Thoracolumbar burst fractures are the most common spine fracture of those that are treated surgically. These fractures are classified as anterior and midcolumn injuries according to the three-column classification proposed by Denis Short-segment posterior spinal instrumentation (pedicle screw instrumentation one level cephalad and caudad to the fractured vertebra) without fusion has merit because it preserves segment motion, provides superior correction of kyphosis using an indirect reduction technique, and is less invasive than other procedures. However, there have been frequent reports that this procedure has failed, with or without instrumentation failure McCormack et al. In our institution, we perform posterior reduction and fixation first to establish spinal stability and reduce surgical stress. Then if anterior reconstruction is considered to be necessary, we plan anterior reconstruction as a second procedure. Thus, we conducted a study to investigate the surgical results of temporary short-segment pedicle screw fixation without augmentation for the surgical treatment of thoracolumbar burst fractures. Our study group consisted of 27 consecutive patients in whom a single thoracolumbar burst fracture, with or without neurological impairment, was diagnosed between September 2006 and July 2012 at Osaka National Hospital. This study has been approved by institutional review board of our hospital and informed consent was obtained from all patients. There were 19 men and 8 women, with an average age of 43 years (range, 20–66 years). The injuries were caused by traffic accidents (6 patients), falls from a significant height (20 patients), and being hit by falling object (1 patients). Thus, all patients suffered high-energy injuries. Twenty-two patients had associated injuries: extremity fracture in 14 patients, stable pelvic fractures in 7, lung injury in 4, abdominal injury in 2, cerebral contusion in 2. The level of spinal involvement was T11 in 1 patient, T12 in 5 patients, L1 in 8, L2 in 10, and L3 in 3. The neurological status of the patients was assessed using the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) impairment scale. We also evaluated (low) back pain before injury and at the final follow-up examination using the Denis pain scale Radiographic assessment was performed using supine anteroposterior and lateral roentgenograms, computed tomography (CT) scans (GE Discovery CT750 HD; slice thickness 0.625 Three independent observers evaluated all radiographs and CT scans. The sagittal plane contour was assessed by measuring (1) the vertebral body angle (VBA), which was measured between the superior and inferior endplates of the injured vertebra, and (2) the superoinferior endplate angle (SIEA), which was measured between the superior endplate of the intact vertebra cephalad to the fracture and the inferior endplate of the vertebra caudad to the fracture with using the Cobb method ( Canal compromise was determined using CT scanning by directly measuring the anteroposterior canal dimension at the maximum area of the retropulsed osseous fragment or fragments and was recorded in millimetres. This value was then compared with the average of similar dimensions measured at the levels above and below the injury. The result of this comparison was recorded as the percentage of anteroposterior canal compromise at the injured vertebra. The extent of intervertebral disc degeneration was evaluated on midsagittal T Fracture severity was calculated using the load-sharing classification Patients were allowed to sit up as soon after surgery as a custom-moulded thoracolumbosacral brace was fabricated. Nine patients had delay to sitting up because of an associated injury. However, they could sit up by 1 week, and no patient was required to remain lying in bed for a long period. The brace was used for at least 3 months after surgery. During this period, physical activity was restricted, and if kyphotic deformity due to vertebral collapse was observed, we planned to perform anterior reconstruction. Sports activities and strenuous labour were prohibited for 6 months after surgery. Removal of implants was performed approximately 1 year after initial surgery after confirming union of the fracture by CT scan and MRI, because of the preservation of segment motion and the possibility of implant failure, which was explained before initial surgery. Therefore, the pedicle screw implants were only temporary. All patients were monitored clinically and radiographically for a minimum of 2 years, with the median follow-up duration being 50 months (range, 24–84 months). All surgical procedures were performed under controlled general anaesthesia. Patients were placed in a prone position; initial postural reduction was then obtained. Using a standard posterior midline approach, we exposed the levels above and below the injured segment. Schanz pedicle screws (AO Universal Spine System, DePuy Synthes, West Chester, PA) with a diameter of 6.2 or 7.0 Posterior wall decompression by way of indirect reduction via ligamentotaxis was performed using the following technique, which is based on a technique described by Aebi et al. We did not perform open reduction, decompression, laminectomies, or laminotomies, with one exception: One patient required laminectomy to treat eruption of the cauda equina caused by injury to the posterior column. In addition, we did not perform autologous iliac bone fusion, posterior fusion, posterolateral fusion, or vertebroplasty. Statistical analyses were performed using the Wilcoxon test. The level of significance was set at Nine patients were taken to the operating room for surgical stabilisation within 24 The mean duration of all surgical procedures was 101 Fifty-two percent (14 of 27) of patients had a neurological deficit: 2 patients had an ASIA grade of B, 4 had a grade of C, and 8 had a grade of D. All patients had improved neurologically by at least 1 ASIA grade by the final follow-up examination ( As defined by the Denis scale, 3 patients had moderate back pain, 13 had occasionally minimum back pain, and 11 had no back pain. At the final follow-up examination, 10 patients reported increased back pain; however, no patients had interruptions in their activities of daily life or work because of pain ( No patients had iatrogenic neurological deficits or developed infections. At implant removal, there were no instances of instrumentation failure, including breakage, bending, or loosening of the pedicle screws; the only exception was the breakage of one 5-mm cephalad pedicle screw 8 months after the initial operation. There have been no additional procedures. Kyphotic deformity was evaluated and mean values were calculated. All patients had union of the injured vertebrae, which was confirmed by MRI and CT scans. The VBA was corrected from 17.3° (range, 31–8°) before surgery to 6.1° (range, 11–1°) after surgery. Loss of correction was 0.5° before removal, which deteriorated by another 0.3° after removal. Total loss of correction was 0.8° from the initial surgery. Thus, fractured vertebrae were corrected and maintained after surgery. Therefore, none of our patients needed anterior reconstruction. Statistical analysis revealed that the VBA was significantly reduced ( The SIEA was corrected from 13° (range, 29° to −16°) before surgery to 1° (range, 24° to −24°) after surgery. Correction loss was 2.3° before removal, which deteriorated by another 7.5° after removal, making the total correction loss 9.8° from the initial surgery. A mean kyphotic deformity of 10.6° (range, 28° to −18°) remained by the time of the final follow-up examination. Six patients (24%) had kyphotic deformity that was >20° (range, 21–28°). The SIEA was also significantly reduced ( CT scans revealed a mean spinal canal narrowing of 50.2% (range, 14–88%) before surgery, 26.3% (range, 7–48%) after surgery, and 14.8% (range, 5.1–34%) by the time of final follow-up examination, showing further improvement ( The mean fracture severity according to load-sharing classification was 7.1 points. Three patients had a score of 9 points, 8 had a score of 8, 8 had a score of 7, 6 had a score of 6, and 2 had a score of 5. Nineteen patients (70%) had a score of ≥7, a score for which anterior reconstruction is traditionally recommended. However, statistical analysis revealed that there was no significant relation between load-sharing score and correction loss. Using the AO classification, we found that 21 patients had type A3 fractures, 3 patients had type B1, and another 3 patients had type B2, whereas under the Denis classification, 7 patients had type A fractures, 19 patients had type B fractures, and 1 patient had a type C fracture. At the 2-year follow-up examinations, MRI revealed that disc degeneration had accelerated at least 1 grade in all 27 patients, at the level above the injury in 23 patients, and at the level below the injury in 6 patients ( The mean correction loss in patients with and without back pain aggravation was 14.6° and 7.5°, respectively. Because this difference was statistically significant ( Several studies have shown that short-segment pedicle screw instrumentation without support of the anterior column for the treatment of unstable thoracolumbar burst fractures is associated with a high rate of early instrumentation failure and progression of kyphotic deformity Multiple factors contributed to the success of this surgical procedure. One factor is the material used in instrumentation. Ebelke et al. McCormack et al. A second factor is the diameter of the pedicle screws. If the diameter of the patient's pedicles was large enough, we used 7-mm pedicle screws. This is the largest diameter of screw available for this system. In patients with narrow pedicles, we attempted to place at least a 6.2-mm screw, even if this required pedicle expansion ( Another factor contributing to the success of this technique is the preservation of the posterior column. We did not perform laminectomy or laminotomy, even in patients with neurological deficits. There is only a minor relationship between decompression and neurological recovery Limb et al. In our study, kyphotic deformity was corrected satisfactorily during surgery. Maintenance of the reduced fractured vertebral body height was successful regardless of the load-sharing classification, even without augmentation. Postoperative kyphotic changes occurred because of loss of disc height, not as a result of the fracture of the vertebral body itself. However, kyphotic deformity occurred because of vertebral collapse, not because of disc degeneration during the early phase before implant removal in previous failure reports. Our results are different from those of previous studies. Concerning the loss of adjacent disc height and disc degeneration after surgery, Wang et al. Furthermore, thoracolumbar burst fractures involve not only injury to the vertebral body but also complex tissue injuries. Such damage inevitably includes injury to endplates and adjacent discs. Consequently, it is impossible to prevent disc degeneration. Disc injury at onset might have been connected with loss of correction in our series. Thus, correction loss at adjacent discs could be unavoidable, and this might be a limitation to this surgical procedure. Six (22%) of our patients had kyphotic deformity of >20°. Fortunately, none of our patients had back pain severe enough to interrupt their daily activities or work. We could have performed short-segment fusion with augmentation, such as posterolateral fusion without implant removal, for these 6 patients, because kyphotic change had occurred mostly after implant removal. However, this would not have allowed preservation of segment motion. Moreover, it is impossible to predict this major kyphotic deformity preoperatively, because correction of kyphosis by vertebral collapse was achieved during the initial operation in these 6 patients, and progression of kyphosis occurred mostly after implant removal, just as for other patients without major kyphotic deformity. Additional surgery such as osteotomy might be needed later in patients who have severe back pain due to major kyphotic deformity. Temporary short-segment fixation without augmentation yielded satisfactory results in the reduction and maintenance of fractured vertebrae, independent of load-sharing classification. Kyphotic change occurred because of loss of disc height mostly after implant removal. Such change might be inevitable because adjacent discs and endplates can be injured at the onset. Kyphotic change may thus be a limitation of this surgical procedure. There is some correlation between back pain aggravation and progression of kyphosis after implant removal. However, we did not determine the factor responsible for progression of kyphosis. All authors report no support and no conflict of interest concerning the materials or methods used in this study or the findings specified in this paper. Medical editor Katharine O’Moore-Klopf, ELS (East Setauket, NY, USA) provided professional English-language editing of this article.