MTS-N detectors are pellets of LiF:Mg,Ti produced at the Institute of Nuclear Physics (IFJ) in Krakow, Poland. The thermoluminescence (TL) response of these detectors to gamma radiation doses up to 10 kGy only has been studied earlier. The aim of this paper is to evaluate the TL and EPR response of MTS detectors irradiated with 60Co gamma radiation at high doses up to 1200 kGy. The results indicate that the MTS-N glow curve presents a new peak at temperature near 420 °C for doses over 700 kGy. This peak is probably associated with the second EPR signal that appears for doses over 100 kGy. The defect center related to this signal is undergoing further studies.Detectors of lithium fluoride doped with magnesium and titanium, distributed as TLD-100 (Bicron) and MTS-N (IFJ), are widely used for personnel, clinical and environmental dosimetry. More recently the LiF:Mg,Cu,P (MCP-N) detector was produced and, due to its high sensitivity, became a standard in modern TL dosimetry. Many nuclear applications, like food irradiation, and high energy accelerators dosimetry, require the measurements of high doses. The behavior of LiF:Mg,Cu,P (MCP-N) detectors at high doses of gamma radiation up to 500 kGy was previously investigated by Since there are no studies of the TL response of the MTS-N detector in the ultra-high dose range, the aim of this paper is to evaluate the TL response of the MTS detectors exposed to gamma radiation of A group of 50 LiF:Mg,Ti (MTS-N) pellets manufactured at the Institute of Nuclear Physics (IFJ), Krakow, Poland, were used for this study. All detectors used belonged to the same production batch and were selected according to their sensitivity. Groups of four dosimeters were encapsulated in a black badge to avoid the room light incidence, since they present light sensitivity. Each group was irradiated with a The glow curves of the MTS pellets irradiated with  In addition, a small peak is observed near 500 °C since irradiation with 20 kGy. Its presence was also reported by  The results of presented investigation have shown that significant changes in the TL glow curves of MTS detectors are observed at high doses. New peaks appear in the TL glow curve of LiF:Mg,Ti (MTS) for gamma doses from 300 kGy up to 1200 kGy. These peaks appear to be associated with the EPR signal, centered at The authors thank for the financial support of the Brazilian agencies