Objective
                  The aim of this study is to determine the risk factors involved in the development of these fractures and analyze the treatments used as well as their influence on the clinical and functional prognosis of patients.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  We made an observational, retrospective case-control study, with a sample of 38 patients (40 femoral bones) operated in our hospital, who had two femoral ipsilateral implants, proximal and distal. We found 10 cases of interimplant fracture and 28 patients who had not suffered a fracture (2 of them had bilateral implants). We analysed the influence of different variables, such as age, gender, comorbidities, radiological variables, type of treatments employed, clinical evolution, etc.
               
                  Results
                  the female sex was predominant in both groups, 80.7 was the average age. Osteoporosis was statistically significant (P
                     =.007) for the development of these fractures. We did not find statistical significance in the radiological variables. Surgical treatment was the most frequent, and the plate of osteosynthesis the most employed option. We found a death rate of 40% at 4 years. Although all fractures healed, the survivors’ ambulation ability was reduced.
               
                  Conclusions
                  interimplant fractures are predominant in elderly women. Osteoporosis is a statistically significant risk factor. Despite optimal treatment and fracture healing, functional outcomes were decreased. Specific classification systems and therapeutic algorithms are necessary to improve the management and prognosis of these patients.Interprosthetic femoral fractures are produced between 2 ipsilateral prostheses, such as the stem of a proximal hip prosthesis and a knee prosthesis with or without distal femoral shaft. In spite of the fact that this is usually the most common combination, we can include any other type of femoral prostheses, such as anterograde or retrograde osteosynthesis plates or nails. These fractures are erroneously considered to be knee or hip periprostheses depending on their proximity to one of the prostheses. However, they present a series of distinguishing characteristics. Examples are the modification of basal anatomy, lack of bone stock, development of osteolysis and the biomechanical demands stemming from the existence of both prostheses in the same femur. The risk factors can be considered similar to those of periprosthetic fractures, depending on the patient (comorbidities, rheumatisms, steroid therapy and osteoporosis), the prosthesis (design, loosening, infection and other complications) and the surgical technique (poor alignment, cementation or not, osteolysis and surgeon experience). The true incidence of these fractures is unknown, because many times there is no correct classification and the series published refer to a limited number of patients. Kenny, in his study published en 1998, There are no specific and validated treatment systems or algorithms for classifying such fractures. They are normally classified using typical systems for knee or hip periprosthetic fractures (Vancouver, Rorabeck and Lewis, Su). Few authors have attempted to develop a system or modify existing ones to make them valid for this type of fractures. They represent characteristic injuries in elderly patients (who normally show multiple pathologies), which are principally caused by low-energy trauma and whose treatment poses biological and mechanical problems. The main objectives of our study were to determine the risk factors that predispose to this type of fractures and to analyse the indication and suitability of the treatments used, as well as their impact on the clinical and functional prognosis of these patients. All patients having femoral prosthetic surgery in our centre during an 8-year period, between 2008 and 2016, were reviewed, selecting those who had 2 ipsilateral prostheses, proximal and distal. The selection was carried out by analysing the arthroplasty and fracture lists (prepared by our hospital's codification services in that time period), yielding a total of 1440 knee prostheses, 2389 hip prostheses and 2990 hip fractures. We obtained 40 femora from 38 patients (2 patients were operated bilaterally), consisting of 10 cases of interprosthetic fracture and 30 without a fracture. We designed a retrospective case-control study, using different types of variables: demographic (age, gender, laterality), associated comorbidities such as chronic corticosteroid treatment, rheumatological diseases and osteoporosis (prior diagnosis in the clinical history or established antiresorptive therapy), prosthesis types and most common combinations (partial or total hip prosthesis, long or short proximal intramedullary nails, primary or revision knee prosthesis, retrograde intramedullary nail, distal femur locking plate), time since fracture appearance and prosthesis insertion, reason for prosthesis (fracture, osteoarthritis, avascular necrosis), presence of cement and mortality. To study the radiological variables, simple x-rays in lateral and anteroposterior (AP) views were reviewed. Using an x-ray image viewing software (Agfa IMPAX, version 6.3.1.4095), different measurements were taken, such as femoral diameter, medullary canal diameter, cortical thickness and the distance between prostheses (all of them in millimetres). These measurements were always done in AP view at the level of the distal end of the proximal prosthesis ( In the group of cases, the fractures were classified using the systems by Vancouver (validated for periprosthetic hip fractures) and by Rorabeck and Su (for periprosthetic knee fractures). We also used the system proposed by Platzer in 2011 (based on fracture contact with the prostheses), establishing 3 types of fracture: type Patient anaesthetic risk was recorded using the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) classification, as well as the different types of treatment used for the fractures (orthopaedic, osteosynthesis with intramedullary plate or nail, revision surgery or a combination of the aforementioned treatments). We also established these patients’ functional deterioration comparing mobility ability to walk before and after treatment, according to whether it was nonexistent, dependent with the help of a cane, dependent with the help of 2 canes or a walker, or independent. To determine fracture consolidation, the principles used by Albareda The 2 groups were demographically similar. Mean age in the cases was 81.9 (range, 74–90) years, with predominance of females (8/10) and of the left side (6/10). The control group had a mean age of 79.5 (64–95) years and a larger proportion of women (20/28) and of prostheses located on the left side (16/28). As for the types of prosthesis used, the most frequent combination in both groups was partial or total proximal hip arthroplasty and primary distal knee arthroplasty (8/10 in the cases and 18/28 in the controls). The other 2 cases were 1 patient with a hip arthroplasty and a revision knee prosthesis, and 1 individual with a proximal intramedullary nail and a revision knee prosthesis ( In the controls, the mean time between the initial prosthetic surgery and the end of follow-up was 8.81 years for the hip prosthesis, and 7.35 years for the knee prosthesis. In the cases, the mean time since prosthesis insertion until the appearance of the fracture was slightly less, with 7.23 years for the proximal prosthesis and 5.85 years for the distal prosthesis. That is, the cases presented a shorter evolution time since the insertion of their prostheses. However, the time of exposition in which the patient has both prostheses simultaneously was greater in the cases (2.83) than in the controls (1.42). The most common reason for insertion of proximal prostheses was different in the 2 groups: 7 of the cases were operated for degenerative arthropathy, while in the controls, 15 were operated for hip fracture, 12 for degenerative osteoarthritis of the hip joint and 1 for avascular necrosis. At the distal level, all individuals were operated for gonarthrosis. At least 1 cemented prostheses in all the patients was found; the knee prosthesis was the most common. In the cases, distal cement predominated (7/10), with 1 case of proximal cement and 2 cases of cement in both prostheses. As for the controls, 21 patients presented distal cement, 1 patient presented solely proximal cement and 7 patients had both prostheses cemented. With respect to the comorbidities studied as likely risk factors for developing these fractures, osteoporosis was present in 80% of the cases, with a crude odds ratio of 11 and of 19.3 adjusted for age and sex, which was statistically significant ( The measurements for the radiological variables were very similar in the two groups. Femur diameter was slightly larger in the controls, with a mean of 34.72 Mean cortical distance was also comparable in the 2 groups, with 8.42 There was a greater difference in the 2 groups in the value of the distance between both prostheses. In the cases, the mean was 197.63 (107.7–279.6 As for the fracture types, according to the Vancouver classification, 5 of them were type C and 3 were type B1. One type B2 fracture and 1 case of type B3 were found. Classified according to Rorabeck and Lewis, 6 fractures were type Using the system proposed by Platzer, we found 8 cases of type IIA fractures (adjacent to 1 of the prostheses, with prosthetic stability) ( Reviewing the anaesthetic risk of these patients revealed that 6 of them were ASA III, with a moderate anaesthetic risk, 2 were ASA IV and 1 was ASA II. As for types of treatment, 8 patients were treated surgically. Of the 2 patients not operated, 1 died during admission and other chose the option of conservative treatment, due to the patient's poor basal condition and to the benign nature of the fracture (simple, nondisplaced). Of the patients operated, 5 were treated with lateral plate osteosynthesis ( Focusing on the functional capability of these patients, 5 of them were independently mobilised before their fracture. Two patients walked helped by 2 canes, 1 used only a cane, and another patient relied on a walker. One case was limited to bed-armchair life. Following fracture treatment, just 1 of the patients managed to walk independently; the rest needed some type of help (canes or walker). Radiological consolidation was found in 7 of the 10 patients ( Mortality in this study was high, with 4 deaths. One of the patients died before operation and the rest, during follow-up: 2 patients at 3 years and the last at 4 years after the fracture.  The true incidence of interprosthetic femoral fractures is unknown, probably because they are underdiagnosed due to the fact that they normally considered periprosthetic fractures of the hip or knee (depending on the closest prosthesis). According to Hou et al., Solarino et al. One of the problems posed in approaching this type of fractures is the limited number of references in the literature, with a lack of classification systems and specific, valid treatment algorithms. The systems traditionally used for periprosthetic hip or knee fractures do not take into consideration whether there is another prosthesis in the same femur, a condition that modifies the basal characteristics and places us in a new landscape. Some authors have attempted to solve this problem modifying the existing classification systems. Duncan and Haddad These fractures can occur with any type of femoral prostheses, without there necessarily being prosthetic components. In fact, Lehman et al., Degenerative arthropathy was the most common reason for insertion of the prostheses, both in the cases and globally. However, in the controls, the most habitual cause of initial prosthetic surgery was a fracture. At any rate, this fact was not statistically significant. Neither were the time since prosthesis insertion or time of exposition (which was slightly higher in the cases). Cement was evidenced in all the study patients; while it was most frequently found at the distal level, this fact was not statistically significant either. Multiple factors have been studied with respect to the appearance of these fractures. However, solely osteoporosis yielded statistically significant results in all these studies, multiply the risk of suffering an interprosthetic fracture by 11. In their respective studies, Albareda and Iesaka In our study, the radiological variables analysed were not statistically significant. Cortical thickness and femoral and canal diameters were similar in both groups, measured in the interprosthetic gap. The risk factor that achieves the best consensus in the bibliography is a reduced interprosthetic distance. According to Soenen, After classifying the fractures following the system proposed by Platzer, At any rate, it seems clear that the main objective of treatment should be early mobilisation of the patients, as prolonged immobilisation increases mortality considerably in the elderly. In our study, the death rate was approximately 40% in a sample of patients with multiple pathologies basally, involving an important anaesthetic risk. In terms of functional prognosis, Sah This study has some important limitations, such as its retrospective nature and the lack of uniformity in the series treatments. Another weak point to remember is the limited number of fractures, which can condition obtaining results that are difficult to understand, such as the fact that the interprosthetic distance was greater in the cases than in the controls, and that the main motive for initial prosthetic surgery in the cases was degenerative osteoarthritis of the hip joint, with hip fractures being more frequent in the controls. Finally, using walking ability as the main functional parameter, without other objective scales or tests, might be an imprecise criterion for establishing the clinical prognosis of the patients. Interprosthetic femoral fractures are more prevalent in elderly women. Osteoporosis is the only statistically significant risk factor. Such fractures have high mortality rates due to the seriousness of the fracture, the fragility of patients with multiple base pathologies and the aggressiveness of the surgery in a population at high surgical risk. Despite high consolidation rates and treatment considered appropriate according to current literature, a deterioration in general function (understood in terms of reduced walking ability) can be seen. Specific, valid classification systems and treatment algorithms are needed to make it possible to optimise patient management patients and improve the prognosis of lifespan and functionality of interprosthetic femoral fractures. Level of evidence III. The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.