The Bushveld Igneous Complex (BIC) in northern South Africa has the largest deposit of platinum group elements (PGEs) in the world. In trace amounts, these are closely associated with base metal sulphides (BMS). Froth flotation is used as a bulk sulphide recovery to beneficiate these PGEores. To maximise the recovery of the PGEs it is required to improve the recovery of the BMS. The chemical additives used largely determines the performance of the froth flotation process. Consequently, mixtures of collectors were used in batch froth flotation tests in an attempt to improve concentrate grades and recoveries of BMS from a Merensky Reef platinum ore. The mixtures consisted of a xanthate (SIBX) with a dithiophosphate (DTP) or a dithiocarbamate (DTC). Each mixture was tested at mole ratios of 80:20 and 60:40, with the xanthate the major component. An increase in nickel recovery was observed with all mixtures relative to pure SIBX at the expense of concentrate grade. The mixtures of DTC with SIBX increased the cumulative nickel recovery by 11%, while the mixtures with DTP increased it by 10%. Copper recovery increased by 6% with the DTP mixtures. No significant improvements in the copper recoveries and grades were observed with the mixtures of SIBX with DTC compared to pure SIBX.South Africa has the largest known deposits of platinum group elements (PGEs) in the world. These are located in the Bushveld Igneous Complex (BIC) in the northern part of the country and have been commercially mined since 1925. They contribute about 73% to the world’s PGE production ( Froth flotation, as a bulk sulphide recovery process, is used to separate the BMS minerals containing the PGE’s from the gangue minerals. It is required to optimise the recovery of the BMS minerals in order to maximise the recovery of the PGE’s. The flotation process largely depends on differences in hydrophobicity of the various mineral surfaces. Hydrophobic particles are separated as a froth concentrate from the hydrophilic gangue that remains in the pulp. To achieve effective separation, various operational, chemical and equipment variables require optimisation ( Xanthates and dithiophosphates are used to impart hydrophobicity to BMS minerals in the concentration of PGE ores. Although novel collectors may be available, patent ownership limits their application and restricts open research on their optimal use. This has motivated research into the use of mixtures of available collectors ( This study evaluated the use of mixtures of thiol collectors in the froth flotation of a Merensky Reef PGE bearing ore. The collectors considered were: sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX), sodium diethyl dithiophosphate (DTP) and sodium diethyl dithiocarbamate (DTC). An ore from the western section of the Merensky Reef in the BIC was prepared for use in batch froth flotation tests. It had a mean copper and nickel mass percentages of 0.06% and 0.14% respectively. The sulphide mineral distribution of the ore is presented in The ore was split into dry, representative samples of approximately 1 The collectors and frother were supplied by Senmin and standard solutions of the reagents were prepared prior to each test. The collectors used in the batch flotation tests were sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX), sodium di-ethyl dithiophosphate (DTP) and sodium di-ethyl dithiocarbamate (DTC). SIBX was received as a powder while DTC and DTP were received as solutions. The total collector dosage used in each of the tests was 0.3 Feed and tailings samples of 25 A summary of the results of the experiments performed is given in A froth should be stable enough to allow for concentrate transfer into a launder, while still allowing for the drainage of hydrophilic particles. Without sufficient drainage, the levels of entrainment are high, resulting in low concentrate grades. Water recovery is a strong indicator of entrainment due to froth stability. To investigate these phenomena, the cumulative concentrate mass recoveries versus cumulative water recoveries for no collector, pure SIBX, DTC and DTP are presented ( Xanthate and dithiocarbamate collectors have insignificant frothing properties compared to dithiophosphates, which have an alcohol as a synthesising reactant ( The final cumulative copper recoveries decreased in the following order; DTP Previous studies ( The majority of the PGEs in the Merensky Reef are associated with pentlandite ( The cumulative nickel grades obtained decreased in the order SIBX The frothing property of DTP, evident from the higher water and mass recoveries over that obtained with SIBX and DTC, led to the higher nickel recovery (64%) at a lower nickel grade (0.30%) ( The performances of mixtures of 80:20 and 60:40 The mass and water recoveries obtained with the mixtures of SIBX and DTC were not significantly different to those obtained with pure DTC. However, pure DTC and the mixtures gave higher mass and water recoveries than pure SIBX ( The cumulative copper grades and recoveries obtained with no collector, SIBX and mixtures of SIBX and DTC were not significantly different ( However, the cumulative nickel recoveries and grades for both mixtures of SIBX and DTC were similar to those obtained with pure DTC ( The Klimpel rate constants for copper and nickel recovery with DTC and its mixtures with SIBX (4.6–5.6 The froth flotation performances of mixtures of 80:20 and 60:40 The cumulative copper recovery obtained with SIBX (90%) was lower than that with DTP (96%) ( SIBX offered a significantly higher cumulative copper grade (0.41%) than DTP (0.14%) and the mixtures SIBX 80:20 DTP and SIBX 60:40 DTP (0.26% and 0.22%) ( The cumulative nickel recovery obtained with pure DTP was 64%, while the recoveries obtained with SIBX 60:40 DTP and SIBX 80:20 DTP were 61% and 58% respectively ( SIBX gave the highest cumulative grade and therefore appeared to be the more selective collector. DTP gave a higher cumulative recovery with a lower grade which may be attributed to its frothing properties ( Similar trends in the cumulative recoveries and grades for copper and nickel were observed ( DTP floated particles indiscriminately due to its strong frothing properties; it is therefore not possible to comment on its selectivity. The Klimpel rate constants for copper recovery with SIBX and SIBX 80:20 DTP were the same (3.8 The Klimpel rate constants for nickel recovery obtained were 1.8 Chalcopyrite, which is naturally hydrophobic, was the only copper mineral present in the ore. Consequently, most of the copper reported to the concentrate, regardless of the collector or collector mixture used. However, the addition of a collector increased the rate of copper flotation. Pure SIBX produced the highest copper grade, while pure DTP and its mixtures produced highest recovery. The addition of collectors improved nickel recovery. This is important as platinum group elements are closely associated with pentlandite. Pure SIBX produced the highest nickel grade while DTP and its mixtures produced the highest nickel recovery. DTP and its mixtures promoted froth stability which resulted in larger recoveries of copper and nickel at a lower grade compared to pure SIBX. The mixture of SIBX 80:20 DTP increased the copper and nickel recoveries in comparison to that obtained with pure SIBX; indicating that an addition of DTP may improve recovery. The use of DTC and its mixtures improved the nickel recovery over that of pure SIBX without a significant decrease in grade. The use of mixtures of SIBX and DTC produced concentrate grades and recoveries comparable to those obtained with pure DTC. This indicates that an addition of DTC to SIBX may improve the recovery relative to that obtained with pure SIBX.