Synthetic diamond is often bonded to metals or itself to fulfil the functional requirements for the applications in machine tools or the fabrication of thermal management materials. The knowledge on the relationship between interfacial microstructure and bonding strength of the synthetic diamond is therefore of significant scientific and technological implications. In this work, the epitaxial growth of titanium carbides formed on synthetic diamond grits brazed using a near-eutectic Ag–Cu–In–Ti active filler alloy was systematically investigated. An ultra-thin TiC layer was identified on the synthetic girts brazed at 680 °C and the epitaxial growth of Ti3InC carbides together with Ag3In and Cu2InTi intermetallics (IMCs) were subsequently examined at the brazing temperatures of up to 880 °C. The solidification microstructures of the Ag–Cu–In–Ti filler alloy in the brazed diamond joints were discussed based on composition analysis and phase diagram information. The growth morphologies of the interfacial products were exemplified by taking the bonding strength, fracture behaviours, and integrity of the brazed synthetic diamond into account. The results obtained would be of great value for developing diamond related devices and materials.Owing to its ultra-high hardness, synthetic diamond grits have been used as cutting and grinding abrasives for decades, which is of essential importance for manufacturing of hard-and-brittle materials [ This research, therefore, aims to provide a comprehensive investigation of the microstructural evolution at the interface of synthetic diamond brazed using near-eutectic Ag–Cu–In–Ti filler alloy at 680–880 °C. It has been verified that a reliable bonding can be achieved through the epitaxial growth of TiC carbide on synthetic diamond brazed at 680 °C, and the crystallographic similarity consequently affected the growth of interface products at 780 and 880 °C. Moreover, the formation of interfacial products was found to obviously affect the bonding strength of brazed diamond cubes. Eventually, the relationship between brazing routine, interface microstructures and bonding strength were discussed to lay a foundation for the further understanding of joints brazed using the near-eutectic Ag–Cu–In–Ti active filler alloy. To prepare substrates, AISI 1045 steel was cut into a dimension of 10.0 (W) mm × 10.0 (L) mm × 1.0 (H) mm and polished using SiC sandpapers of a mesh size of #2000. Commercial near-eutectic Ag–45Cu–20In–5Ti alloy powders (in at. % unless mentioned elsewhere, Changsha Tianjiu Co. Ltd., China) with an average grain size of approximately 50 μm as shown in     As shown in  In-doped or In-free Ag–Cu–Ti alloys have been extensively employed to braze diamond and ceramics [ As shown in After brazing at 880 °C for 20 min, the dissolution of AISI 1045 substrate was momentous (see It has been well recognized that the interfacial carbide formation is the prerequisite for the reliable bonding of brazed diamond [ According to When brazing temperature was increased to 780 °C, the thickness of TiC carbide was slightly increased to a few tens of nanometres, but the Ti Although the TEM results in Diamond is metastable and prone to transform into amorphous carbon [ To validate the mechanical integrity of the brazed and isothermal treated diamond grits, toughness impact (TI) test was conducted. In According to the growth morphologies and defects analysis in interfacial carbides, it is derived that the extensive formation of Ti In this work, the formation and evolution of interfacial products formed between a synthetic diamond and a near-eutectic Ag–Cu–In–Ti filler alloy were systematically investigated, together with their shear strength and fracture behaviours. Based on the experimental results and microstructural analysis, the conclusions can be drawn as the following: The sluggish growth of an ultra-thin and epitaxial layer of TiC carbide was observed on the surface of the synthetic diamond grits brazed using Ag–Cu–In–Ti filler alloy at 680 °C. The dislocation and stacking faults were found in this ultra-thin TiC carbide layer, and were rehabilitated after the thickening of TiC carbide to 40 nm. The average shear strength of the bonded synthetic diamond cubes brazed at 680 °C was 158 ± 55.7 MPa, which suggests that a reliable bonding can be achieved through the low-temperature active brazing without the compromise of mechanical integrity of brazed synthetic diamond. To ensure a reliable bonding, the formation of faceted blade-shape Ti The dissolution and diffusion of Fe atoms from AISI1045 substrate started to be obvious at 880 °C and comprehensively influenced both the solidification microstructure of near-eutectic Ag–Cu–In filler alloy and the interfacial microstructure of brazed synthetic diamond.  The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial supports from The following is/are the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at