In this work, modified BET model was applied to obtain phase diagrams and to design new eutectic mixtures. As a result, the eutectic composition and the melting point of two mixtures based on salt hydrates: LiNO3·3H2O–NaNO3–Mn(NO3)2·6H2O and LiNO3·3H2O–Mn(NO3)2·6H2O–Mg(NO3)2·6H2O were predicted. Both mixtures present the same predicted melting temperature of 10.8 °C. Experimental verifications by T-history method showed satisfactory accordance of the predicted temperatures values with a difference of 0 °C and +2.3 °C for the mixtures, with sodium nitrate and magnesium nitrate, respectively. It is added that the thermal and physical properties such as density, the heat capacity for solid and liquid phases, as well as viscosity and volume change during the fusion of the new PCMs were evaluated. The results of the characterization, the energy storage density (about 300 MJ m−3) and material cost estimation show that both mixtures are promising candidates for use in low temperature energy storage systems.water activity salt activity i BET model parameters, A and C dimensionless, B/K specific heat binary parameter of the model (specific for each salt)/ energy storage density chemical potential of formation of salt hydrate chemical potentials of anhydrous salt formation chemical potentials of water formation enthalpy equilibrum constant mole number of water bound to salt i mole number of water mole number of salt i heat BET parameter of the salt i general gas constant salt hydrate temperature volume difference volume of solid molar fraction on dry basis (or in the anhydrous mixture) of salt j empirical interaction parameter between salt i-salt j Salt hydrates as inorganic PCM are attractive materials for use in TES systems because they have a higher energy storage density, they are also cheaper, more abundant, and have relatively high levels of thermal conductivity, in addition of moderate costs compared to alternative organic materials. One of the effective approaches to create new PCMs for a specific application is to prepare eutectic mixtures, since, combining or mixing two or more salt hydrates, it is possible to obtain new eutectic mixtures with lower melting points than their individual components. In general, new mixtures of salt hydrates as potential eutectic PCM can be obtained through experimental tests, however, these methods can be expensive and take a long time. Therefore, the theoretical prediction through a thermodynamic model and subsequent experimental verification can be an attractive alternative for the design of phase diagram of these materials [ The experimental verification of the modeled mixtures is carried out using diverse characterization techniques, such as Differential Scanning Calorimeter (DSC) with different operation modes [ In the current state of the art, there is a limited number of inorganic PCM with melting temperature (T The commercial availability of the salt hydrates, proposed for low temperature heat storage (see In this work, in order to contribute to the field of material science knowledge and to fill the gap in the availability of PCMs and their thermophysical properties data for low temperature applications, two new eutectic mixtures were designed. For that, in the present work the phase diagrams for the mixtures LiNO The modified BET model published in Ref. [ The modified BET model has been successfully applied to calculate the melting temperature and chemical composition of a eutectic mixture of salt hydrates. For this purpose, the equations of the melting process of a salt hydrate with The constant The coefficients Substituting the activities According to equations The equations of the modified BET model for this case, are written as: From equations The calculation procedure for predicting the composition of the eutectic point of the quaternary mixtures described above was automated by computer. The calculation program also allowed the construction of the solid-liquid phase diagrams of the LiNO The reagents used in the preparation of the eutectic mixtures were anhydrous lithium nitrate of purity +98.0 wt% (Merck), sodium nitrate of purity +99.7 wt% (Winkler), magnesium nitrate hexahydrate of purity +99.5 wt% (Merck) and manganese nitrate tetrahydrate of purity + 98.5 wt% (Merck). The weight of each salt was measured with an analytical balance with a resolution of ±1 × 10 To measure the thermal behavior of the crystallization and melting process of the aforementioned mixtures, a heating and cooling equipment was implemented, which is shown in The experimental verification of the modeling was carried out for the two mixtures found and the heating/cooling cycles were carried out for the composition obtained by this modeling (composition It is added that three additional points (called A, B, and C) were defined with compositions close to those obtained by modeling ( To determine the phase change temperatures and the latent heat of melting and crystallization of the PCM, a DSC 204 F1 Phoenix NETZSCH with N Specific heat analysis for both samples was determined using DSC method during the heating stage in the temperature range from −10 °C to 30 °C with a heating rate of 1 K min The density of the solid PCM was determined using a pycnometer with n-dodecane as displacement fluid [ The dynamic viscosity of the liquid PCM was determined experimentally with a Schott-Gerate viscometer, model AVS 310 at 298 K. The measurement is based on the time that it takes the liquid to flow between two points of a Micro-Ostwald type capillary, therefore, the accuracy is ±0.1 s. This viscometer is automatic and requires 2 mL of liquid sample for its measurement. The volume changes and fractional expansion of salt hydrates or mixtures during the melting process must be considered for the encapsulation of the PCM and its implementation in TES systems. To estimate these parameters, the densities of solid and liquid samples were extrapolated to the melting point, determining the density decrease value due to the phase change [ The predicted results with the thermodynamic model showed the same melting temperature of 10.8 °C for both quaternary systems. The composition of the eutectic point for both samples is given in The equations of the thermodynamic model were used to construct the phase diagram of the quaternary system, therefore, it was possible to predict the isotherms and polythermal lines to establish the eutectic composition as the intersection point of the three polythermal lines (see In The eutectic points for the two quaternary mixtures found with the modified BET model, were verified, validated and compared with mixtures A, B, and C to a different composition from the predicted The experimental results obtained with the cooling and heating equipment for composition The experimental results for mixtures A, B and C reported in The experimental results for the eutectic composition The experimental results for the mixtures with the compositions A, B and C defined in In addition, the experimental verification allows to determine the nucleation temperature (T The properties of the eutectic mixtures are expected to be the average of the properties of the individual components in the mixture multiplied by their mass fractions. In some cases, as indicated in Ref. [ In It is denoted that the crystallization heat value obtained is slightly lower than the melting heat value for both samples. This is mainly due to a higher thermal resistivity and lower thermal transfer in the solid state than in the liquid state, which prevents achieving the measurement of crystallization heat in the thermal equilibrium under the conditions of the relatively high cooling rate used in this study. Similar results were obtained in Refs. [ It is very common to observe the presence of subcooling in PCMs based on salt hydrates or their mixtures [ The melting/crystallization heats and the phase change temperatures of the mixtures LiNO According to NaNO In this work, it is demonstrated that the modified BET model is an effective tool to reduce the number of experimental tests and find new eutectic mixtures with appropriate fusion temperatures for use in low-temperature thermal storage systems.  For solid samples, the specific heat values are 1.535 J g It should be emphasized that no previous work on the dependence of Cp with respect to temperature is reported for a eutectic mixture in a melting temperature range between 278 and 288 K. It is added that, in addition to temperature, the Cp depends on the nature of the components of the mixture and the proximity of the measurement configuration to the melting point of the analyzed sample. A thorough literature review of salt hydrates was carried out considering melting points close to 0 °C. The following salt hydrates and their mixtures were found: CaCl The Cp of the solid samples shows an increase in a temperature range of 272.6–280.0 K with values from 1.535 to 2.379 J g Specific heat values for the liquid phase in a temperature range of 290.0–302.1 K were 2.500–2.583 J g The results of density in the solid and liquid phase for LiNO The density data in the liquid state in the temperature range of 25 °C to 45 °C are fitted as a linear function of the temperature and are represented by equations The density was 1.753 ± 2.1 × 10 In the scientific literature, there are no viscosity values of the inorganic compounds involved in the formulation of eutectic mixtures, despite the importance of this parameter for practical applications of PCMs. The viscosity of LiNO In order to calculate the volume change during melting, the solid and liquid density values were extrapolated to the melting point. When the material melted, the density decreased in −0.086 g cm In order to evaluate the potential application of new designed PCMs, the calculation of the total heat The results presented in Both eutectic mixtures are good candidates to study their possible application, however, the first one has better energetic value (17.1% more) and lower cost (4.1% less). Two new eutectic mixtures using modified BET model were successfully predicted. These quaternary systems were LiNO Melting heat results were 172.5 and 152.8 J g It is mentioned that future work is needed to overcome the subcooling problem found in the new PCMs. However, since subcooling depends on the amount of sample mass, this phenomenon could probably be overcome in the final application, where a large amount of PCM is used. Svetlana Ushak analyzed the data, obtained the financial support for the project leading to this publication, supervised the writing and discussion of the paper; Mariela Vega wrote the paper. Jorge A. Lovera-Copa developed, implemented BET model and wrote thermodynamic modelling part of paper. Mario Grágeda conceived and supervised experiment work. Sergio Pablo performed the experiments. Marcos Lujan discuss results and contributed to the paper review The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The work is funded by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at