The evolution of the mechanical properties of rock as a function of thermal damage is relevant to various engineering applications, such as nuclear waste repositories, underground coal gasification, dry-fracture shale system and geothermal energy extraction. The thermal properties of heterogeneous rock control heat transmission with differential thermal expansion potentially resulting in significant changes in the mechanical and transport behavior of reservoir rocks. We define a novel dual-damage thermal-mechanical model accommodating the interaction of thermal conductivity, thermally-induced deformation, rock mechanical deformation and damage to define the evolution of the thermal and mechanical properties of rock during thermal treatment. Importantly, the dual-damage constitutive model is capable of using elastic modulus and strength to solve for asynchronous changes in peak strain and peak strength, respectively. The proposed model is validated against analytical solutions and laboratory data. The results indicate that thermally-induced damage increases rock porosity and permeability while simultaneously decreasing elastic modulus and strength. Thermal treatment causes a realignment in the rock microstructure and results in a change in the ultimate failure pattern. Thermally-induced damage causes irreversible increases in rock porosity and permeability even as temperature is restored. Furthermore, it is confirmed that thermally-induced damage in rock is dominated by the type of tensile damage during the thermal expansion. The proposed dual-damage constitutive model better explains the non-proportional relationship between peak strength and peak strain observed in many experiments.Thermally-induced damage in rock plays a vital role in various engineering applications, including containment in nuclear waste repositories, underground coal gasification, dry-fracture shale system, geothermal energy extraction, and deep mining. Rocks can be considered as a typical dual porosity media, containing ‘solid’ space (i.e., the mineral matrix) and ‘void’ space (the sets of cracks and pores). The mechanical strength of rocks depends strongly on the geometry and density of the cracks and pores. Many experimental investigations have been conducted in an attempt to further understand the evolution of rock mechanical behaviors when subjected to elevated temperatures. Many numerical simulations on thermal-induced rock damage are also studied. Hueckel et al The understanding of the behavior of altered rocks requires an accurate geomechanical model, in which the evolution of important physical and mechanical characteristics has to be included. This work provides a detailed description of the evolution of rock alteration during different thermal treatments. We develop a novel thermal-mechanical coupled model based on dual damage constitutive theory, to simulate the rock mechanical behaviors induced by thermal damage. The proposed model is validated by analytical solutions and laboratory data. Routine theory cannot accommodate the effect of ductility of a material upon the thermal stresses which can be induced therein. This is because routine theory assumes that the thermal conductivity, thermal expansion, elastic modulus, Poisson's ratio, strength, porosity, and permeability are all constant. The following defines a method that allows all these co-called constants to evolve with the temperature path and, more importantly, may accommodate stress-strain curves which respond to damage, as illustrated in When rocks are exposed to high temperatures, the complex interaction of stress and thermal-induced damage exert a strong influence on properties. These include influences on thermal transport, rock deformation via porosity and permeability, thermal conductivity and thereby spatial heat change. In this study, we define this chain of reactions as “coupled processes” implying that one physical or mechanical process affects the initiation and evolution of another. In particular, damage is at the core of interactions of multiple coupled processes. Therefore, the inclusion of damage is the key to rigorously formulate the full mechanics of thermal-mechanical-damage (TMD) coupling interactions. Furthermore, the damage model in this study is based on a novel dual-damage constitutive theory. The thermal analysis provides interactive coupling to mechanical stress calculations through the thermal expansion coefficient and damage evolution law. Thermal volumetric strain and dual-damage constitutive models are introduced into the incremental mechanical constitutive laws to account for the TMD coupling. The general formulation for heat conduction through rock is given by: Rock porosity is related to the effective strain of the pores and fractures as In this study, only the increment of effective strain According to the typical cubic relationship between permeability and porosity, For static equilibrium of the medium, mechanical equilibrium of the solid phase is defined as: The constitutive equation (Hooke's Law) defines the relation between the total bulk stress components, Substituting Eq. A realistic analysis of the coupled thermal-mechanical response must rely on numerical modeling with adequate consideration of heterogeneities. According to Eq. As illustrated in According to As shown in Under any stress and initial conditions, the tensile stress criterion is applied sequentially. In other words, the maximum tensile stress criterion is first applied to judge whether the elements are first damaged in tension or not. Only elements that survive this test will be checked for damage in shear using the Mohr-Coulomb criterion. In Eqs. Considering the irreversibility of rock damage, the damage variable may only increment monotonically from zero during loading ( Many observations suggest that the thermal properties of rock are not constant, but vary with temperature or loading, particularly when damage or cracking occurring. During the loading process a significant number of open (air-filled) cracks may develop. In principle, their effects can be evaluated, in the macroscopic sense, by the use of mixing rules to take into account the air-filled volume fraction in the rock sample. The temperature dependence of thermal conductivity may be empirically expressed as In thermal-mechanical damage model, a coefficient Experimental studies have shown that the effect of the temperature on specific heat is also large and should be accounted for. The specific heat capacity at constant pressure is a function of temperature. The proposed dual-damage constitutive theory TMD model is validated against analytical solutions and experimental observations. First, the proposed TMD model is validated against analytical solutions, in which the distribution of the temperature and stress fields are individually verified. Especially, since the analytical solution is a completely elastic solution, the model solution calculated by FEM code does not consider the effect of damage. Second, the proposed TMD model is compared with experimental observations of stress-strain curves and porosity evolution. The analytical study is carried out considering a cylindrical core embedded in a rock cylinder, as shown in Due to the temperature increase, a radial pressure The radial and circumferential deformations in the rock due to the radial pressure The circumferential deformation of is the sum of two contributions: the radial pressure due to thermal expansion as prompted by the temperature variation. As a consequence, the circumferential strain in the rock is expressed as: The radial displacement, Similarly, the circumferential deformation of the core, at the core and rock interface due to the effect of the radial pressure and the temperature variation, is given by: Using the compatibility equation linking the transverse deformations at the core and rock interface, the radial pressure is calculated as: Model parameters and boundary values for the numerical simulations are listed in  The experiments are carried out in the following steps. First, the rock specimens are heated to the designated temperature. Second, the temperature is retained constant for 2 h. Third, the rock specimens are allowed to cool naturally with the drop in temperature of the furnace. Finally, uniaxial compression tests are conducted. According to the experimental conditions, A comparison between the stress-strain curves for numerical and experimental results is shown in As noted above, the numerical simulations are conducted according to the experimental conditions. The heating rate is 30 °C/min with each designated temperature retained constant for 2 h. Then the temperature (power) is shut-off, the rock specimen is allowed to cool naturally with the cooling (temperature) of the furnace. Thermally induced microcracks can significantly change the physical and mechanical properties of rock. From the numerical simulation, thermal-induced damage is shown in Porosity and permeability are basic physical properties of rocks. In this study, the natural porosity of the rock ranges between 0.72% and 0.97%. As mentioned above, there are two stages in the thermal treatment. The rock is first heated to the designated temperature at a constant rate and then slowly cooled. We simulate the complete process of the heating and cooling treatment. Rock porosity and permeability are closely related to temperature change. As shown in The data of Thermally-induced damage (as shown in The damage variables of Eqs.  This study develops a novel dual-damage constitutive model to examine coupled thermal-mechanical-damage process that result during thermal treatment. This approach accommodates damage variables to separately modify elastic modulus and strength and is applied to explain the non-proportional alterations of elastic modulus and strength in heterogeneous rocks. The physical and mechanical processes involve fully coupling thermal transport in the porous rock to alterations in thermal conductivity and special heat capacity by simultaneously accommodating rock deformation and damage. Based on the results and the observations reported in previous studies, the following conclusions are drawn: External heating raises the temperature of the rock from the outside to the inside with damage similarly propagating. Rock damage occurs during thermal treatment, thus altering the mechanical properties and the microstructure of the rock. With an increase in temperature, both the elastic modulus and strength of the rock decrease. The higher the temperature, the lower the elastic modulus and strength. Numerical results are in good agreement with the experimental results. Rock porosity and permeability are closely related to temperature change. Thermally-induced damage causes irreversible increases in rock porosity and permeability, even when the temperature of the rock is restored to its initial temperature. Thermal treatment induces further alteration in the rock mass mechanical properties, reducing elastic modulus and weakening the rock, causing the rearrangement of rock microstructure and resulting in a change in the failure patterns of rock. During thermal treatment, the state of the microstructure of the rock is controlled by thermal expansion. Numerical results demonstrate that thermally-induced damage is dominated by tensile damage. With an increase of temperature, the peak strength decreases and the peak strain increases. However, the change ratios of peak strength and peak strain are quite different. The strength and elastic modulus of the rock conform to different damage laws. The proposed dual-damage constitutive model well explains the non-proportional alterations in peak strength and peak strain observed in many experiments. The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work. We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted. This work was funded by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at