The general model developed in the first part of this study is based on the grain model. In order to determine the overlapping range of this kinetic model and the unreacted shrinking core model the attempt is made in this part of the article to identify the simplest and most accurate model. Although under certain circumstances the found results in both the models are almost similar, the developed model based on grain model predicts the experimental data much better than the shrinking core model. The simplicity of the model's results in the outcome is due the predominant diffusional regime. This regime is revealed where the pellet size is big; nevertheless, the results of two models are not similar even in small values of pellet porosity. Two correlations for determining effective diffusivity are tested and it shows a direct effect on the overlapping range of both the models.Many mathematical models are presented to handle gas–solid reactions. The study on the difference between various models and discovery of the overlapping range of models is a challenging point in this area. In the scale of a single particle there are a number of studies that have addressed the overlapping range of different models ( Many factors like heat effects, flow pattern, chemical reactions, and the properties of reacting materials affect the performance of a given reactor. Simultaneous consideration of all these effects usually prevents developing a comprehensive and general model for all types of reactors. The kinetic model for expressing gas–solid reactions usually is subjected to being simplified. Most studies do not provide persuasive reasons for the selection of a kinetic model. Discovering the easiest and most accurate kinetic model has always been a challenge. The unreacted shrinking core model is a well-known model that has been widely used for modeling gas solid reactions (  In the grain model ( The general model developed in the first part of this two-part article merits the accurate and valid grain model as the kinetic model. However, its numerical solution is rather complicated and time consuming. It is advantageous to analyze whether it could be replaced with a simpler kinetic model like the unreacted shrinking core model. Therefore, in this study, the applications of the grain model and the existing unreacted shrinking core model are investigated comprehensively in a moving bed reactor's model. The unreacted shrinking core model kinetic model applied is similar to the one introduced and used by Since the model presented in part one of this article was developed based on the grain model, in this article it is referred as the grain-based model (GBM). Furthermore, the model introduced and applied here is based on the shrinking core model and it is referred as the shrinking-core-based model (SCBM). The shrinking core model has adopted as a basic model in the case of moving beds ( The formulation of the mathematical model for the moving bed is exactly based on those assumptions introduced in part one. Here, within each pellet, the non-catalytic gas–solid reactions are formulated by applying the shrinking core model of The mass balance equation for a gaseous component In Eq. For these reactions, Contrary to the GBM, here the reaction rates The energy balance for gas consisting of terms related to heat transferred between gas and solids, the heat transferred between gas and reactor walls, the heat of gaseous reactions, and the axial thermal dispersion is expressed by the following equation: In the GBM, the energy balance for a single pellet is developed by taking radial distribution of temperature within the pellet into account (see Part I). In the shrinking core model this radial distribution is not usually considered in the model; therefore, the solid pellet is considered as a thermally lumped heat capacity. The heat balance of the pellet is expressed by the following equation: One of the important parameters that intensively affects the model results is the effective diffusion coefficient within a porous pellet. In GBM, in order to calculate this parameter a well-known correlation which is a mixed-type Knudsen diffusivity and molecular diffusivity is taken into account according to ( The gas diffusion mechanism in the grain model and the shrinking core model is shown schematically in In the shrinking core model ( As seen either in Eq. Determining effective diffusivity empirically is a more typical way. In the case of hematite reduction reactions, The SCBM is applied for the moving-bed reactor used for hematite pellets reduction. The capability of this model is analyzed in predicting the moving-bed performance and it is compared with the results of the GBM. Various operating conditions are studied in order to evaluate the effects of the two considered models. The profiles of (a) degree of hematite reduction and (b) gas temperature across moving bed length obtained from the SCBM and GBM are shown in In the GBM the resistance of gas diffusion into the grains is neglected; therefore, the overall conversion degree is slightly over predicted by GBM. Furthermore, the extent of grain overlapping, which has been ignored in the kinetic model may have an influence on the reactivity of solid. This depends on the complications of the intraparticle behavior or product layer diffusional limitations (  The ratio of hydrogen to carbon monoxide is further increased to H The investigation performed on the effect of varying the ratio of reducing gas show that the GBM predicts the experimental data better than SCBM. However, this investigation shows an inconclusive effect of this parameter on the overlapping range of GBM and SCBM. In the next sections, the effects of those parameters are studied which relate to the type of kinetic regime. The effect of H Pellet diameter is an important parameter affecting the diffusional resistances. Therefore, investigating the effect of this parameter on the models' results is important in specifying the overlapping range of the models. The variations of (a) outlet conversion of hematite pellets, (b) outlet gas temperature, (c) outlet mole fraction of H Moreover, the results of GBM show that for pellets smaller than a specific value (here about 4 In For the purpose of further in depth analysis of the moving bed performance predicted by two studied models a scenario is considered that the diffusional resistance becomes more prominent. Pellet porosity as an important parameter affecting the diffusional resistance is studied here. The degree of solid conversion across the moving bed for various pellet porosity ranging from 0.25 to 0.55 is illustrated in In the case of By an increase in the pellet porosity the intra-particle diffusion of gas species increases. The gas reactants diffuse fast within the pellet and the reactions take place all over the solid pellet volume. Despite the major assumption of the shrinking core model, the reactions do not advance topochemically in a narrow zone between the unreacted solid and the product. This is where the drawbacks of the shrinking core model become evident. In order to apply the SCBM in a proper manner one must ensure that the reaction rate is much faster than the diffusion rate. Otherwise, the GBM as a homogeneous model may offer more accurate results. As observed in Two correlations are introduced in the previous section for effective diffusivity in a porous pellet. The equations are the Knudsen-molecular diffusivity and the empirical diffusivities available in the study of The kinetic model applied in the developed general model in part one of this two-part article is analyzed in detail. The possibility of simplification of this kinetic model to the simpler unreacted shrinking core model is investigated since the unreacted shrinking core model can be used for quick determination of solid conversion in the moving bed. In general, the following major conclusions are made: Generally, each one of the two studied kinetic models results in different predictions for the moving bed performance. Applying the unreacted shrinking core model although advisable is not necessarily practical at all stages for modeling a moving bed reactor. When the diffusional regime is predominant, both the GBM and the SCBM predict more similar results for the moving-bed performance. This occurs in conditions where the pellet size is big. Therefore, in a moving bed consisting of relatively large pellets the unreacted shrinking core model could be applied as the kinetic model with a proper accuracy. Decreasing the pellet porosity results in an increase in the diffusional regime. Nevertheless, the two models' results do not overlap in the studied pellet porosity values even a value as low as The ratio of two gas reactants entering the bed, as a non-kinetic parameter, has shown an inconclusive effect on the overlapping range of models. When the pellet porosity is high, the empirical values for pellet diffusivity presented in the literature are in agreement with the theoretical values calculated by the Knudsen-molecular diffusivity equation.  bed cross sectional area (m pellet surface area (m total gas concentration (mol/m mean specific heat of gas and solid, respectively (J/mol.K) axial dispersion coefficient of gas (m effective diffusivity in a pellet (m effective diffusivity in a grain (m molecular diffusivity in a pellet (m Knudsen diffusivity in a pellet (m pore diameter (m) heat transfer coefficient between gas and pellet (W/m molecular weight (g/mol) molar flow rate of solid feed (mol/s) number of pellets per unit time (pellet/s) mass flow rate of inlet solid (kg/h) volumetric flow rate of gas (Nm gaseous reaction rate (mol/m universal gas constant (J/mol.K) pellet radius (m) grain radius (m) gas and particle temperature, respectively (K) ambient temperature (K) wall heat transfer coefficient (W/m solid velocity (m/s) superficial gas velocity (m/s) gas–solid reaction rate (mol/s) mole fraction of gas (–) axial distance in bed (m) voidage of bed (–) pellet porosity (–) thermal dispersion coefficient (W/m.K) heat of reaction (J/mol) tortuosity factor grain-based model shrinking-core-based model