This paper presents the study of an innovative process: the reductive dissolution of mixed lithium cobalt oxide contained in the cathodes of spent Li-ion batteries with phosphoric acid. The studied parameters were: reaction time, temperature, stirring speed, solid-liquid ratio and concentrations of the leaching agent (H3PO4) and the reducing agent (H2O2). Reactants and products were characterized by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS), X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). The results showed that the reducing dissolution process with phosphoric acid is an efficient way for the extraction of lithium and cobalt, achieving dissolution values close to 100%. In addition, a recovery of 88% of Li+as Li3PO4 and 99% of Co+2 as CoC2O4, with purities of 98.3% and 97.8% was found respectively.Today, Li-ion batteries (LIB) are used as energy sources for various portable devices such as mobile phones, laptops, cameras and camcorders, and hand tools among others. LIB are generally constituted by a graphite anode adhered to a copper sheet and lithium cobalt oxide (LiCoO In the last few years there has been a significant increase in the production of portable devices that use this kind of batteries that is why the demand for them has considerably grown, arousing great concern regarding their final disposal once their life time is over. At present, batteries are discarded along with domestic garbage, and then deposited in solid waste dumps which could lead to serious environmental problems, since the leaching of battery components caused by organic waste could contaminate soil, water and air, the last one when landfills are burnt ( Most recently developed hydrometallurgical processes include stages of preparation and pretreatment of the sample. In them, batteries are firstly discharged, then opened and disassembled, separating their components, and then selecting cathodes, which have LiCoO Many researchers have investigated the process of LiCoO In a comprehensive literature review, researches on the dissolution of LiCoO The purpose of this paper is to look for an innovative process of LiCoO The reagents used were phosphoric acid, oxalic acid, sodium hydroxide, ethanol and hydrogen peroxide, all of them with analytical grade. The samples were obtained from LIBs from mobile phones of different brands and models. The dissolution tests were performed in a closed batch reactor of 800 The reactants and products were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) carried out in a diffractometer Rigaku D-Max III C. Morphological analysis was performed by SEM in a microscope LEO 1450 VP which was equipped with an X-ray dispersive spectrometer EDAX Genesis 2000 used to determine the semiquantitative composition of the synthesized compounds by electron probe microanalysis (EPMA). Composition quantitative determinations were performed by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) using a Varian SpectrAA 55 spectrometer with a hollow-cathode lamp. The particle size was determined with an Analysette A-20 Fritsch scanning photosedimentograph.   In Analysis of particle size distribution by photosedimentography showed that the sample has the highest frequency in the 10 For each test, 4.8 The dissolution efficiency was calculated by using the expression: In this research, an univariate analysis of each of the experimental leaching conditions was performed. Studied variables and intervals were: concentration of H Phosphoric acid is polyprotic and therefore it presents several dissociation reactions in aqueous solution, each species acting as an acid or as a base depending on the way in which According to The lithium and cobalt contained in the leach liquors from the dissolution with phosphoric acid and hydrogen peroxide were recovered as cobalt oxalate and lithium phosphate using oxalic acid and sodium hydroxide as precipitating agents, respectively. These tests were carried out in two stages, the first stage was cobalt recovery through its precipitation with oxalic acid, and this precipitate was filtered and dried at 348 In The results presented in The study of the addition of hydrogen peroxide was carried out between 0 and 8% v/v. The tests were performed under the following conditions: solid-liquid ratio, 8  The decomposition of hydrogen peroxide produces oxygen, which reduces Co (III) to Co (II) despite being the chemical bond between Co (III) and O extremely strong. When reduction occurs, ionic radius of cobalt changes, then the strength of chemical bond decreases, facilitating Co expulsion from the structure and, therefore, the dissolution of the oxide is favored by a moderately strong acid. Moreover, as Co and Li are the main components of LiCoO The dissolution tests for studying the effect of temperature were performed under the following conditions: concentration of H  The dissolution tests were conducted under the following conditions: H The results observed in The study of the effect of solid-liquid ratio was performed under the following conditions: concentration of H The results plotted in The conditions in the process of dissolution were: solid-liquid ratio, 8 The results shown in The obtaining of oxalate cobalt (step 1) was performed using an aliquot of leach liquor, heating it to 348 Step 1: The following reaction has been proposed as the one for the recovery of cobalt with oxalic acid: In the second step, an aliquot obtained from the above filtrate was used (step 1), this was previously pre-concentrated by evaporation at 348 Step 2: The following reaction has been proposed as the one for the recovery of lithium: In  The percent recovery of the solid obtained in stage 1, of 99%, was calculated using Eq. The solids obtained in both steps were washed and dried and then characterized by EDS and SEM. The results of these studies are shown in Finally, based on the results obtained, it can be said that this process could be carried out in pilot-scale to evaluate its economic viability. Experimental results show that the process using phosphoric acid as the leaching agent and hydrogen peroxide as the reducing one, achieves efficient dissolution of LiCoO The optimum conditions for the dissolution process were: temperature, 363