Wet massing is commonly performed during the wet granulation process after the addition of a liquid binder. Torque values were measured using a Mixer Torque Rheometer (MTR) by the method of multiple additions of water and variable mixing time. The main objective of this work is to link water diffusion coefficients and penetration time in pharmaceutical powders to torque profiles generated in an MTR. The diffusion coefficients were calculated by fitting the experimental data to an exponential decay function and by minimizing the Root Mean Square Error between the fitted curve and the solution of Fick’s 2nd law. Water penetration times were measured and calculated using experimental drop penetration and Washburn methods, respectively. The main research hypothesis is that the temporal change in torque profiles after each water addition step is related to the mass diffusion coefficients and water penetration time in the powder of varying degrees of water content. The results show that for the microcrystalline cellulose (MCC) powders at varying granulating fluid levels, capillary diffusion seems to be more adequate to explain the rheological behavior observed compared with the Fickian diffusion model.Liquid – vapor surface tension (N/m) Viscosity (Pa.s) Time (s) Concentration (mol/m Diffusion coefficient (m²/s)  Water droplet volume (m  Pore radius (m) Contact angle (rad) Shape factor Sauter mean diameter (m) Mean torque at t, initial, at equilibrium and maximum (N.m)  Water volume at each step Initial powder bed volume (m Powder bulk mass Kinetic constant or rate torque decrease (1/s) Temperature (Kelvin, K) Solid handling is an important process in many industries such as pharmaceuticals, ceramics, and mineral processing [ Wet granulation is the preferred process for the granulation of pharmaceutical solids [ The next sections will discuss the transient period observed during high-shear wet granulation, i.e., the existence of a steady state and wet mass mixing kinetics studied in a MTR. Water/binder diffusion in porous material as well as capillary phenomena through penetration time in porous powder bed will be depicted. Elementary wet granulation processes, i.e., nucleation, consolidation and growth, and breakage, all occur simultaneously. The processes are transient, coupled, and their rates vary nonlinearly with key process variables such as fluid level and impeller speed [ Michaels et al. [ In recent years, the MTR has become the go-to equipment for those seeking to characterize the behavior of powder materials used for wet granulation and other specialized applications such as pelletization by extrusion/spheronization [ As a granular material is mixed with a liquid, it is characterized by different states of saturation. The first stage is referred to as the pendular state (single bridges between particles) as shown in An MTR may be used to monitor the granulation processes in one of three ways according to Hariharan and Mehdizadeh [ Rowe and Sadeghnejad [ Polymeric binders may also be used during wet granulation. The impact of hydroxyl-propyl-methylcellulose (HPMC) and hydroxyl-propyl-cellulose (HPC) binders on the rheological behavior of MCC and Diltiazem (HCI) was studied by Alanazi et al. [ Process variables, e.g., impeller speed, wet mass rheology, and bowl geometry which influence granule size distribution, are coupled through the spatial distribution in water saturation. If the addition of the granulation fluid is stopped at a well-established value and the wet mass is massed for an extended time, any macroscopic inhomogeneity in the distribution of granulating fluid will be significantly reduced and/or eliminated [ In general, the transportation of liquids in porous materials takes place in open pores through concentration-driven transport and capillary absorption. The latter is the movement of water through the capillaries in material, resulting in the surface interactions between the water and the pore wall in the absence of an externally applied hydraulic head [ Some authors tried to study the water diffusion in porous materials through several methods such as the Pulsed Gradient Spin–Echo Method [ Mirzajanzadeh et al. [ The drop penetration time is an indication of the kinetics of nucleus formation. Penetration time (Eq. 2) depends on several factors including The wettability of several heterogeneous powder beds has been investigated by the drop penetration time method. Single-drop nucleation experiments were performed by Nguyen et al. [ All of the above indicate that the liquid diffusion and penetration in the granular material is of paramount importance. Its knowledge could contribute to linking all other wet granulation parameters, e.g., wet massing time, water penetration, and distribution, and provide both a mechanistic explanation and a quantification of the process variables and their control. Thus, this present work aims to use the MTR to determine if it is possible to establish a link between (a) the torque profiles over time and liquid addition rate and (b) the water diffusivity mechanisms and kinetics. Microcrystalline cellulose, MCC, Avicel® PH101 was provided by FMC Biopolymer (Newark, Delaware, USA) and dicalcium phosphate dihydrate DCP, DI-TAB, was supplied by Innophos, Inc. (Cranbury, New Jersey, USA) while distilled water was used as the binding liquid. Sieving of MCC and DCP was performed using 10-cm brass pan sieves (ASTME E-11 standard test sieve, Gilson Company, Lewis Center, Ohio, USA) during 20 min and 10 min, respectively. MCC powder passed through 45 μm sieve diameter and DCP collected on 125 μm and passed through 180 μm sieve were used for the trials. The PSD was confirmed using laser diffraction because particle orientation during sieving can affect the fraction retained on each sieve. PSD was measured with a Malvern Particle Size Analyzer 2000 and water is used as the dispersive phase. Particle morphology and surface roughness were visualized with Scanning Electron Microscopy, SEM (S-4700, Hitachi, USA). Powders are placed on a carbon adhesive surface holder deposed on an aluminum rack and pulverized with air to spread particles properly on the adhesive surface. Particles are coated with gold–platinum in an argon plasma chamber where a partial vacuum was maintained. The coated particle’s images were taken using a 3 or 15 kV voltage and observed at 1000× and 180× magnification for the MCC and DCP, respectively. Nitrogen adsorption isotherms were measured at 77 K in an accelerated surface area and porosimetry system (ASAP 2020) (Micro metrics, USA). Particle samples were previously degassed at ambient temperature under vacuum for 24 h. MCC and DCP specific surface areas were calculated using the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) equation in the range 0.068 to 0.3 Rheological studies were performed in an MTR (MTR-3, Caleva Ltd. UK) equipped with a stainless-steel bowl and two counter-rotating blades in which speed was maintained at 50 rpm for all trials. Multiple additions experiments make it possible to find the optimal liquid to solid (L/S) ratio for the wet granulation process. The MTR allows us to set water addition steps and the duration of mixing and the subsequent data acquisition period. First, empty bowl torque measurements are obtained to evaluate the baseline; second, dry powder is added to the mixing bowl followed by 60 s of mixing before data acquisition for the dry powder during 20 s. Water volume at each binder addition step is maintained at 2 ml and 1 ml for the MCC and DCP, respectively; water addition is performed with a controlled syringe pump at a rate of 1800 ml/h. However, mixing time is set at 60 s, as well as data acquisition time always set at 20 s after each water addition regardless of the material used. The jacketed mixing bowl is connected to a water heating setup to monitor the powder bed temperature set at 25, 40, and 50 °C. In the variable mixing time experiment, the baseline is recorded before any dry powder and water additions as mentioned above. A volume of water (V), corresponding to the volume required to reach the capillary saturation state, is added at the beginning of the experiment in the mixing bowl containing the dry powder, and the mean line torque is calculated at each mixing period (mixing and data acquisition). The optimal mixing time corresponds to the time where stabilization mean line torque is achieved. In our case, experiments using multiple additions at varying mixing times were performed. The addition of water is done manually. Mixing continues until torque is stabilized before the next water addition. Regarding the experiments using TAVT, Concerning DCP powders, mixing periods are set at 80 s i.e., 60 s of mixing and 20 s of data acquisition ( In the MAVT experiment type, 2 ml of water are added to the MCC powder after each torque stabilization. Each mixing period consists of 120 s mixing and 30 s of data acquisition step ( It is important to mention that water addition is performed manually (after torque stabilization) except for the first addition step which is done by a pump connected to the MTR because the variable time experiment type only allows one pump addition step. The volume of 18 or 11 ml corresponds to the optimal L/S ratio multiplied by the MCC and DCP sample weight, 15 or 30 g, respectively. Water diffusion coefficients calculated from experimental data are obtained from Fick’s 2nd Law whose solution is represented by Eq. Because mean torque is linked to the water saturation level or water concentration, we can express this equation in terms of mean torque Before performing penetration time experiments, powders are humidified (granulated) during 20 min at 50 rpm with a certain amount of water ranging from 4 to 18 ml (21–54.5% w/w water) for the MCC and 9 ml (23.1 % w/w) for DCP, to investigate the effect of water content (L/S ratio) on penetration time. Furthermore, the temperature effect is investigated: experiments are carried out at 25, 40, and 50 °C for MCC and solely at 40 °C for the DCP. Finally, the temperature effect on penetration for the MCC and DCP dry powders were also investigated. A drop shape analyzer (DSA25, KRÜSS, USA), equipped with a high-speed camera and a humidity chamber where the temperature can be controlled is used for the experiments as well as for contact angle determination. The powder is granulated in the MTR and then put in the humidity-controlled chamber ( The sample weight of the DCP powder is 3.5 g, which was tableted at 1379 kPa because DCP wet powders tablet made at 690 kPa was friable and could not be handled manually. A 500 μL syringe with a 24-gauge needle was used to deliver precisely 7 μL droplets at 5 mm height to avoid any splashing, a video was recorded at 200 or 300 fps and the time taken by the drop to completely penetrate the dry and wet tablet was measured. For each trial, two tablets were made, and two droplets were deposited on each tablet. Concerning contact angle measurement, dry powders were tableted at 28 MPa for 1 min; a 2 μL droplet was delivered at a rate of 2.67 μL/s with a 24-gauge needle. Videos were recorded and processed via the ADVANCE software. For theoretical water penetration time in the dry powders, the initial powder bed porosity The theoretical penetration time in the prewetted powders are calculated by assuming that after each water addition The kinetic constant (rate torque decrease) is determined by integrating this first-order equation (Eq. 8) between  The particle morphology can provide useful information regarding porosity and surface morphology. As illustrated in It is very important to mention that DCP particles are more spherical (aspect ratio 0.71 ± 0.17), but present rough sharp spikes. This assessment will be validated with surface area measurement because the rough particles have greater specific surface areas. DCP morphology is, among other parameters, responsible for its good flowability besides the presence of sharp edges.  As mentioned, the mean torque increases as the liquid binder saturation increases until the maximum torque is reached and thereafter decreases. As depicted in MCC and DCP torque profiles are very different. In MCC, profiles obtained at 25 and 40 °C show similar trends; we observe two peaks at 1.2 and 1.733 ml/g L/S at 25 °C and 1.333 and 1.867 ml/g at 40 °C. Recent work points out similar values; Kuhs et al. [ It is important to point out the presence of a “valley” that appears between these two peaks, whose depth decreases with the temperature rising and disappears at 50 °C as we can see in Another important point to draw from Although pendular and funicular phases are similar for the three temperature levels regarding the MCC, torque values during the droplet phase are very different: torque values are higher at 25 and 40 °C but the same trends are observed for the three levels of temperature. At the pendular state, only lens-shaped rings of liquids are formed at the points of contact of the particles until the funicular state, where a continuous liquid network of liquid interspersed with air is formed [ For torque profiles assessment, experiments were carried out at 25, 40, and 50 °C for MCC, while DCP experiments were performed solely at 40 °C because temperature seems to not affect the optimal L/S. The MTR could be used to estimate the optimum mixing time for wet massing as well as examine mixing kinetics of wet masses [ After adding 18 ml of water, we observe a torque increase until a maximum after 7 min of wet massing before starting to decrease for the three levels of temperature investigated. This is followed by a stable torque value of 0.2 N.m attained after approximately 20 min. The same scenario is observed when the second addition of water is performed after the torque has stabilized. However, the rate of torque decrease is slower and the temporary torque stabilization is obtained at different times depending on the temperature value, i.e., around 72 min at 40 °C and 54 min at 25 °C. This is the case at 50 °C, but a second steady-state torque value at 0.2 N.m is attained for the three levels of temperature investigated. In each case, the maximum torque value observed after each water addition depends on the temperature and seems to be higher when this parameter is lower. In the case of the MAVT experiment, 2 ml of water were injected into the dry powder at the beginning and at each liquid addition step. During the first liquid additions, torque values remained constant and no peak was observed until the seventh addition. Another important point is that the first peak torque value is small (around 0.277 N.m) for all three temperature levels, then, the second peak value observed around 64 min is followed by a torque decreasing as expected. However, it should be noted that two other torque peaks appear at around 78 and 100 min. The former is followed by a decrease at a lesser rate than the first one, but the torque value still stabilizes around 0.2 N.m at different times depending on the level of temperature. Finally, the third peak values for all temperature levels are higher than those of the two peaks observed before. Nevertheless, we notice that the decreasing rate is slower, and the torque value does not reach a constant value even if mixing continues. Similar trends are observed in the literature; water content is shown to have a strong impact on Avicel® PH101 mixing kinetics. For example, an equilibrium torque value of around 0.2 N m is obtained after 10 min of wet massing when MCC powder is about 1.2 ml/g water content. Whereas the torque value does not reach a constant value within 12 min at higher L/S (1.3 ml/g) [  The MAVT experiment type shows a different behavior. As water is added to the powder, torque rises slowly until the eighth addition where torque rises and reaches its maximum value after 24 min of mixing; then it decreases and reaches an equilibrium value. It is important to underline that once this stabilization is attained, further liquid addition does not raise the torque value any more. Early studies showed that the stabilized torque value is linked to the water distribution. Hariharan and Mehdizadeh [ Water diffusion coefficients in the MCC powder calculated from Fick’s 2nd Law and the experimental data are shown in The water diffusion coefficient is higher at the 0.93 ml/g level of wetness than at 1.067 and 1.2 ml/g. For all temperature levels investigated, water diffusion coefficients tend to increase slowly with temperature. For the two highest degrees of solid wetness, the diffusion coefficient decreases slightly between 25 and 40 °C before rising between 40 and 50 °C. A statistical test shows that only the water content effect is significant (p-value < 0.05) while the temperature effect has a p-value of 0.47 and 0.26 for MAVT and TAVT, respectively. Regarding the DCP at 40 °C, the water diffusion coefficients are summarized in Regarding our results, the TAVT experiment type shows a higher water diffusion coefficient value at the highest degree of solid wetness (curve 2) compared with the MCC dry powder. The existence of water molecules acting as a barrier at the surface, crystallinity which decreases as water content increases and the ability of MCC chains to form hydrogen bonds might affect the diffusion coefficient according to Belbekhouche et al. [ Finally, the Fickian diffusion model seems to not explain this rheological behavior properly during wet massing. However, even if water diffusion occurs, these phenomena might be negligible when compared with capillary diffusion.  The dependency of penetration time on water content is rather hard to perform, even if the water content is assumed to be uniformly distributed among the powder bed after 20 min of mixing time, some areas could be oversaturated. Higher water content, i.e., 1.067 and 1.2 ml/g confirms this observation. Furthermore, when the powder is tableted, water migration could take place, and thus create some areas where water content is higher. Thus, water penetration time could be higher than the expected value. On the other hand, the existence of oversaturated areas in the powder tablet gives rise, to some extent, to local overheated zones which impact the reproducibility of droplet penetration time. Nevertheless, as expected, water content increases droplet penetration time. In fact, below the optimal L/S ratio for the MCC, penetration time is between approximately 0.01 and 1 s and this value tends to increase sharply at 1.2 ml/g L/S (54.5 % w/w water content) which is the optimal point. As explained above, the temperature dependency on droplet penetration time is not very clear to see through experimental results for some levels of powder wetness. By comparing MCC and DCP penetration times we can see that penetration time in the dry MCC is higher than for the DCP powder, this is not surprising because the latter powder is more hydrophilic than the former. As mentioned, the diffusion coefficient was determined through the torque profiles. It does not seem to be inadequate to explain the rheological behavior of MCC. Attempts are made to explain the rheological behavior of MCC by establishing a relationship between torque rate decrease and penetration time at different levels of solid wetness.  In this work, the rheological behavior of MCC and DCP has been studied using an MTR; the granulating fluid level, the mixing time, and the temperature effects on torque profiles have been investigated. The first method relies on the assumption that the diffusion is Fickian. Water diffusion coefficients determined through torque profiles show a nonlinear temperature dependence for all experiments except the MAVT experiment type for the lowest temperature and L/S ratio. These observations do not correlate with the torque profiles and seem not to clarify MCC and DCP rheological behavior. On the other side, experimental penetration time is assessed at different granulation fluid levels and temperatures. The corresponding theoretical value is calculated using the Washburn equation and assuming that water partially fills inter-particle pores. Experimental penetration time is well predicted by the theoretical penetration time with the torque rate decrease at different water contents. We concluded that viscous forces equal capillary forces when the torque value reaches an equilibrium and the time elapsed between The present work enlarges and extends the practical usefulness of MTR measurements. For the very first time, the protocol using an intermittent addition of binder (water) has been shown to be an important parameter affecting the rheological properties of the resulting wet granulates. Temperature, binder addition rates and waiting time between additions can be optimized as a function of the required rheology of the resulting product. Each pharmaceutical powder mixture behaves differently; the adoption of general protocols can prove inefficient and lead to process failure and product rejection. The present results propose a methodology combining the use of MTR and penetration time measurements, which leads to an optimal process design space; the latter contributes to an intensification of the wet granulation process in terms of time, efficiency and failure avoidance. This ongoing work seeks the establishment and use of dimensionless number(s) which could more efficiently delimit the design space and expedite the work towards the adoption of optimal protocol as a function of the powder mixture composition and physical attributes. The authors report no declarations of interest. The authors are indebted to the N