Surface sulfidization behavior of smithsonite at high temperature was investigated by X-ray powder diffractometer (XRD) along with thermodynamic calculation, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and electron probe microanalysis (EPMA). The XRD and thermodynamic analyses indicated that the smithsonite was decomposed into zincite at high temperatures. After introducing a small amount of pyrite, artificial sulfides were formed at surface of the obtained zincite. The XPS analyses revealed that the sulfide species including zinc sulfide and zinc disulfide were generated at the zincite surface. The EPMA analyses demonstrated that the film of sulfides was unevenly distributed at the zincite surface. The average concentration of elemental sulfur at the sample surface increased with increasing of pyrite dosage. A suitable mole ratio of FeS2 to ZnCO3 for the surface thermal modification was determined to be about 0.3. These findings can provide theoretical support for improving the process during which the zinc recovery from refractory zinc oxide ores is achieved by xanthate flotation.Smithsonite containing nearly 52% Zn is a typical zinc oxide mineral. With continuous exploitation of resources, the existing sulfide resources are soon going to be insufficient to supply the demand. The low-grade zinc oxide ores have been developed to offer the above metals and this needs to process the ores to obtain a marketable product [ Flotation of zinc oxide mineral is more difficult than that of the corresponding sulfide minerals due to its higher solubility and more extensive surface hydration [ In order to improve the sulfidization of zinc oxide mineral, significant amounts of studies have been reported. Wu et al. [ Recently, sulfidization roasting has received considerable attentions to transform the zinc oxide minerals to sulfides. There are usually two kinds of vulcanizing agents including elemental sulfur and pyrite. Li et al. [ Generally speaking, the zinc oxide minerals after sulfidization roasting can be easily collected by xanthate. However, the previous studies about sulfidization at high temperatures have been mainly restricted to improvement of sulfidization extent, and information involving surface changes for zinc oxide mineral before and after sulfidization treatment is of severe lack. Factually, the flotation performance of zinc oxide minerals depends on whether a stable sulfide film can be formed at the mineral surface to the greatest extent. Therefore, it is very necessary to comprehensively and specifically investigate their surface sulfidization behavior at high temperatures. In this study, phase transformation at surface of the smithsonite before and after sulfidization roasting with pyrite was firstly identified by XRD along with thermodynamic calculation. Then, surface composition changes were detected by XPS to interrupt the sulfidization mechanisms at an atomic level. Finally, EPMA was carried out to compare the surface differences of natural sphalerite and smithsonite after surface thermal modification. The objective of this study is to clarify the surface sulfidization behavior of smithsonite at high temperatures and to provide an excellent theory reference for the processing of refractory zinc oxide resources. The smithsonite, pyrite and sphalerite samples used in the experiments were obtained from Yunnan Province in China. All of the samples were crushed and dry ground in an agate torsion mortar. The ground products were sieved using a standard screen to achieve their particle range from −74 to +45 μm. Chemical analyses show that the smithsonite sample contained 49.52% Zn, the pyrite sample contained 44.5% Fe and 51.2% S and the natural sphalerite sample contained 65.3% Zn and 32.8% S, which indicated these samples with high purity. XRD patterns of theses samples are exhibited in Roasting of smithsonite with pyrite was conducted under a tube furnace, as shown in The obtained samples from the roasting tests were examined on a Germany Bruker-axs D8 Advance X-ray powder diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). XPS (PHI5000, ULVAC-PHI, Japan) equipped with a monochromatic Al Ka X-ray source at 1486.6 eV were applied to identify the surface components. EPMA (JXA-8230) were used to determine the surface morphology and composition of the obtained sample at different pyrite dosage. Acceleration voltage of the EPMA was set to 20 kV and the probe current to 20 nm using a focused electron beam. The effect of pyrite dosage on the surface sulfidization behavior of smithsonite was investigated under these conditions: roasting temperature of 700 °C, residence time of 60 min, 1.5 L/min of flow rate (nitrogen). XRD patterns of the obtained samples are shown in The peak intensity of zincite decreased while the peaks of sphalerite and wurtzite began to occur when small amounts of pyrite were added ( In order to further investigate the effect of pyrite dosage on the phase transformation, the equilibrium amounts of products were calculated using the Equilibrium Composition module of Out-okumpu HSC5.0 [ XPS is a powerful technique to identify both of the chemical composition and chemical state of the element at the sample surface based on the distinctive binding energy of inner electron from each element. In this work, XPS analyses were carried out for the smithsonite roasted at high temperatures in the absence and presence of pyrite, as shown in      In order to further investigate the artificial film of sulfides at the zincite surface, EPMA analyses were carried out to compare the surface differences between the natural sphalerite and smithsonite modified with pyrite at high temperatures, as shown in From The present paper introduced a new discussion about the surface modification of smithsonite with pyrite at high temperatures and some detail interfacial information. The following conclusions could be drawn: Smithsonite was decomposed into zincite at high temperatures and after introducing pyrite, sphalerite and wurtzite were formed at surface of the obtained zincite. A small amount of ZnFe Zinc sulfide species were detected to form at the mineral surface after surface modification at high temperatures, and it consisted of zinc sulfide and zinc disulfide. The film of sulfides was unevenly distributed at surface of the generated zincite. Average concentration of elemental sulfur at the sample surface increased with increasing of pyrite dosage. A suitable mole ratio of FeS The authors would like to acknowledge the