A simple, selective and rapid flotation method for the separation–preconcentration of trace amounts of cobalt, nickel, iron and copper ions using phenyl 2-pyridyl ketone oxime (PPKO) has been developed prior to their flame atomic absorption spectrometric determinations. The influence of pH, amount of PPKO as collector, type and amount of eluting agent, type and amount of surfactant as floating agent and ionic strength was evaluated on the recoveries of analytes. The influences of the concomitant ions on the recoveries of the analyte ions were also examined. The enrichment factor was 93. The detection limits based on 3 sigma for Cu, Ni, Co and Fe were 0.7, 0.7, 0.8, and 0.7ngmL−1, respectively. The method has been successfully applied for determination of trace amounts of ions in various real samples.The direct determination of heavy metals at trace level in saline samples by flame atomic absorption spectrometer (FAAS) or electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometer (ETAAS) Based on the spectrophotometric and potentiometric studies in non-aqueous and water sample, we revealed that phenyl 2-pyridyl ketone oxime (PPKO) forms very stable and almost water insoluble 2:1 (ligand to metal ratio) complexes with a number of transition metal ions such as Cu The purpose of the presented work is preconcentration by flotation of copper(II), cobalt(II), nickel(II) and iron(III) using PPKO. The influences of the some analytical parameters including pH and sample volume on the quantitative recoveries of the analytes were investigated. The measurements of metals were performed with a Shimadzu 680 AA spectrometer equipped with a hollow cathode lamp and a deuterium background corrector, at respective wavelengths using an air–acetylene flame. The instrumental parameters were those recommended by the manufacturer. A Metrohm 691 pH/Ion meter with a combined glass–calomel electrode was used for adjustment of test solution pH. All chemicals were analytical reagent grade and were used without further purification. Acids and bases were of the highest purity available from Merck and were used as received. Doubly distilled deionized water was used throughout. All the plastic and glassware were cleaned by soaking in dilute HNO The pH measurement method for speciation of different forms of complexes between analyte ions and PPKO were carried out according to previous publication A combined glass electrode was immersed into a 1 Analysis of water sample was performed as following: 400 Homogenized soil sample 20 Spinach sample was purchased from Gachsaran, Iran. Afterwards, they were taken in small mesh. A 40 In preliminary experiments, our potentiometric studies revealed that PPKO could form a fairly stable and selective complex with copper, nickel, iron and cobalt ions with mole ratio of M:L of 1:2. The possible complexation form and their stability between these ions and PPKO has been presented in The presence of 2-pyridyl ketone oxime ligand and hydroxyl group results in selective interaction with these ions while oxygen atoms of the ligand mostly interact with these ions as a soft acid through ion–dipole interactions, while all resulting in fast complexation and higher sensitivity. We decided to examine its capability as a suitable reagent for sensitive and selective flotation of copper, nickel, iron and cobalt ions. The influence of affective parameters including pH, amount of PPKO, type and amount of surfactant on sensitivity were examined. The influences of pH on the quantitative recoveries of copper, nickel, iron and cobalt ions by the presented flotation method were investigated at the pH range of 2–10 with model solutions. Due to possible hydroxide formation of the analytes, the investigation on the pH values higher than 10 were not carried out. The results are given in The effects of the concentration of PPKO ob the recoveries of analytes was evaluated over the range 0.4–7.0 A number of tests under optimized conditions were carried out to find suitable surfactant for quantitative recoveries of analytes. The results are presented in The flotation efficiency was evaluated using SDS concentrations ranging from 0.001% to 0.1% (w/v). The quantitative recovery values for copper, iron, nickel and cobalt ions were obtained with 0.005% (w/v) SDS. By decreasing the surfactant concentration to 0.0002% (w/v) the recovery was reduced. The recovery values were also decreased for a higher SDS concentration (0.1%, w/v). In addition, the viscosity of the surfactant-rich phase increases, leading to poor sensitivity Since the surfactant-rich phase foam obtained after flotation is rather viscous, experiments were carried out in order to choose a proper eluent for the retained ions on the foam layer and respective results are presented in KNO Interferences studied were those related to the preconcentration step, cations that may react with PPKO or species that may react with analytes and decrease the extraction efficiency. Flotation procedures for trace elements in the high salt content samples can be strongly affected by the matrix constituents of the sample Calibration graphs were obtained by flotation of 750 The detection limit of the method (DL) was estimated as three times the standard deviation of the blank. The values of DL for cobalt, iron, nickel and copper ions were calculated as 0.8 The procedure was applied to the determination of copper, nickel and cobalt ions in different samples, including spring water, tap water, spinach, soil and blood sample and spinach samples by standard addition method. The results are presented in The flotation of copper, nickel iron and cobalt ions with PPKO into SDS has been investigated. Analytes extractions were shown to be achieved with PPKO due to the hydrophobic complex compound formation. The sensitivity, metrological characteristics, ecological safety, simplicity, and convenience of the suggested procedure are competitive with respect to the methods based on the extraction with organic solvents. The method presented in this study is most promising for the analytes as the preconcentration factor is 93. The preconcentration factor achieved with presented procedure is superior to some preconcentration procedures including cloud point extraction, solid phase extraction, electroanalytical techniques