The extraction and separation of heavy rare earths is always one of the most challenging unit operations in hydrometallurgy. Research and development of novel efficient extractant is one way to solve this problem. Organophosphinic acid is a good potential extractant. A new method was established for the synthesis of nonsymmetric dialkylphosphinic acid (NSDAPA) (R′R″POOH, R′≠R″), optimized the synthesizing conditions of the key intermediate mono-alkylphosphinic acid and successfully synthesized three novel extractants (n-octyl)(2,4,4′-trimethylpentyl) phosphinic acid, (n-octyl)(cyclohexyl)phosphinic acid and (2,3-dimethylbutyl) (2,4,4′-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid. The extraction ability of the novel extractants was investigated. The structure–property relationship and the separation performance for heavy rare earth couples Er/Y, Y/Ho, Yb/Tm and Lu/Yb were evaluated.Acidic organophosphorus extractants are widely used in extraction and separation fields for actinide/lanthanide ( Steric hindrance and electronic effect of nonsymmetric dialkylphosphinic acid (NSDAPA, R′R″POOH, R′ Reports about the synthesis of NSDAPA are few and till now only some patents referred to this. For example, In this paper, we chose sodium hypophosphite as the phosphorus source. It was first reacted with one olefin to yield monoalkylphosphinic acid (MAPA), and then reacted with another olefin to yield NSDAPA ( Sodium hypophosphite, acetic acid, cyclohexane, tetrahydrofuran, and 1,4-dioxane were of analytical reagent (A.R.). Diisobutylene provided by Zibo Runfu Chemical Technology Co., Ltd was composed of 76% 2,4,4-trimethyl-1-pentene and 20% 2,4,4-trimethyl-2-pentene. 2,3-Dimethyl-1-butene was provided by Dalian Chemphy Chemical Co., Ltd. and the purity was more than 99.0%. Other feed olefins of 1-octene and cyclohexene were purchased from Aladdin Reagent Company, of which purities were 98% and of guaranteed reagent (G.R.) respectively. Amantadine hydrochloride was also provided by Aladdin Reagent Company and the purity was of 99%. Di-(2,3-dimethylbutyl)-phosphinic acid (HYY-2), di( Vertical tube furnace for synthesis was designed and made by ourselves, of which temperature could be precisely controlled by a CKW-1100 temperature controller provided by Beijing Chaoyang Automated Instrument and Meter Plant. A RCT B S25 IKA magnetic stirring apparatus was placed under the vertical tube furnace to provide agitation when necessary. A VORTEX-5 turbine mixer was adopted for shaking and mixing the aqueous and organic phases. In order to accelerate the separation of these two phases, a LG 10-2.4A high speed centrifuge provided by Beijing Medical Centrifuge Factory was employed. The pH value of the aqueous phase was measured by a model 545 pH meter with CHN060 pH electrode, which was manufactured by American Orion and calibrated daily with 4.01 and 7.00 standard buffer solutions. The concentration of rare earth metals in the aqueous phase was determined by Analysis and Test Center in Tsinghua University using VISTA-MPX CCD Simultaneous ICP-AES manufactured by VARIAN. Taking mono- The normal acid–base purification process (NABPP) was as follows: The reaction mixture was transferred to a 150 Then the product was further purified through the amantadine method to remove the byproduct of di-octylphosphinic acid. 18 Mono- Mono-(2,3-dimethylbutyl)phosphinic acid ( Taking ( ( ( (2,3-Dimethylbutyl)(2,4,4′-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid ( For preparation of rare earth and extractant working solutions and general extraction procedures see The intermediate mono-alkylphosphinic acid is the key step for the synthesis of nonsymmetric dialkylphosphinic acid. In order to obtain mono-alkylphosphinic acid as the main product through the free-radical-addition-reaction method shown in In the synthesis of symmetric dialkylphosphinic acids, the reaction time is always more than 24 The molar ratio of 1-octene/NaH The initiator effectiveness depends closely on the reaction temperature. The half-life periods of DTBP at 100 This reaction of mono- So the best conditions for the synthesis of mono- Under the obtained optimized conditions, when the feed olefin was changed from 1-octene to 2,3-dimethyl-1-butene the yield dropped from 91.9% to 81.4%. And the yield continued to decrease slightly to 79.7% when the temperature went up to 135 In the synthesis of mono-substituted alkylphosphinic acids Amantadine could selectively react with The purified mono-alkylphosphinic acid In order to evaluate the extraction performance of the above synthesized nonsymmetric dialkylphosphinic acids, extraction percentage under different equilibrium pH values was measured in the same extractant concentration of 1.0 As seen from For NSDAPAs (R Besides, a significantly higher extraction ability occurred when one alkyl of Cyanex 272 was replaced by 2,3-dimethylbutyl (  Among the three nonsymmetric dialkylphosphinic acids, the extraction ability of Separation performance of the synthesized new nonsymmetric dialkylphosphinic acids was evaluated through extraction from the mixed Er/Y nitrate solutions with different acidities, of which the concentrations of Er(III) and Y(III) were both 4 As seen from As the extraction ability of The separation coefficients of Yb/Tm from the Yb/Tm mixed solutions and of the Lu/Yb from the Lu/Yb mixed solutions with 1.0 The extraction and separation data for the rare earth ion binary systems based on  A new method for the synthesis of NSDAPA was established, which used non-toxic sodium hypophosphite as the phosphorus source through intermediate of MAPA. MAPA then reacted with another olefin in excess to generate NSDAPA. The synthesis of MAPA is the key step and the optimized conditions are as follows: tetrahydrofuran as the solvent, DTBP as the initiator, mol ratio of olefin/NaH The extraction ability descended down in the following sequence: HYY-9 Novel extractant This work was supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at