The deformation modulus of rock masses (Em
                     ) is one of the significant parameters required to build numerical models for many rock engineering projects, such as open pit mining and tunnel excavations. In the past decades, a great number of empirical equations were proposed for the prediction of the rock mass deformation modulus. Existing empirical equations were in general proposed using statistical technique and the reliability of the prediction relies on the quantity and quality of the data used. In this paper, existing empirical equations using both the Rock Mass Rating (RMR) and the Geological Strength Index (GSI) are compared and their prediction performances are assessed using published high quality in situ data. Simplified empirical equations are proposed by adopting Gaussian function to fit the in situ data. The proposed equations take the RMR and the deformation modulus of intact rock (Ei
                     ) as input parameters. It has been demonstrated that the proposed equations fit well to the in situ data compared with the existing equations.The deformation modulus ( Commonly used approaches to estimate Due mainly to the above mentioned difficulties encountered in laboratory and In the past decades, a great number of empirical equations were proposed for the estimation of the isotropic rock mass deformation modulus using various rock mass classification systems, such as the Rock Mass Rating (RMR), the Geological Strength Index (GSI) (see Existing empirical equations were in general derived using statistical methods, such as the regression analysis, and the reliability of estimation of these equations depends on the quantity and quality of data used in the statistical analysis. As a consequence, large discrepancies in the predicted values using different empirical relations can be experienced which reduce the confidence in the predicted values. For example, for a rock mass with the following properties: GSI In this research, existing empirical equations using the RMR and the GSI classification systems are evaluated. The prediction performance of these equations is tested by using high quality well publicized In this paper, the strategy of evaluation of existing equations for predicting In this research, we focus only on the empirical equations which contain the RMR and GSI as input parameters. According to different input parameters, the existing empirical equations using the RMR and GSI classification systems can be divided into five groups (see  These The value of Root Mean Square Errors (  Various attempts have been made to develop empirical equations taking the RMR as the input parameter to estimate The first empirical equation for predicting the rock mass deformation modulus using the RMR system was proposed by Based on the assessment of One major limitation of the equations listed in Group 1 is that the deformation modulus of intact rock ( The values of The empirical equations using the GSI classification system as the input parameter to estimate the rock mass deformation modulus can be divided into three groups according to the input variables as given in In this group, the empirical equation proposed by  The best fit equation in this group is the one proposed by  From The empirical equation proposed by As seen from Gaussian function (see the general form in Eq. The proposed empirical equation is based on Gaussian function and use the RMR classification system as input parameters. The least square fitting based on the data used in this research gives the following equation: The comparison between the observed and estimated values calculated from the proposed Eq. To derive an equation which takes the RMR and The comparison between the observed data and the estimated values calculated from Eq. As a further test of the prediction performance of Eqs. Scatter in the data in  In this paper, the most widely used empirical equations for the estimation of deformation modulus of rock masses based on the Rock Mass Rating (RMR) and the Geological Strength Index (GSI) classification systems have been reviewed. These equations were grouped according to the required input variables and their prediction performance were assessed using well acknowledged published Comparison analyses of existing equations show that in the category which does not involve the deformation modulus of intact rock ( Two simplified empirical equations have been proposed in this research using Gaussian function. The proposed empirical equations use the RMR classification system and the deformation modulus of intact rock ( As for all empirical relationships, the proposed empirical equations are open to further improvement as more PhD Scholarship provided by China Scholarship Council (CSC) is gratefully acknowledged. The authors also would like to express their gratitude to anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments on the paper.