The entrainment of hydrophilic gangue particles in flotation is related to the amount of water reporting to the froth. It is well established that the amount of water reported to the froth is controlled by frother concentration. As it is shown in this paper, in the flotation systems in which emulsified oily collector is also used (e.g. coal flotation), solids recovery strongly depends on the collector dosages as also does the water recovery. While the tests carried out at low (1000 g/t) and high (8000 g/t) oil dosages show different effects of frother additions on water transfer rates to the froth, all the experimental points when water transfer rates are plotted versus solids transfer rates to the froth converge on one single curve. This suggests that the effect of both the frother and collector on water transfer rates is first of all determined by the transfer of solids to the froth, and thus by the effect of these two agents on the solids transfer to froth.Frothers are utilized in flotation processes to enhance generation of fine bubbles and to stabilize froth. The effect of frothers on bubble size and foam stability has been extensively studied and it was shown that the CCC (critical coalescence concentration) and DFI (dynamic foamability index) describe well frother ability to reduce bubble size and produce stable foam ( The frother concentration directly affects the bubble size (by controlling bubble coalescence). Better selectivity and higher recoveries are reported at finer bubble sizes. The presence of frother also affects the amount of water transferred to froth products ( The relationship between frother characteristics expressed by critical coalescence concentration (CCC) and dynamic foamability index (DFI) and the effect of frother on water recovery and entrainment were investigated by In flotation of some minerals so-called oily collectors, water-insoluble hydrocarbons, are utilized. For instance, while flotation of bituminous coals can be carried out using only a frother, in the flotation of less hydrophobic, sub-bituminous coals (also anthracites and oxidized coals), also a collector is required and commonly emulsified kerosene or diesel oil are used. In general, oily hydrocarbons are known to flatten froth in a flotation cell. However, the addition of oil to a stirred suspension of fine hydrophobic particles leads to agglomeration of these particles. The oil agglomeration of fine coal by hydrocarbons relies on the formation of large agglomerates strong enough to be separated by screening from the pulp. With the oil dosages lower than a few percent the recovery of combustible matter tend to deteriorate since the agglomerates formed under such conditions are not strong enough to withstand handling/screening. But since the agglomerates formed at low oil dosages result in a formation of loose aggregates which easily entrap air bubbles such aggregates can be recovered by flotation, and a simultaneous use of a frother provides quite good flotation results ( Thus, the effect of oil (e.g. diesel oil, kerosene) used in the flotation tests with coal may result from: (i) making coal particles more hydrophobic and thus facilitating particle-bubble attachment, or (ii) selective agglomeration of coal fines. It is difficult to discriminate between the two mechanisms. The objective of this research project was to study the effect of both a frother (MIBC) and a collector (emulsified diesel oil) on water transfer to the froth, and entrainment in flotation of a low-rank coal. A low-rank sub-bituminous coal (LS-20) provided by the Luscar Sterco mine, Alberta, Canada, was used in the tests. The sample was crushed and pulverized below 150 μm ( In flotation tests, emulsified diesel oil (EDO) and MIBC (methyl iso-butyl carbinol) were used as collector and frother, respectively. Following Flotation tests were carried out at 10% solids content by wt. A 3 L Open-top Leeds flotation cell was used; the froth products were collected at different froth thickness over 30 s and 60 s intervals. The pulp level and froth thickness during the flotation tests were controlled and maintained constant. The entrainment degree was calculated by following the procedure proposed by Since the equation illustrating the relation between the amount of water and solid particles content directly gives the data similar to the entrainment degree, the experimental data obtained in this study were evaluated depending on the initial rate of water and solids transfer. The water transfer rates/initial water transfer rates were calculated following the procedure described by Since large water recoveries were reported by The two series of tests that followed were carried out at 1000 g/t of EDO ( More detailed information on the experiments with 8000 g/t EDO is given in The initial rate of water transfer to froth is clearly dependant on frother concentration at 1000 g/t of EDO ( Since the amount of water transferred to the froth is generally linked to the entrainment degrees, and the amount of water in froth and the entrainment degrees are controlled by frother and frother/collector combinations, the effects of frother and collector dosages were also examined. The effects of EDO and frother (MIBC) concentrations on the initial water transfer rates and entrainment degrees are illustrated in In this study, the entrainment degree was analyzed following the procedure described by While  These results imply that agglomerate flotation is taking places at high oil dosages and they are consistent with As already mentioned, several factors such as particle size, hydrophobicity, nature of the collector etc., control water transfer to froth. The obtained results seem to indicate that while the flotation process at 1000 g/t resembles a typical emulsion flotation, the process at 8000 g/t is probably an agglomerate flotation. While in the former case the effect of the oily collector results from making coal particles more hydrophobic, in the latter case the overall effect results from agglomeration of coal particles by added oil. In the low oil dosages range the water transfer rates to froth are low, and so also low is the entrainment ( In this project, the effect of frother on the flotation of low-rank coal with emulsified oily collector is studied. Two different effects of frother concentration for two extreme collector dosages were found: for low collector dosages the flotation system requires higher frother concentrations to reach the stable froth conditions, for higher collector dosages selectivity deteriorates and this is particularly clear when water transfer to froth is monitored. The results imply that while at low oil dosages the presence of oil makes coal particles more hydrophobic, at higher oil dosages the coal particles get agglomerated.