This paper presents the results of a study concerning the consolidation of aluminothermic niobium powder under high-pressure conditions at room temperature. The method of cold powder consolidation consists of two steps: initial die-compaction followed by high-pressure treatment in almost hydrostatic conditions. The densification behaviour of the aluminothermic niobium powder during compaction was evaluated by using the compaction response diagram. The microstructure of highly dense parts was evaluated by SEM. The influence of the precompacting pressure and the high pressure on the final density was investigated. Successful compaction was obtained for precompacting pressure of up to 700MPa and high pressure of up to 4GPa. The niobium powder compaction is governed, at the applied high-pressure range, by mechanisms such as axial and radial plastic deformation. In addition, the experimental results showed that porosity lower than 2% can be attained under high-pressure compaction conditions, without external heat supply.Niobium, which belongs to group Vb of the Periodic Table of Elements, is classified as a refractory metal because of its elevated melting point of 2468 Niobium is mainly processed by powder metallurgy (P/M) techniques The cold powder compaction in rigid dies at high pressures of some metals has been investigated This paper reports the densification behaviour of aluminothermic niobium powder under high-pressure cold compaction conditions up to 6 The aluminothermic niobium powder (ATR-niobium) of high purity obtained by aluminothermic reduction of the oxide Nb The ATR-niobium powder initially was submitted to a single action die-compaction step in a cylindrical 7 The high-pressure compaction needs an apparatus that can stably generate a pressure of more than 1 The variation of the green density and the relative density of die-pressed ATR-niobium powder compacts as a function of the applied pressure is shown in The high-pressure treatments can be done using different designs of the high-pressure device The results of compaction under high pressure are shown in Some important changes in the final density occurred for high pressures above 4 The fractional porosity ( From the results presented above, the following conclusions can be drawn. The ATR-niobium powder was successfully compacted under high-pressure conditions. The method used can be an alternative for Nb dense parts processing, without external heat supply. High final densities near theoretical density have been obtained. Extensive plastic deformation occurred during compaction. Only small flat pores are left. In the high-pressure zone, the combined axial and radial plastic deformation of the particles controls the compaction. It was also verified that the high final density obtained is dependent on the applied precompacting and high pressure. Although high densification has been achieved, structural defects in dense parts at some studied conditions were observed. Thus, this study suggests a precompacting value of up to 700 The authors would like to thank FAENQUIL-DEMAR (Lorena-SP) by the supply of the ATR-niobium powder.