The combustion synthesis of elemental Mo nanoparticles by zincothermic reduction of MoO3 was investigated in this research. It was determined that MoO3 reduces to Mo by means of two sub-reactions. The results showed that MoO3 reduces initially to MoO2 and subsequently dioxide phase reduces to elemental Mo. Due to the formation of MoO2 during the combustion moment, a considerable amount of unwanted Zn2Mo3O8 (2ZnO·3MoO2) phase was synthesized. Since the presence of this phase would prevent the reduction to be completed, hence this article was devoted to introduce some ways by which the zincothermic reduction of MoO3 can be completed. In one approach, the results indicated that by increasing the microwave heating duration after combustion moment, the unwanted Zn2Mo3O8 compound reduced successfully to Mo. In the other approach, the use of over-stoichiometric amounts of Zn led to prevent the formation of the undesired phase. In this research, X-ray diffraction technique (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) were used to characterize the products of the reactions.Molybdenum (Mo) is a body-centered refractory metal with the melting point of 2620 One of the most conventional methods for the preparation of molybdenum in metal industries is the hydrogen reduction of molybdenum trioxide, which is carried out at different temperature steps Recently, metallothermic reductive production of refractory metals has been suggested by various researchers Previous works have shown that Zn can reduce MoO The first goal of the current work was to study the feasibility of self-sustaining reduction of MoO In this research MoO     The absence of initial MoO  Two different approaches were studied to overcome the problem of Zn The effect of further microwave heating after the combustion was studied. For this reason, specimens were kept inside the chamber under microwave exposure for several times after their combustions. Here two different paths can be suggested for the mechanism of Zn In order to study the probability of the paths presented in Finally, this approach consisted of two consecutive steps. The first step was the combustion in which Zn This section deals with a way for the prevention of Zn  On the other hand, according to the Le Chatelier's principle, when a system at equilibrium is subjected to change in concentration, then the system re-adjusts itself to counteract the effect of the applied change and a new equilibrium is re-established. Therefore, adding extra amounts of Zn will shift reaction At last,  Solid-state reduction of MoO