Microwave treatment has been considered as a promising rock breakage method. The weakening mechanism of vaporizing expansion of pore water in sandstone under microwave irradiation was studied in this paper. The effect of water in the heating process was studied by comparing the heating characteristics of dry and saturated sandstones, which was further explained by the mercury intrusion porosimetry tests. Moreover, the influencing factors including rock strength, permeability, saturation degree and microwave power on rock bursting were investigated by comparing the bursting time of water-bearing sandstone samples under microwave irradiation. The results show that water plays a more important role in the heating process of sandstones with higher porosity and lower microwave sensitivity. The heating curves of saturated sandstones can be divided into 3 stages according to the heating rate, which is related to the interaction of water heating and steam escape during microwave irradiation. In addition, it is found that the favorable conditions of water-bearing sandstone bursting under microwave irradiation are low rock strength, low permeability, high saturation degree and high microwave power. This law can be explained by the interaction of rock properties and the generation, increase, diffusion, and escape of steam in rock.Mechanical rock breakage has experienced great development in the past century in the field of mining, mineral processing, stone processing, tunneling and petroleum drilling due to its advantages such as high mechanization degree, low disturbance to the surrounding rock and high construction efficiency. However, the mechanical method also has its limitations. For instance, low advance rates and excessive cutter wear take place when tunneling in rocks with high strength (especially rocks with uniaxial compressive strength over 200 MPa) using a tunnel boring machine, leading to an increase in construction cost and duration, and even unexpected early boring terminations. Under microwave irradiation, natural and induced dipoles in materials rotate hundreds of millions of times per second with the alternation of the electric field of microwave (the commonly used frequencies are 915 MHz and 2.45 GHz). Microwave energy is converted into heat through fierce friction between molecules, which results in overall temperature increase. Microwave irradiation features (1) volumetric heating, which means the interior and the exterior of a material are heated simultaneously and thereby the duration of heat conduction and energy consumption are greatly reduced compared to the traditional heating methods; (2) selective heating, which means that good microwave absorbers are selectively heated, whereas those poor microwave absorbers stay relatively cool, generating large enough thermal stresses to efficiently break rocks. Since the 1990s, the weakening effect of microwave irradiation on rocks has been extensively studied. It is found that the weakening is induced by 3 major mechanisms: different volumetric expansion of minerals with different dielectric properties, physical and chemical changes of minerals, and vaporizing expansion of pore water. Rocks are constituted of different minerals that have different microwave absorbing capacities. For example, iron oxide and biotite have strong absorption to microwave while quartz and feldspar don't. The heating effect of microwave can bring measurable physical and chemical changes to some minerals and greatly affect the heating and weakening effect of rock. The most common change is the α-β quartz phase transition at 573 °C. Natural rock has certain porosities, where more or less water exists depending on the surroundings. Water is an extremely strong absorbing material whose loss factor is 12.04 at room temperature, which is much higher than common rock-forming minerals. The mechanism of differential volumetric expansion between minerals has been systematically studied, while that of vaporizing expansion of pore water still needs further investigation. Sedimentary rocks cover three-quarters of the world's land area, which are the most common rocks in engineering. Sandstone, limestone and siliceous rock are three types of high-strength sedimentary rocks, among which sandstone is the most widespread, accounting for one third of sedimentary rocks. Meanwhile, according to the work by Peinsitt et al., 4 types of sandstone were obtained from a local stone market in Nanjing, China, including a feldspathic quartz sandstone (FQS), a lithic arkose sandstone (LAS), and two quartz sandstones (QS). The cuboid samples with a dimension of 50 The experimental apparatus used in the study was a 2.45 GHz multi-mode microwave oven with a power range of 0–2 kW (see Only one sample of each type of sandstone was heated repeatedly in the microwave oven under both dry and saturated conditions to avoid possible influence of rock property variation on the heating effect. Dry and saturated samples were prepared according to the standard method suggested by ISRM (1978). Combining the data from    As could be found in Stage 1 At this stage, except for the heating of minerals, water contained in the pores is heated rapidly by absorbing most of the microwave energy and converted into steam. Steam pressure is then generated due to the confinement of the rock structure, which in turn raises the boiling point of water. As a result, the water and steam continuously absorb microwave energy and reach higher temperature. The heat of water and steam is simultaneously conducted to minerals, thus playing a positive role in heating the sandstone sample. As the temperature rises and more pore water is converted into steam, the steam pressure is built up and the steam tends to escape from the rock when the pressure reaches a certain level. Since the temperature of steam is much higher than that of the sandstones, the escaping steam takes away some of the heat from the mixed media, thus having an adverse effect on the heating process. At Stage 1, the steam escape is weak and hence the heating rate of the saturated sample is higher than that of the dry one. Stage 2 At the second stage, with the reduction of water and steam contained in the sandstone sample, their positive role in heating the sample becomes weak. Meanwhile, the steam continuously escapes and takes the heat away from the sample. Therefore, the heating rate of the rock declines and becomes lower than that of the dry one. Stage 3 At the third stage, only a small amount of water remains in the sandstone sample (The water content is less than 0.1% after 8 min irradiation), which plays a negligible role in the heating process. The heating rate depends on the sensitivity of rock. In this case, the heating rates of saturated and dry samples are equal.  The MIP tests were further conducted to study the pore size distribution and permeability of the sandstones for better understanding of their heating characteristics. From LAS and QS #1 have similar stage characteristics due to almost the same pore size distribution and permeability. For FQS and QS #1, only one sharp peak at 1000 nm is observed. However, the peak value of FQS (0.073 mL/g) is greater than that of QS #1 (0.021 mL/g). This is consistent with their permeability and porosity. It demonstrates that, despite of similar pore sizes, FQS has more pores so that steam can escape faster. As a result, Stage 2 of QS #1 starts at the 5th min while that of FQS starts at the 3rd min with a sharper decline of heating rate. A broad peak ranging from 15,000 to 35,000 nm is observed in the pore size distribution curve of QS #2. Although its porosity is similar to FQS, the pores in QS #2 are larger in size. Meanwhile, it has a much higher permeability and intensive bubbles can be observed while soaking, which was not observed in FQS. It indicates that pores of QS #2 have larger sizes as well as better connectivity than those of FQS, thus a lower pressure is needed for steam escape. Saturated QS #2 and FQS samples, containing the same amount of water, have a higher heating rate than the dry ones at Stage 1. However, since the steam can easily escape from QS #2, its Stage 2 starts at the 1st min. After 2 min, with the increase of steam pressure, more steam escapes and more heat is taken from the rock sample, causing a drop of the rock temperature. After 4 min, almost all the water has escaped and its heating rate equals to that of the dry sample. With similar porosity but smaller pores and lower permeability, FQS has a lower steam escape rate, compared to QS #2. Therefore, its Stage 2 starts later and the heat loss due to steam escape could only slow down the heating rate instead of causing a temperature drop. By analyzing the sandstone bursting, it is found that rock strength, permeability, saturation degree and microwave power are the influencing factors. It can be seen from For LAS and QS #1, saturated samples burst at 75 s and 60 s under 2 kW microwave irradiation respectively. Since they have similar porosity and permeability, it indicates that a lower strength is favorable for saturated sandstone fragmentation by microwave as a lower steam pressure is required for rock bursting. Under 2 kW microwave irradiation, FQS burst at 49 s while no bursting occurred in QS #2. This indicates that permeability plays a key role in sandstone fragmentation by microwave. Sandstones with a lower permeability are more prone to burst. For FQS, most water contained in pores was converted into steam, producing high steam pressure because of a low steam escape rate. Rock bursting takes place when the pressure exceeds the rock strength. For QS #2, however, the build-up of steam pressure is greatly suppressed as a result of rapid steam escape due to its high permeability. Therefore, no bursting occurred in QS #2 under 2 kW microwave irradiation. FQS samples with saturation degrees of 100%, 28%, and 15% burst at 49 s, 70 s, and 86 s, respectively, while no bursting occurred in samples with a saturation degree of 10%. It indicates that sandstones with higher saturation degree are more prone to bursting under microwave irradiation. The interior of samples has a higher temperature than the exterior due to heat radiation into the surrounding air near the sample surfaces The steam pressure inside the sample is higher due to less steam escape and higher temperature compared to the exterior; As samples with higher saturation degree contain more water, high steam pressure is generated in a short time, during which little steam escapes and the sample burst from the interior; For samples with lower saturation degree, less water is contained and longer time is required to produce high steam pressure for bursting. With the increase of irradiation time, the internal pressure continuously transfers to the boundary due to the pressure difference and the pressure in the rock tends to distribute more evenly. Therefore, while the steam pressure exceeds the rock strength, the sample would eventually burst at multiple locations. No bursting occurred in the FQS samples with a saturation degree of 10% under 2 kW microwave irradiation. This is because the steam pressure increases too slow due to the small amount of water in the rock sample. Moreover, the steam escape also prevents the generation of high pressure for rock bursting. The saturated FQS sample didn't burst under 0.5 kW microwave irradiation (see Section As a summary, the favorable conditions of water-bearing sandstone bursting are low rock strength, low permeability, high saturation degree and high microwave power. It is worth noting that due to the limitation of microwave apparatus, no bursting occurred in saturated QS #2 and FQS samples with a saturation degree of 10% in the present study. However, they might burst under higher microwave power. In this paper, the rock breakage mechanism of vaporizing expansion of pore water in rock under microwave irradiation was investigated. The effect of water in the heating process was studied by comparing the heating characteristics of dry and saturated sandstones, which was further explained by the MIP test results. Moreover, the effects of rock strength, permeability, saturation degree and microwave power on rock bursting were investigated by comparing bursting time of water-bearing samples under microwave irradiation. The main conclusions are as follows: Water plays an important role in the heating process of all 4 types of sandstone in this paper. The heating characteristics of saturated sandstone are related to its porosity and microwave sensitivity. The effect of water is more pronounced for sandstones with higher porosity and lower microwave sensitivity. The heating curves of saturated sandstones can be divided into 3 stages according to the heating rate. At Stage 1, the heating rate of saturated sample is higher than that of dry one. At Stage 2, the heating rate of water-bearing sample declines and becomes lower than that of dry one. At Stage 3, the heating rate of saturated samples depends on the sensitivity of rock itself, which is equal to that of dry samples. This is related to the interaction of water heating and steam escape during microwave irradiation. The rate of steam escape is related to the rock permeability. The steam escapes more easily in a rock with higher permeability, which results in an earlier and longer second stage, as well as a sharper decline of heating rate (even causing a drop of the rock temperature). The influencing factors of sandstone bursting include rock strength, permeability, saturation degree and microwave power. The preferred conditions are low rock strength, low permeability, high saturation degree and high microwave power. For samples with different saturation degrees, smaller and more fragments are formed after bursting when the sample has a lower saturation degree. The above laws can be explained by the interaction of rock properties and the generation, increase, diffusion, and escape of steam in rock. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was funded by the