A simple and accurate electrolyte-equation of state is introduced for correlation of the mean activity coefficients of strong aqueous electrolyte solutions. The nonelectrolyte contribution of the new electrolyte-equation of state is based on the cubic square-well equation of state, SWEOS, that is composed of the van der Waals repulsive part of EOS and the attractive term is based on the square-well potential. The explicit version of the mean spherical approximation (MSA) is adopted for electrostatic contribution of electrolyte solution. The new electrolyte-equation of state, eEOS, has three adjustable parameters per each salt that are optimized by correlation of the mean activity coefficients of more than 130 binary aqueous electrolyte solutions at 25°C and 1bar. Furthermore, the parameters are used for prediction of the osmotic coefficients and densities of several aqueous binary electrolyte solutions at 25°C. Also the mean activity and osmotic coefficient of a number of electrolytes have been correlated in temperature range of 0–100°C. Moreover, the ionic specific parameters are obtained for five binary aqueous electrolyte solutions by simultaneous fitting of mean activity, osmotic coefficient and apparent molal volume. The results demonstrate that the new eEOS can be applied for accurate representation of the activity and osmotic coefficients of the aqueous electrolyte solutions at wide range of the electrolyte concentration and temperature of binaries.Accurate representation of thermodynamic properties of electrolyte solution is vital in design of many processes in chemical industries such as natural gas treatment, extractive distillation, desalination, hydrometallurgy, biotechnology, etc. Generally, there are two approaches for thermodynamic modeling of electrolyte solution, one major group of models is based on excess Gibbs energy function and the other category is developed from a fundamental basis that is based on the residual Helmholtz energy equation. The models such as electrolyte virial Pitzer equation Recently Haghtalab and Mazloumi Wu and Prausnitz So the expressions for each term in the total residual Helmohltz energy are proposed as follows. The Born equation Using Eq. Similarly, the chemical potential expression which is used for calculation of fugacity coefficient, is obtained by differentiation of residual Helmholtz energy respect to number of mole, As it can be seen the Born model is contributed to both pressure and chemical potential equations, if one uses the Pottel's model Moreover, the linear dependence of Born Helmohltz energy model respect to mole fraction leads to no contribution of the Born effect on the chemical potential equation. Therefore, in this work the contributions of the Born term to the pressure and chemical potential equations are vanished. On the other hand, the summations in the Born term are over ions, thus, it has no effect on chemical potential of the solvent. The contribution of the short-range forces is expressed by using the cubic SWEOS The pressure and chemical potential equations of CSW EOS are obtained as A few models such as Debye–Hückel and MSA have been used for long-range contribution of ions in the electrolyte solution. While the Debye–Hückel type models are frequently implemented in the activity coefficient models, a version of MSA theory is often used in the Helmohltz energy equation. In this work, the explicit simple version of MSA is adopted for long-range interaction of ions in the electrolyte solution As well as Born equation, the summations in the MSA term are over ions, so it has no effect on chemical potential of solvent molecule. Using the residual chemical potential, the unsymmetrical activity coefficient of ions in an electrolyte solution is calculated as The three adjustable parameters of water were obtained by simultaneous fitting of saturated vapor pressure and liquid density of water in the temperature range of 283–373 The new electrolyte-equation of state, eCSW, was used for correlation of the mean activity coefficient of 132 binary aqueous electrolyte solutions at 25 The results of the new eEOS is shown in To extend the present model to the other temperatures, nine aqueous electrolyte solutions have been selected that are given in As shown in One may consider that there are two types of the interaction parameters that have been used for electrolyte solutions so that one group of models is based on electrolyte parameters and the other group uses the specific ionic parameters. At this work, for the new EOS we used the electrolyte parameter for each electrolyte as given in A new electrolyte-equation of state was developed. The cubic nonelectrolyte part of the new eEOS was combination of vdW repulsive equation and the attractive term which is based on the square-well potential function. The explicit version of MSA theory was used for long-range contribution of electrolyte solution. The mean activity coefficients of 132 aqueous electrolyte solutions have been successfully correlated by the new eEOS at 25 molar Helmholtz free energy (J coefficients in Eq. dielectric constant of solution dielectric constant of solvent electronic charge (1.60219 Boltzmann's constant (1.38066 orientational parameter defined in Eq. molality (mol/kg) molecular weight of solvent (g total number of mole (mol) Avogadro's number (6.02205 pressure (Pa) gas constant (8.314 temperature (K) molar volume (m volume (m van der Waals close-packed volume (m mole fraction of component maximum coordination number charge number of ionic species a function of temperature defined in Eq. MSA screening parameters (m activity coefficient square-well potential parameter square-well potential depth (J) vacuum permittivity (8.85419 size parameter (m) fugacity coefficient Debye screening length (m constant (0.7405) chemical potential (J mol stoichiometric number objective function defined in Eq. osmotic coefficient cubic square-well electrolyte component binary pair of component mean spherical approximation theory solvent cationic property of electrolyte anionic property of electrolyte mean ionic property of electrolyte calculated properties experimental properties ideal gas molality scale residual properties mole fraction scale unsymmetrical normalization infinite dilution properties