Spalling of pillar ribs has been a major hazard in the mining industry for decades. In the absence of rib support guidelines, accidents have continued to occur in recent years. Developing effective support guidelines requires a complete understanding of complex pillar damage mechanisms. Continuum models represent a convenient tool for analyzing this problem, but the behavior of such models is dependent of the choice of the constitutive model. In this study, a recently proposed constitutive model was used to simulate the rib fracturing process in a longwall chain pillar at West Cliff mine. After calibration, the model was able to capture the rib displacement profiles for multiple locations of the longwall face and the stress evolution 4 m into the pillar. The rib bolts in the model were found to be yielding over 60% of their length under the headgate loading condition. The model also predicted a steady damage accumulation in the rib for certain face locations, which is consistent with the description of the rib at the site. Damage was localized along the upper part of the pillar and underscored the role that the dirt band played in controlling rib deterioration at the site. The ability of the numerical model to replicate field measurements provides confidence in the capabilities of the new constitutive model. Finally, the need of using multi-point calibration is highlighted by comparing the results of the calibrated model to an alternative model calibrated to a smaller amount of data.Coal pillars are natural supports that are left underground to uphold the structural and functional integrity of mine openings. Most modern mines employ squat pillars with The behavior of pillar ribs is governed by numerous variables: coal seam height, mining depth, in situ coal strength, cleat orientation with respect to entry direction, mining rate, support type and density, mechanical behavior of the interface between the host rock and the coal seam, etc ( In this study, a recently developed rock yield criterion has been employed in FLAC Continuum models calibrated using in situ data serve as useful tools for studying complex physical phenomena. For example, Over the years, continuum models have been successfully used for simulating different aspects of coal pillar behavior. In all the aforementioned studies, the coal pillars were represented using either the Mohr-Coulomb strain-softening model or the Hoek-Brown model with residual strength parameters. In contrast, this study uses a new constitutive model based on the fundamental fracturing process of brittle rocks. This is likely to be more representative of coal mass behavior, given that coal is known to be highly brittle in nature. A note of caution when employing continuum models with a complex constitutive relationship is to understand the uncertainties associated with the modeling method ( The progressive S-shaped criterion is built upon the previous works of The criterion has three major thresholds: (a) Yield threshold: The low confinement portion corresponds to the crack initiation threshold ( The yield threshold evolves to the peak threshold over a specific range of plastic shear strain values The progressive S-shaped criterion was implemented in FLAC 4 cohesion values: Two for the peak threshold and one each for the yield and residual thresholds; 5 friction angles: Two each for the yield and peak thresholds and one for the residual threshold; and 2 plastic shear strains: Further details on the yield criterion are presented by The West Cliff mine is a longwall mine located in the south-eastern part of Australia. The particular panel under consideration is housed in the Bulli seam and has a working depth of 480 m below ground surface. A two-entry mining system is employed in the mine, with the pillars spaced at 125 m and 42 m center-to-center along and across the length of the panel, respectively. There is some variability in the thickness of the coal seam (2.7–3.2 m) but at this locality, it was 3 m. Correspondingly, the entry was 3 m high and had a width of 4.8 m. The immediate roof in the study area primarily consists of mudstones and interbedded sandstones and was separated from the coal seam by a narrow dirt band. This was thought to be responsible for inducing instability in the entry-side ribs ( At Site A, two 1.2 m long, 16 mm diameter, grouted rebars were installed at 1 m spacing along the long axis of the pillar. The upper row of bolts secured a 400 mm wide and 2.4 m long steel strap to the rib. A two-dimensional (2D) plane-strain model of a half pillar and half entry with dimensions of 21 m (along Only 14 m of the roof and 14 m of the floor were simulated in order to reduce the model runtime. The sides, front, back and bottom were constrained by rollers. A stress boundary condition was imposed on the top surface. The plane-strain assumption is applicable in this case since the instruments are located near the middle of the longer edge of the pillar. The three-dimensional (3D) stress arching effect reduces as one moves away from the cross cut. The stress is almost non-existent when the center of the pillar is reached ( The simulation in this study was conducted in three distinct stages similar to those used by In the first stage, the model was run without any excavation until mechanical equilibrium was achieved. Pre-mining horizontal stresses of 16.3 MPa (along The next stage consisted of developing the entry using the traction reduction method ( In the final stage, bolts were installed in the rib, and the vertical stress along the top of the model was increased by 0.2 MPa/step to simulate the retreat of the longwall face, using the same loading procedure of It is acknowledged that the gateroad loading is complex and asymmetric in nature. However, in absence of any pertinent information regarding loading at West Cliff mine ( Although the progressive S-shaped criterion was originally developed for hard brittle rocks that exhibit spalling failures, it has been shown to be applicable to coal as well given its documented brittle behavior ( In hard rock pillars, extensile spalling fractures also form parallel to the rib surface. The similarity in the direction of anisotropy in the coal pillar and typical spall fractures in hard rock pillars implies that an isotropic rock yield criterion (like the progressive S-shaped criterion) should be capable of approximating the compound damage process (spalling through intact coal and minor buckling along cleats) at this site. The calibrated parameter set obtained in this study, however, might not be capable of reproducing rib damage where the cleats are oriented along some other direction. In continuum models, the macroscopic behavior is controlled by both the yield criterion and the dilation angle model. Numerous studies have found that dilation angle varies with damage (quantified using plastic shear strain) and confining stress ( The strength and dilation parameters were calibrated by first varying them individually to understand their effect on the model response, followed by simultaneous changes to multiple parameters (considering the ones that have the greatest impact) until the field-measured displacement and stress profiles could be reasonably reproduced. The calibrated coal parameters are listed in In total, 17 parameters were constrained by comparing the model responses to measured stresses and displacement profiles for different locations of the longwall faces. Some of the dilation parameters were not varied as a part of the calibration process (  The original data presented by An interesting trend observed in the data is the large increase in rib displacement between stresses of 4 MPa and 6 MPa. The two sets of data points were separated by about 67 m of longwall face advance. Such sudden changes in displacement tend to be related to discontinuum damage processes, as previously observed by the authors at a longwall mine in the Western US. At the Western US mine, the pillar edge collapsed completely within 5–10 m advance of the longwall face ( The axial load along the bottom rock bolt (location shown in The capability of the FLAC During model calibration, another set of input parameters that could reproduce the measured displacements but not the stresses was determined (see The displacement-calibrated model better replicates the displacements observed under development loading conditions in comparison to the displacement and stress calibrated model. However, this model shows a significant mismatch between the rib displacements for stress changes less than 6 MPa ( This model comparison illustrates the non-uniqueness issue in numerical models when dealing with problems that are data-limited relative to the model complexity ( The progressive S-shaped criterion has over 10 input parameters, and this can be problematic from a practical standpoint. However, since the criterion is based on the fundamental damage mechanism of intact rock, many of the different input parameters can be easily determined or estimated (e.g. the crack initiation (CI) threshold can be determined from laboratory testing ( This study presented a calibrated model of a coal pillar rib using a recently developed rock yield criterion (the progressive S-shaped yield criterion) in FLAC A rapid increase in rib displacements was noted in the field data when the face advanced from 66 m outby to 133 m outby. Such changes can manifest as rib-bursts in the field but in this case, the rib was supported and was described to be in a good condition by The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. The research conducted in this study was funded by the