In the first part of this two article series on the imperative technologies for wastewater treatment, a review of oxidation processes operating at ambient conditions was presented. It has been observed that none of the methods can be used individually in wastewater treatment applications with good economics and high degree of energy efficiency. Moreover, the knowledge required for the large-scale design and application is perhaps lacking. In the present work, an overview of hybrid methods (the majority are a combination of advanced oxidation processes) has been presented. Hybrid methods viz Ultrasound/H2O2 or ozone, UV/H2O2 or ozone, Ozone/H2O2, Sono-photochemical oxidation, Photo–Fenton processes, catalytic advanced oxidation processes, use of advanced oxidation processes in conjunction with biological oxidation, SONIWO (sonochemical degradation followed by wet air oxidation), and CAV-OX have been discussed with specific reference to the principles behind the expected synergism, different reactor configurations used and optimum considerations for the operating and geometric parameters. An overview of different chemicals degraded has been presented. Some of the important works evaluating the application of these processes to real effluents have been described in detail. Some guidelines for the future work required to facilitate efficient large-scale operation have been given. A model effluent treatment scheme based on the various techniques discussed in the present work has been presented.In the previous work ( The similarity between the mechanism of destruction in the case of different advanced oxidation techniques and some of the common optimum operating conditions point towards the synergism between these methods, and the fact that combination of these advanced oxidation processes should give better results as compared to individual techniques. Moreover, some of the drawbacks of the individual techniques can be eliminated by some characteristics of other techniques. For example, the efficiency of photocatalytic oxidation is severely hampered by two main factors viz mass transfer limitations and fouling of the solid catalyst. If photocatalytic oxidation technique is used in combination with the ultrasonic irradiation, not only the rate of generation of hydroxyl radicals will be increased (due to increased energy dissipation and generation of extreme conditions of temperature and pressure due to the cavitation phenomena), but also due to the acoustic streaming and turbulence created by ultrasonic irradiation, mass transfer resistance will be eliminated. Also, the turbulence helps in cleaning of the catalyst, which increases the efficiency of photocatalytic oxidation process. There are many other combination techniques studied extensively in the literature for a variety of contaminants. The present work aims at reviewing different combination techniques and recommendations have been made in terms of the selection of operating conditions for cost-effective operation. The main driving mechanism in the degradation of pollutants using ultrasound is the generation and subsequent attack of the free radicals though some of the reactions have been explained more suitably on the basis of hot-spot theory (localized generation of extreme conditions of temperature and pressure). In the case of reactions where the controlling mechanism is the free radical attack, the use of hydrogen peroxide or ozone should enhance the rates of degradation due to generation of additional free radicals. The reversible reaction of dissociation of hydrogen peroxide liberating free radicals is a well-known fact. Though the combination of ultrasound with hydrogen peroxide looks to be a promising option to increase the generation of free radicals, not many studies have been reported in the literature to the best of our knowledge. This may be attributed to the fact that the concentration of hydrogen peroxide plays a crucial role in deciding the extent of enhancement obtained for the combined process. On one side where hydrogen peroxide acts as a source of free radicals by the dissociation process, it also acts as the scavenger of the generated free radicals, as indicated by the following reaction scheme: Thus, the effect of the combined process will be very much dependent on the utilization of free radicals by the pollutant molecules, which in turn is dependent on the efficiency of contact of the generated free radicals with the pollutant over a specified time period. Operating pH, the intensity of turbulence existing in the reactor, state (whether molecular or ionic) and nature (hydrophobic or hydrophilic) of the pollutant, and sometimes concentration of the pollutant and composition of the effluent stream are the crucial factors to be analyzed before selecting the combination of ultrasound with hydrogen peroxide as the oxidation treatment scheme.  In a recent study ( In another recent work ( The combined effect of ultrasound and hydrogen peroxide may further be improved by using catalyst acting on the dissociation reaction of hydrogen peroxide. To summarize, it can be said that the use of hydrogen peroxide in conjunction with ultrasound is beneficial only till an optimum loading and where the free radical attack is the controlling mechanism of destruction. The optimum value will be dependent on the nature of the effluent stream and the operating conditions as mentioned above and laboratory scale studies are essential to establish this optimum for the effluent stream in question. Literature reports may not give significantly correct solutions (for optimum concentration) even if matching is done with respect to the primary components as it is the auxiliary components of waste stream (most notably radical scavengers such as bicarbonate, carbonate ions, The release of free radicals due to the presence of ozone along with ultrasonic irradiation is a two-step process ( The reaction products migrate to the interfacial sheath of the bubble where they subsequently react in the aqueous phase. The turbulence created by the acoustic streaming induced by ultrasound is bound to reduce the mass transfer limitations. Due to this fact and production of two free radicals per molecule of ozone consumed, even for compounds that react fairly quickly with ozone, the rate of degradation will be enhanced in the combined operation of ozone and sonication. Further, the absorption of ozone in the solution and hence its utilization will also be enhanced due to the elimination of the G-L mass transfer resistance by the action of ultrasound. Presence of hydrogen peroxide simultaneously may also further enhance the contribution of ozone in the overall generation of free radicals by following mechanism Comparatively, the use of ozone in combination with ultrasonic irradiation has been studied more extensively. As explained in the case of hydrogen peroxide combination with ultrasound, it must be stated first that the enhancement in the rates of degradation will only be observed if the free radical attack is the controlling mechanism.    To summarize the discussion of use of ozone in combination with sonochemical degradation, the following important points need to be noted: The synergistic effect of combining ozonation with ultrasonic irradiation is observed only when the free radical attack is the controlling mechanism and the rate of generation of free radicals due to ultrasonic action alone is somewhat lower (at lower frequencies of operation and power dissipation levels). At higher frequencies of operation, optimum for the ozone concentration exists and should be established by laboratory scale studies for the pollutant in question as the published literature usually deals with model simulated wastes and may not give similar results with actual waste containing radical scavengers as discussed earlier. The rate of sonolytic ozonation will be higher at lower concentration of the pollutant and hence dilution of the effluent stream may be considered as a pre-treatment scheme only after balancing the enhanced power requirements for the treatment of large quantum of effluent against the reduction obtained in the time of treatment due to enhanced rates of reaction at diluted conditions. The effect of the presence of radical scavengers such as bicarbonate, chloride, sulfate ions, naturally occurring material will be dependent on the pollutant in question. For volatile materials such as chloroform, MTBE, the reactions take place in the cavitating bubble and hence the effect will not be felt. But for the majority of the other contaminants, the reaction takes place usually in the liquid bulk or gas–liquid interface and hence the decrease in the rates of degradation process will be significant. Acid pre-treatment (only with a weak acid for the selective removal of ionic radical scavengers; also other types of treatment may be required if some of the non-ionic radical scavengers are present even under acidic conditions) along with sparging with neutral gas can be done for increasing the reactivity of the effluent stream. It must also be noted that, no doubt, a large concentration of the weak acid will be required for achieving similar acidic conditions as compared to the stronger acid but if the selection of the weak acid is made in such a way that radical scavenging action of the dissociated acid is not there (Strong acid counter-ions, i.e. Cl The principle behind the beneficial effects observed using ultraviolet light in combination with hydrogen peroxide or ozone as compared to the individual application, lies in the fact that the rate of generation of free radicals is significantly enhanced in the case of combination technique, which is very similar to Ultrasound/H  Synergism between UV photolysis and hydrogen peroxide will be beneficial only for the contaminants, which require a relatively higher level of oxidation conditions (higher activation energies). If the combination technique is applied to contaminants like 4 chlorophenol, the observed enhancement in terms of substrate removal rates as compared to the UV photolysis is marginal. It should be also noted that though the substrate removal rates are marginally affected, the overall degradation mechanism might be affected to a higher degree. An analysis in terms of COD/TOC removal should provide a better picture for the comparison of the efficacy of the hybrid technique as against the individual technique. The kinetic rate constant for the degradation process is observed to be inversely proportional to the initial concentration of the pollutant and hence dilution of the effluent stream should be done at an optimum level. It should be also noted that the net removal of the pollutant will also be dependent on the driving force available for the reaction and hence the exact dependency should be established with the laboratory scale studies. On the other hand, it may even be observed at times that absolutely no reduction in TOC is observed even for the combination technique. In such cases, dilution factor of 10–15 may also be required before obtaining any appreciable degree of mineralization. For such cases, this method should only be used as a pre-treatment stage followed by biological oxidation or new hybrid methods consisting of additional oxidants, e.g. Fenton's reagent should be devised. The concentration of hydrogen peroxide also needs to be properly selected. Usually there is an optimum concentration beyond which the presence of hydrogen peroxide is detrimental to the degradation reaction due to the scavenging action. Lower operating pH (in the range 2.5–3.5) is usually preferred for the combination technique of UV photolysis coupled with hydrogen peroxide and the exact value is dependent on the p Presence of radical scavengers is a crucial factor in deciding the overall efficiency of the process. Usually there is an optimum concentration of the radical scavengers below which the reduction in the rates of degradation is marginal. Presence of compounds (e.g. humic acid), which results in strong absorption of incident UV light is another factor that needs to be considered while adjusting the dose of hydrogen peroxide. If these chemicals are present in the effluent stream, higher dosage of hydrogen peroxide will be required to achieve the synergistic effect. Kinetic modeling of the degradation process is the key point in the effective design of the reactors. A most realistic reaction model should consider all the chemical and photochemical reactions (the number may be even above 50–100), including the effect of the presence of radical scavengers and should be as rigorous as possible due to the observed major influence of other minor components. The work of Thus, it can be said that the future work should be directed in developing realistic kinetic models and in establishing the optimum conditions for hydrogen peroxide dose, concentration of radical scavengers, pH for a variety of different contaminants and mixtures. If the pertinent information is not available in the existing literature, laboratory scale studies with near identical geometric and operating conditions are recommended with the real effluents in question.  The discussion about ozone/UV process follows a much similar path as the UV/H  Ozone feed rate is one of the most important factors that decides the efficacy of the UV/O  Operating temperature also plays an important role in deciding the extent of degradation for a particular contaminant. In the case of UV/O   To summarize the discussion on UV/O Use higher ozone partial pressures and continuous bubbling. Lower initial concentration of the pollutant is preferred; effluent stream needs dilution. Operating temperature should be optimized considering the enhancement in the rate of degradation process and lower ozone solubility at higher temperatures. Operating pH should be near neutral or slightly alkaline (in the range 7–8). Presence of radical scavengers in high concentrations inhibits the degradation process, as free radical attack is the controlling mechanism. The capability of ozone in oxidizing various pollutants by direct attack on the different bonds (CC bond (   If humic acid is present in lower concentrations, it may act as a radical chain initiator (  Another crucial factor in deciding the efficacy of the combination technique is the operating pH. The initial concentration of the pollutant also affects the rate of degradation, though the concentrations of ozone and hydrogen peroxide may be suitably adjusted so as to treat a particular loading of the pollutant.  Few recent studies have indicated that multistage injection systems (reactors in series) are beneficial ( The following important considerations can be highlighted to summarize the discussion on the use of combination of ozone and hydrogen peroxide as the advanced oxidation technology: The combination technology will be particularly helpful for the pollutants showing less reactivity towards the molecular ozone attack and for the systems where no radical chain initiators such as humic acid in low concentrations are present. The operating conditions for attaining maximum efficiency can be given as optimum ozone and hydrogen peroxide concentration (depends on the nature of the effluent stream and to be established with preliminary studies), near neutral pH, lower initial concentration of the pollutants, pre-treatment to lower the concentration of radical scavengers and also to neutralize lower organic solutes specifically having strong reactivity towards ozone/free radicals, which may interfere in the oxidation of higher molecular weight complex organic compounds as observed by The design of the reactor for increasing the ozone utilization is another critical factor. Though spray columns have been reported to be beneficial as compared to commonly used bubble columns or stirred reactors, their efficacy in treating large quantum of effluent needs to be tested before a definite conclusion can be established. Use of static mixers ( Multistage injection systems are another recent invention, reported to yield much better results as compared to conventional operation. Apart from using reactors in series, the addition of hydrogen peroxide or ozone can be adjusted in increasing steps depending on the concentration of the remaining pollutants as well as the oxidation products. Also, addition of hydrogen peroxide at multiple locations is promising technique rather than single point addition. Detailed analysis, however, is required for a variety of pollutants before these systems can be considered for practical applications. In the case of photocatalytic oxidation, the most common problem associated is the reduced efficiency of photo-catalyst with continuous operation possibly due to the adsorption of contaminants at the surface and blocking of the UV activated sites, which makes them unavailable for the destruction. Thus, our aim should be in devising a technique for proper continuous cleaning of the catalyst surface during the photocatalytic operation. Ultrasonic irradiation is one such technique that can be used simultaneously with UV/solar irradiation. Moreover, photocatalytic oxidation technique is also affected by severe mass transfer limitations especially in the immobilized catalyst type of reactors, which are generally preferred over slurry reactors to avoid solid catalyst separation problems. One more factor suggesting that the two techniques will give better results when operated in combination is the fact that for both the techniques (UV and US), basic reaction mechanism is the generation of free radicals and subsequent attack by these on the pollutant organic species. If the two modes of irradiations are operated in combination, more free radicals will be available for the reaction, thereby increasing the rates of reaction. Thus, the expected synergism between these two modes of irradiation can be possibly attributed to: Cavitational effects leading to increase in the temperatures and pressure at the localized microvoid cavity implosion sites. Cleaning and sweeping of the TiO Mass transport of the reactants and products is increased at the catalyst surface and in the solution, due to the facilitated transport by shockwave propagation. Surface area is increased by fragmentation or pitting of the catalyst. Cavitation induced radical intermediates participate in the destruction of organic compounds. The organic substrate reacts directly with the photogenerated surface holes and electrons under cavitating conditions. Most of these effects are likely to be occurring simultaneously and though their relative contributions to the ultrasonic enhancement of heterogeneous photocatalytic process is not established, the overall global effect is the substantial enhancement in the rates of destruction. There have been many studies depicting the observed synergism and the enhanced rates of degradation for the combinatorial operation of sonochemical reactors and photocatalytic oxidation. It is of utmost importance to operate simultaneously rather than having sequential irradiation of ultrasound followed by photocatalytic oxidation. This is because the catalyst surface is kept clean continuously due to the cleaning action of ultrasound in the operation as a result of which maximum sites are available for the reaction. Also, the number of free radicals generated in simultaneous irradiation (more dissociation of water molecules due to more energy dissipation and also the presence of solid particles enhances the ultrasound effects due to surface cavitation and adsorption of contaminants) will be the maximum when compared to the sequential operation, thereby increasing the rate of degradation. The sequential operation may also yield similar rates of degradation for some specific cases such as equilibrium-controlled operations with very low rates of adsorption. The stability of photocatalyst in terms of shape, size and the structure of the molecules, and also their support in the case of supported photocatalyst is another critical factor affecting the extent of enhancement. It might happen that under the ultrasonic irradiation, the crystal structure is affected thereby affecting the adsorption characteristics of the pollutant molecules on titania, which in turn affects the rate of photocatalytic degradation. Thus, the aim should be at the development of proper supports for loading titania, which are stable even in the presence of turbulence generated due to acoustic streaming under the effect of ultrasonic irradiation. It must be noted at this stage that although, this problem will not arise in the case of slurry reactors (on the other hand, defragmentation under the action of ultrasound will increase the effective surface area available for reaction), these are in general not preferred as compared to immobilized or supported catalyst reactors due to the problem of solid separation. It is also important to state here that the separation problems associated with the slurry reactors will be reduced to an extent for the combination technique due to the reduction in the catalyst loading required for the same extent of degradation. The different reactor designs used so far for evaluating synergism between ultrasound and ultraviolet irradiation have been depicted in There have been some reports indicating that the synergistic effects are obtained only at volumes above 300 ml ( Aeration results in enhanced benefits in the presence of ultrasound. This can be attributed to the fact that one of the mechanisms explaining the observed enhancement ( The operating pH is another crucial factor in deciding the rates of degradation and hence the overall efficacy of the process. There have been several studies in the past although for an individual operation of ultrasonic irradiation as well as photocatalytic oxidation ( The rate of sonophotocatalytic degradation has been observed to increase in the presence of H  Another additive that should affect the rates of combination technique is ozone. It can also be seen from the table that apart from few studies by group of Fung ( Cavitation generated by alternative means, i.e. hydrodynamic cavitation (Gogate and Pandit, 2001) may be used instead of acoustic cavitation in the large-scale treatment of wastewaters. Indeed, there exists one such commercial process (CAV–OX process), which employs ultraviolet radiation, hydrodynamic cavitation and hydrogen peroxide to oxidize organic compounds present in the water at ppm level concentrations to non-detectable levels. The system has been used successfully for the effective degradation of volatile organic compounds primarily trichloroethane, benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene and xylene. Hydrogen peroxide is added to the contaminated groundwater, which is then pumped through a cavitation nozzle, followed by ultraviolet radiation ( A combination of hydrogen peroxide and UV radiation with Fe(II) or Fe(III) oxalate ion, the so-called photo–Fenton process produces more hydroxyl radicals in comparison to the conventional Fenton method (Fe(II) with hydrogen peroxide) or the photolysis, thus promoting the rates of degradation of organic pollutants. It should be also noted here that the exact mechanism and the role of Fe(II) and Fe(III) ions; identifying the exact equilibrium concentration of the two species is very complicated and not understood in detail up to now. Fe(III) oxalate complexes are also photoreactive, in fact giving more quantum yield of Fe(II) ions as compared to the Fe(III) hydroxy complexes and also the absorption range is extended to 570 nm leading to an increase in the absorption coefficient. The reactions in this case can be given as: Thus, due to the reaction of intermediate oxalate radicals with the Fe(III) oxalate complex, additional Fe(II) ions are generated. Subsequently, the generated Fe(II) ions react with hydrogen peroxide leading to the formation of the free radicals. Fe The hydroxyl radicals formed in the system are highly reactive oxidants and initiate the oxidative destruction of pollutants (RH) in water, which may lead to a total mineralization of the organic pollutants An organic radical generated in the reaction sequence reacts instantaneously with dissolved oxygen to yield a peroxyl radical, which initiates the free radical reaction chain leading to the subsequent oxidation. The use of photo–Fenton technique for the destruction of pollutants is not new to the researchers. The efficacy of photo–Fenton technique is significantly higher as compared to the Fenton oxidation or the photolysis alone. Use of sunlight in the case of commercial applications would be significantly cheaper and is also suitable due to the formation of Fe(OH) For the treatment of highly loaded pollutants, appropriate dilution factors must be used before the oxidation treatment. Aeration results in significantly enhanced rates of degradation. It is important to select the salt, i.e. appropriate combination of Fe(III) and the counterion so that the dissociation is favored at the operating pH and enhanced concentrations of Fe There are reports in the literature that the effect of radical scavengers such as Operating pH is always one of the crucial factors affecting the rates of degradation and for the photo–Fenton oxidations strongly acidic conditions are favored (pH of 2.8 has been used in majority of the studies). Under such acidic conditions, the effect of radical scavengers such as bicarbonate and carbonate ions will not be felt. It should also be noted that the cost associated with the achievement of acidic conditions will indeed have to be compared with the beneficial effects obtained due to the elimination of ionic radical scavengers as similar intrinsic rates of Fenton oxidation can also be obtained using appropriate ion chelators at near neutral pH. Majority of the studies have reported that an increase in the concentration of Fe(III) ions increases the rate of degradation continuously and there is no optimum value beyond which the rates either stabilize or become lower. It should also be noted that this conclusion could not be generalized as the radical scavenging action of Fe In the case of photo–Fenton techniques, H Incident light intensity and UV component of the same is also another factor affecting the rate of generation of the free radicals and hence the rates of degradation of the pollutants. Thus, it appears that photo–Fenton oxidation technique is much more suitable and energy efficient for the degradation of complex mixture of the pollutants and reactors based on the use of sunlight for photo-activation should be developed for large scale economical applications. The use of semiconductor catalyst with ultraviolet/solar irradiations have been reported to give better results as compared to photochemical oxidation and it forms a separate class of oxidation treatment described more commonly as photocatalytic oxidation. In the earlier work ( The presence of solid catalyst in the sonochemical reactors can enhance the rates of degradation by the following mechanisms: Formation of increased cavitation nuclei due to a greater number of discontinuities in liquid continuum as a result of the presence of particles to give larger number of collapse events resulting in increase in the number of free radicals. In a biphasic solid–liquid medium irradiated by power ultrasound, major mechanical effects are reduction of particle size leading to increased surface area and the formation of liquid jets at solid surfaces by the unsymmetrical inrush of the fluid into the collapsing voids. These jets not only provide surface cleaning but also induce pitting and surface activation effects and increase the rate of phase mixing and mass transfer. Enhanced generation of free radicals due to some catalysts such as FeSO Better distribution of the organic pollutants increasing the concentration at reaction sites. Alteration of physical properties (vapor pressure, surface tension) facilitating the generation of cavities and also resulting in more violent collapse of the cavities.  Nagata et al. (2000) studied the effect of Fe(II) ions on the degradation of 3-chlorophenol in a 65 ml cylindrical glass vessel irradiated with ultrasound at 200 kHz frequency and 200 W input power. Addition of Fe(II) at the concentration of 1 mM has been reported to be beneficial, but further increase to 2 mM concentration decreases the rate of 3-chlorophenol degradation possibly due to scavenging of the hydroxyl radicals by the additional Fe(II). Recently,  Use of catalyst in conjunction with ultrasound seems to be a promising strategy since the effect is by multiple mechanisms; still a lot of work is required in generalizing the observed trends and also laboratory studies will be required for deciding the optimum conditions for catalyst concentration, power density into the medium, operating frequency and reactor configuration for the target pollutant. The published studies seem to be restricted to iron compounds (enhancement in the generation of free radicals by Fenton chemistry mechanism; hence optimum concentration is observed) or sodium chloride (increasing the distribution of organic pollutants at the gas–liquid interface). Future studies may be directed at using CuO, Mn Oxidation using ozone follows two main reaction pathways; direct attack of the ozone molecule on the pollutants or generation of free radicals due to decomposition of ozone and the subsequent attack of the free radicals on the pollutants. Catalytic ozonation is a promising technique mainly developed for systems which are weakly reactive with ozone (e.g. atrazine shows a limited reactivity toward molecular ozone (     Since the main mechanism driving the catalytic ozonation using Mn(II) is the formation of Mn(IV) and its subsequent catalytic action on the generation of free radicals ( Kinetic modeling forms the essential part in the design of reactors and establishing the operating parameters required for treating a given load of the effluents. Kinetic modeling has been studied in detail for the catalytic ozonation by Mn(II) catalyst ( It can be said that, though catalytic ozonation has shown good results with atrazine, lower molecular weight acids, more work is required with a variety of pollutants and also different catalysts (in majority of the studies Mn(II) is used as the catalyst). The optimum conditions can be given as optimum loading of ozone, lower operating pH, lower temperatures, increased concentration of Mn(II) up to an optimum value, presence of naturally occurring materials in low concentrations and removal of radical scavengers such as bicarbonate ions, The efficiency of the biological oxidation techniques is often hampered by the presence of bio-refractory materials, though these are most conventionally used and economical treatment strategies. On the other hand, though advanced oxidation processes promise degradation of almost all the contaminants, their use is hampered by the fact that the knowledge required for the design and efficient operation of the large-scale reactors is perhaps lacking. Moreover, considering the economical aspects, the use of advanced oxidation processes alone as treatment procedure may not look lucrative. Thus, a hybrid method consisting of using advanced oxidation processes to reduce the toxicity of the effluent up to a desired level followed by biological oxidation is perhaps needed for the future. In this section, some of the hybrid methods based on this principle have been discussed with emphasis on the recent year studies.    It can be said that the use of advanced oxidation processes in conjunction with the biological oxidation has been a recent innovation in the treatment strategies for the wastewater treatment. Apart from the work of The use of wet air oxidation is becoming popular to treat various industrial toxic and refractory wastes. Wet oxidation is a process of subcritical oxidation of organic matter in aqueous phase with oxygen (either in pure form or as air) at elevated temperatures (100–350 °C) and at pressures ranging from 0.5 to 20 MPa. The slow rate of oxidation coupled with refractory nature of some of the complex materials, e.g. polychlorinated biphenyls, polyaromatics is a major limitation of the wet air oxidation process. Due to the requirements of severe conditions of temperatures and pressures, capital and operating cost is another major factor in deciding overall economics of the waste treatment plants. Sonication can serve as a pre-treatment to the waste stream in order to increase the reactivity by wet air oxidation, most importantly at less severe conditions. On the other hand, the disadvantages of using sonication alone in the wastewater treatment schemes are well known (  In the same reactor configuration as used by Thus, the efficacy of hybrid technique is established against the individual technique of wet air oxidation. It may, however, happen that the refractory nature of the waste stream towards the wet air oxidation treatment may not be altered even after pre-treatment with sonication. This is usually the case with the real wastewaters containing a variety of compounds, more importantly the mixture of complex polyaromatics, polyhalo compounds, etc. A critical analysis of these studies leads us to the following important considerations: The hybrid technique of SONIWO is more beneficial as compared to individual technique of wet air oxidation. Importantly these studies are based on the real industrial wastes, which makes the findings even more authentic. There is always a difference between the results obtained for the real effluents as compared to simulated effluents containing the primary components of the waste stream. The auxiliary chemicals present in the traces usually hold the key to the success of particular treatability scheme. Presence of CuSO Addition of phenol in small amounts (possibly due to radical chain reaction initiation) also enhances the rate of generation of free radicals and hence may be used during the wet air oxidation process. Again further studies can be done with different concentrations of phenol to clearly establish the effect. Operating pH plays a crucial role in the overall rates of degradation and acidic conditions are recommended. Moreover, if the pH is likely to be altered during the sonication and wet air oxidation processes, addition of acidic agents might also be done in order to increase the efficacy. Additional pre-treatment in terms of adsorption using activated carbon or membrane separation may also be needed depending on the characteristics of the waste. These pre-treatments might be needed prior to any of the advanced oxidation process or their combinations discussed earlier and a decision about this will have to be made by doing laboratory studies with the actual waste. A crucial point that needs to be considered here is that all the 4 studies by the group of Mahajani as discussed above are restricted to laboratory scale, i.e. capacity of 500 ml for the sonication reactor whereas 300 ml for the wet oxidation reactor. The efficacy of sonication in reducing the complexity of the waste stream will always be a question when large-scale operations are considered. Also, the sonochemical reactor used in the work is the ultrasonic bath, which is not very efficient in the case of sonochemical treatment; its main use is for cleaning purposes. Thus, a definite conclusion about the use of sonication for reducing the toxicity of the waste stream and subsequent operation of wet oxidation reactor at severely less conditions with enhanced efficiency, cannot be made at this stage.  The purpose of using an equalization tank is homogenization and proper mixing of the effluent stream coupled with, addition of solid catalyst TiO Initially, the effluent is pumped through a hydrodynamic cavitation setup consisting of orifice plates in the main line, which generates cavitation due to sudden drop in the pressure. The bypass line is used to adjust the pressure and the flow rate through the mainline and these parameters should be kept just below the maximum values required for the onset of supercavitation. The free area on the orifice plates should be distributed in large number of small diameter holes and the free area should be at minimum so as to generate intense cavitation. The distance downstream of the orifice plates should be adjusted in such a way that the cavities generated at the orifice plate travel and are available as nuclei in the sonochemical reactor. The sonochemical reactor is basically a flow cell equipped with multiple frequency, multiple transducers and serves as multi purpose unit. Firstly, cavitation takes place in the reactor, which helps in the destruction of contaminants, and intensity of this is further increased due to additional nuclei from the preceding hydrodynamic cavitation setup. The turbulence generated by the acoustic streaming helps in catalyst cleaning (mainly for the recycled catalyst) and also in increasing the surface area of the catalyst due to fragmentation (mainly for the make-up catalyst load). Further, it also helps in increasing the rate of decomposition of hydrogen peroxide and ozone generating enhanced number of free radicals. Addition of Fe(III) ions in proper concentration also helps in increasing the free radical generation. The dose of ozone and hydrogen peroxide should be adjusted depending on the contaminant load in such a way that some residual amount of the oxidants is also available in the subsequent photosonic reactor. It may be advised here that depending on the constituents in the effluent stream, ozone should be kept at a minimum possible load so as to minimize the energy consumption of the system. The photosonic reactor is a tubular reactor irradiated by sunlight with the help of reflectors, UV light placed at the annular location (the incident intensity and frequency of intermittent operation should be adjusted depending on the pollutant load so as to minimize the energy consumption) and ultrasonic transducers placed at the bottom of the reactor. The selection of operating frequency and power dissipation for the ultrasonic transducers should be done based on the guidelines available for sonochemical reactors, i.e. at optimized conditions. The design of the reflectors and the reactor should be done properly so as to achieve uniform distribution of the incident light and is a critical factor in deciding the overall efficiency of the process. Depending on the degree of mineralization achieved after these three oxidation stages, wet air oxidation or biological oxidation may also be used. It is a well-known fact that oxidation rates for the lower molecular weight organics are less and hence biological oxidation may be employed if these are found in large concentrations. Wet air oxidation cannot be used in this case as it also gives lower oxidation rates. Simple filtration equipments can be used for the separation and reuse of the catalyst before possible biological oxidation step. Always some make up amount of the catalyst will be required as it is almost impossible to recover and reuse the entire catalyst load. The model hybrid system discussed here is on similar lines of the CAV–OX process, which is available commercially but with substantial enhancement in the degree of oxidation. Perfect synergism between the advanced oxidation processes achieved using optimized operating conditions and the loadings of oxidants viz hydrogen peroxide, Fe(III) ions, ozone could be the key to the success of this hybrid scheme. The expected synergism between different hybrid methods discussed in the present work is mainly due to an identical controlling reaction mechanism, i.e. the free radical attack. Generally, combination of two or more advanced oxidation processes such as UV/ozone, UV/H Combining ozone and/or hydrogen peroxide with ultrasound leads to a better utilization of both the oxidants and hence higher degradation rates due to the dissociation of ozone and hydrogen peroxide under the action of ultrasound. The mass transfer resistance, which is a major limiting factor for the application of ozone or hydrogen peroxide alone, is also eliminated due to the enhanced turbulence generated by ultrasound. The operating frequency is a crucial factor in deciding the synergism and should not be increased beyond 500 kHz. The problems of high frequency operation and existence of optima beyond which the rates of degradation decrease have been discussed in detail in the earlier work ( Similar to the ultrasound/ozone or ultrasound/H Ozone/hydrogen peroxide hybrid technique give better results as compared to the use of ozone or hydrogen peroxide especially for the treatment of pollutants, refractory towards ozone, e.g. organophosphoric acid triesters. As the synergism is strongly dependent on the efficient use of hydroxyl radicals, concentration of radical scavenging agents plays a crucial role in deciding the overall efficacy of the process. Optimized dosages of the oxidants need to be established for the effluent stream in question and critically designed multistage injection system (addition of the oxidants in stages) appears to be the best choice for this hybrid technique. For details of the multistage injections systems, the work of In the case of sonophotochemical/sonophotocatalytic reactors, it is important to have simultaneous irradiation of ultrasound and UV light rather than sequential operation. Addition of hydrogen peroxide or ozone to this hybrid system until an optimum value as an additional source of the free radicals also increases the extent of destruction. The major factor controlling the overall efficiency of destruction is, however, the stability of the photocatalyst under the effect of ultrasound and efforts are required in terms of new designs, which will protect the catalyst but at the same time will give enhanced effects. The scale-up of reactors appears to be a daunting task as the literature studies are typically restricted to few milliliters apart from certain exceptions ( Photo–Fenton processes offer additional advantages in terms of possibility in the use of sunlight instead of UV light with a minor decrease in the rate of degradation, which is a very important factor for the scale-up and commercial use as the costs of treatments will be substantially lower for the sunlight irradiation. Apart from the generation of enhanced number of hydroxyl radicals, in-situ generation of additional oxidizing species, e.g. Fe(OH) Use of catalyst in conjunction with some of the advanced oxidation processes viz sonochemical oxidation and ozonation have been found to substantially enhance the rates of the reaction. In the case of sonochemical reactors, the effect is complex as there are multiple factors, which are influenced by the presence of the solid particles including detrimental effects such as scattering of sound waves resulting in non-useful utilization of the supplied energy; still seems to be a lucrative option though the beneficial effects have been established only on a laboratory scale. More studies are required for deciding the optimum concentration and form (particle size) of the catalyst, geometry of the reactor, power dissipation into the system and operating frequency for the target pollutant. The rates of degradation using ozonation are substantially enhanced with the use of catalyst like Mn(II) ions, which enhance the rates of ozone decomposition and hence the effective utilization of the supplied ozone. It should be noted that the reported studies of catalytic ozonation have been restricted mostly to the use of manganese ions and for atrazine as the pollutant; hence it can be only said that more studies are required with a variety of pollutants and their complex mixtures also with different catalysts, before a firm conclusion can be made about the use of catalysts. Use of ultrasound in conjunction with catalytic ozonation appears to be extremely promising considering the synergistic effects but more studies in this direction are required. It must be said that the advanced oxidation processes or even the hybrid methods may not be useful in degrading large quantum of the effluent with economic efficiency and hence it is advisable to use these methods for reducing the toxicity of the pollutant stream to a certain level beyond which biological oxidation can take care of the complete mineralization of the biodegradable products. An optimized pre-treatment stage (in terms of the oxidant dose and the reduction in the toxicity level) will substantially decrease the total treatment time and hence the size of the reactor using the combination technique. It is recommended that the added oxidants, e.g. hydrogen peroxide are completely utilized in the pre-treatment stage alone, as its continued presence may hamper the activity of the microorganisms. It is also important to analyze the constituents of the effluent stream after the pre-treatment stage as it may happen that some of the intermediates formed as a result of the oxidation are biorefractory or more toxic than the parent compound. SONIWO is another good technique developed mainly with an aim of increasing the efficiency of wet air oxidation in terms of both operating cost as well as the extent of mineralization. Use of sonochemical irradiation as a pre-treatment stage appears to be an excellent option for wet air oxidation but all the reported studies have been restricted to laboratory scale operation. Thus, the efficiency of the SONIWO technique at industrial scale operation remains an unanswered question. Still the work of Mahajani and Co-workers cannot be overlooked as the SONIWO technique has been reported to be very efficient for the treatment of real wastes, for which, often the efficiency of advanced oxidation processes (driven by radical chain reactions) is lower. It is also important to develop realistic and generalized kinetic and yet mechanistic models for predicting the rates of the degradation process as a function of different operating parameters. The developed kinetic model should consider the effect of all the constituents of effluent stream even if the concentrations are in traces, e.g. radical scavengers and also the different reactions taking place in the chain of radical reactions. Another crucial point that needs to be considered is the change in the pH of the system as the degradation rates are strongly dependent on the pH. The recent work of Overall it can be said that the advanced oxidation processes follow a similar mechanism of destruction and hence there is ample scope of combining the different techniques in a synergistic way. Depending on the critical analysis of the different processes, model hybrid scheme has been designed for large-scale operations. A crucial advantage of the described scheme is that the load of oxidants and the energy consumption (ultrasonic irradiation, ozone generator) can be adjusted depending on the composition of the effluent stream and this should lead to considerable savings in the operating cost. Moreover, the overall mineralization process has been divided into multiple oxidation stages viz use of hydrodynamic cavitation, use of ultrasonic irradiation combined with ozonation, Fenton chemistry, hydrogen peroxide and sonophotocatalytic oxidation, which is similar to extremely beneficial multiple injection systems reported recently. It should be noted that though the model scheme has been designed purely on empirical basis, the degree of oxidation achieved in this scheme is substantially larger as compared to CAV–OX process, which has been found to degrade real effluents with extent of mineralization as high as 90% and has been commercialized. Thus, the model hybrid treatment scheme described above appears to be the need for the future and is recommended for the treatment of complex mixture of effluents, though it needs optimization for different yet specific effluents. Authors would like to acknowledge the funding of the Indo-French Center for Promotion of Advanced Research (Centre Franco-Indien Pour La Promotion de La recherche Avancee), New Delhi, India for the collaborative research work.