We introduce and analyze a mixed finite element method for the numerical discretization of a stationary incompressible magnetohydrodynamics problem, in two and three dimensions. The velocity field is discretized using divergence-conforming Brezzi–Douglas–Marini (BDM) elements and the magnetic field is approximated by curl-conforming Nédélec elements. The H
                     1-continuity of the velocity field is enforced by a DG approach. A central feature of the method is that it produces exactly divergence-free velocity approximations, and captures the strongest magnetic singularities. We prove that the energy norm error is convergent in the mesh size in general Lipschitz polyhedra under minimal regularity assumptions, and derive nearly optimal a priori error estimates for the two-dimensional case. We present a comprehensive set of numerical experiments, which indicate optimal convergence of the proposed method for two-dimensional as well as three-dimensional problems.The field of magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) studies the behavior of electrically conducting fluids (such as liquid metals, plasmas, salt water, etc.) in electromagnetic fields We consider a standard form of the incompressible MHD equations as derived in The above equations are characterized by three dimensionless parameters: the hydrodynamic Reynolds number Re We consider the following homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions: Various finite element methods for discretizing linear and non-linear MHD systems can be found in the literature. The magnetic field is often approximated by standard nodal (i.e., In the mixed formulation of We are interested in discretizations for incompressible MHD problems that are based on discontinuous Galerkin (DG) methods; see, e.g., the surveys In this paper we design a new finite element discretization, in an attempt to overcome the above mentioned difficulties. Instead of discontinuous elements for all unknowns, we use divergence-conforming Brezzi–Douglas–Marini (BDM) elements We prove well-posedness of our discretization, and show convergence under minimal regularity assumptions. Thus, our method captures the strongest magnetic singularities in non-convex polyhedra. Our numerical results clearly indicate optimal convergence rates in two and three dimensions, but we manage to show (nearly) optimal estimates only for the two-dimensional case. Specific details on this are given in Section The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section To write To discuss the well-posedness of the mixed formulation The following result can be found in  In this section, we introduce a mixed finite element method that employs divergence-conforming elements for the approximation of the velocity field and curl-conforming elements for the magnetic field. The We consider a family of regular and quasi-uniform triangulations The average and jump operators are defined as follows. Let For The space Now we consider the following finite element method: find ( The form By choosing the divergence-conforming BDM elements as the approximating space for the velocity, the method gives exactly divergence-free velocity approximations; cf.  ∇   To prove item (i), we proceed as in To prove item (ii), we take For our analysis, it will be convenient to introduce the following product forms: To discuss the stability properties of the finite element formulation First, we note that the forms Next, we introduce the following spaces of (discretely) divergence-free functions: Furthermore, the following stability properties of Finally, let us address the inf–sup stability of the forms An immediate consequence of In In the following theorem, we state the unique solvability of the method  The solution of  A more efficient non-linear solver such as Newton’s method can also be used for solving In this section, we present the main results of this paper, namely the convergence of finite element approximations and a priori error estimates for the two-dimensional version of our MHD problem. We provide detailed proofs in Sections Our first result is a convergence result. To state it, we suppose the solution ( The regularity assumption   Next, we present a priori error estimates for the two-dimensional version of the MHD problem  The convergence rates in Our technique of proof is applicable to three-dimensional problems. However, since in three dimensions the Sobolev embeddings are more restrictive, the use of the inverse estimates leads to convergence rates that fall short half a power of For the linearized variant of the MHD system The proofs of We begin by revisiting the continuity properties of the forms in a more general setting. To that end, we introduce the space In Next, we state the continuity of the convection term. The proof of this result follows similarly to the ones in  In the sequel, we shall analyze the two- and three-dimensional cases simultaneously (see also By introducing the kernel      We proceed in two steps.  Next, we recall the inverse inequality (cf. Further, let Finally, we present the following Sobolev embeddings:  To establish the second inequality, we follow For the first term on the right-hand side of To verify item (iii), we define The proof of item (iv) is similar to that of item (iii): Applying As an immediate consequence of    In this subsection, we present two lemmas for estimating the errors. Let ( We begin by defining the residual In the following, we shall denote the errors by  We proceed in two steps.   Next, we present the following result for the multipliers.  For any ( For In this subsection, we prove the convergence result stated in In view of Next, we show the convergence of the multipliers in the energy norm ∥·∥ In this subsection we prove the a priori error estimates in Based on To prove the error estimate for the multipliers, we first apply In this section we present a series of numerical experiments. Our computations have been carried out using Throughout this section, the lowest order BDM and Nédélec elements are employed and the interior penalty stabilization parameter is We test our method on problems with mixed Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions in the hydrodynamic variables, even though the analysis has been carried out solely for the Dirichlet case. Throughout this section, First, we verify the theoretical results stated in We consider the following two-dimensional problem. We set In In In order to verify the capability of the proposed method to capture singularities in two dimensions, we consider a problem in the L-shaped domain For this example, we have that ( In Next, we consider Hartmann channel flow problems in two and three dimensions; cf. Consider the two-dimensional Hartmann flow problem, which involves a steady unidirectional flow in the channel In In In this example, we consider the three-dimensional unidirectional flow in the rectangular duct given by In our tests, we set In Let us consider a classic test problem used in fluid dynamics, known as driven cavity flow. It is a model of the flow in a cavity with the lid moving in one direction; cf. In this example, we consider the two-dimensional domain We set The problem we consider is the three-dimensional driven cavity flow in the domain We set The example we present here is another classical problem of a flow over a step under a transverse magnetic field; cf. The domain is  We have introduced a new mixed finite element method for the numerical discretization of a stationary incompressible magnetohydrodynamics problem, with divergence-conforming BDM elements and curl-conforming Nédélec elements for the velocity and magnetic fields, respectively. The approximation of the velocity field is exactly mass conservative. We have shown the well-posedness of the discrete formulation under a standard small data assumption, and convergence of the approximations under minimal regularity assumptions. We have proved that the energy norm error is convergent in the mesh size in general Lipschitz polyhedra, and have derived a priori error estimates. As shown in detail in Section Based on the theoretical results in The scope of our work can be broadened in a number of additional directions. A very important issue is the investigation of efficient linear solvers for large-scale problems. In such settings iterative solvers are necessary, and this brings up the need for deriving effective and scalable preconditioners. While there are efficient solution techniques for the Navier–Stokes equations as well as for the curl–curl operator, the primary challenge is how to deal with the coupling term, especially when coupling is strong. Preliminary work on this is currently underway. Another item for future work is the derivation of a non-linear solver that converges more rapidly than the Picard iteration used in our experiments. As we have pointed out in