XPS was used to indicate the difference in surface properties between fresh and oxidized coals. XPS results showed that fresh coal had much more CC and CH groups than oxidized coal. In contrast, oxidized coal had much more CO, CO and OCO groups than fresh coal. Oxidized coal had higher ash content than fresh coal and oxidized coal surface had more ash minerals than fresh coal surface. The contact angle of fresh coal was much higher than that of oxidized coal, and hence oxidized coal was more hydrophilic than fresh coal. Flotation behavior of different size fractions of fresh and oxidized coals at different collector dosages were investigated in an experimental flotation cell. Flotation results showed that combustible matter recovery of oxidized coal was much lower than that of fresh coal. Combustible matter recovery decreased with the increase of particle size. Oxidation processes had much more negative effect on the flotation of coarser coals than the flotation of finer coals. The flotation behavior of oxidized coal may be enhanced by the increasing of collector dosage. Furthermore, a lower hydrophobic property makes larger oxidized coals (especially for the coal size more than 0.125mm) more difficult to float. Reducing coal particle size should be suitable for oxidized coal flotation.Coal oxidation processes usually change both the surface properties and structures of coal Besides these pretreatments, some efficient collectors and promoters were also used to enhance the flotation of oxidized coal. Both ionic and non-ionic surfactants could change the surface characteristics of oxidized coal. Oxidized coal could be well floated by the new collectors or surfactants. Blending of hydrocarbons and non-hydrocarbon collectors, such as copolymers, long chain amines and fatty acid amides could improve the floatability of oxidized coal Even though the flotation of oxidized coal could be partly enhanced or improved by the above-mentioned methods, the flotation behavior of different size fractions of oxidized coal was little investigated. Very little attention has been paid to the comparison of flotation behavior of different size fractions of fresh and oxidized coals. In this investigation, we attempted to find out the effect of particle size on the flotation behavior of oxidized coal. A comparison of flotation behavior of different size fractions of fresh and oxidized coals was made in order to give a useful concept of oxidized coal flotation. Fresh bituminous coal samples were obtained from Shanxi Province of China. Coal samples were dry-ground in a laboratory mill to pass 0.5  The XPS experiments were carried out at room temperature in an ultra high vacuum (UHV) system with the surface analysis system (ESCALAB 250Xi, America). The base pressure of the analysis chamber during the measurements was lower than 1.0 The fresh and oxidized coals were firstly pressed into the plates. The plates of fresh and oxidized coals were measured using water contact angle analyzer (JC2000D), such as a water droplet on the surface of coal plates in air. The contact angles were obtained as the water droplet contacted with the coal plate at the exact moment. In this investigation, fresh coal and oxidized coal was pre-wetted at a flotation cell for 3 Where C1s peak is near 285 The content of atomic carbon on fresh coal was higher than that on oxidized coal while the content of atomic oxygen on fresh coal was lower than that on oxidized coal. Meanwhile, the contents of atomic silicium and atomic aluminum on fresh coal were lower than those on oxidized coal. It seemed that a small part of organic materials might shed from coal surface, or this part of organic materials might be oxidized to gas fractions (CO and CO  The content of C Natural weathering processes made C As shown in  Furthermore, the concentrate ash content of fresh coal is lower than that of oxidized coal. Oxidized coal surface has much more ash minerals which also makes oxidized coal more hydrophilic. The selectivity during oxidized coal flotation may be lower than that during fresh coal flotation. Besides, the ash content of feeding in oxidized coal flotation is higher than that in fresh coal flotation, which also increases the concentrate ash content of oxidized coal.   In order to show the difference in flotation behavior of different size fractions of fresh and oxidized coals, Larger coals have larger gravity and the bubbles may be difficult to introduce them into the frother products. The hydrophobic property of oxidized coal is much lower than that of fresh coal. A lower hydrophobic property makes larger oxidized coal more difficult to be captured by the bubbles. Furthermore, larger oxidized coals may be easier to be detached from the bubbles. For smaller oxidized coals, they should be easier to be captured by the bubbles compared with larger oxidized coals. In conclusion, larger oxidized coals cannot obtain a better flotation performance. The particle size of feeding in the flotation of oxidized coal should be reduced in order to reduce the effect of oxidation processes since coal oxidation processes can obviously reduce the hydrophobic property of coal surface.  XPS results showed that the content of atomic carbon on fresh coal was higher than that on oxidized coal while the content of atomic oxygen on fresh coal was lower than that on oxidized coal. Meanwhile, the contents of atomic silicium and atomic aluminum on fresh coal were lower than those on oxidized coal. Besides, the content of C Since oxidation processes increase the content of hydrophilic functional groups but reduce the content of hydrophobic functional groups on coal surface, the oxidized coal should be more hydrophilic than fresh coal. The contact angle of fresh coal was much higher than that of oxidized coal. A lower hydrophobic property makes larger oxidized coals more difficult to be captured by the bubbles. Furthermore, larger oxidized coals may be easier to be detached from the bubbles. Therefore, larger oxidized coals should be more difficult to float than finer ones. The combustible matter recovery of the flotation process for oxidized coal increased with the increase of collector dosage or the decrease of particle size. Therefore, the flotation behavior of oxidized coal may be enhanced by reducing the coal particle size or increasing the collector dosage. This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20140211) and A Project Funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.