In their article ‘The boom in mineral markets: How long might it last?’ (Resources Policy 33 (2008) 125–128), Professors Radetzki, Eggert, Lagos, Lima and Tilton (hereafter Radetzki et al.) argued that the increase in mineral prices from 2003 onwards was essentially the product of the normal lagged supply response of a capital intensive industry. In several worked examples, they showed how this operated. There was no need to resort to the notion of a 20 or 30 ‘supercycle’ to explain what was going on. It may have been the case that prices had remained buoyed up for longer than in earlier cycles but this was because the surge in demand had been unusually strong, meaning that it was taking longer than usual for supply to catch up. In time, and consistent with previous cycles and the authors’ worked examples, they fully expected supply to come into alignment with demand well before the theory of the supercycle suggested and prices to fall back to the industry's marginal costs of production, which is to say, a long way below the prices then prevailing. As to exactly how long it would take for supply tightness to ease, Radetzki et al. claimed that it could conceivably be 10–15 years but, then again, it could be less in the event that demand for minerals was to slow sharply, as it was threatening to do. In a remark that now looks prescient, the authors argue that ‘global recessions have abruptly terminated past commodity booms and the same could occur with this one in the near future’. So it has proved. The general point of the article is an important one and the useful reminder of one of the defining characteristics of the mineral business. Supply is sticky. Nevertheless, the impression left by the article that there is really nothing to distinguish this cycle from previous ones, save for its length, is questionable. Moreover, the claim that prices will fall back to levels that ‘approximate their marginal production costs’, while on one level obviously correct, begs an important question about The surge in minerals demand that produced the price boom that is the subject of this analysis arguably had two distinct, though not wholly unconnected, components. The first was an extended economic upswing resulting from a massive surge in global liquidity based on the availability of low-cost credit. This was rooted in the developed world and particularly in the US. It began around 2003. While the scale of this boom may have been unprecedented in modern times, the nature of the commodities boom it gave rise to was for the most part conventional. With the passing of the boom and the inevitable softening of demand, prices have dropped back sharply. In itself, it carries no lasting implications for long-run commodity prices. The second component of the price boom reflected a deeper-rooted structural shift in the global economy. For many commodity analysts, this structural shift was represented by an increase in the trend rate of growth in demand for minerals resulting from the industrialisation and urbanisation of emerging economies. This was deemed likely to be a long-run phenomenon, similar to the era of post-WWII reconstruction, and to keep mineral markets under pressure for many years to come. Whether or not this argument proves soundly based, Radetzki et al. provide reasons for doubting whether it has any particular significance for long-run mineral prices. In principle, after a period of adjustment, supply should adapt to the new higher rate of demand growth. There is no reason for this to take 20 years. There may, nevertheless, be a supply-side dimension to this argument about structural change that could possibly have longer lasting significance for mineral prices. Parallel with the surge in demand for minerals from emerging economies, the world economy has experienced a massive supply shock, reflective of a huge growth in the availability of low-cost labour. This is most dramatically illustrated by, but is not confined to, developments in China. The effect of this has been effectively to double the global workforce (which is to say, the workforce producing for world markets) since 1990 and to reduce dramatically the costs of manufacturing ( This downward pressure on global manufacturing costs, and its suppression of global inflationary pressures, has been advanced as a reason why central banks in western countries were able to run loose monetary policies for so long in the early part of the decade, fuelling the liquidity boom described above. However, it also has some more direct implications for commodity markets in so far as the resurgence of manufacturing has a galvanising effect on the demand for raw materials. An intuition that might assist with an appreciation of what is going on here is that while a reduction in manufacturing costs may enable a consumer to buy two fridges for what it would have formerly cost to buy one, the demand for metals to make the fridges has still increased two times. While the rapid growth in manufacturing in the emerging economies can thus be seen as contributing to boosting global demand for commodities and lifting commodity prices in nominal terms, the suppression in the prices of manufactured goods potentially has implications for the There is some evidence of this shift in relative prices in the terms of trade between commodity-importing and commodity-exporting regions ( If what we are witnessing here is a longer term shift in the terms of trade between manufactures and commodities, then this conceivably has implications for long-run commodity prices in real terms, since ‘real terms’ is essentially about the expression of the price of one good While Radetzki et al. may thus be right to challenge the exponents of the supercycle for attributing long-run significance to normal cyclical adjustments in supply–demand volumes, the impression created by the article that there is nothing particularly special about this cycle and that after the cycle everything will look pretty much as it did before may not prove so well founded, particularly with respect to mineral prices. Prices have come down as the cycle has weakened and will eventually come to rest in the vicinity of marginal costs of production. The key question for practitioners in the industry is where these costs are and what they imply about the likely level of long-run commodity prices. All cycles have features in common but they have important differences too. No one now doubts that the commodity price boom of the 1970s marked the beginning of a discreet phase in the life of the mining industry that lasted 20–25 years and had long-lasting effects on commodity prices. The challenge is to identify what exactly the differences are this time around and to make judgements on their likely sustainability. It is not easy but major investment decisions hinge on these judgements and so therefore does future supply availability.