The tool wear of high-purity alumina (Al2O3) dies applied in semi-solid extrusion of steel X210CrW12 under near-isothermal conditions at 1250–1350°C is investigated. Results show excellent wear resistance of the Al2O3 dies against semi-solid steel and scale under experimental conditions. Minor chemical interaction was observed at the die inlet which, in contrast to the die land, is in contact with scale formed on the billet during pre-heating. This effect is attributed to the appointed billet pre-heating procedure. A tribochemical interaction mechanism between alumina dies and semi-solid steel is presented. This paper contributes to the evaluation of a self-heating ceramic tool concept for steel thixoextrusion introduced previously. Results lead to the conclusion that the targeted benefit of applying corrosion resistant but thermal shock-sensitive ceramics as die materials for the semi-solid processing of steel is achieved.Processing of metals in the semi-solid state (thixoforming) offers significant advantages in comparison to established metal forming processes such as forging and casting by taking advantage of the rheological effect of thixotropy exhibited by non-eutectic metals in the temperature interval between solidus and liquidus However, owing to the importance of iron-based alloys in terms of market numbers semi-solid processing of steel has been in the focus of research and development during the last two decades. Generally, the load profile acting on thixoforming dies is characterised by the superposition of typical impacts on casting moulds and forging dies. This consequently leads to a very complex load profile consisting of mechanical and thermal shock loads that have to be sustained by the bulk of the tool. Wear and surface degradation occur due to corrosive attack by liquid fraction of the semi-solid slurry, which in case of steel is further enhanced by the increased process temperatures. This liquid fraction is highly aggressive due to the large amount of steel alloying elements present in the liquid and the increased solubility of most constituents in the melt in comparison to the solid fraction. The relative movement of the semi-solid slurry to the die surface leads to abrasive attack by the solid particles in the metal suspension, being further increased during ejection of the solidified part from the die. In industrial processes scale formation on the work material cannot be completely avoided, resulting in oxide scale inclusions during processing, further enhancing tribochemical attack on the die surfaces. Based on the excellent property profile of ceramics with respect to steel thixoforming process conditions Results on tribological attack on these coated forming tools during service indicate that adhesive wear caused by the solidifying liquid fraction of the semi-solid slurry The work on bulk ceramic tools was focused on silicon nitride (Si Recently, a ceramic tool concept has been introduced allowing for operating temperatures up to isothermal processing of steel Alumina ceramics are thermodynamically stable up to temperatures >1600 Annealing experiments of alumina in contact to different steel grades in the temperature range relevant for semi-solid processing in air and protective atmosphere revealed that Al Since in typical metal forming applications tool life is determined by the surface degradation within predefined tolerances the understanding of the interaction mechanisms is of crucial importance for the viability of the high-temperature tool concept introduced previously. The influence of the exalted die pre-heating temperatures on extrusion velocity, process forces, and work piece quality is discussed elsewhere High-purity alumina was selected as die material for extrusion tools. Commercially available alumina tubes (Alsint 99.7, Haldenwanger, Waldkraiburg, Germany) were applied as recipients, surrounded by a heating core. Dies of shamrock-like cross section ( Ceramic tool parts were assembled and mounted on an INSTRON test frame. Die pre-heating proceeded to a target temperature of 1250 Steel billets were pre-heated in a resistance furnace in air to a bulk temperature of approximately 1300 After extrusion the ceramic tool parts were inspected visually. Owing to the inevitable solidification of the steel biscuit left in the recipient it was necessary to break up the recipient and die in order to examine the as-worn surfaces. Microscopical analysis was performed using a LEO 440i scanning electron microscope (SEM) provided with an Oxford Instruments GEM-EDX detector for energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). Element quantification was carried out using the Oxford Link Isis Energy Dispersive Analyser software package. Note that the software allows for oxygen quantification directly from the X-ray data or, alternatively, by inverse calculation of the stoichiometric oxides of the respective elements selected for quantification. Quantitative chemical analysis of the contact zone was performed according to the following procedure: first, the elements of interest were selected on the basis of the respective X-ray spectrum. If present, the oxygen content determined from the spectrum was compared to the amount of oxygen required for stoichiometric oxides. If both values are in agreement within reasonable tolerance, results are given as elemental composition as well as oxide composition, otherwise only the elemental composition is given. Steel billets were successfully extruded in the semi-solid state without premature freezing of the steel in the die. Ram forces required and hence mechanical loads on extrusion dies were low, being less than 22 Microscopical analysis of the die using SEM revealed a continuous adhesive layer on the die land surface. Comparison of the chemical distribution as depicted in Further SEM-analysis of cross sections of the die land shows very few thin adhesion layers on the inner die surface ( The die inlet surface after semi-solid extrusion is depicted in  Wear of the tool surfaces, as frequently observed in steel thixoforming The former effect was repeatedly observed in ceramic/steel contact corrosion experiments and on ceramic tools after steel thixoforming The latter effect of a high silicon amount detected on the die surface is attributed to silica impurities present as glassy grain boundary phase in the alumina microstructure. This phase softens during pre-heating and dwell time at test temperature and presumably is squeezed out by extrusion forces, resulting in a silicon-enrichment in the contact zone. This deduction is endorsed by the wall-like structure and the grain boundary-like geometrical arrangement of the silicon-rich adhesion layers ( For analysis of corrosive attack on alumina dies in current experiments the different material contacts and environmental conditions during thixoextrusion experiments have to be taken into account. After billet insertion and the onset of extrusion the die inlet is in contact with the oxide shell of the pre-heated billet and the oxygen partial pressure drops at the interface. Concurrently, the yet unaffected die land is still in contact with air. During extrusion the oxygen partial pressure rapidly decreases throughout the tool due to complete die filling. At this stage the semi-solid slurry squeezed out of the billet oxide shell is in contact with the die land surface. After extrusion a gap forms between the die surface and the steel, owing to the mismatch in thermal expansion coefficients of steel and alumina, enabling ambient air to penetrate the interface. While the chemical stability of alumina in contact to pure iron in the absence of oxygen is reportedly high The above-mentioned significance of ferrous oxides for corrosive attack on alumina is confirmed in current experiments by one single reaction area detected on the die inlet at the interface of iron oxide adhesions and the alumina substrate. This tool surface is subjected to the highest corrosive stresses due to the presence of ferrous oxides at temperatures of 1200–1300 Chemical interaction between steel alloys and ceramics is strongly influenced by the alloying elements of the steels and the sintering aids of the ceramic materials Based on the effects described above, the following generalised tribochemical interaction mechanism of semi-solid steel and alumina ceramics during isothermal thixoforming is proposed, assuming chemical interaction between primary alumina grains and semi-solid steel to be negligible: Softening of the glassy grain boundary phase containing large amounts of the residual impurities, e.g. SiO Partial squeeze-out of the softened grain boundary phase under mechanical loads during forming. Relative movement of semi-solid steel in contact to the alumina surface, during which the glassy phase acts as a lubricant. Slow depletion of grain boundary phase of the superficial alumina layer. Feasibly, local breakout of primary alumina grains will occur. Regarding tool costs engineering ceramics are expensive die materials compared to bulk refractory materials like sand and clays. However, alumina is a well-investigated material and one of the most common structural ceramics. Owing to the oxide nature of alumina, raw material and production costs as well as investment costs are low compared to non-oxide ceramics that are also considered as potential steel thixoforming tool materials, e.g. silicon carbide and silicon nitride. Apart from the corrosion and wear resistance exhibited by alumina ceramics in contact with semi-solid steels the effect of chemical interaction between tools and the work material on the chemical composition and mechanical properties of the manufactured parts are of concern. Constituents of die materials diffusing into the semi-solid alloys and phases formed in the contact zone included in the surface affect work piece quality to various extends, depending on their nature and amount. Carbon as an element readily diffusing into ferrous metals is of particular interest in this regard. Silicon carbide, though exhibiting beneficial properties in view of the thermo-mechanical process loads, is subjected to severe corrosive attack leading to decomposition and the release of free carbon resulting in undesired carburisation of the semi-solid slurry in long-term forming series. This applies accordingly for graphite dies. Contrarily, alumina as an oxide ceramic is highly refractory and does not decompose under steel thixoforming process conditions, leaving the work piece unaffected. Taking into account the positive effect of the underlying tool concept The tribochemical attack on high-purity alumina (Al It is concluded that by applying self-heating die concepts reducing thermal shocks during forming, the semi-solid processing of metals may benefit from the excellent corrosion and wear resistance of thermal shock-sensitive oxide ceramics. In conjunction with the low extrusion forces and the high shape accuracy, homogeneity and mechanical properties of the bars reported previously these results are highly encouraging in view of the transfer of semi-solid processing technologies to high melting point alloys. Moreover, in view of semi-solid casting and forging this tool concept allows for an increase in flow length and a simultaneous decrease in minimum wall thickness of thixoformed parts. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) within the Collaborative Research Centre SFB 289: “Forming of Metals in the Semisolid State and their Properties”.