The AMR effect of single-domain film-resistors is being widely used for magnetic field and linear/angular displacement sensing. However, several constrains attributed to the repeatability of magnetization orientation limit the accuracy of such devices. There is a trade-off between device sensitivity and measurement repeatability; the anisotropy field H
                     K affects both parameters in an inverse manner. To overcome such problems we propose the employment of AMR film-resistors as fluxgate devices. Using a rotating magnetic field vector as excitation, the anisotropic magnetoresistance material is kept continuously in saturation and a pseudo-super-paramagnetic behaviour is observed. Thus, the signal noise coming from Barkhausen jumps can be narrowed down to zero.In magnetic field sensing, the main problem that limits the sensitivity capabilities of a sensing device is the magnetic noise The AMR effect of single-domain film-resistors is widely used in field sensing. But, the lack of repeatability of magnetization orientation limits the accuracy of such devices In fact, this is the motivation of this paper, namely the development of a technique to increase the sensitivity by eliminating the Barkhausen noise. A way to eliminate the Barkhausen noise is to keep the material in deep saturation state. This can be achieved by using a rotating magnetic field vector on the surface of the AMR film as excitation field with an angular speed If a DC magnetic field is applied parallel to the surface of the AMR film, the sinusoidal output voltage is formed according to the analysis of the applied vector on the two axes of the material, the one being the axis the resistance under measurement and the other one the vertical to it. The output voltages are then modulated by multiplying them by sin( If the amplitude Consequently, the parametric control of the set-up (film geometry, stoichiometry, material structure and micro-structure) can lead to the minimization of the anisotropic field For amplitudes The series of these harmonics are related to the difficulty of the magnetization vector of a mono-magnetic or quasi-mono-magnetic area to turn from one easy axis to another. The number of the Barkhausen jumps in a given period of the external field is equal to the number of the easy axes that the material has on the surface of the rotating field. Every term of the series is periodical with the same period but phase difference, which is an unambiguous function of the orientation of each grain or magnetic domain. The parametric control of the angular speed of the rotating external magnetic field can zero the “dead” time between the Barkhausen jumps in the output voltage, as shown in For a film of cubic bcc or fcc symmetry and with the proper selection of the angular speed of the excitation field, so that the output signal be a sinusoidal function, the frequency of the harmonic addition or noise of each magnetic grain will be 2 For a first validation of the above principle, an AMR magnetic sensor obtained from Honeywell was used (HMC1512). The device consists of two pairs of perpendicular film-resistors connected in Wheatstone bridge configuration. The AMR elements had a saturation field of 6.4 The current Around the sensor two orthogonal coils vertical to each other were placed in order to provide the rotating external magnetic field. The two coils were supplied by The AMR sensing elements deployed in a Wheatstone bridge and functioned as previously mentioned were put under DC field of 500 In order to weigh the response and the sensitivity capabilities of the set-up in very weak external fields, a DC external field at 0° was imposed on the sensing elements by a pair of Helmholz coils. The output voltage of the Honeywell sensor on which the root mean square voltage of the sinusoidal response is added is illustrated in Even if the research is still in an early stage and the tested material has a rather high The design of sensors with resolution in the range of Δ The described sensing principle can be used in non-volatile magnetic RAMs. Using the schematic of A permanent magnet film is placed above the whole set-up and can be magnetically oriented by another set of orthogonal current conductors towards the Finally, it should be mentioned that detailed measurements for magnetic noise have not beet taken. Anyway, the presented experimental set-up is sub-optimal in the sense that the employed AMR films exhibit strong anisotropy (we used standard AMR's that are intended to be anisotropic for repetability purposes). The presented device must be thus considered to serve proof-of-concept purposes rather than being an optimized field sensor. Further work is underway to develop and optimize such type of sensor. A new class of hybrid AMR-fluxgate sensors has been presented in this work based on the phase modulation of the magnetization rotation of magneto-resistive thin-films evoked due to the influence of the external DC magnetic field. The devices provide two-dimensional field sensing capability with increased sensitivity and low magnetic noise. Preliminary measurements taken by means of prototype sensor set-ups that prove the described concept have also been presented. Acknowledgments are due to the PENED 2003-03ED275 of the Hellenic GSRT.