Objectives
                  Total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) is a viable treatment for elderly patients with distal humerus fracture who frequently present with low-grade open fractures. This purpose of this study was to evaluate the results of a protocol of serial irrigations and debridements (I&Ds) followed by primary TEA for the treatment of open intra-articular distal humerus fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Seven patients (mean 74 years; range 56–86 years) with open (two Grade I and five Grade 2) distal humerus fractures (OTA 13C) who were treated between 2001 and 2007 with a standard staged protocol that included TEA were studied. Baseline Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) scores were obtained during the initial hospitalization, and the 6- and 12-month follow-up visits. Elbow range of motion (ROM) measurements were obtained at each follow-up visit.
               
                  Results
                  Follow-up averaged 43 (range 4–138) months. There were no wound complications and no deep infections. Complications included one case of heterotopic ossification with joint contracture, one olecranon fracture unrelated to the TEA, and two loose humeral stems. The average final ROM was from 21° (range 5–30°) to 113° flexion (range 90–130°). DASH scores averaged 25 at pre-injury baseline and 48 at the most recent follow-up visits.
               
                  Conclusions
                  TEA has become a mainstream option for the treatment of distal humerus fractures which are on occasion open. There is hesitation in using arthroplasty in an open fracture setting due to a potential increased infection risk. The absence of any infectious complications and satisfactory functional outcomes observed in the current series indicates that TEA is a viable treatment modality for complex open fractures of the distal humerus.Total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) has become a viable treatment alternative for elderly patients with distal humerus fractures. Initially indicated for end-stage arthritis of the elbow, the indications have expanded to include complex fractures of the distal humerus Unlike distal humerus fractures, open fractures of the hip and proximal humerus are rare, yielding exceedingly little evidence for the safety of performing an arthroplasty in the setting of open fracture. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the results of a protocol of debridement followed by primary TEA for the treatment of open intra-articular distal humerus fractures in elderly patients.  The open fractures were classified with the Gustilo–Anderson system with two Grade I and five Grade II fractures All patients were treated with a standard protocol that included TEA (Coonrad-Morrey, Zimmer, Warsaw, IN, USA). The protocol included emergent operative irrigation and debridement (I&D) upon presentation followed by repeat I&D and TEA when the wounds were stable. A previously described and standard operative technique for prosthesis implantation was followed ( The average time from fracture until TEA was 6 days (range 2–19). Two patients with Grade II open fracture underwent I&D, definitive wound closure, hospital discharge, and semi-elective TEA at 9 and 19 days after fracture, respectively. The other five patients had TEA within 4 days of injury during their index hospital admission. The timing for definitive internal fixation after low-grade open fracture is generally immediate or within several days. The decision to perform TEA followed this same rationale in the majority of cases. Open fractures were treated urgently with I&D. Short delays to TEA were primarily related to the availability of surgeons experienced with TEA. Longer delays in two patients were related to other logistical issues. For the two patients with semi-elective TEA, antibiotics were administered upon presentation and continued until 48 Patients were evaluated with routine postoperative follow-up for an average of 43 (range 4–138) months. Baseline (pre-injury) functional outcome scores (DASH) were obtained during the initial hospitalization and again at the 6- and 12-month follow-up visits. Elbow ROM measurements were obtained at each follow-up visit. Complications, particularly infections, were extracted from the medical record. There were no wound complications and no deep infections. Other complications included one case of heterotopic ossification with joint contracture, one olecranon fracture and two loose humeral stems identified in long-term follow-up. The olecranon fracture occurred after a secondary fall, was minimally displaced, and was successfully treated nonoperatively. The patient with a contracture required formal operative capsular release. The first patient with a loose stem had rheumatoid arthritis and underwent successful revision arthroplasty at 2.5 years after index TEA. There was no evidence of infection on preoperative labs and from intraoperative cultures. The patient had a well-functioning prosthesis at final follow-up 3 years after revision. The second presented at 11.5 years postoperatively with complaints of arm pain, and had loosening diagnosed with radiographs, but was not revised due to patient preference. The average elbow ROM at the most recent postoperative evaluation was 21° short of full extension (range 5–30°) to 113° flexion (range 90–130°). The average arc of motion was therefore 92°. DASH outcome scores averaged 25 at pre-injury baseline and 48 at the most recent follow-up visits. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the results of a protocol of debridement followed by primary TEA for the treatment of open intra-articular distal humerus fractures in elderly patients. In elderly patients with complex distal humerus fractures, TEA may be the best surgical option; however, there may be hesitation in using arthroplasty in an open fracture setting due to a potential increased infection risk. The high historical incidence of infection seen in elective TEA performed for joint arthropathy can be attributed to populations that were nearly one-half patients with rheumatoid arthritis. These patients frequently are taking medications that increase their susceptibility to infection In addition to the lack of infectious complications, functional outcomes also determine whether a treatment is successful. The ROM seen postoperatively in this study is comparable to similar patients with TEA performed for closed fractures. While multiple studies have examined the outcomes of TEA following distal humeral fracture ( There are limitations to the present study that should be considered. The small sample size may make identification of less common complications difficult and may make identification of common complications problematic ( Further studies with larger numbers of patients would help to identify both late complications and more rare complications. While no infections were noted in the patients that had late loosening, particular attention should be paid to ensure that implant failure is not due to infection. The current study indicates that TEA should not be considered contraindicated for elderly patients with an open distal humerus fracture. The absence of any infectious complications and satisfactory functional outcomes observed in the current series indicates that TEA is a viable treatment modality for open fractures of the distal humerus. M.L. and B.G. have no financial disclosures to report. W.M.R. – Consulting: Smith & Nephew, Biomet, Stryker, and Wright Medical; Product Development/Royalties: Smith & Nephew, Wright Medical, Biomet (expected), Stryker (expected), and Lippincott (expected); Research Support: Smith & Nephew; Payment for Manuscript Preparation: JBJS American. M.J.G. – Consulting: DePuy Synthes, DGIMed, Stryker, RTI Biologics, BoneSupport AB, and Pacira Pharmaceuticals; Product Development/Royalties: Lippincott; Research Support: DePuy Synthes; Payment for Manuscript Preparation: JBJS American. C.M.M. – Grants: NIH NCATS UL1TR000448 for tuition support; Payment for Lectures: AO North America and DePuy Synthes; Payment for Manuscript Preparation: JBJS American.