Nickel-metal hydride batteries (NiMH) contain rare earths (RE) and a variety of valuable metals such as nickel and cobalt. Using a hydrometallurgical process developed for the recovery of metals from spent batteries, a selective separation of RE by precipitation of Sodium RE double sulfate can be performed. Leaching solution was obtained by using 2 M H2SO4 at 20 °C. The paper reports the experimental studies involving the precipitation process and the characterisation by X-ray diffraction of the resulting product (Sodium RE double sulfates). It has been shown that it is possible to recover about 80% of the RE contained in spent NiMH batteries.The rare earths (RE), as a group, constitute 8×10 Rare earth elements (metals and their compounds) are characterised by a variety of physical properties allowing wide applications as functional materials. Commercially available RE materials have been used for additives to steels or alloys, permanent magnets, hydrogen storage materials, magneto-optic storage discs, electro or cathode ray luminescence, household batteries, etc. Therefore in addition to the primary sources such as the commercial-enriched ores of the above referred minerals, wastes such as spent catalysts, super-alloy scrap, spent batteries, sludge, dusts, etc. are potential secondary sources of rare earths. Batteries are daily used in many portable electronic devices (cellular phones, computers, video recorders, etc.). Therefore spent batteries represent, within the wastes, an important environmental pollutant in terms of heavy metals content. Considering the risk associated with uncontrolled disposal, directions for issuing legislation on disposal and recycling spent batteries have been made by industrialised countries (i.e. EC directive 91/157). The development of metal recovery processes is thus convenient for economic and environmental reasons (i.e. high cost of landfill disposal of hazardous material, waste recycling and natural resources conservation). In particular, AB In general, spent battery wastes have to be landfilled or treated, usually by pyrometallurgical processes. Recently, some hydrometallurgical processes have been developed to recover metals from these secondary sources In the case of hydrometallurgical treatments of waste, the solid material is mostly leached/dissolved in acid medium (nitric acid, sulfuric acid, hydrochloric acid or their mixtures) and processed to recover metal ions. The experimental approach used in this study was to produce a leach liquor from NiMH spent batteries, to obtain the selective separation of RE by precipitation in sulfuric media before sending the solution to others separation steps (Fe, Ni, Co, and Zn) and to investigate the behaviour of other metals during the precipitation. Experiments were done by using both real and simulated solutions containing RE salts only. The real solution was obtained by leaching electrode materials of prismatic cells of NiMH spent batteries. A mass ratio of 6:1 of AB All reagents used for the simulated solution were of analytical grade and were used without further purification. Stock solutions containing metal ions were prepared from nitrate salts (Aldrich) and standardized by AAS (Perkin Elmer 5100 series). The concentration of lanthanum in the aqueous solutions at low concentrations was determined by a spectrophotometric method The X-ray diffraction was performed by Seifert PAD-VI Automatic Diffractometer equipped with MoKα radiation, a LiF monocromator and at Sulfuric acid has been chosen, after comparison with other leaching agents, considering, besides the metal yields, the economic aspects and, in particular, the low iron dissolution rate of the electrode grids The mixed rare earths were precipitated from the leachate solution by pH adjustment performed by NaOH addition until pH<1.5 to avoid the ferric hydroxide precipitation usually started at pH 2.5–3. Rare earths are precipitated in the form of insoluble double sulfate salts as confirmed by the X-ray diffraction analysis. The chemistry of the precipitated double sulfates is still somewhat obscure and their composition may be summarized as NaRE(SO Some of the metals contained in leachate solution can also be precipitated effectively by pH adjustment to give poorly soluble compounds (ferric hydroxide or manganic oxide) or by co-precipitation or adsorption on a carrier such as iron that usually forms a bulky floc The filtered precipitate was analyzed by X-ray diffraction and it was found that five peaks of NaLa(SO The technical feasibility of recovering rare earths from the sulfate leachate solution obtained from NiMH spent batteries has been demonstrated by means of real solution. Considering the high cost of the enriched ores such as monazite sand and bastnaesite (about US$3/kg in 1997), spent batteries can be considered as potential source of metals: from 1 ton of spent batteries (all materials), 37.5 kg of RE (as metal) at about 80% of purity can be obtained, very close to the bastnaesite composition. Moreover, two important objectives can be attained: waste treatment/recycling and natural resource conservation. The authors would like to thank L. Cafiero for technical assistance regarding the X-ray spectra.