In this study, addition of Ag micro-particles with a content in the range between 0 and 4wt.% to a Sn–Zn eutectic solder, were examined in order to understand the effect of Ag additions on the microstructural and mechanical properties as well as the thermal behavior of the composite solder formed. The shear strengths and the interfacial reactions of Sn–Zn micro-composite eutectic solders with Au/Ni/Cu ball grid array (BGA) pad metallizations were systematically investigated. Three distinct intermetallic compound (IMC) layers were formed at the solder interface of the Au/electrolytic Ni/Cu bond pads with the Sn–Zn composite alloys. The more Ag particles that were added to the Sn–Zn solder, the more Ag–Zn compound formed to thicken the uppermost IMC layer. The dissolved Ag–Zn IMCs formed in the bulk solder redeposited over the initially formed interfacial Au–Zn IMC layer, which prevented the whole IMC layer lifting-off from the pad surface. Cross-sectional studies of the interfaces were also conducted to correlate with the fracture surfaces.The electronics industry will make substantial progress toward a full transition to Pb-free soldering technology in the near future. The current leading Pb-free solder alloys are the ternary near-eutectic Sn–Ag–Cu alloys A Composite approach has been recently developed in lead-free solder research in an effort to improve the mechanical properties of solders, especially their creep and thermo-mechanical fatigue resistance The present study investigates the microstructural evolution and shear strength of Sn–9Zn eutectic solder with different additions of Ag micro-particles. The effect of the Ag content on the spreading and melting point evolution was also examined. The formation of intermetallic compounds of Ag–Zn as a function of Ag content was also investigated. The compositions of the composite solder alloys were Sn–9Zn with 0–4 A solder mask-defined copper bond pad on a BGA package was used as a base for electro-deposition of Ni and Au. The solder mask-opening diameter was 0.6 Shear tests were performed for the as-reflowed samples using a Dage (Dage Holdings Ltd., Aylesbury, UK) Series 4000 Bond Tester. The shear tool height and the test speed of the shear test in this study were about 20 Another set of composite solder balls were placed on a highly polished pure copper sheet and reflowed at 250 The fracture surfaces after the ball shear tests were investigated thoroughly using a Philips scanning electron microscope (Eindhoven, The Netherlands) XL 40 FEG (SEM) in the secondary and backscattered electron mode as well as by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). To investigate the microstructures and intermetallic layers at the interface, the as-reflowed samples were mounted in resin, cured at room temperature, mechanically ground, and then polished in order to obtain the cross sections of the solder/UBM interfaces. The chemical and microstructural analyses of the gold-coated cross-sectioned samples were obtained using the SEM equipped with an EDX spectrometer. The accuracy of the compositional measurement was about ±5%. To determine the formula composition of the intermetallic compounds (IMCs), the chemical analyses of the EDX spectra were corrected by standard ZAF software. The backscattered electron imaging mode of the SEM was used for the interfacial study. DSC analyses were carried out in order to investigate the fundamental thermal reactions on heating of the composite solder alloys and also to find the sustainable range for these composite solders. The distribution of Ag rich-particles in the Sn–Zn matrix was found to be reasonably homogeneous in the composite solders prepared from the Sn–Zn paste and the Ag particles ( Detailed cross-sectional studies were carried out to investigate the interfacial morphologies of the solders with the Au/electrolytic Ni/Cu pads. All interfaces, to a greater or lesser extent, reveal similar features—solidified solder, reaction zone, original electrolytic Ni layer, and Cu pad. Most interestingly, a layer-type spalling at the interface was clearly observed in the Sn–Zn solder system from the initial reflow ( With the addition of 1% Ag, no severe spalling of the initial IMC from the pad surface was noticed at the interface of the Sn–Zn composite solder/Ni system. On the other hand, there were places along the interface with no spalling. But some spalling of the IMCs was confirmed at some other places along the interface ( With 2–4% Ag, no spalling of the initial IMCs was observed at the interface. On the other hand, three distinct IMC layers were formed at the BGA bond pad and composite solder interface. These three different IMC layers were also different in chemical composition. Another important thing is that the Au does not dissolve into the Sn–Zn based solders. Instead, Au formed an IMC layer at the interface. The EDX analysis of the three IMC layers revealed that in the lower two IMC layers Au reacted with Sn and Zn to form different compounds which form different compounds.  The intermediate white IMC layers in The interfacial reactions between the Pb-free solders and the electrolytically deposited Au/Ni/Cu bond pads were conducted by holding at 250 The fractured surfaces of the pads and sheared balls were immediately studied by SEM. The results reported here (from fracture surface and cross-sectional studies) are based on the highest number of similar occurrences from each readout point of shear strength data. In most cases ductile fracture occurred within the solder for the reflowed samples. For 1% and 2% Ag containing composite solder alloys, the fracture occurred at a location near but lower than the shearing height (20 It was confirmed that the Au–Zn IMC layer began to spall off from the interface of the Sn–Zn eutectic solder and Au/electrolytic Ni/Cu system after the initial reflow The wetting/spreading behavior is also a very important issue for a solder. Thus, a comparative study spreading was carried out for the different solders. From The addition of Ag particles in the Sn–Zn solder gave two major consequences. With the increase in Ag content, the uniformly distributed AgZn Several conclusions can be made about the effect of the reinforcement with Ag particle additions in Sn–9Zn eutectic composite solder alloys. The shearing strength can be increased by the addition of Ag particle into Sn–9Zn eutectic solder up to 2 When more than 2 Three distinct IMC layers were formed with the BGA substrate for additions of 2–4 For all the composite solders the fracture mechanism is mainly ductile, while for the higher (3–4 As the Ag particle in the composite solder increased, the α-Zn phase was depleted from the matrix. For 3 and 4 Finally, it can be concluded that the shear strength of the Sn–9Zn eutectic alloy can be enhanced by the addition of Ag particles, but only up to a certain level. The Sn–9Zn eutectic reinforced with 2 The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by City University of Hong Kong for the Project “Development of a Nano-activator Doped Surface Modifier for Sn–Zn Based Lead-free Soldering,” CERG Project No. CityU 111307 (CityU Ref. 9041222).