The effects of 200 mM copper ions on the synthesis of membrane and periplasmic proteins were investigated in iron-grown cells of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans (At. ferrooxidans). Total membrane protein profiles of cells grown in the absence of copper ions (unadapted cells) and in the presence of copper ions (copper-adapted cells) were compared by two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE). Crude preparations of outer membrane and periplasmic proteins were analyzed by SDS-PAGE. The synthesis of proteins was diminished or increased in the presence of copper ions. Low molecular weight proteins (<14 kDa) were significantly repressed by copper. These proteins are probably acidic proteins located in the outer membrane. An over-expression of a periplasmic protein of about 17 kDa was detected in the copper-adapted cells and was assumed to be rusticyanin, a 16.5-kDa periplasmic copper protein present in At. ferrooxidans cells and involved in the electron-transport chain of the iron oxidation pathway. To our knowledge, this is the first report of a possible involvement of the rusticyanin and outer membrane proteins in the mechanism of copper resistance in At. ferrooxidans. Copper is the most extensively recovered metal in biohydrometallurgical operations, mainly via dump or heap leaching systems. In recent years, bioreactors have been used in the recovery of copper from copper concentrates and in the pretreatment of gold ore concentrates. In bioreactors, bioleaching processes are much more controlled than in dump or heap operations. Besides optimization of operational parameters, improvement in performance of  The mechanism of copper resistance in  The response of In this work, we investigated the changes in the membrane and periplasmic protein profiles after adaptation of The strain Copper-adapted cells were developed by repeated sub-culturing in the medium containing 200 mM Cu Protein extractions (total membrane, periplasmic and outer membrane) were performed with unadapted and copper-adapted cells obtained from 2 L of cultures grown in the absence (control) and in presence of 200 mM Cu Membrane proteins were isolated as described by Approximately 10 μg of membrane proteins were separated by 2D-PAGE in a Mini-PROTEAN II 2D system (BioRad), according to Outer membrane preparation was obtained essentially as described by The periplasmic proteins were released by the procedure described by After quantification and denaturation in Laemmli buffer Two-dimensional analysis was performed to detect differences in the total membrane protein profiles of The synthesis of many membrane proteins was decreased or increased in the presence of copper ions Most of the membrane proteins that were strongly repressed or even suppressed by Cu Little appears to be known about the role of outer membrane proteins in the copper resistance mechanisms of Copper-induced membrane proteins that were observed by 2D-PAGE analysis Recently, Our SDS-PAGE profiles of outer membrane proteins showed some additional bands, which could be due to contamination by inner membrane. These profiles showed differences in the relative amounts of some proteins when compared to the outer membrane profile reported by those authors The outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria allows the passage of ions due the presence of a major group of porins, proteins that form hydrophilic channels across the membrane Some reports have demonstrated a relationship between outer membrane protein deficiency and an increase in metal resistance in a variety of bacterial species. For example, In contrast to the repression of proteins from the outer membrane preparation, we observed an induction of periplasmic proteins in cells grown in the presence of 200 mM copper ions Some proteins presented in the periplasmic preparation (>40 kDa) The periplasmic preparation of copper-adapted cells showed an over expression of a protein of about 17 kDa. This protein was not observed in the total membrane According to the review of However, the site of ferrous oxidation has been inferred to be outside of the cell, and Another possible role for this over-expression may be related to the sequestration of excess of copper in the periplasmic space to protect the cell. The copper-binding capacity of rusticyanin and its abundance in copper-induced cells (if it occurs) would support this hypothesis. Although sequestration of heavy metals is a more unusual mechanism of resistance for bacteria than its active efflux, this process can be more viable for copper, an element essential for the bacterial cell. A similar role has been proposed to the blue copper proteins CopA and CopC that are plasmid-encoded periplasmic proteins of the copper-resistance system in Investigations of the 17-kDa periplasmic protein over-expression by metal ions other than copper are in progress. At the moment, we do not know if this effect is a specific response to copper or a more general response to heavy metals or high concentration of salts in N-terminal sequencing and sequence comparison with databases will help in the identification of the repressed and induced proteins observed in this work. Once identified, these proteins will contribute to a better understanding of the copper resistance mechanism in Our findings suggest that copper ions at high concentration activate mainly the synthesis of a 17-kDa protein, probably rusticyanin, and repress the synthesis of several outer membrane proteins in APF and MTMN received research fellowships from Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP) (00/01272-4 and 99/11590-4, respectively). We acknowledge Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientı&#x0301;fico e Tecnológico (CNPq) for a research fellowship to O.G.