Objective
                  The purpose of this study is to describe the outcomes of using a triple button device for the treatment of displaced distal-third clavicle fractures (Neer type II-b).
               
                  Material and method
                  A retrospective review was conducted on a series of patients between November 2011 and December 2014. Fourteen patients initially met the inclusion criteria, but 2 were excluded, leaving 12 patients (83.3% male; mean age 32.2 years) for the final analysis at a mean follow-up of 26±11.24 months (range, 12–48). Post-operative follow-up was performed at 2 weeks (two first months), and monthly thereafter, until was achieving clinically and radiological healing. The functional outcome was evaluated using the Constant score, and DASH score in the last follow-up.
               
                  Results
                  The mean Constant Score was 95.5±5.2 points (range, 85–100), with a mean DASH score of 3.3±4.4 points (range, 0–12.5). The mean time to clinical healing was 10.3±3.1 weeks (range, 8–16), and the mean time to radiological healing was 13.6±2.6 weeks (range, 12–20). There were no major complications. There were 5 minor complications without clinical impact: 2 coracoclavicular calcifications, 1 hypertrophic scar, 1 patient with discomfort due to the device, and 1 superficial wound infection. All patients returned their previous activity.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Good clinical results can be achieved with the triple button device in unstable distal fractures of the clavicle, without the need to remove the hardware.In recent series distal-third clavicular fractures make up 21–28% of all clavicular fractures. Neer's classification Type II injuries are unstable, because the fracture is medial to the coracoclavicular ligaments and the medial fragment is drawn upwards and backwards by the effect of the trapezius. In addition, the distal fragment is pulled downwards by the weight of the arm and rotated by the scapula ( Since the first clinical series, the trend has been towards treating these Neer type II injuries surgically, justified by the high incidence of pseudoarthrosis, 22–50%, The number of treatment techniques has increased considerably in recent years, including arthroscopic alternatives, and generally achieve satisfactory outcomes. A retrospective study was performed which included Neer type II-b distal-third clavicular fractures operated using the Twin Tail TightRope™ system (Arthrex, Naples, FL, U.S.A.) in our work centre from November 11 to December 2014, with a minimum of one year's follow-up in order to form part of the study. Patients with skeletal immaturity, fractures or previous shoulder injury surgery, patients with a high anaesthetic risk or those who did not want to participate in the study were excluded. Of the 14 patients who met the criteria, 2 were excluded: one was lost to follow-up and another presented a previous fracture in the injured clavicle, a total of 12 patients remained for the final study: 10 males (83.3%) and 2 females (16.7%). The mean age was 32.25 All the patients included in the study underwent a standard anteroposterior X-ray of the shoulder and projection of the clavicle with 30° cephalic tilt, both without load. Radiological assessment was undertaken preoperatively and postoperatively: every 2 weeks for the first 2 months, monthly from the third to the sixth month, and then annually. Radiological healing was defined as the presence of bone bridging obliterating the fracture space with no significant radiolucencies around it. Clinical healing was defined as the absence of spontaneous pain or pain on palpation of the fracture site, and articular balance of the shoulder with no pain. Similarly Constant The presence of major complications was assessed, such as those requiring a second unscheduled operation (deep infection requiring surgical drainage, implant failure, need for revision due to reduction loss, non-union), and minor complications which did not necessitate reoperation (intolerance to the material, superficial infection resolved with medical treatment, problems with scarring, calcifications). The need to remove the material was recorded independently from the rest of the complications. All the patients gave their written consent. The patients were operated in the deckchair position, with a pillow underneath the ipsilateral scapula. The arm was left free so as to be able to move it during the operation. The patients were given a general anaesthetic and an associated ultrasound-guided upper limb nerve block. Antibiotic prophylaxis with cefazolin was administered. All the operations were performed by 2 shoulder surgeons (JAC;GNS). The triple button system was used (AC Twin Tail A vertical incision is made, slightly medial to the acromioclavicular joint, to the coracoid apophysis, about 5 The postoperative protocol involves immobilisation in a sling in internal rotation and abduction for one month, allowing pendular movements from the first postoperative day. Limited elevation and abduction movements at 90° are allowed from the third week, and complete articular balance from the sixth week. Muscle strength potentiation is allowed from week 12. Contact sport or intensive physical activity is not allowed until the sixth month. A descriptive analysis was made of each variable, and the data shown as arithmetic mean The mean time to clinical healing was from 10.3 The definitive treatment for distal-third clavicular fractures, more specifically Neer type II-b fractures, remains a challenge. In any case, due to instability and the multiple deforming forces that act on the fracture site, surgical treatment is the best therapeutic option, The different ways of radiographically assessing these fractures (projections with or without load, purely anteroposterior or with degrees of tilt), Two main groups of surgical techniques are used for treatment: those that attempt direct healing by rigid fixation (traditional osteosynthesis, with different types of plates) and those that attempt indirect healing by flexible fixation (different coracoclavicular fixation systems, some of which can be performed arthroscopically). Most of the techniques used have provided good outcomes in terms of clinical and radiological healing, although to date no technique has proved superior to another. The problem with these techniques is essentially down to the material (intolerance, movement, infection), inadequacy of the technique (reduction loss) or articular damage (acromioclavicular arthrosis). Transfixation systems Conventional clavicle plates, distal radius plates or the recent preshaped plates have the great advantage of providing rigid fixation, with screws locked to the plate of different sizes and angulations, without affecting the acromioclavicular joint. The main problems with them are the need for wide exposure which can devascularise the clavicle, and the need to remove them due to discomfort produced by the material in between 17% and 45%. Isolated coracoclavicular cerclages (1 or 2), secured to harpoon suture anchors in the coracoid or otherwise, have also proved effective, although they present frequent reduction losses The literature describes clinical healing as taking place from the sixth The triple button system, initially designed to treat acute acromioclavicular dislocation and demonstrated to be effective in the laboratory,      The main radiological complication of the triple button system was the appearance of calcifications – already described in other studies with rates of 7–12% This study has a series of limitations. Firstly, it is a retrospective observational study; secondly, it presents a low number of patients, since the frequency of the injury makes long series with a minimum follow-up difficult in order to be able to compare surgical techniques with sufficient scientific evidence The triple button system is an alternative to the more conventional methods for the treatment of Neer type II-b distal-third clavicular fractures. It is reproducible and effective, both clinically and radiologically. Its main advantage is that a second intervention is not required to remove it. Level of evidence IV. The authors declare that neither human nor animal testing have been carried out under this research. The authors declare that they have complied with their work centre protocols for the publication of patient data. The authors declare that no patients’ data appear in this article. There was no source of funding available to undertake this study. The authors have no conflict of interest to declare in preparing and submitting this article. To the department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Traumatology of the General University Hospital