In this paper we present the results of the photocatalytic degradation of humic acids (HAs) in aqueous solution. Bench scale experiments were carried out using titanium oxide as photocatalyst. We studied the adsorption of HAs on TiO2 surface and we describe the kinetics of their photocatalytic degradation. The adsorption study of HA at three pH solution (1.9/7.5/11) by FT-IR DRIFT technique indicated that at acidic pH, HA are adsorbed on TiO2 mainly by carboxylate groups. We determined the isotherms of HA and it was shown that Langmuir model cannot be applied in this case. However, if the asymptotic values of the isotherms were assumed for these analytical methods the close values were obtained. The kinetics of degradation was followed with TOC and pH. There are no important pH evolutions. It was obtained 88% of TOC removal after 6h of irradiation with optimum TiO2 loading 1.0g/l. We observed the presence of two domains of HA degradation kinetics. In the first step, slight TOC decreased possibly due to the photodepolymerization of adsorbed HA on TiO2. In the second one, the photodegradation followed pseudo-first-order kinetics. Organic intermediates were determined by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (PDA-detector) analysis as well as biological oxygen demand (BOD5). It was shown that photocatalysis process improved the biodegradability of HA nevertheless mineralization process mainly occurred and there was no large amount of easy biodegradable species present in the reaction solution.The humic acids (HAs) have a significant role in the aquatic systems. They can complex heavy metals and organic pollutants such as pesticides, insecticides and herbicides In many countries, the HA is eliminated from water before chlorination by coagulation with aluminium sulphate and filtration. However, coagulation process brings two main disadvantages. Firstly, is the maintenance of residual sludge with high aluminium concentration. Secondly, treated water needs high quality monitoring of aluminium concentration. While the water contains more than 0.2 The heterogeneous photocatalysis can be an effective alternative solution for the elimination of the HA from aqueous solution During this work the photomineralization and photodecomposition of commercial HA in water solution have been studied. The mineralization kinetics was controlled by total organic carbon (TOC) and pH changes determination. Organic intermediates were studied with high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis, as well biodegradability (measuring biological oxygen demand, BOD HAs sodium salts was supplied by Sigma–Aldrich company and titanium dioxide P25 from Degussa (70% anatase, 99.8% purity, average particle size 30 The degradation of HA as well as formation and disappearance of the oxidation products were analysed after filtration (0.45 The affinity of HA to TiO The solutions of HA (100 Samples were loaded stress into 10 Photocatalysis experiments were carried out in a Solar box ATLAS SUNTEST CPS+ simulating natural radiation. The light source was a vapour xenon lamp Adsorption could play a prominent role in catalytic photodegradation of organic molecules  At the beginning of the reaction, the TOC value decreases slowly (domain I) and then pseudo-first-order is observed for the TOC decrease (domain II). The initial decrease is connected with the amount of TiO The fair evolution of TOC means that the mineralization of HA is rather limited in the domain I. The evolution of the reaction is certainly due to a surface degradation of carboxylate leading to shorter chain of HA followed by the re-adsorption of macromolecule. It was proven that photodegradation can proceed in surface via oxidation by hole and this mechanism is favoured in case of adsorbed molecules The photocatalytic degradation of HA as well as the formation and disappearance of the by-products were followed by HPLC  It could be explained by the formation of by-products. During the photocatalytic reaction the decrease of P2 and increase of P3 was observed simultaneously. Peak 3 seems to be associated with photoresistant products or nonadsorbed products. These products explain the level of the TOC after 6 The UV spectra of oxidation compounds were compared with some registered standard model spectra of low-molecular-weight organic carboxylic acids (4-hydroxybenzoic acid, oxalic, succinic, malonic acids) known as possible degradation products of HA Resuming these results it should be indicated that the photodegradation of HA leads to smaller molecules. Two kinds of molecules are produced: easily photodegradated one (peak 2) and photoresistant one (peak 3). We can estimate the last molecules as about 10% in weight of the starting material considering the TOC level. The influence of the photocatalyst concentration on the mineralization kinetics of HA has been investigated employing different concentrations of P-25 Degussa varying from 0.1 to 2 BOD measurement allows to follow the biodegradability of organic HA intermediates products during irradiation time. This indicates that photocatalysis process can break down or rearrange molecular structures of HA and convert the nonbiodegradable organics to more biodegradable forms. It is of great importance in the case of the application of a physicochemical–biological coupled system to wastewater treatment In our batch experiments only slight increase in the BOD The results obtained in a bench scale experiments were encouraging and photocatalytic treatment of HAs solution appears as an efficient process. We found that adsorption play a prominent role in photocatalytic degradation HA. Study of the HA adsorption on the TiO The global evolution of the photocatalytic degradation has shown two distinct domains. For the first step, we observe a slow decrease of TOC probably due to photodepolymerization of adsorbed HA on TiO It was found that biodegradability of refractory organic substances such as HA increase with irradiation time. It is of great importance in the case of the application of physicochemical–biological coupled system to wastewater treatment. Photocatalysis process can break long organic molecules into smaller biodegradable compounds and can make their biological treatment eligible. It may at the end reduce the cost of process. However, it was indicated that during photocatalysis of HA mineralization process was dominating without forming large amounts of easy biodegradable species in our conditions.