The vacancy-ordered τ-phases (VOPs) in Al-transition-metal (TM) alloys can be classified into three distinct categories in the commensurate limit. These are: (a) τ
                     3 and its τ
                     3 inflated phases possessing inversion centres on Al and V layers, (b) τ
                     5 and its τ
                     3 related phases displaying centres on Al and TM layers and (c) τ
                     8 and those generated after τ
                     3 inflation having centres on TM and V layers. The six-dimensional model proposed by us earlier generates all of them in three-dimensional physical space with the above structural characteristics. The consequence of taking a physical space cut from a six-dimensional anti-phase domain leads to an anti-phase domain for τ
                     3 and τ
                     ∞, but it will be shown that such a cut leads to the generation of translational twins for other phases.The formation of a series of structures in aluminium transition-metal (TM) based on binary and ternary alloys offers an opportunity to understand the various structural features of a gamut of phases where the golden mean ( Many authors, since the discovery of icosahedral quasicrystals, have emphasized the economy of description of quasiperiodic phases in terms of a higher-dimensional approach. A succinct review by us The 6D ordered orthogonal hypercell proposed by us We have mentioned in the preceding section that two sets of line motifs are required for reproducing the atomic coordinates of known We have chosen these three structures in the Al-TM systems with a view to illustrate some of the distinguishing features of VOPs and Now, we propose to discuss their stacking sequence generated by our model. The layer heights reported in We have shown in this presentation that a shift of Al and TM+V motifs in 6D space gives rise to anti-phase domain structures in hyperspace. The consequence of a physical space cut from the above two domains for the The authors are grateful to Professors J.-M. Dubois (France), S. Ranganathan, G.V.S. Sastry and Dr. N.K. Mukhopadhyay for their interest in the present work. One of us (RKM) thanks Professors K. Urban, H.-R. Trebin and S. Ranganathan for their help and support to enable him to attend ICQ7.