Objectives
                  The objective of this study was to analyze the effects of Choukroun's PRF (platelet-rich fibrin), a leucocyte and platelet concentrate clinically usable as fibrin membrane or clot, on human primary cultures of gingival fibroblasts, dermal prekeratinocytes, preadipocytes, and maxillofacial osteoblasts.
               
                  Study design
                  For the proliferation study, these cells were cultivated with or without a PRF membrane originating from the same donor as for the cells. For osteoblasts and fibroblasts, dose-dependent effect was assessed (using 2 membranes). Cell counts and cytotoxicity tests were performed at 3, 7, 14, and 21 days, and even 28 days for osteoblasts. More osteoblast cultures were prepared in differentiation conditions according to 3 modalities (without PRF, with PRF, with PRF the first day and differentiation medium applied only after the first week of culture). Osteoblast differentiation was analyzed using Von Kossa staining and alkaline phosphatase, DNA and total cell proteins dosage.
               
                  Results
                  PRF induced a significant and continuous stimulation of proliferation in all cell types. It was dose dependent during all the experiment with osteoblasts, but only on day 14 with fibroblasts. Moreover, PRF induced a strong differentiation in the osteoblasts, whatever the culture conditions. The analysis of osteoblast cultures in differentiation conditions with PRF, using light and scanning electron microscopy, revealed a starting mineralization process in the PRF membrane itself after 14 days. Moreover, PRF leucocytes seemed to proliferate and interact with osteoblasts.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Cultures with PRF are always cocultures with leucocytes. These “chaperone leucocytes” could be the source of differential geographic regulation within the culture and explain the double contradictory effect proliferation/differentiation observed on osteoblasts.Optimizing healing is a key objective in many fields of biotechnological research. Platelet growth factors are a well known source of healing cytokines, usable for clinical applications. Numerous techniques of autologous platelet concentrates have been developed and applied more or less successfully since the first publications in oral and maxillofacial surgery. During their degranulation, platelets release a large quantity of growth factors that enhance cell proliferation (especially platelet-derived growth factor [PDGF]), matrix remodelling (especially transforming growth factor β [TGFβ]), and protection of the healing cells (anti-apoptotic role of insulin-like growth factor [IGF]). Despite the obvious interest of bringing such molecules on a surgical site, the results forwarded with the different types of PRP were often quite close to those obtained using conventional fibrin glues, which have been use for more than 30 years in surgery. Choukroun's PRF (platelet-rich fibrin) may be considered as a second-generation platelet concentrate, using simplified protocol. The composition and the quantities of growth factors seem very stable in each PRF clot because of the mechanical process of polymerization during centrifugation. Each PRF membrane slowly releases high amounts of growth factors (such as TGFβ-1, PDGF-AB, and vascular endothelial growth factor [VEGF]) and other matrix glycoproteins (such as Thrombospondin-1) for at least 7 days. The purpose of this study was to assess in vitro the behavior of 4 human cell lineages, i.e., dermal prekeratinocytes, gingival fibroblasts, preadipocytes, and mandibular osteoblasts, in the presence of Choukroun's PRF. To perform human cell cultures in the presence of PRF, we had to harvest tissue specimens and blood from patients, healthy men aged from 50 to 60 years old, after informed consent. Per each culture, cells and PRF were harvested from the same patient for immune compatibility reasons. During indicated and planned surgeries, we were able to harvest some extra tissue instead of destroying it: gingival fibroblasts from the alveolar ridge, osteoblasts from a mandibular bone harvest, preadipocytes originating from the inner face of the knee, For each tested cell type, 8 culture plates (diameter 90 mm, Nunc, Langenselbold, Germany) were cultivated (20,000 cells per plate): 4 plates were used as controls (control group) and 4 received a PRF membrane (expressed from its serum), originating from the same donor as the explant (test group [PRF]). Only one exception: for the osteoblasts, 10 culture plates (diameter 60 mm, Nunc) were cultivated starting with 50,000 cells per plate. To quantify a possible dose-dependent effect of the PRF on the proliferation of the fibroblasts and osteoblasts, test groups with 2 PRF membranes were also prepared, i.e., 8 more culture plates for the fibroblasts and 10 plates for the osteoblasts (test group [2PRF]). The PRF was produced according to the protocol described above, using a collection kit and centrifuge table specifically designed for this application (Process protocol, Nice, France, with 9-mL glass-coated plastic tubes). For this cell proliferation study, cultures were performed in triplicate to ensure reproducibility of results. A fourth series was used for the MTT assay at each experimental time point, respectively. Detailed procedures for these MTT measurements have been previously described by Mosmann. For the osteoblastic differentiation analysis, the primary cultures of osteoblasts were used in a different way. The culture plates were seeded with 50,000 cells per plate (diameter 60 mm, Nunc), and the plates of the test groups received a PRF membrane. Three groups were thus formed: control group D (differentiation without PRF) and test group D0 (differentiation with PRF) were submitted to differentiation culture conditions at the very start of the experiment, whereas test group D8 was submitted to the differentiation conditions only after 7 days of culture in contact with the PRF. After 7 days, all the PRF membranes were removed from all the test groups. At days 3, 7, 14, 21, and 28, one plate of each group was removed for analysis. In total, 6 series were performed. Each series was composed of 15 plates (3 groups at 5 experimental times). Three series were stained with Von Kossa. This staining allowed to detect the mineralization process of the extracellular matrix of the cells in the culture plates, and the mineralization nodules appeared as dark brown/black spots. Three series were preserved for cell counting, quantification of ALP, DNA, and total proteins of the sample. The DNA/protein ratio was calculated and analyzed at each experimental time. Finally, a seventh slightly different series was prepared for scanning electron microscope (SEM) examination. The osteoblasts were seeded normally, and cultivated with differentiation medium and a PRF membrane during 14 days. After these 14 days, the culture plates were fixed with the membrane in place, and analyzed using SEM. These independent cultures were performed in triplicate. In presence of a PRF membrane, the number of osteoblasts in culture was significantly higher ( In the presence of 1 PRF membrane, the number of gingival fibroblasts in culture was significantly higher ( In the presence of 1 PRF membrane, the number of prekeratinocytes in culture was significantly higher ( In the presence of a PRF membrane, the number of preadipocytes in culture was significantly higher ( In conclusion, with these 4 cell types, Choukroun's PRF was able to stimulate significant cell proliferation in vitro. This series of cytotoxicity tests confirmed the absence of cytotoxicity of PRF for these 4 cell types ( The activities of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) were expressed in nU/cell and compared among the 5 experimental groups ( The cultures with PRF and differentiation conditions in the very beginning of the experiment (test group D0) showed very intensive activities of ALP as soon as the third day, and during the whole experiment. The values measured with these cultures were much higher ( The cultures with PRF and differentiation conditions on the eighth day only (test group D8) logically produced ALP activities that were similar to the cultures proliferating with PRF (test group [PRF]) during the 7 first days. As soon as the differentiation conditions were added, the ALP activities increased very much, and were then significantly higher ( The development of the percentage of surface colored in brown/black with the Von Kossa staining generally followed the pattern of the ALP activities ( The Von Kossa staining blackened all the starting mineralization processes, but allowed especially to well individualize the most significant mineralization nodules. All the cultures with PRF showed a high number of nodules at D21. The control group D followed the same pattern but did not seem to ever reach the number of nodules found in the 3 test groups with PRF. At D28, the test group D0 (with PRF and differentiation medium) reached nearly complete blackening, with multiple nodules, which rendered quantification very difficult. This qualitative observation was a significant indication when considering the favorable effect of PRF on bone mineralization. In the conditions of our experiment, these results with ALP and the Von Kossa staining seemed to indicate that the presence of PRF stimulates the differentiation of human osteoblasts in culture. The evolution of the total DNA/protein ratio was also characteristic ( In this series of osteoblast cultures with PRF and differentiation conditions for 14 days, the light microscope examination following a Von Kossa staining allowed detection of an onset of mineralization at the PRF membrane contact. This mineralization process often started at the borders of the membrane ( SEM analysis showed interesting pictures on the organization of the relationships between the osteoblasts and the components of the membrane. The osteoblasts formed a network at the surface and the periphery of the PRF membrane, and organized the apposition of a bone matrix ( In this study, the contact with a PRF membrane induced stimulation of the proliferation in the 4 tested cell types. We particularly noted a growth peak for the osteoblasts, for which the test group showed nearly 5.5 times more cells than the control group at 7 days. The large presence of growth factors in a platelet concentrate could suggest that the in vitro stimulation of proliferation by these preparations would be the rational and inevitable result. Now, several studies have demonstrated an absence of stimulation on the proliferation of osteoblasts and human fibroblasts cultured with PRP, One of the particularities of this study comes from the cell type and the platelet concentrates that have been used. In the literature, all the studies carried on PRP have used either animal cell lineages The platelet and growth factor concentration could also be a significant factor. Some recent studies have shown a stimulation of osteoblastic proliferation by platelet concentrates in a dose-dependent way. Finally, it is important to note that the prekeratinocytes and the preadicpocytes have a similar evolution when they are placed in the presence of PRF. The effect of PRF on their proliferation was evident in the very first days, but the range increased significantly over time. Generally, these lineages seemed to require a longer induction period. This enlightens especially the osteoblast and gingival fibroblast reactions in regard to PRF: these cells underwent a very important boost of inital stimulation during the first days, especially the osteoblasts with a 5.5 factor between the test group and the control group at D7. This could indicate that the architecture of the PRF, with its fibrin matrix and leucocytes, has more specific effects on certain cell types that are naturally fibrin-sensitive, such as the osteoblasts. In terms of osteoblastic differentiation, the results obtained with PRF are here again very different from those of the previous studies with the PRPs and other platelet releasates. Some studies showed a stimulation The adjunction of PRF in the proliferating cultures seems to stimulate simultaneously the proliferation and some kind of differentiation characterized by a strong ALP activity and the formation of mineralization nodules. Osteoblasts placed in differentiation medium without PRF seemed to barely reach the same level of differentiation. Finally, the osteoblasts that received PRF and differentiation medium (test group D0) showed very important characteristics of differentiation, which were largely superior to all the observations previously described in the literature on this topic; the delayed application of the differentiation medium, just after removing the PRF at 7 days (test group D8), enhanced the effects of PRF, but the observed delay of differentiation in comparison with test group D0 was not compensated for. These results are arguable, because they seem to indicate that the PRF would induce simultaneously both proliferation and differentiation, which appears unlikely. The only rational explanation for this improbable proliferation/differentiation combination would be that 2 subpopulations of cells cohabit in the cultures with PRF. A majority proliferates actively under the effect of the platelet growth factors, thus explaining the overall DNA/protein ratio, which increases in the whole of the culture plate. Inversely, a minority differentiates, possibly at the contact of the fibrin or the leucocytes, thus explaining the ALP and mineralization activities in the whole culture plate. As the cultures become nonhomogeneous, the values calculated “per cell” appear contradictory, because it concerns 2 pathways, proliferation and differentiation, coexisting in the same culture. This explanation is corroborated by analyzing the differentiation profile of the cells in test group D8. Their DNA/protein ratio always remained much higher than that of control group D, despite the fact that the application of differentiation medium on D8 slightly slowed down the ratio induced by the PRF. However, evaluation of the ALP activity indicated a strong osteoblastic differentiation, superior to that of control group D. The coexistence of these 2 results means that the application of the differentiation medium triggers the differentiation pathway in the osteoblasts, despite the proliferation induced by the PRF. But the 2 processes remain concomitant. It is interesting to note that the differentiation medium, although it is meant to be very powerful, is unable to induce an immediate differentiation on the cultures with PRF. Indeed, the nonhomogeneity of the cell profiles continues for a long time. The juxtaposition of these 2 profiles in the same culture gives some more information concerning the PRF fibrin clot effects on the cultured cells. PRF is not an extract mixed with the culture medium, it is a complex and nonhomogeneous biomaterial on which the cells are seeded. It is possible to imagine that the nonhomogene of the culture may be geographic, i.e., that the cells that are the closest to the PRF clot undergo effects that are different from the most distant cells. Indeed, PRF combines numerous cytokines, leucocytes, platelets, and proteins of a different nature, trapped in a very dense fibrin membrane. The fibrin matrix itself has a very significant action on the differentiation of the osteoblasts. The literature often tends to forget the impact of the leucocytes within platelet concentrates. Several studies have already discussed the notion of immune concentrate, The cultures with PRF during 14 days analyzed in SEM, may possibly have slightly different profiles from the test groups (with PRF during only 7 days), particularly concerning the leucocytes. Unfortunately, the risks of culture contamination seemed too high to leave the membrane systematically more than 10 days in culture. Because of these technical problems, we therefore had decided to limit PRF induction to 7 days in the test groups. Differentiation medium used for osteoblast cultures (with dexamethasone) may have an incidence on the proliferation and behavior of the PRF leucocytes too. Anyway, we can not impute any in vitro negative effect to these leucocytes on the “cocultured” cells. Their role deserves to be further investigated, and the notion of “platelet concentrate” should be specified. This first study provides an overview on the effects of PRF on several very different cell types. Besides stimulating the proliferation of these cells, the effects on the osteoblastic differentiation are highly significant. The role of leucocytes in these cocultures also seems to be important. To this day, this aspect has been occulted in the literature on PRP, and the role of leucocytes should be analyzed more carefully in all platelet concentrate types. Choukroun's PRF is a leucocyte- and platelet-rich fibrin matrix. The clinical and biotechnological perspectives of this cheap and easily produced biomaterial are numerous and deserve further investigation.