The fly ash (FA) and red mud (RM) are the primary solid waste produced in the aluminum plant. Present work investigates the possible utilization of these wastes for preparation of insulation bricks by blending different proportion of their mixture with sawdust. Study of the effect of varying FA:RM ratio, firing temperature (Tf) and sawdust blending on the physical properties of bricks has been carried out. Bricks having 60:40 ratio of FA:RM were found to possess maximum strength independent of Tf. It showed that higher firing temperature increases the strength of bricks. The blending of sawdust improves the porosity and the thermal insulation properties of the bricks. Bricks fired at 1100 °C and made by blending of minimum 7.5% saw dust, with 40% red mud in fly ash fulfills the criterion of ‘Type- A’ insulation brick as per IS:2042 standards. These bricks are suitable for insulation in the ambiance having low to medium temperature (up to 600 °C) applications.In the last few decades the huge waste generation (municipal, electronics and industrial) has turned to a major global concern ( In spite of large generation, their physical and chemical properties that make them an environmental threat if disposed in landfills. Red mud is highly alkaline, having heavy metals and other potential pollutants. Its disposal in landfills leads to the leaching of pollutants into soil and water ( Due to the concerned environmental impacts and humongous generation, researcher are exploring their alternative utility rather than dumping. Usage of these waste as – alternative for construction material ( Researchers investigated the utility of these waste Alternatively, the co-utilization of red mud with other waste Most of the research reporting the co-utilization of red mud and fly ash is mainly focused on fire brick and other geopolymers with no focus on the preparation of insulation firebricks. Insulating bricks are most common refractory for heat insulation having high porosity, lightweight, and very low thermal conductivity. Conventionally silica, alumina, fireclay, calcium silicate, kaolin, perlite diatomite, expanded vermiculite and aggregates are used for the manufacture of insulating bricks ( Keeping the above fact in mind, present work aims towards the production of insulation bricks using a mixture of fly ash and red mud with sawdust (SD) acting as a pore forming agent. The red mud cake and fly ash were collected from Hindalco Industries- Renukoot, India. The saw dust samples were obtained from the registered local wood dealer. The red mud cake was crushed to −0.1 mm size by using a mortar-pestle. To ensure narrow and uniform porosity of the bricks, the saw dust of size 1–2 mm has been utilized in the experiments. The combustibles and volatiles present in the saw dust and fly ash were determined by proximate analysis. Moisture content was determined by placing sample of sawdust in an open crucible and then heating it at 110 °C for 1 h. The volatile matter was analyzed by heating the samples (placed in covered crucible) to 950 ± 5 °C at a rate of 35 °C/min and holding it for 7 min. To determine the ash content of the residue, measured samples were heated to 400 °C, for 30 min followed by heated again to 950 ± 5 °C at a rate of 2.5 °C/min ( Ws- Weight of bottle filled with water and 5 g of a sample (150 μm size) W W Specific surface area of the samples was measured by BET (Brunauer-Emmett-Teller) theory by obtaining adsorption and desorption isotherm of N Dried samples of fly ash and red mud were mixed homogeneously in varying proportion (FA: RM = 0:100 to 100:0). The mixture of FA-RM was blended with sawdust in varying proportions The cold crushing strength (CCS) of fired bricks was measured using a small range universal testing machine Bulk density and porosity of fired bricks were measured as per ASTM standards using equations W W W v- Apparent volume of fired bricks sample Thermal conductively was measured by calorimeter method as per ASTM C201 standard ( k-thermal conductivity q-water flowing through the calorimeter L-thickness of the bricks t t A-surface area of bricks exposed to t The scanning electron microscopic (SEM) images of broken fired bricks samples after compressive strength testing were recorded by using SEM make ‘ The data of proximate analysis has been shown in The XRD of fly ash and red mud has been shown in The size distribution study shows that fly ash and red mud possess similar distribution and nearly 90% particles are of - 0.1 mm size. The fineness of fly ash and red mud match to the size specification requirements of clay ( The specific gravity (SG) of raw materials has been shown in  The apparent porosity of fired bricks varies inversely with firing temperature and increases with sawdust addition ( The bulk density variation of fired bricks with varying sawdust addition is shown in Thermal conductivity measurement (at 600 °C) shows thermal insulation properties of bricks decreases with increase in firing temperature and red mud content. Further, the addition of sawdust increases the thermal insulation ( The high temperature and red mud addition results in localized fusion, higher bulk density, lower porosity, and low insulation properties of the bricks. Further, excess blending of sawdust drops the CCS of the bricks therefore; to meet the satisfactory criterion of IS:2042 (Type A) standards bricks must be at least 7.5 wt% sawdust, maximum 40% red mud and maximum firing temperature of 1100 °C (   This study investigated the formation of thermal insulation bricks by blending sawdust to the mixture of fly ash and red mud and effect of variation of parameters on the properties of formed bricks. The physico-chemical study showed that fly ash and red mud possess size equivalent to the clay and thus it may be used as brick forming raw material. These also comprise of mineralogical phases like free silica, kyanite, hematite, alumina which results in formation of iron and aluminum silicates and other harder phases after firing. Results also showed that sawdust is a suitable pore forming agent. The high temperature firing of bricks results in better strength, bulk density and thermal conductivity, relatively due to the localized fusion of particles and formation of hard phases. SEM analysis also corroborates with the above results. Red mud content increase up to 40% improves the desired properties of bricks due to transformation of free silica to the silicates of iron and aluminum. Sawdust addition resulted increase in porosity at the cost of loss of strength and bulk density. Yet its addition is highly favorable to achieve requisite thermal conductivity. The results showed that 7.5 wt% addition of saw dust is optimum to achieve satisfactory properties. The study revealed fired bricks (1100 °C) having FA:RM of 60:40 with 7.5 wt% saw dust blending exerts properties that meets the criterion of Type-A insulation bricks as per IS:2042 standard. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at