In this paper, the stack-like crystallization of calcium carbonate in the presence of hen eggwhite under direct drying and vacuum freeze drying was investigated, and marked morphological changes in the calcium carbonate particles were observed depending on the reaction condition used. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), Transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and Nano Mechanical Tester were employed to characterize the samples. Results indicate that gelling eggwhite-mediated the formation of the “stack-like” layered calcium carbonate aggregates composed of considerable nanosheets under direct drying while only rhombohedra calcite crystal (104) was formed without any additives. An analogous structure to the brick-and-mortar arrangement was attainted by vacuum freeze drying. The average elastic modulus and the hardness of “stack-like” calcium carbonate hybrid material were assessed 0.9952 and 0.0415GPa with Nano-indenter test, respectively.Nature has ingeniously succeeded in producing an impressive variety of inorganic functional structures with designed shapes and sizes on specific sites through a biologically controlled mineralization process Because of perfect mechanical properties, artificial preparation of the nacre has been an attractive target for the design of toughened synthetic ceramics. Employment of laminated structure of minerals and the crystal growing under high pressure to synthesize artificial analogues of nacre were fundamental milestones in the development of composite materials, and many studies have been made in this area. Kotov and Tang The organic matrix plays important role in the mineralization for mediating the inorganic structure, morphology and polymorphs Hen eggwhite is an original biological fluid in which major proteins have been widely studied In this paper, we report a new “stack-like” structure of calcium carbonate hybrid materials synthesized with hen eggwhite as organic matrix of nacre and its mechanical properties. All chemicals were of analytical grade and used without further purification. In all cases calcium carbonate hybrid materials were precipitated by rapid pouring of 0.2 Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) measurements were performed with a TM-1000 (Hitachi, Japan) and an LEO S440 (Leica Cambridge LTD, UK) microscope. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a Rigaku D/max-γA diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) spectra were taken on an FT-IR-G988 spectrometer by a KBr disk. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) observation was conducted on a JEOL 2010 (JEM, Japan). Mechanical properties were carried out on Nano Mechanical Tester (Hysitron Inc). The crystallization of calcium carbonate incubated at 15±2 Interestingly, different crystal morphologies were attained by different drying methods. An analogous structure to the brick-and-mortar arrangement of calcium carbonate hybrid materials was obtained with 7 We found that incubation temperature also play important role on the morphology of eggwhite-mediated calcium carbonate. The XRD patterns of calcium carbonate obtained with different concentrations of eggwhite incubated at 15±2  In order to meet the Nano-indenter test, the calcium carbonate hybrid materials in bulk after drying at 55 According to the above analysis and discussion, the formation process of “stack-like” structure and pseudo-sphere of calcium carbonate hybrid materials shown in In summary, we gave an environmentally friendly route to form the materials of seashell nacre. This green chemical method could scale up the industrial productions of calcium carbonate with different morphologies. Eggwhite is fantastic material to simulate the role of organic matrix in the nacre to form “stack-like” layer structures materials, which were composed of nanosheets from TEM and HRTEM observation. The XRD and FT-IR spectrum results confirm that the calcite were the only crystal polymorph present in all cases. Besides, the Nano-indenter test suggests that the “stack-like” structures of calcium carbonate hybrid materials have considerable mechanical properties. Of course, further investigations on the effects of eggwhite on the mechanical properties are needed and in progress. This work was supported by the