Surface behavior of the commonly found minerals in nickel laterite ores — quartz, magnetite, hematite and goethite — was investigated using electroacoustic measurements. The goal was to assess the surface potentials as single minerals and in mixed systems to understand possible interactions between particles in laterite slurries. Surface potentials were evaluated according to the electroacoustic theory with the understanding that a direct relationship existed between zeta potential and electroacoustic sonic amplitude (ESA) values. Results were evaluated using Bruinsma's equations. Measured (actual) and calculated ESA values were compared to determine whether the mixed systems remained dispersed or a tendency towards heterocoagulation existed over a range of pHs. For all mixed systems the behavior of the system was affected by the mineral of higher proportion in the mixture. For the fine quartz–magnetite system, no heterocoagulation was observed at all proportions of quartz and magnetite over the entire pH range. In the fine quartz–hematite and fine quartz–goethite systems a tendency towards heterocoagulation was observed with increase in quartz. The effect of the particle size was also investigated using coarse quartz–magnetite mixtures. A higher tendency towards heterocoagulation was observed with coarser quartz. The amount of quartz was found critical for the rheology of laterite slurries, determining the state of dispersion and/or heterocoagulation in the slurry.As easily processed nickel sulfide ores are being depleted, the need to mine and process nickel laterite ores is increasing. Processing of lateritic ores involves the preparation and transport of concentrated aqueous suspensions. Particularly for hydrometallurgical processing of nickel laterites many technical challenges exist during transport such as material build-up in pipes and tanks leading to plugging of pipes and eventual decreases in throughput ( Several attempts were made to investigate the surface charge characteristics of single minerals. In practice ores are mineralogically complex and knowledge on a single mineral is not sufficient to explain slurry rheology. Zeta potential distributions have been recently used to study particle systems by comparing single and mixed mineral systems ( Electroacoustic theory and measurement of the Electrokinetic Sonic Amplitude (ESA) is an alternative method to determine the electrokinetic properties of particles in suspensions ( The use of the ESA technique has been well established for colloidal systems in industrial chemistry, powder and materials science (pigments, paints, food, ceramics) ( It should be emphasized that in addition to the advantages of the method, it has been mostly O'Brien's and Bruinsma's contributions which adapted and advanced the application of the method on colloidal suspensions of minerals ( Pure quartz, magnetite, hematite, and goethite were used in this study. The characteristics of these minerals were presented in A Colloidal Dynamics Zeta Probe was used to determine the surface charge of particles using electro-acoustic sonic amplitude (ESA) as a function of pH, to predict the iso-electric point for each mineral. The ESA effect occurs when an alternating electric field of known frequency and amplitude is applied to a suspension of fine, charged particles. As the particles oscillate in the applied electric field, small pressure fluctuations develop around the particles in the surrounding liquid when a difference in the density of the liquid and particles exists, a macroscopic acoustic wave is generated. It is possible to correlate the magnitude of this wave with the dynamic mobility/zeta potential of the particles since these two quantities determine the magnitude of particle motion in an electric field. In zeta potential measurements, this mobility spectrum is obtained by using electro-acoustic instrument and measuring the ESA signal of a suspension over a range of frequencies. The Zeta Probe works at seven frequencies from 0.3 to 3 According to O'Brien's equations the zeta potential of particles are calculated from the ESA values using the following formulas with slight modifications depending on the type of the instrument and method used ( In Also, the raw ESA signal is given by; The electro-acoustic theory also states that zeta potential is zero when ESA signal is zero. This means that the magnitude and sign of the zeta potential is proportional to the magnitude and sign of the ESA signal. Electroacoustic measurements were conducted on fine quartz, coarse quartz, magnetite, hematite and goethite samples as single minerals and on mixed systems of these minerals. The mixed mineral systems and the weight proportions of the minerals in the mixtures are presented in Besides electro-acoustic measurements on single mineral systems, In this equation, ζ is the zeta potential, ρ is the density of the testing medium [g/cm Using these equations and Bruinsma's principles ESA values were calculated and fitted for mixed mineral systems to allow a comparison of the measured (actual) and calculated (Bruinsma) ESA values. Since it is not possible to measure ζ ESA measurements were conducted on single minerals first. The first mineral system tested was fine quartz–magnetite mixture. The results are presented in The second mineral system tested was fine quartz–hematite mixture. The results are presented in The third mineral system tested was fine quartz–goethite mixture. The results are presented in The effect of particle size on the state of dispersion/heterocoagulation was also investigated. A mixture of coarse quartz and fine magnetite was tested for this purpose. The results are presented in The electro-acoustic signal of mixed mineral suspensions can successfully be modeled using the electro-acoustic theory. The Bruinsma equation predicts the ESA curve (and iso-electric point) of mixed mineral systems reasonably well where the particles in the system are of equal size, density, and shape. For systems with particles of different sizes, the measured ESA values may not be predicted as accurately. If the ratio of the zeta potential of the mineral in the mixture to the zeta potential of the mineral alone, equals or approximates to 1 it can be anticipated that the mixed system is dispersed. Deviation from unity suggests that heterocoagulation is likely to occur. The data, therefore, shows that the electroacoustic behavior of dispersed mixed systems is easier to predict than that of aggregated suspensions. The agreement between experimental results and the model was good, particularly when all the components in the mixture had the same sign of surface charge and an electrostatic repulsion existed between particles. Deviations between the experimental data and the model were observed when the minerals in the mixture were oppositely charged, which corresponds to conditions for inter-particle attraction and aggregation.