In this work the effect of reaction temperature, sulfuric acid concentration, liquid-to-solid ratio and Fe2+ concentration on sulfuric acid leaching of gallium from phosphorus flue dust was studied. The results showed that gallium extraction increased with the increase of temperature, sulfuric acid concentration and liquid-to-solid ratio. Fe2+ concentration did not significantly affect the recovery of gallium. The acid-soluble gallium could be completely extracted with simulated spent acid containing 20% sulfuric acid and 0 to 50 g/L Fe2+ at temperature of 80 °C, and liquid-to-solid ratio of 10:1. The effect of phosphate concentration, reaction temperature and pH on the precipitation of gallium and ferrous iron was also studied in order to determine the optimum conditions for the recovery of gallium from simulated spent acid leach solution. It was found that under optimum precipitation conditions, when all gallium precipitated from the simulated spent acid leach solution containing 31 g/L ferrous iron and 0.1 g/L gallium, the precipitation of iron was less than 2%, the ratio of iron-to-gallium decreased from 310:1 in the leach solution to 5:1 in the precipitate. Gallium was therefore concentrated in the precipitate.Gallium is an important metal extensively used in high-tech industries ( In the pretreatment–leach process, about 1 ton concentrated sulfuric acid was needed when 1 ton flue dust was treated. In order to reduce the cost of extracting gallium from the flue dust, we attempted to leach the flue dust with spent sulfuric acid released from the production of titanium pigment. The sulfuric acid concentration of the spent acid was about 20%; in addition, the spent acid also contained 18–30 g/L ferrous iron. In order to find out optimum conditions for the leaching of gallium from the flue dust with spent acid, effect of reaction temperature, sulfuric acid concentration, liquid-to-solid ratio and Fe When the flue dust was leached with spent acid, the leaching solution contained large amount of Fe The flue dust used in this study was obtained from electrostatic precipitators in the production of elemental phosphorus by reductive smelting of phosphate in electric furnace. When removed from the precipitators and exposed to air, the dusts burned and fused causing the formation of agglomerates. The agglomerates consisted of particles of several micrometers. They were ground and screened to a proper size for optimal surface contact with reagents before test. The particle sizes of flue dust used in this study were smaller than 0.417 mm (35 mesh). The major phases of the flue dust were unreacted apatite, quartz, amorphous silicate and small amount of coke. The composition of the flue dust is shown in The simulated spent sulfuric acid leaching solution was prepared from analytical grade sulfuric acid, ferrous sulfate and deionized water. Analytical grade chemicals hydrochloric acid, titanium trichloride, methyl isobutyl ketone, toluene, Rhodamine B, sulfosalicylic acid, ammonia solution and deionized water were used in the measurement of gallium and iron. The leaching test and the precipitation test were carried out in a 500 mL round bottom glass flask with three necks. The reactor was equipped with an overhead stirrer driven by a variable-speed motor and it was immersed in a water bath. The desired temperature was controlled within about 0.5 °C by a contact thermometer connected to the heating device. A water-cooled condenser was linked to the reactor for the recovery of evaporated water. The pH was measured using a pH meter and a glass electrode. At the beginning of leach test, sulfuric acid solution was added into the glass vessel. Heating of the solution was started and when the solution reached the desired temperature, flue dust was added. At selected time intervals, slurry sample was withdrawn, centrifuged and filtered. The filtrate was analyzed for gallium. For the precipitation test, sodium hydroxide was added dropwise to the solution using a titration buret to progressively increase pH to target level. When the effect of phosphate concentration, temperature and pH on the precipitation of gallium and iron was studied, the solution was mixed for 30 min to allow the reaction to reach equilibrium, then slurry sample was withdrawn and passed through a 0.45 μm membrane filter. Gallium and iron were analyzed in the filtrate. When the effect of reaction time was studied, slurry sample was withdrawn at selected time intervals and filtered. Gallium and iron were analyzed in the filtrate. Analysis of gallium was carried out using Rhodamine B spectrophotometric method. Gallium in the solution was extracted into the mixture of methyl isobutyl ketone and toluene. In the extraction of gallium, the hydrochloric acid concentration in the aqueous phase was 6 mol/L, and the titanium trichloride was added to keep the solution in a reductive condition. Rhodamine B was used as color-producing reagent. Analysis of iron was carried out using sulfosalicylic acid spectrophotometric method. Sulfosalicylic acid was used as color-producing reagent, the pH of the solution was adjusted with ammonia solution. The effect of reaction temperature on the leaching of gallium from flue dust is shown in The effect of sulfuric acid concentration on the leaching of gallium from flue dust is shown in In the flue dust the major phases are unreacted apatite, quartz, amorphous silicates and small amount of coke. The gallium-containing phase is not identified because of its very low content; gallium in the flue dust probably exists as Ga The dissolution process of gallium can be expressed by the following equations:  During the leaching of the flue dust sulfuric acid is the limiting reagent; the theoretical amount of sulfuric acid demand can be calculated from the H The gallium in the flue dust is difficult to dissolve; in order to completely recover acid-extractable gallium in the flue dust, excess sulfuric acid is needed to keep a higher concentration in the leaching solution. The effect of liquid-to-solid ratio on the leaching of gallium from flue dust is shown in The sulfuric acid concentration of the spent acid is about 20%, which is approximately 2 mol/L. Preliminary sulfuric acid leaching experiments showed that sulfuric acid of 2 mol/L concentration could effectively extract gallium from the flue dust; therefore, the spent acid can be used to leach the flue dust without further concentration. However, the spent acid contains large amount of ferrous iron, whose concentration was 18–30 g/L; thus, the effect of Fe From The effect of phosphate concentration on the precipitation of Ga In order to identify the form of gallium in the precipitate, the ratio of PO The precipitate formed in the solution containing Ga From The effect of temperature on the precipitation of Ga The above mentioned precipitation behavior of gallium and iron indicates that it is possible to completely and selectively recover gallium from solution containing large amount of iron and phosphate when the precipitation conditions are properly controlled. In order to investigate the feasibility of selective recovery of gallium from the simulated spent acid leach solution, the flue dust was leached with simulated spent acid containing 20% H In this work the leaching of gallium from phosphorus flue dust with simulated spent sulfuric acid and the recovery of gallium from the leach solution by precipitation were studied. The following was concluded from the experimental results. In the sulfuric acid leaching process, recovery percentage of gallium increases with the increase of temperature, sulfuric acid concentration and liquid-to-solid ratio, while Fe In the precipitation process phosphate prompts both the precipitation of gallium and the precipitation of ferrous iron. Reaction temperature does not significantly affect the precipitation of gallium, but the precipitation of ferrous iron increases significantly with the increase of temperature. When the phosphate-to-metal ratio exceeds 1:1, gallium precipitates completely at ambient temperature and pH 3.5. Under these conditions only a small amount of ferrous iron precipitates. By using precipitation method, when all gallium precipitates from the simulated spent acid leach solution containing 31 g/L ferrous iron and 0.1 g/L gallium, the precipitation of iron is less than 2%. It is an effective method for the selective recovery of small amount of gallium from solution containing large amount of ferrous iron and phosphate. The experimental results in this work also indicate that a possible application of these findings is that phosphate ion can be used for the selective recovery of gallium from solution containing large amount of ferrous iron by adding phosphate to the solution and then increasing the pH of the solution.