The resistance of steel plate girders subjected to concentrated load can be described using a strength curve, which includes a gradual transition from yielding to buckling depending on the slenderness ratio of the web. The slenderness is a function of the ratio of the yield resistance to the critical buckling load. This paper describes a methodology for the determination of buckling coefficients for longitudinally stiffened plate girders subjected to partial edge loading or concentrated loads. After an extensive parametric analysis, the optimum parameters that govern the change from a global buckling mode to a more local buckling mode were found. As in similar buckling problems, the results show that the location and the relative flexural/torsional rigidity of the stiffener are relevant parameters that govern the final buckling shape. Finally an expression for the buckling coefficient used to determine the critical buckling load for longitudinally stiffened girder webs is presented.length of web panel width of flange width of stiffener position of longitudinal stiffener flexural rigidity of unit width of the web plate [= Young’s modulus critical buckling load yield resistance shear modulus [= depth of web panel effective second moment of area of stiffener St. Venant torsion constant for the stiffener buckling coefficient buckling coefficient for longitudinally stiffened plate girders contribution of a longitudinal stiffener to the buckling coefficient length of patch load flange thickness stiffener thickness web thickness flange stiffness parameter [= resistance function slenderness parameter [ relative torsional rigidity of the longitudinal stiffener [= relative flexural rigidity of the longitudinal stiffener [= transition rigidity Poisson’s ratio In current practice, longitudinal stiffeners are provided close to the compression flange of plate girders under negative bending to increase the resistance of deep plate girders subjected to bending and/or shear. The effect of longitudinal stiffening for these two types of loading has been extensively investigated and included in design codes. A secondary function of longitudinal stiffeners is to prevent lateral web deflections, thereby reducing secondary effects that can lead to premature failure due to web breathing. In Graciano and Johansson According to classical buckling theory, the critical buckling load Based on a parametric study using FEM, the following approximate equation was proposed in Ref. In the EC3 Part 1.5 As mentioned above, the effect of longitudinal stiffening on the patch loading resistance is not included in the design model in EC3. Graciano and Johansson The buckling analysis of longitudinally stiffened girder webs is a theoretically difficult matter due to the number of parameters involved. Therefore, numerical approaches In general, two parameters are used to describe the capacity of a stiffener to resist buckling namely the flexural rigidity ( The second moment of area In this paper, the buckling coefficients are computed by means of finite element analysis using the FE-package ABAQUS Due to symmetry in load and boundary conditions only one half of the plate is considered in the FE-analysis herein by considering boundary condition accordingly. In addition to symmetry, in the vertical edges the degrees of freedom 2, 3 and 4 were constrained ( Rockey et al. A sensitivity analysis was conducted to calibrate the model with available numerical results, and a mesh with 192 elements was chosen. Only one web panel aspect ratio ( In general, a good correlation between the numerical results is observed in The influence of the longitudinal stiffener on the critical buckling load of a simply supported plate subjected to patch loading is investigated in this section. The plate has been stiffened with: (a) a symmetric stiffener, and (b) an asymmetric stiffener (  It is observed that the buckling coefficient In practice, the patch load is transmitted through the flanges in plate girders as shown in The boundary conditions were assumed as follows. In the vertical edges, degrees of freedom 2, 3 and 4 were constrained. The same boundary conditions were used at the edges of the flange and longitudinal stiffener. In addition, all the nodes in the area where the load is transmitted were controlled to displace only in the vertical direction, i.e. degrees of freedom 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 were constrained and only displacement in direction 3 was allowed. The following geometry was used in the current FE-analysis:  The effect of a longitudinal stiffener on the critical buckling load of plate girders has not yet been studied herein. To this purpose a longitudinal stiffener was added to the FE-model developed in  In The following geometry is used in the analysis: To prevent the longitudinal stiffener from losing carrying capacity through local buckling, the width-to-thickness ratio  When comparing the buckling coefficients for the two different width-to-thickness ratios for the stiffener, a slight decrease for the larger slenderness Furthermore, In order to investigate the influence of the relative position of the stiffener on the buckling coefficient some parameters are kept constant: the ratio In In most practical cases, plate girders are stiffened with a longitudinal stiffener located within the range 0≤  In  For plate girders with In Two segments define the bilinear model in The transition rigidities It is important now to obtain an expression for the transition rigidity. From The plots are very similar for the three panel aspect ratios investigated herein. Then, the variation of However, The variation in the transition rigidity with The aim is to find an expression for A linear model can be considered in the first segment (0≤ In It is important to notice that the line for Several trials indicated that a third order polynomial gives a close fit to the equation relating From Beyond the transition rigidity the increase in buckling coefficient is rather small, and for simplicity it is neglected. The buckling coefficient is then limited by In conclusion the increase in the buckling coefficient due to an open section stiffener can be expressed as  In general a good agreement is observed between the predicted values using  The influence of the torsional rigidity of the stiffener on the buckling coefficient has not yet been considered. In the next section, a parametric analysis is performed using closed section stiffeners in order to include the contribution of the torsional rigidity of the stiffener in Eq. In the buckling analysis of longitudinally stiffened plates, the influence of the torsional rigidity of the longitudinal stiffener has usually been ignored, though its influence on increasing the critical buckling loads has been acknowledged. For instance, Graves Smith and Gierlinski In modern bridge construction, longitudinal stiffeners made of cold-formed trapezoidal shapes are welded to the web plate constituting closed sections like that shown in  The following geometry is used in the FE-analysis:  When the stiffener is located at A comparison of buckling coefficients for a web panel aspect ratio      From the plots showed in A substantial increase in the buckling coefficient when compared to flexurally rigid stiffener with small torsional rigidity. For web panels with larger In a similar manner as for open section stiffeners an expression is found for the buckling coefficient for closed section stiffeners with For flexural rigidities beyond This equation is valid for longitudinal stiffener with a ratio of torsional to flexural rigidity In this paper, a database of buckling coefficients for unstiffened and longitudinally stiffened plates was developed using the finite element method. In general, it was observed that the critical buckling load increases considerably due to the presence of a longitudinal stiffener. The buckling coefficient for unstiffened plate girders has been modified to account for the contribution of longitudinal stiffening by addition of one more term to Additionally, the contribution of the longitudinal stiffener to the buckling coefficient was derived using a ratio A further development of the formulae presented here is to include explicitly the influence of the torsional rigidity of the stiffener (