A numerical model of fully grouted bolts is proposed in this study by implementing the tri-linear bond–slip relationship of bolts into the numerical framework presented by Hyett et al. (1996). The bond–slip relationship of bolt–rock interface is simplified and represented by the tri-linear model. The proposed numerical model is characterized by (1) its ability in modeling decoupling mechanism of bolt–rock interface, i.e. the degradation of the interfacial shear bond stress along bolts; (2) its easy implementation in a numerical code. The proposed numerical model is verified with the pullout tests, and good agreements with the experimental results can be observed in terms of axial stress distributions in the bolt, shear stress distributions along the bolt and load–displacement relationship. The proposed model also gives a reasonable prediction on the behavior of bolts installed in the field.The stability and reinforcement of surrounding rock mass in surface slopes and underground openings is of a major concern. The rock reinforcement techniques can reduce the deformation of jointed rock mass and significantly improve its stability. In the past few decades, rock bolts have become a primary rock reinforcing support method to the unstable strata. They have become an integral part of the modern rock reinforcement system. Rock bolts are installed with the objective of improving the inherent strength of the rock mass and reducing its deformation. The fully grouted rock bolts are the mostly used bolt type in civil and mining engineering practice. In a fully grouted rock bolt system, the shear stress is generated at the bolt–grout interface and the grout–rock interface during the deformation of rock mass. The load can be transferred between rock bolts and rock mass via the shear resistance of the grout. The shear strength of the grout determines the reaction of rock bolts to the rock mass deformation. Failure of a rock bolt subjected to tensile load may occur in the rock bolt, in the grout medium, at the bolt–grout interface or the grout–rock interface, depending on which one of them is the weakest. In this study, only the interfacial failure will be considered and the general term ‘bolt–rock interface’ will be used to represent the ‘grout–rock interface’ or ‘bolt–grout interface’. The relationship of the generated shear bond stress in the bolt–rock interface and relative displacement between the rock bolt and the grout governs the rock bolt behavior. Hence, better understanding of the bolt load transfer mechanism can lead to the improvement of the rock bolt reinforcement design. Many research have been conducted on the load transfer capability of the rock bolting system ( Bond–slip models of rock bolts have been proposed in the past. The shear force on the bolt–rock interface The parameters “ The shear bond stress (the load transfer between the rock bolt and rock) in the first stage shows a linear ascending relationship with the relative displacement until it reaches the peak bond stress Although the tri-linear model was proposed to describe the shear bond stress–slip relationship, Based on the tri-linear bond–slip model, Although these aforementioned analytical models can agree well with experimental data, they do not take into account the rock mass deformation and it is difficult for using them to simulate the interaction between reinforced rock mass and bolts, which is important to the civil and mining engineers as a better understanding on the bolt–rock interaction can lead to a safe and efficient design of slopes and underground excavations. As computer based numerical methods are widely used in rock engineering, a numerical method taking into account a proper bond slip relationship is needed. To date a few researchers have conducted numerical study on the behavior of bolt rock interfacial bond–slip relationship. A numerical method taking into account the tri-linear bond–slip model is proposed in this paper and is verified by the experimental results of the bolts under pullout loads. The proposed numerical solution can be implemented in numerical analysis packages such as discontinuous deformation analysis (DDA) or finite element method (FEM) simulation software packages to model the rock mass reinforcement interaction. According to In this paper, rock bolts are assumed to be in elastic deformation and accordingly, its stress–strain relationship is: Substituting Eq. As discussed in Section In this paper, the tri-linear bond–slip model, represented by Eqs. The general tri-linear bond slip model Eq. Substituting Eq. Assuming that the bolt displacement Eq. When When If a faceplate is installed at When the When the When the Eqs. The program flowchart of the implementation of the tri-linear bond–slip model into the numerical method under every loading step is shown in Pullout tests are normally chosen to assess the axial performance of rock bolts. The instrumented rock bolts (with stain gauges attached on the surface of bolts) can provide the information with respect to the axial stress in the bolt and interfacial shear stress along the bolt. Hence, the proposed numerical model is evaluated by pullout tests conducted by The proposed model needs to be modified to be suitable for modeling the bolt pullout test. When a pullout load During pullout tests, concrete or rock mass is fixed hence,  The parameters of the tri-linear model for By using Eqs. The axial stress in the bolt can be calculated by: Axial stress distributions along the bolt from the proposed numerical model and The shear stress can be computed according to the unit shear force by Eq. However, the predicted axial stress and shear stress for loads of 200 Eq. With Eqs. According to the study of  The shear bond stress–slip relationship at node The number of node Node number  The proposed rock bolt model considering the tri-linear bond–slip relationship has been verified by pullout tests. In this section, the performance of a bolt installed in the field is modeled by the proposed numerical method. Bolts tend to resist the deformation of the reinforced rock mass, hence, the bolt is loaded when rock mass deforms and the interfacial shear bond stress is generated. The axial force and shear force along the bolt depend on the rock mass deformation. After the tunnel excavation, rock mass attempts to move toward the tunnel and the rock mass near the excavation deforms more than the interior rock mass. Bolts transfer the loads from the exterior rock mass to the interior through the shear stress generated between bolts and rock mass ( The radial displacements of rock mass around a circular tunnel can be described by an analytical function as follows: A bolt of 9 A bolt works together with the rock mass after its installation, which results in three different zones formed along the bolt: pick-up length, the neutral point, and anchor length as shown in As can be seen in  The bond–slip model of the bolt at node This study however does not take into account the interaction between rock mass and the bolt. When the rock mass displacement creates the shear stress at bolt–rock interface, the shear stress would restrain the rock mass displacement. The rock mass reinforcement interaction mechanism can be modeled after the proposed numerical model being implemented into a geotechnical simulation software. Unlike other numerical bolt models where the grout in the bolt system is simulated by shear springs (FLAC, UDEC), or spring/damper systems in A tri-linear bond–slip model is implemented into a numerical framework to simulate the axial behavior of rock bolts. Pullout tests are carried out using the numerical bolt model proposed in this paper. The obtained numerical results such as bolt axial force distributions, shear stress distributions along the bolt, and the load–displacement curve, match well with test data of A bolt installed in the field without a faceplate is simulated by the proposed numerical model which considers the displacement of reinforced rock mass. Pick-up length, the neutral point, and anchor length are generated along the numerically modeled bolt. The interfacial shear stress distributions of the bolt subjected to different rock mass deformation are comparable to the field measurements. The proposed bolt model can be embedded in numerical software packages with which the interaction mechanism of bolts and rock mass can be modeled. Future work will be focused on implementation of the numerical bolt model into the discontinuous deformation analysis (DDA) or finite element method (FEM) and the study of the interaction between bolts and rock mass. The authors would like to thank the reviewers’ valuable comments and suggestions for improvement of the manuscript.