Introduction
                  Treatment of open tibial shaft fracture is controversial due to the risk of infection. We assessed results in a continuous series of open tibial shaft fractures treated by primary intramedullary nailing.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  Factors can be determined for non-union and onset of infection following primary intramedullary nailing in open tibial shaft fracture.
               
                  Patients and method
                  A retrospective study assessed open tibial shaft fractures treated by primary intramedullary nailing between January 2007 and December 2013. Fractures were classified on the AO and Gustilo classifications. Infection rates and time to union were compared.
               
                  Results
                  Eighty-five patients (85 fractures) were included: 13 Gustilo type I, 43 type II, 19 type III-A and 10 type III-B. Eight patients had infection (9%). Healing and union were obtained after nail exchange and reaming in 5 cases, and after bone transport in 2. One patient showed non-union at last follow-up. Infection risk did not correlate with Gustilo (p
                     =0.55) or AO type (p
                     =0.69). The interval between trauma and wound debridement was significantly longer in infected patients (p
                     =0.048). Eighty-three fractures (97.6%) healed, at a mean 6.9±6.1 months (range, 2–40). Non-union was associated with AO type (p
                     =0.04), and showed a non-significant association with Gustilo type (p
                     =0.06).
               
                  Discussion
                  Time to treatment was the only factor influencing risk of infection. Non-union was related to AO comminution grade. Primary intramedullary nailing seemed reliable if treatment was early, with rigorous debridement. The advantages then are early resumption of weight-bearing and low patient burden.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  V, retrospective study.Primary intramedullary nailing in open tibial shaft fracture is controversial due to risk of infection The classic attitude consists in primary external fixation, especially in case of severe soft-tissue lesion and/or hemodynamic instability Intramedullary nailing enables stable fixation, weight-bearing, simple skin coverage and low patient burden. The present study hypothesis was that certain factors affect healing and infection after primary intramedullary nailing for open tibial shaft fracture. The aim of the study was to assess healing and infection rates in a continuous series of primary intramedullary nailing for open tibial shaft fracture. A single-center retrospective continuous series included patients operated on between January 2007 and December 2013, with 102 open tibial shaft fractures in 101 patients. Seven fractures were treated by external fixation; 2 of these patients (3 fractures) had multiple trauma and died in the immediate postoperative period; the other 4 fractures received secondary intramedullary nailing. Five fractures were treated by plate fixation, and 92 fractures (92 patients) by primary intramedullary nailing. Seven patients were lost to follow-up before the study minimum of 6 months, without healing at last follow-up, and were excluded from analysis. Only open tibial shaft fractures treated in emergency by primary intramedullary nailing were included. Exclusion criteria comprised; age Data were analyzed for 85 patients: 23 female, 62 male; mean age, 40.3 The first step consisted in drastic debridement with resection of damaged soft tissue and devascularized bone fragments. Tibial torsion was modeled on the contralateral limb. In 37 cases the nail used was UTN™, in 26 AO™ and in 22 Expert™ (all Synthes Dual antibiotic prophylaxis was implemented with amoxicillin In 10 cases of Gustilo III-B, closure could not be achieved and an aspiration dressing was implemented Three patients (1 Gustilo II, 2 Gustilo III-A) developed secondary skin necrosis requiring a flap (2 soleus at days 21 and 48, 1 fasciocutaneous at day 60). Fractures were classified following Gustilo and the AO. Location on the shaft, any bone defect, and interval from trauma to debridement were noted, as were skin coverage procedures and time after treatment initiation. Clinical and radiographic assessment with full-leg AP and lateral views was performed at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months then monthly until healing (if not achieved by 6 months), defined as bone callus uniting at least 3 cortices. Delayed consolidation (non-consolidation at 6 months but callus progression on the following X-ray) or definitive non-union at 6 months and any procedures to promote consolidation (dynamization, change and reaming of nail) were noted. Malunion exceeding 5° frontally and/or sagittally was screened for at the time of consolidation on full-leg AP and lateral views. Onset of sepsis was defined by CRP elevation with hyperleukocytosis and purulent effusion and/or local inflammatory signs and/or positive bacteriology at revision surgery. Correlations between onset of infection or non-union and Gustilo or AO type were analyzed on Fisher exact test. Correlation between onset of infection and time to treatment was analyzed on parametric Student t test. Correlation between consolidation time and Gustilo or AO type was analyzed on non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test. First-order risk was set at 5%. Discrete variables were reported as mean Eight patients (9.4%) developed deep infection, without correlation with Gustilo or AO type ( Mean trauma-to-debridement time was 406 Septic complications were significantly associated with trauma-to-debridement time ( At last follow-up, 83 patients (97.6%) showed bone healing, at a mean 6.9 AO type correlated with time to healing ( At 6 months, 28 patients (32.9%) did not show complete bone healing. Twelve showed delayed consolidation, including 4 after dynamization before 6 months, and 1 after nail change and reaming at 4 months, for infection. Sixteen (18.8%) showed non-union: 12 aseptic, 4 septic ( Nine of the 83 patients with bone healing at last follow-up (10.8%) presented The present results were comparable to those in the literature regarding deep infection rates after primary intramedullary nailing in open tibial shaft fracture (9.4%, compared to 6.5–12.9%, depending on the series The present study involved certain limitations. It was retrospective. Inter-observer assessment of soft-tissue lesions varied, introducing a measurement bias No difference in infection rates emerged according to Gustilo type or degree of comminution on the AO classification. Only the interval between trauma and debridement was significantly related to onset of deep infection. Some authors questioned the importance of operating within 6 The antibiotic prophylaxis protocol did not follow the guidelines of the French Society of Anesthesia and Intensive Care (SFAR) for open fracture and notably for Gustilo type I Consolidation at last follow-up was good, with a rate of 97.6%. However, there was a high rate of non-union in Gustilo III fractures, equivalent to rates for external fixation We included cases with severe initial bone defect, which must have had negative impact on results for healing and non-union. However, we believe that intramedullary nailing in such cases facilitates secondary segmental bone transport Primary intramedullary nailing in open tibial shaft fracture seems reliable and feasible whatever the severity of skin wound and comminution. It effectively stabilizes the fracture site, facilitates skin coverage procedures and early resumption of weight-bearing, and is less burdensome for the patient than external fixation. In Gustilo type III fracture, this internal fixation technique presupposes emergency management associating early antibiotic prophylaxis, meticulous debridement and rapid skin coverage. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. None. The authors all collaborated to write the article.