The aim of the research was to determine the production viability and mechanical durability of briquettes made of shredded cones of three species: Scots pine, Norway spruce and European larch The agglomeration was carried out under constant operating conditions (at 20% of material moisture content, briquette diameter of 50 mm, at throughput of 50 kg h−1) in an industrial briquetting press. The particle size distribution of the shredded material was determined. The produced briquettes were evaluated for their density, mechanical durability and compressive strength. At moisture content of approximately 20%, the highest briquette density (1078 kg m−3), durability (97.87%) and compressive strength (9.69 MPa) were obtained for spruce briquettes. Pine cone briquettes showed the lowest density (938 kg m−3) and compressive strength (2.81 MPa), while larch cone briquettes had the lowest durability (87.58%). The produced briquettes were of high quality in terms of physical and mechanical characteristics. The novelty of research was the use of crushed cones of coniferous species, which are waste in seed extraction facilities, and due to the low bulk density, they are difficult to store and transport over long distances. After agglomeration, they form briquettes with good physical and mechanical parameters that can be used in local heating plants and stoves.At present, the most important source of energy are fossil fuels, which release greenhouse gases into the atmosphere during combustion. However, global reserves of these fuels are limited and therefore the share of renewable energy sources that have low contribution to greenhouse gas production increases. One alternative to conventional energy sources is the use of pressed biofuels from plant biomass in the form of briquettes or pellets. Thus, the proper densification of the product is achieved, contributing to high volumetric concentration of energy, low moisture and better fuel homogenization. In the case of pellets their agglomeration allows for automation of the combustion process, so they are typically intended for use in automatic house-hold boilers. On the other hand, briquettes for end consumers are often packaged in plastic foils which prevents moisture uptake and makes them easily storable. In both cases there is a reduction in the transport and storage costs. Work safety and hygiene is another consideration favouring agglomerated fuels, since they result in lower emissions of fine particles during storage and manipulation. The combustion process is also usually cleaner, especially in smaller combustion devices, since a fuel with homogeneous size will burn at a steady rate. The process of plant material agglomeration [ An appropriate initial preparation, mainly comminution to appropriate size, of the raw material is an important part of the compaction process. The pre-treatment method should cause particles fragmentation and lead to the breakage of compacted structure of the lignocellulose by damage of its microfibers. Sun and Cheng [ One of the determinants of the obtained agglomerate quality is durability, which depends on many factors, including material type, lignin content and water content, coefficient of friction between material and die, compaction force, length to diameter ratio, temperature and many others [ Good densification of plant material needs appropriate material moisture content. Too high biomass moisture content exhibits enhanced interaction between particles, but it adversely affects the agglomeration process [ Other properties of the raw material affecting the agglomerate density are coefficient of internal friction and granulometric composition. High density is obtained by using material of small particles, and that is a result of the larger contact area of smaller particles and leads to better compaction of particles [ The mechanical properties of briquettes are an important factors in the design of new solutions used in the process of plant materials agglomeration. The main mechanical properties of briquettes include compressive strength, tensile strength, bending, resistance to gravity discharge, hydrophobicity and others [ According to the literature review, there are many scientific papers on the production and physical properties of refined fuels. There are also many works on energy properties of fuels or composition of various plant materials used in the production of briquettes and pellets [ Harvesting seeds for the production of forest tree seedlings in several countries, every year gives several dozen or even several hundred tonnes of cones as reported by Aniszewska and Bereza [ Cones can be a good material for the production of pressed fuel. They are characterized by high gross and net calorific values in the range of 18.11–19.28 MJ kg Materials used for tests were conifer cones which remain after seed extraction in Grotniki located in the Regional Directorate State Forests in Lodz (GPS 51°53′02.7″ N 19°23′24.1″ E). The species were Scots pine ( The cones of the listed species were shredded in a 11 kW/350 kg h The briquettes produced from the original materials had very low durability - pine 27%, spruce and larch 0%. They have disintegrated due to the too low moisture content. Based on the literature data, the highest number of briquetting studies were conducted in the moisture in the range of 10–20% [ Quality of briquettes was evaluated by determining the moisture content of the material, particle size distribution, density, durability of briquettes and performing compression tests to calculate the modulus of elasticity, compressive strength and specific deformation energy. Measurements were carried out in accordance to EN 13183-1:2004 standard. Moisture assessment was performed by drying 20 randomly chosen samples of each species for 24 h in a laboratory dryer at 105 ± 1 °C. Samples were weighed on a laboratory scales WSP 210 S (RADWAG, Radom, Poland) with an accuracy of 0.001 g. Moisture content (MC) is defined as the mass proportion of water contained in the ground cones according to formula: Determination of individual fractions of different particle size in particulate material was performed using a LAB-11-200/UP (EKO-LAB, Jasień, Poland) laboratory sieve analyser. A set of sieves with square holes and mesh sizes from top to bottom: 4.750, 3.350, 2.360, 1.600, 1.180, 0.850, 0.600, 0.425, 0.300, 0.212, 0.150, 0.100 mm and a plain collecting pan were used. The weight of test sample was 100 ± 0.01 g. The device performed vibration at 25 Hz and testing time was 300 ± 1 s measured by a stopwatch. To determine the particle size results, the logarithmic-normal distribution the geometric mean value of particle size The density of individual briquettes was determined by a direct measurement of length and diameter in two perpendicular directions (±0.01 mm) using an electronic calliper. Front surfaces were levelled by a belt grinder. The mass of individual briquettes (±0.01 g) was determined on the RADWAG WSP 600/C (RADWAG, Radom, Poland) laboratory scales. There were 54 measurements made for pine cones briquettes, 94 for spruce and 69 for larch. Determination of density ρ (kg m The mechanical durability of briquettes was determined in a device according to the method described in ISO 17831-2:2016-02 standard. Samples of several briquettes weighing 2 ± 0.1 kg were placed in a drum chamber of 600 mm diameter and depth, in which a baffle wall is placed. The drum rotated at 21 rpm and made 105 rotations [ The durability measurement was repeated 11 times for pine cones, 15 for spruce and 8 for larch. Compressive strength σ Measurement of the compressive forces of individual briquettes on a metal plate was made using a rectangular stamp until the sample was destroyed and the force dropped 30% below the maximum value. Stresses were calculated as a ratio of load force and cross-sectional area, i.e. given by the original diameter and length of the briquette before compression, to which the compressive load was applied. Compressive strength was the stress under the maximum load force [ The compressive modulus of elasticity was calculated as the secant modulus, i.e. the ratio of stress and relative deformation for the point at which the first force-displacement curvature appeared [ Specific deformation energy was calculated as a ratio of the total deformation energy, given by numerical integration of the surface below the force-displacement curve, and the same cross-sectional area as for the stresses. Equations used for calculations were described by Fell and Newton [ The program Statistica (v.13, Dell Inc., USA) was used for statistical analysis. The effects between species-dependent variables were analysed using a one-way ANOVA and Fisher's NIR multiple comparison tests for groups of equal magnitude and Tukey's HSD for groups of different abundances. Significant differences were found between groups for p < 0.05. After adding water to the original materials the moisture increased to an average value of about 20% ( Results of composition and particle sizes of pine, spruce and larch cones are presented in Density results are summarized in The results of mechanical durability as decisive factor of briquette quality are presented in The strengths of briquettes from crushed cones according to the Brazilian compression test are shown in Mani et al. [ In most industrial agglomeration processes, briquettes and pellets at density over 1000 kg m Briquette density is also an indicator of its strength. In the briquetting process, the particle size of the raw material significantly affects the density of the product. Dense briquettes can be produced from fine particle material, but agglomeration without additional binder requires high pressure and temperature. This is confirmed by Mitchual et al. [ The density and quality of the product is also influenced by its moisture content. Water in the raw material assists in the formation of intermolecular bonds. As the measurements showed, too little moisture (about 8%) in cones shredded immediately after the seed extraction process did not help to achieve an appropriate quality - the briquettes disintegrated. Besides durability, another important factor related to the handling and transport is the compressive strength. According to Richards [ The compressive strength test has shown that all briquettes made of crushed cones meet the requirements given by Richards [ In briquettes made of crushed pine, spruce and larch cones, the briquette density correlates well with compressive strength (R In research on the durability of briquettes made of shredded wood of two deciduous species, Mudryk [ Compressive strength of cone briquettes of individual species correlated to the modulus of elasticity (R The choice of type of solid biofuel depends on its durability, strength and energy efficiency. Studies showed that the briquettes made of shredded cones of pine, spruce and larch are characterized by relatively high densities which correlate well with their durability and compressive strength. Based on the experimental results of briquettes made of fine shredded pine, spruce and larch cones, described by particle size, briquette density and their qualitative assessment for mechanical durability, maximum compressive strength, modulus of elasticity and specific compression energy, good quality of briquettes was achieved. Too fine disintegrated material should not be used for briquettes production. With increase in particle size, the density and strength of briquettes increased, and at higher density the briquettes were more durable. In order to fully assess the quality of briquettes from the crushed cones, as a fuel, further studies will be required using variable parameters of the compaction process (i.e. compaction pressure) and on the material parameters (particle size, moisture content) as well as the chemical composition and determination of calorific value and ash content. For use as a solid biofuel the briquettes should meet the requirements set in the technical standard ISO 17225-3: Solid biofuels - Fuel specifications and classes Part 3: Graded wood briquettes in places where this standard has been accepted.