Superhydrophobic surfaces have been widely used in biology, medicine, aerospace and other fields due to their special surface wettability. The surface wettability of materials mainly depends on the surface chemical composition and surface morphology. Therefore, the wettability of materials can be effectively controlled by changing the surface chemical composition and surface morphology. In this paper, the hydrophobic templates with different wettability were obtained by controlling the laser etching distance of 6061 aluminium alloy tube surface. The superhydrophobic flexible tubes were further fabricated using prepared 6061 aluminum alloy tubes as the template and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) for replica. The contact angles of water and blood could reach 162.8°and 152.1° respectively. By using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), it could be seen that there were micron-sized structures and hydrophobic groups on the surface. The free energy on the surface of superhydrophobic PDMS was 70.7% lower than that on smooth PDMS. In addition, the superhydrophobic flexible tube had excellent durability and abrasion resistance, and the prepared surface was also blood repellency. Blood droplets easily passed through the inclined flexible tube without contaminating the tube. And the superhydrophobic flexible tubes could be used in various fields requiring productivity extensively, such as medical catheters.The wettability is an important feature of solid surface, which is the phenomenon of liquid spreading along solid surface when liquid phase contacts solid phase [ In previous reports, Nokes et al. used high throughput roll-to-roll (R2R) manufacturing to prepare superhydrophobic flexible tubes [ The fabrication process of flexible tube is shown in The morphology of the samples was observed by the thermal field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, JSM-7100 F, JEOL, Japan) and fluorescence inverted microscopy (ECLIPSE Ti, Nikon, Japan). The chemical bonds of the materials were analyzed by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (Alpha II, Brooke, Germany). Surface roughness was measured by a tactile roughness measurement equipment (MarSurf M400, Mahr GmbH, Germany). And static water contact angle (CA) and sliding angle (SA) were measured at environmental temperature using the contact angle measurement instrument (JY-82C, China). The droplets used for CA and SA measurements were 3 μL and 5 μL, respectively. In the SA measurement, the drop was attached to the test surface and gradually tilted until sliding occured. The sliding angle was the angle of inclination of the solid surface when the droplet began to slide downward. All data tested were measured at five different points, and then averaged. Laser processing technology is to irradiate material surface with high energy density laser beam. After absorbing laser energy, the material surface generated thermal excitation process in the irradiation area, which made the surface temperature rise rapidly and produce melting and evaporation [  Surface free energy is one of the methods to evaluate the wettability of samples [ In formula (1), if the dispersion force In order to observe the air layer trapped in the micron-sidzed structures of the superhydrophobic surface, mirror effect can also be used as a characterization method of superhydrophobicity [ Because abrasion is common in practical application, abrasion testing is a very important part in the evaluation of superhydrophobic materials. In order to study the abrasion resistance of the surface of the prepared material, 1000# sandpaper was used as the abrasive ( Surface wettability makes it widely used in many fields [ Blood is difficult to adhere to superhydrophobic surfaces owing to the anti-wetting property, superhydrophobic surfaces can also be used to prevent blood coagulation [ it is difficult for blood to adhere to superhydrophobic surface. As shown in the magnified (ECLIPSE Ti, Nikon, Japan) and SEM images, there is almost no residual blood on the surface of the superhydrophobic tube due to blood repellency ( Through the combination of laser etching technology and template method, the strong, translucent and highly superhydrophobic flexible tubes were successfully prepared. And flexible tubes of different diameters could be prepared according to different template tube diameters, with a water contact angle of up to 162.8° and a rolling angle of approaching 1°. In addition, water contact angle could reach 153.6° after being immersed in water for 8 h. After 10 cycles of abrasion on the sandpaper, the contact angle of water droplet was still close to 150°. We also found that the prepared surface had good repellency to water, urine, saliva and blood. In terms of blood adherence, a drop of blood could easily roll off the superhydrophobic tube without contaminating the surface, while a smooth surface required multiple droplets of blood to slide off the surface. Because PDMS is a good hydrophobic material, our research only constructed micron-sidzed structures on hydrophobic materials, and there was no further chemical coating. Compared with corrosion, electrospinning, anodizing and so on, laser etching has significant advantages, such as no pollution source, laboratory monomer design, high efficiency and so on. At the same time, laser etching we proposed also provides a simple and feasible idea for the preparation of superhydrophobic flexible tubes. In addition, our superhydrophobic flexible tubes can be widely used in biomedical equipment. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work supported by the