Consumption of processed foods is increasing in today's modern diet. Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) can be formed by Maillard reactions as well as oxidation of proteins and fats in food processing. The aim of the present study was to determine the amount of glyoxal and methylglyoxal in chips, crackers, and breakfast cereals and to evaluate their effects on human health. In this research, chips (26), crackers (5), and breakfast cereals (11) were obtained from different markets in Istanbul, Turkey. The amounts of glyoxal and methylglyoxal in these foods were determined by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using 4-nitro-1,2-phenlenediamine as a pre-column derivatizing reagent. The measured amount of glyoxal and methylglyoxal ranged between 94 and 1464 and 123–661 µg/100 g in chips, and between 338 and 1936 and 727–1397 µg/100 g in crackers, and between 8 and 1575 and 111–1201 µg/100 g in breakfast cereals, respectively. The products used in this study, especially chips and crackers, contained high fat and were baked at a high cooking temperature. Therefore, these products had higher amounts of AGE precursors. Besides, high salt content in crackers may affect the increased amount of glyoxal and methylglyoxal. On the contrary, low fat containing breakfast cereals had lower amounts of AGE precursors. People who often consume AGE-rich snack foods will be at higher health risk than those who consume less. The health problems associated with AGEs can be reduced with an AGE-restricted diet.Consumption of processed foods is gradually increasing in today's modern diet. Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) can be formed by Maillard reaction (MR), oxidation of proteins and fats in food processing. MRs are initiated by the non-enzymatic reaction between a carbonyl group of reducing sugars and an amino group of proteins. MR products are formed during the processing of foods and these products contribute to increase the appearance and sensory properties of foods Glyoxal (GO) and methylglyoxal (MGO) are reactive intermediate products formed by food processing such as frying, baking, storage, and roasting. More often, GO and MGO are formed from lipid peroxidation, sugar autoxidation, and microbial fermentation. These α-dicarbonyl (α-DC) compounds, GO and MGO, are precursors of AGEs Endogenously, AGE formation is part of human metabolism. This reaction occurs as the glycation is initiated by the attachment of reducing sugars to amino groups of proteins and nucleic acids to produce unstable Schiff bases. This Schiff bases undergo unstable Amadori rearrangements and convert to more stable Amadori products. Eventually, these products convert to the final, non-reversible, and highly reactive carbonyl compounds such as GO, MGO, and 3-deoxyglucosone. These carbonyl compounds can occur during glucose autoxidation, lipid peroxidation, and the polyol pathway in human metabolism A daily AGE intake of 4000–24,000 kU/day was calculated for healthy people and people suffering from chronic diseases such as diabetes mellitus and kidney disease. The daily CML and CEL intake was estimated based on a food frequency questionnaire for people suffering from diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular disease. The average CML and CEL intake was 3.1 and 2.32 mg/day, respectively The excessive amount of AGEs in the circulation leads to oxidative stress and inflammation by binding to the cell surface and cross-linking with proteins. There is strong evidence that dietary uptake of AGEs correlates with serum AGE levels HPLC is the preferred method for the determination of α-DCs. Pre-column derivatization is required because there is no chromophoric group in α-DC structures There is evidence that consumption of chips and other snack foods causes obesity and other chronic diseases in children and adolescents Crackers and chips examined in this study are heat treated and contain high amounts of fat while breakfast cereals contain added sugar. Generally, α-DCs compounds, GO and MGO, can be formed in lipid- and sugar-rich foods. These intermediate compounds react with proteins to form final harmful AGEs during long storage times. Since AGEs are formed in a longer time, it will be important to identify these precursors in foods to predict the final AGEs. In the literature, there is a limited data on precursors of AGEs in snack foods. Therefore, this study will provide a valuable data on AGEs precursors in snack foods to the literature. The aim of the present study was to determine the amount of GO and MGO in chips, crackers, and breakfast cereals and to evaluate their effects on human health. Glyoxal, methylglyoxal, methanol, sodium acetate, 4-nitro-1,2-phenlenediamine, acetonitrile, fructose, glucose, and sucrose were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). In this research, chips (26), crackers (5), and breakfast cereals (11) were purchased from different markets in Istanbul, Turkey. The extraction method for GO and MGO in foods described by Mahar et al. The extraction method of sugars described by Richmond et al. The HPLC conditions described by Mahar et al. The HPLC conditions described by Richmond et al. Method validation of GO and MGO analysis was verified by using AOAC guidelines The HPLC chromatograms of GO and MGO standards and sample (chips) are shown in The method validation results of the GO and MGO are shown in GO and MGO in the samples were extracted with the reagent of 5 mL methanol and followed by using the ultra-thorax homogenizer for 2 min. Then, the extract was derivizated with 4-nitro-1,2-phenlenediamine solution. Besides, in the sugar analysis, only deionized water was used as the extraction solvent. According to the Eco-Scale Green Analytical Procedure described by Gałuszka et al. The contents of the snack foods are given in Because of food processing, AGEs can be formed during MRs. AGE precursors, primarily MGO and GO, are formed as a result of the oxidation of proteins and fats in food processing. These compounds then react with residues of lysine and arginine in proteins to form the final AGEs. Compared to GO, MGO is very reactive and produces CEL and hydroimidazolones Jiang et al. The level of d-AGEs in foods is correlated with increasing level of acrylamide The measured amount of GO and MGO ranged between 8 and 1575 µg/100 g and between 111 and 1201 µg/100 g in breakfast cereals, respectively. The declared amount of fat in breakfast cereals ranged between 0.7 and 13.0 g/100 g. The free sugar content of chips and crackers was not studied because the free sugar amount in chips and crackers is very low according to the labels (<0.5 g/100 g). The free sugar contents of breakfast cereals are shown in Cereals, legumes, breads, vegetables, and fruits contain low amounts of d-AGE unless prepared with fat. Biscuits prepared with fats contain 10 times higher d-AGEs compared to low fat breads, rolls, or bagels In some clinical studies, AGE-restricted diet is associated with a reduction of circulating AGEs levels as well as complications of diabetes mellitus and Alzheimer’s Maillard reactions occur during food processing and storage, and eventually lead to the generation of AGEs in the human body. Accumulation of these products has harmful effects in the human body. The increased level of AGEs in the circulation is related to complication of diabetes mellitus and Alzheimer’s. The AGE precursors, GO and MGO, are formed endogenously and exogenously. The AGEs amount in foods is correlated with increasing fat content and cooking temperature. The products used in this study, especially chips and crackers, contain high fat and baked at a high cooking temperature. Therefore, these products had higher amounts of AGE precursors. The addition of salts to foods increases the lipid oxidation and inhibition of anti-oxidant enzymes. The salt content of crackers was higher than that of chips. When we compare the chips and crackers, crackers predominantly contained higher amounts of GO and MGO. We thought that the high salt content in crackers may affect the increasing amount of GO and MGO during food processing and long-term storage conditions. On the contrary, low fat containing breakfast cereals had low amounts of AGE precursors. Finally, this study revealed that the fat and in particular salt content in snack foods may promote the occurrence of α-dicarbonyl compounds. People who often consume AGE-rich snack foods will be at higher health risk than those who consume less. The health problems with associated AGEs can be reduced with an AGE-restricted diet. In addition to this recommendation, AGE generation can be reduced by consuming nutrients such as polyphenols, catechins, proanthocyanidins, vitamins A, E, and C, thiamine, and vitamin B  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We thank the İstanbul Sabahattin Zaim University for their support.