We have synthesized mesoporous nickel titanate (NTO) rods encompassing interlocked nanoparticles with clearly visible textural boundaries via the sol-gel route, as an excellent working electrode for the supercapacitor. The mesoporous NTO rods assembled in the hexagonal shape of average diameter ∼ < 1 μm and ∼3–6.4 μm long, are composed of nanoparticles of diameter ∼46 nm. The well crystalline NTO rods of the hexagonal phase to the space group of R–3H possess average (mean) pore size distribution of 17.48 nm throughout the rod body. The stoichiometric mesoporous NTO rods with increased textural boundaries played a significant role in the larger diffusion of ions, and delivered the specific capacitance (Cs) of 542.26 F/g, the energy density of 8.06 Wh/kg and a power density of 4320 W/kg in an aqueous KOH electrolyte, is significantly better than Ni, Mn, Fe, Cr, and Ti-based perovskites or their mixed-phase accompanied by metal oxides as impurities. Moreover, the diffusion-controlled easy/faster and enhanced access to the OH− ions (20.4 μs) deep inside the rod body, delivered long life cycle, high stability up to 2100 cycles, and excellent retention of 91%. Overall, mesoporous NTO rods hold potentials as an electrode material for long cycle lifetime supercapacitor and holds possibilities for further improvement after forming the nano-hetero-architecture or hybrid structures with other prominent materials such as NiO, and Mn2O3, etc.Supercapacitors have attracted considerable attention from researchers and industries for their extensive utilization in the hybrid electric vehicles, portable devices, industrial uninterruptible power supplies, and military field, owing to the high power density, long life expectancy, eco-friendliness, and high safety [ The nanosized perovskite metal oxides with ABO In this study, we introduced mesoporous NTO rods encompassing interlocked nanoparticles with clearly visible textural boundaries synthesized via sol-gel route, as an excellent working electrode for the supercapacitor. Synthesis of mesoporous NTO rods without any impurity was examined using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), BET analysis, X-ray diffraction (XRD), and X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS). The electrochemical mechanism of mesoporous NTO rods was analyzed utilizing contact angle meter, cyclic voltammetry (CV), galvanostatic charging-discharging (GCD), and impedance analysis using optimized 2 M aq. KOH electrolyte. Our study corroborates that the mesoporous NTO rods deliver faster/easy access for ion transportation (20.4 μs), enhanced power density (4320 W/kg), greater retentivity (∼91%), and longer cycle lifetime (2100) with excellent stability. The analytical grade chemicals were used for the synthesis of mesoporous NTO rods. 1 M of nickel acetate (Sigma Aldrich, Ni(CH FESEM images in Further, the quantitative analysis of the electronic structure and chemical properties of NiTiO Structural analysis of the mesoporous NiTiO Nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherm measurements performed to evaluate the pore structure of NTO rods and the surface area of the nanoparticles encompassed in their growth. The Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) analysis in The interface of the electrolyte with the NTO controls the intercalation of the ions, thereupon the energy storage ability of NTO rods. Therefore, mesoporous NTO rods were subjected to understand the surface wettability of the electrolyte via contact angle measurement [ The electrochemical properties of mesoporous NTO rods were confirmed from cyclic voltammetry (CV), galvanostatic charge-discharge (GCD), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements in the 2 M KOH electrolyte. The CV measurement performed in the potential range of 0–0.6 V at various scan rates ( The scan rate dependent variation in the current density can be interpreted from Randle-Sevcik equation [ The C The current density influences the exchange of ions between the electrolyte and the working electrode. The analysis of galvanostatic charging-discharging (GCD) of mesoporous NTO rods studied at various current densities ranging between 30 and 130 mA/g is shown in The longer lifetime and excellent cycling stability are the prerequisite features for highly stable supercapacitors. The cyclic stability for long time usage of mesoporous NTO rods was explored for continuous charging-discharging cycles of 2100 at the current density of 100 mA/g ( The textural boundaries, surface morphology, the core of the nanostructures, and the electrical properties of the active materials play a crucial role in the diffusion of ions from the electrolyte. Therefore, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was utilized to understand the involvement of electrical resistance and textural boundaries in the diffusion of OH The correlation of the evaluated energy and power density is shown in In summary, we report the synthesis of mesoporous nickel titanite (NTO) rods encompassing hierarchically interlocked nanoparticles with clearly visible textural boundaries. The NTO nanoparticles of diameter ∼30 nm hierarchically arranged in the hexagonal form delivered mesoporous rods of the average pore size distribution of 17.481 nm throughout the rod body. The mesoporous NTO rods of average diameter ∼ < 1 μm, and ∼3–6.4 μm long are of hexagonal crystalline phase to the space group of R–3H. XPS analysis revealed the insignificant existence of Ni  The authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors would like to thank The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at