A novel mechanochemical approach, known as solid–liquid reaction ball milling, was developed in order to prepare solid state intermetallic compound powders by the reaction of the milling mediums with a liquid state metal over a particular temperature range. Numerous ultrafine elevated temperature intermetallic compound powders were obtained by this newly developed process. In contrast to the conventional mechanical milling technique, nanometer-sized elevated temperature intermetallic powders and nearly pure intermetallic phases can be formed directly at relatively low temperatures. This short review will introduce the main results and reaction mechanism for this mechanochemical approach as well as its advantages and potential applications.Since the term mechanochemistry was first proposed by W. Ostwald and added to the types of reactions initiated by mechanical force, it has been widely used in the fields of materials synthesis, the chemical industry, extractive metallurgy, minerals engineering, bioengineering and so on ( Intermetallic compounds, a type of metallic material, have attracted intense study by materials scientists and engineers. Their ordered nature leads to them having attractive elevated temperature properties such as high strength, increased stiffness and excellent corrosion/oxidation resistance. However, their low ambient temperature ductility and fracture toughness preclude their large-scale industrial application. Over the past few decades, the ball milling/mechanical alloying process has proved to be a successful method of improving the room temperature ductility of intermetallics, because it can reduce the grain size, disorder the lattice and modify the crystal structure of the phase into a more symmetrical one ( Although the chemical reactions of intermetallic synthesis caused by solid–solid and solid–gas reactions have been very widely reported, there have been few investigations and reports about solid–liquid reactions (SLRs) ( A novel solid–liquid reaction (SLR) ball milling technique, based on the combined effects of mechanochemistry and thermochemistry, has recently been developed by our group ( In this chapter, the equipment and methods used in the experiment are briefly described, together with the main results obtained and the reaction mechanism of the solid–liquid reaction ball milling technology. The advantages and potential applications of this mechanochemical approach will also be discussed. The solid–liquid ball milling equipment developed by the authors is shown in The milling cylinder was first evacuated and then filled with pure inert gas to avoid oxidation of the metals during milling at the chosen The as-milled products of the binary alloy systems that were synthesized by solid–liquid reaction milling under different conditions are summarized in  For the Fe–Sn system, the FeSn Furthermore, FeZn In addition, the results show that the addition of powdery iron to the molten metal expanded the surface area and hence accelerated the reaction rate. For instance, the addition of 20 Ni is another element that was used as a grinding medium in our research. From the Ni–Sn system, pure Ni   Moreover, some of the binary intermetallic compound powders listed in In the Al–Fe–X system, the iron in the balls and the milling cylinder acted as the start material and pure binary alloy ingots, that is Al–33.2wt%Cu, Al–54wt%Cu, Al–7wt%Si (hypoeutectic composition), Al–12.6wt%Si (eutectic composition) and Al–30wt%Si were used as the reactants, respectively ( Completely solid state Al Al Using a similar approach, Al A process control agent (PCA) is usually used in the process of mechanical alloying to avoid cold welding and bonding between the powder particles and the balls and the agglomeration of powder during milling, which is also noticeable for some alloy systems in the solid–liquid reaction ball milling process ( PCAs can be solid, liquid or gas and most of them are organic compounds. The usual addition of PCA is 1–5% ( It should be noted that the addition of NaCl, KCl, Na Traditionally, intermetallics have been prepared by ingot metallurgy technology, which requires high-temperature processing, and powder metallurgy, With regard to mechanochemical effects, ball milling can cause crystal lattice distortions, crystal defects and electron emissions, resulting in improved chemical activity and an increased reaction rate. As a result, the activity of the starting material, that is iron during the solid–liquid reaction milling process, is high enough to accelerate the reaction and shorten the milling time for the formation of pure intermetallics. Additionally, collisions between the milling balls lead to a local temperature increase above the The reaction milling process shows distinct differences from conventional mechanical alloying such as high-energy ball milling and tumbler milling. The former involves a direct reaction, while the latter involves repeated flattening, cold-welding, fracturing and rewelding and a solid state diffusion process at the atomic scale of the powders. Consequently, solid–liquid reaction ball milling has a higher reaction rate than mechanical alloying. For example, some investigation results show that the intermetallic compound phase of FeAl appeared after high-energy ball milling for 25 One characteristic of our novel solid–liquid reaction milling technique is that it can produce nano-sized intermetallic particles. The formation mechanism is explained in Finally, obtaining high-temperature intermetallic compound phases at a relatively lower temperature has a particular advantage over the usual casting process. It is well known that in the casting process, the melting temperature must be higher than the melting points of all the alloy elements, in other words, the temperature where the intermetallic compound phases form must be higher than the highest melting point of the alloy elements. However, in the solid–liquid reaction ball milling process, the temperature at which intermetallic compound phases are obtained only needs to be higher than the lowest melting point of the alloy elements. Obviously, the latter approach is simpler, more convenient and less costly. In this section, a detailed comparison is made of the milling mechanisms used in solid–liquid reaction ball milling and conventional mechanical alloying (high-energy ball milling). First, solid–liquid reaction ball milling utilizes the combined effects of the mechanical force field and the temperature field and induces a chemical reaction between the solid ball milling medium and the liquid metal melt. Mechanical alloying involves lengthy intense impacting of the powder particles and the balls, after which the powders flatten, fracture and cold-weld; these steps are repeated until the alloy is produced. Some studies have shown that local intense impacting during the mechanical alloying process produced high temperature and pressure, resulting in partial melting and a chemical reaction. But this reaction is thermopositive and alloying occurs through the self-propagating reaction. The present studies show that this is only one model of mechanical alloying mechanisms, not the universal and essential principle. It mainly applies to some metal–oxide systems, and the constituents of the reactant, the reaction type, the intensity of the milling, the reaction thermodynamics, the additive component and the microstructure, and so on, all have an effect on it. The mechanism for the formation of mechanical alloying is based on the ball-milling process: the impact of the mechanical force, the intense plastic deformation of the powder particles and the large amount of dislocations  Based on the description above, the diffusion rate of the solid–liquid reaction is much (often several orders of magnitude) larger than that of the solid–solid reaction. So the reaction rate of solid–liquid reaction ball milling is not analogous to that of mechanical alloying, which has already been proved by experiment. According to the reaction model suggested by the authors, intermetallic compound powders are produced by a solid–liquid reaction from the beginning of the ball milling process and what follows is only the accumulation of the production of the reaction until the liquid state is fully exhausted. But during mechanical alloying, the chemical reaction process must have an induction period, which is a period of accumulation of the reaction energy, before the mechanical alloying begins and intermetallic compound powders are obtained. Similarly, based on the reaction model mentioned in In comparison with mechanical alloying, the temperature field of the solid–liquid reaction ball milling process decreases the reaction activation energy significantly. The solid–liquid reaction ball milling process induces some reactions and produces some alloys and compounds which could not be obtained during the mechanical alloying process. As seen from the experimental results of solid–liquid reaction ball milling and high-energy ball milling (commonly called the MA process), the products of the two are not exactly the same. For example, most of the products of the Fe system are not the phases obtained during mechanical alloying, except for FeSn Finally, although the solid–liquid reaction ball milling process and mechanical alloying are both based on the mechanical force chemical reaction theory, they are quite different. The mechanical force chemical reaction theory was not used at its birth to explain the chemical reactions that happen in the mechanical alloying process, because the appearance of this theory and the establishment of the subject both occurred half a century earlier than the mechanical alloying process. Therefore it was used to explain some of the experimental results found during mechanical alloying, while solid–liquid reaction ball milling is a new process based on this theory. Following on from the discussions above, the two main advantages of solid–liquid reaction ball milling compared to mechanical alloying are given below. First, the reaction rate and the productivity of solid–liquid reaction ball milling are high. The rotation speed used by the current authors for solid–liquid reaction ball milling was 80 Second, compared with the mechanical force field of mechanical alloying, the temperature field induced during milling caused the effects of fields external to the material to be stronger, so the ability to produce new alloy As a new approach to preparing intermetallic compound powders, solid–liquid reaction ball milling shows some promising applications for extending the industrial scale application of intermetallic compounds. In fact, the industrialization of this technology has been carried out in some companies in China. Moreover, if some intermetallic compound phases exist at certain high temperatures or some unusual phase transformation processes occur at high temperatures, the solid–liquid reaction ball milling process may be able to help in obtaining these high-temperature intermetallic compound phases and phase transformation processes. Furthermore, some new alloy phases, which cannot be obtained by traditional means, may be discovered and produced in this way, which may be beneficial in understanding some dark or questionable regions (especially in some high temperature range) of the existing phase diagram. However, some limitations of this new ball milling method can be foreseen. Improvements need to be made in order to control the reaction process and production more precisely and the detailed micro-reaction mechanism for particular alloy systems is not very clear as yet. The authors are grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project 50574039) and the Doctorate Fund of the Education Ministry of China (20050532004, 20070532016) for their support of the present research. Chen Ding gratefully acknowledges the helpful discussion and important information received from Prof. Dr Yan Hong-ge (Hunan University, Changsha) and Prof. Dr Chen Gang (Hunan University, Changsha).