In this study, the maximum ratio of greasy sludge to incorporate with waste activated sludge was investigated in batch and CSTR experiments. In batch experiments, inhibition occurred with a greasy sludge ratio of more than 20–30% of the feed COD. In CSTR experiments, the optimal greasy sludge ratio was 60% of the feed COD and inhibition occurred above a ratio of 80%. Hence, batch experiments can predict the CSTR yield when the degradation phenomenon are additive but cannot be used to determine the maximum ratio to be used in a CSTR configuration. Additionally, when the ratio of greasy sludge increased from 0% to 60% of the feed COD, CSTR methane production increased by more than 60%. When the greasy sludge ratio increased from 60% to 90% of the feed COD, the reactor yield decreased by 75%.Sewage sludge management is one of the most expensive items in small wastewater treatment plants (WWTP Lipid-rich wastes are known to combine high biodegradability and a high BMP value. However, the degradation of such a substrate leads to the production of long chain fatty acids (LCFAs) in the digester, which may destabilise the process in different ways ( More recently, studies were made of the impact of the lipid to substrate ratio in the influent of an anaerobic CSTR that treated a mixture of primary and secondary sludge. According to the results obtained in CSTR and comparing them to those obtained in batch experiments, the frequently cited upper limit of 20% of greasy waste in the total influent COD does not appear to be accurate and mainly results from batch experiments ( WAS was sampled in a French activated sludge wastewater treatment plant (Mordelles, France) whose capacity is about 10,000 Greasy sludge was sampled in the storage tank of a dissolved air flotation system that processes wastewater from a meat industry (pork processing). Sampling was monthly and samples were stored at 4 Total solids (TS), volatile solids (VS), total Kjeldhal nitrogen (TKN), total ammonia nitrogen (TAN) and total chemical oxygen demand analysis (COD) were measured using standard methods ( Total lipid content was determined with a Soxhlet© extraction on substrate dry matter. Each substrate was previously dried at 105 For the biochemical fractionations, proteins (as % COD) were determined from organic N content considering a ratio of 6.25 Equation for the calculation of the lipid fraction of COD. Equation for the calculation of the carbohydrate fraction of COD. In addition, volatile fatty acids (VFAs) and long chain fatty acids (LCFAs) were analysed by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Varian©, U3000) combined with evaporative light-scattering detection. For VFAs, raw samples were first centrifuged and the supernatant was used for analysis. For LCFA analysis, Soxhlet© extraction using the same methodology as described for total lipid extraction was carried out. But to preserve LCFA concentration and characteristics, extraction was performed on the raw sample without previous drying. After extraction, the solvent containing LCFAs was injected into the HPLC. Batch experiments were performed to determine the biochemical methane potential (BMP) of individual substrates and the methane production rate of mixtures of greasy sludge and WAS to check at what ratios inhibition occurs. For this purpose, individual substrate or a mixture of two substrates, inoculum and nutritive solution (Hach©, BOD Nutrient Buffer Pillows) were placed in a 330-ml serum flask. The quantity of substrate was adjusted to maintain a substrate:inoculum ratio of about 1 Depending on the experiments, three different inoculums were used. The first inoculum (inoculum 1) was sampled in a mesophilic anaerobic CSTR fed with a mixture of pig slurry and horse feed and operating with an HRT of 27 CSTR experiments were performed using two different digesters. The first digester (A) was a CSTR with a working volume of 200 The second digester (B) was a CSTR with working volume of 3.4 All CSTR experiments were divided into nine successive runs in which increasing greasy sludge ratios in the influent ( In all cases, feedings were defined to obtain an HRT of about 25 For each greasy sludge ratio, CSTR efficiencies were calculated after a 1 Physical–chemical properties of WAS and greasy sludge are listed in In conclusion, because of its high BMP value, greasy sludge resulting from a flotation process is a potentially usable co-substrate for co-digestion with WAS. In addition, due to its low N and P contents and its high biodegradability, using it as a co-substrate would have only a slight impact on the N and P loading rates of the WWTP (back to top of the liquid fraction after dewatering) and the sludge production, respectively. Batch experiments were carried out to investigate the maximum ratio of lipid-rich effluent to incorporate in WAS. The effect of the origin of the inoculum on batch results in terms of BMP of the mixture and inhibitions was also investigated by comparing the results of inoculum 1, 2, and 3. Batch experiments with inoculum 1 were carried with four different greasy sludge to WAS ratios. As inhibitions were ever observed for lipid ratios higher than 18% in the literature ( Batch results also provide information on biodegradation kinetics and were thus used to investigate inhibition. To sum up, inhibition occurred for a greasy sludge ratio between 20% and 30% of the total substrate COD, depending on the inoculum. However, the origin of the inoculum appeared to have a significant effect on the results of batch experiments in terms of inhibition mainly due to acclimation of the inoculum and consequently the use of such results for designing continuous CSTR processes would probably not be simple. The maximum ratio of lipid rich effluent to incorporate with WAS was also investigated in a CSTR configuration. For this purpose, nine different greasy sludge ratios (from 0% to 90%) were evaluated based on total COD. CSTR experiments were carried out with an increasing ratio of greasy sludge to allow biomass acclimation in the reactor. To avoid effects of other configuration parameters than the greasy sludge ratio in the influent, OLR and the HRT were maintained as constant as possible during the experimental runs. However, due to variations in substrate contents and in operational conditions, some variations were observed. HRT ranged between 24 and 30 First, COD mass balance was calculated for each run considering the input COD stream in the digester and the output COD stream in the digester (CH Calculation of total mass balance of the COD: Except for the period corresponding to a greasy sludge ratio of 90%, the COD mass balance obtained ranged from 89% to 122%. Thus, a maximum difference of 22% was observed with the theoretical value of Experimental results in terms of reactor yield and biogas production are presented in These results are in agreement with those obtained by In addition to reactor yield, different parameters were monitored during each run to provide information on process stability and on the origin of any inhibition. All these data are presented in On the contrary, monitoring of LCFA concentrations in the effluent revealed significant accumulations. The main LCFAs that accumulated were palmitic, stearic and oleic acids. The concentration of palmitic acid increased from 247 to 4733 A comparison of the effect of the greasy sludge ratio on the reactor yield obtained from CSTR experiments and calculated from batch experiments without considering inhibition is presented in As a result, batch experiments can be considered as an accurate way to estimate the methane production related to co-digestion, if the degradation phenomena are additive. However, batch experiments do not allow determination of the maximum ratio of lipid rich effluent to incorporate for anaerobic digestion of a mixture of substrates. Indeed, in this case, negative substrate interactions observed in the batch experiments were over-estimated. This phenomenon can be explained by the acclimation phenomenon as highlighted by CSTR experiments indicated that co-digestion of greasy sludge with WAS is optimal with a greasy sludge ratio of 60% of the feed COD (lipids representing 31% of the feed VS). In these conditions, the addition of greasy sludge in the digester multiplies by 4.7 the methane production of the digester. With higher ratios, accumulations of LCFAs (palmitic, stearic and oleic acids) were observed. In batch experiments, a reversible inhibition occurred from a greasy sludge ratio between 20% and 30% of the feed COD. Hence, batch experiments can predict methane production in a CSTR when the degradation phenomenon are additive (without inhibition). But when inhibitions occur, it is not possible to directly extrapolate batch observations to design data for CSTR co-digestion. The authors thank Saur