 He was a senior visiting Fellow at the University of Sussex, UK; Humboldt Foundation Fellow at Max-Planck Institute for Metallforschung, Stuttgart, Germany; and a visiting Professor at Ohio State University, Columbus, USA. In recognition of his seminal contribution to the field of materials science, he has been conferred with numerous national and international prestigious awards such as Indian National Science Academy (INSA) Young Scientist Award (1976); National Metallurgists’ Day Award (1981); Acta Metallurgica Outstanding Paper Award (1984); Shanti Swaroop Bhatnagar Prize in Engineering Sciences from the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (1989); GD Birla Gold Medal of The Indian Institute of Metals (1997); INSA Prize for Materials Science; Materials Research Society of India (MRSI)-Superconductivity and Material Science Prize (2003); Indian Nuclear Society Award (2003); Alexander von Humboldt Research Award (2004); Professor Brahm Prakash Memorial Medal (2004) from INSA; Padma Shri from Government of India (2005); Distinguished Materials Scientist Award from MRSI (2008); Indian Science Congress Association’s Excellence in Science and Technology Award (2009); Ram Mohun Puraskar of Ram Mohun Mission for an Outstanding Contribution to Nuclear Science (2010); and CNR Rao Prize Lecture in Advanced Materials (2011). He has been conferred with several Doctor of Science (Honoris Causa) degrees from various universities and institutions such as Sathyabama University, Chennai; Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpur; Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur; Guru Ghasidas University, Chattisgarh; and the University of Calcutta. He is an elected Fellow of Indian Academy of Sciences; National Academy of Sciences, India; Indian National Science Academy; Indian National Academy of Engineering; and Third World Academy of Sciences.  He was awarded his PhD by Mumbai University in 1991. He was at Max-Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Stuttgart, Germany, for postdoctoral research during 1995–1996 on a Max-Planck Fellowship. In addition, he has also visited the Institute of Superior Technology, Portugal; the National Research Council, Ottawa, Canada; Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada; Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia; Institute for Materials, Nantes, France; University of Malay, Malaysia; National Institute of Materials Science, Tsukuba, Japan; National University of Singapore, Singapore; Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden; Rice University, Houstan, USA; Tongi University, Shanghai, China and University of Valencia, Spain. In recognition of his significant contributions to the field of solid state chemistry, he has been conferred with several awards, such as the Dr. Laxmi Award by the Indian Association of Solid State Chemists and Allied Scientists (2001); Rheometric Scientific-Indian Thermal Analysis Society Award (2002); Gold Medal of the Indian Nuclear Society (2004); Materials Research Society of India Medal (2005); Chemical Research Society of India Medal (2006); Homi Bhabha Science and Technology Award (2006); IANCAS-Dr. Tarun Datta Memorial Award (2007); Rajib Goyal Prize in Chemical Sciences (2007); RD Desai Memorial Award from the Indian Chemical Society (2009); and Department of Atomic Energy's Science Research Council (DAE-SRC) Outstanding Researcher Award (2010). He is a Fellow of the National Academy of Sciences (FNASc), India; Maharashtra Academy of Sciences (FMASc); and Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC), UK. Recently, he has been selected for the CNR Rao National Prize for Chemical Sciences. At present, he is heading the Solid State Chemistry Section of the Chemistry Division, BARC, Mumbai. He is also a Professor (Chemistry) at Homi Bhabha National Institute (HBNI), Mumbai.