A Brønsted acidic ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methyl-imidazolium hydrogen sulphate ([bmim]HSO4) and its aqueous solutions were used for the leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate at ambient pressure under air in the temperature range of 50 to 90 °C. Copper extraction increased from 52% to 88% as the ionic liquid concentration in solution increased from 10% (v/v) to 100%. Copper extraction was very low at temperatures below 70 °C, but increased significantly at temperatures from 70 to 90 °C, suggesting a high activation energy for the chemical reaction. Elemental sulfur formed a solid layer surrounding the surface of unreacted core during the leaching to affect the reagent diffusion and limit the leaching rate. Hydrogen ion, released by the ionic liquid, and dissolved oxygen were determined to be foremost responsible for the oxidative leaching of chalcopyrite. Compared with leaching of chalcopyrite in acidic aqueous sulphate solutions, the pure ionic liquid and its aqueous solutions exhibited easier leaching of chalcopyrite at higher temperatures which is attributed to increasing the oxygen solubility and transfer of dissolved oxygen to speed up the oxidation reaction.In recent decades, hydrometallurgical processing of sulfide ores, such as chalcopyrite, has become increasingly important as more attention have been paid to the green and sustainable development of metallurgical industry. Some leaching processes, including chloride leaching, bioleaching and pressure sulfate leaching have been developed to recover copper from chalcopyrite concentrates to date ( Room temperature ionic liquids (RTILs), also called ionic liquids (ILs), are defined as salts consisting of an organic cation with an inorganic or organic anion that are liquid at low temperatures and have a wide liquidus temperature range ( The chalcopyrite concentrate used in this study was obtained from Somincor Corporation, Portugal. The chalcopyrite sample was dried in an oven at 105 °C to remove the moisture content and then classified by sieving into narrow size fractions. The analysis of chemical composition and mineralogy of the sample (74/65 µm fraction) is shown in The ionic liquid [bmim]HSO All leaching experiments were conducted in a glass leach reactor placed in an oil bath thermostatically controlled by a thermocouple with ± Copper and total iron concentrations in the leach liquor were analyzed by atomic absorption spectroscope (Shimadzu AA6300, Japan). The ferrous ion concentration was determined by potassium dichromate titration. Leaching residues were characterized by X-ray diffraction (Rigaku Ultima+D/MAX-2200, Japan) and scanning electron microscope (XL 30 ESEM TMP+EDAX, Philips, Netherlands). The pH values of various leach solutions were determined by a pH meter (REX PHS-3C, China). The solution redox potentials were measured in a conventional three-electrode cell composed of a platinum working electrode, a saturated Ag/AgCl reference electrode and a glassy carbon counter electrode, using a PCI4-300 potentiostat (Gamry Instrument, Inc., USA) coupled to a PC installed with the Echem Analyst software. Before each test, the surfaces of the Pt and glassy carbon electrodes were polished with 0.5 µm alumina polishing powder, then washed in distilled-deionized water and rinsed with acetone in an ultrasonic washer. The solution redox potential was obtained when the rest potential of Pt electrode measured as a function of time leveled off with a rate of change less than 1 mV min The pH values of pure ionic liquid [bmim]HSO The ability to release hydrogen ion makes this ionic liquid a Brønsted acid and the acidity of the ionic liquid mainly depends on the hydrogen sulfate anion ( Here The redox potential ( It is well known from the Pourbaix diagram of CuFeS According to The leach residues obtained both from the neat ionic liquid and its aqueous solutions were characterized by X-ray diffraction and SEM. Firstly, elemental sulfur was detected, also identified by Therefore, it is reasonable to propose Eq. In addition to reaction Consequently, chalcopyrite will then be oxidized by the ferric ions produced as follows: Previous researchers ( The effect of agitation on copper and iron dissolution from chalcopyrite concentrate was studied under an air atmosphere. The result shown in A shrinking core model is proposed to explain the dissolution kinetics of chalcopyrite with the formation of a product layer of elemental sulfur, in accordance with the research by If the reaction is determined by interfacial chemical reaction, the integrated rate equation can be simplified as: Chalcopyrite concentrate was leached at temperatures varying from 40 to 90 °C under air atmosphere to determine the effect of temperature. As shown in The constant The Arrhenius plot was obtained ( The effect of the ionic liquid concentration on chalcopyrite dissolution ( The evident increase of copper extraction in 10 to 60% aqueous solutions may be ascribed to increasing acidity and dissolved oxygen concentration, whereas the small increase in copper extraction up to 100% ionic liquid is most likely due to the increased viscosity and diffusion resistance of the ionic liquid. It was reported that the solubility of oxygen in [bmim]HSO It was found by AAS analysis, X-ray diffractograms and SEM/EDS of the leaching residues that chalcopyrite dissolved to release copper, iron and formed elemental sulfur surrounding the unreacted chalcopyrite core. Very little FeS  The ionic liquid [bmim]HSO Oxygen is an indispensable and foremost oxidant directly participating in the oxidative leaching of chalcopyrite, simultaneously oxidizing ferrous ions released from chalcopyrite to ferric ions that may in return act as oxidant to participate in the leaching of chalcopyrite. Compared with conventional aqueous solution, [bmim]HSO The reaction in the temperature range from 40 to 90 °C is controlled by oxygen or ferric ion diffusion through a solid product layer of elemental sulfur, followed by an electrochemical surface mechanism. The authors are grateful for the financial support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project No. 50564006) and the Natural Science Foundation of Yunnan Province (Project No. 2005E0004Z).