Availability of cost-competitive biomass conversion technologies plays crucial role for successful realization of biorefinery for sustainable production of fuels and organic chemicals from biomass. The present article provides an outline of opportunities and socio-techno-economic challenges of various biomass processing technologies. The biomass processing technologies were classified into three broad categories: thermochemical, chemical and biochemical. This review article presents an overview of two potential thermochemical conversion processes, gasification and fast pyrolysis, for direct conversion of lignocellulosic biomass. The article further provides a brief review of chemical conversion of triglycerides by transesterification with methanol for production of biodiesel. The highly productive microalgae as an abundant source of triglycerides for biodiesel and various other fuels products were also reviewed. The present article also provides an outline of various steps involved in biochemical conversion of carbohydrates to alcoholic bio-fuels, bio-ethanol and bio-butanols and conversion of nature׳s most abundant aromatic polymer, lignin, to value-added fuels and chemicals. Furthermore, an overview of production of hydrocarbon fuels through various biomass processing technologies such as hydrodeoxygenation of triglycerides, biosynthetic pathways and aqueous phase catalysis in hydrocarbon biorefinery were highlighted. The present article additionally provides economic comparisons of various biomass conversion technologies.The energy and chemical security of the world is extremely important for sustainability of human civilization. The world is currently facing severe energy crisis due to incessant increase of energy demands and gradual depletion of fossil fuels. Therefore, there is a growing need of shifting dependency away from finite fossil fuels to carbon neutral renewable resources like biomass. The biomass being origin of fossil fuels provides wonderful opportunities to meet societal needs of both fuels and organic chemicals. Therefore, new manufacturing concepts are developing continuously for production of fuels, organic chemicals, polymers, and materials from biomass using complex processing technologies. These manufacturing concepts are analogous to today׳s integrated petroleum refinery and petrochemical industry commonly known as biorefinery Considering tremendous forthcoming potential of biorefinery, a comprehensive overview of possible opportunities and challenges of various biorefinery systems were presented in the previous article The traditional biorefinery was mainly envisaged through a set of bio-fuels and platform chemicals containing oxygen heteroatoms in their structure Gasification and fast pyrolysis are two potential thermochemical processes for direct conversion of LCB as outlined below. The biomass gasification is a potential technology to generate synthesis gas, heat and electricity. In gasification, the biomass is converted to combustible gas mixture consisting of H The gasification and pyrolysis of biomass is usually described using three different regimes based on severity: primary (below 773 The presence of tars and methane in the resulting synthesis gas are two serious concerns of biomass gasification that restricts its application for power generation only While a great deal of time and money has been spent on biomass gasification in the last two decades, there are very few truly commercial gasifiers, operating without government support or subsidies, day in, day out, generating useful gas from biomass. The typical project starts with new ideas, announcements at meetings, construction of the new gasifier. Then it is found that the gas contains 0.1–10% ‘tars’. The rest of the time and money is spent trying to solve this problem. Most of the gasifier projects then quietly disappear. In some cases the cost of cleaning up the experimental site exceeds the cost of the project. Thus ‘tars׳ can be considered the Achilles heel of biomass gasification. In the gasification of coal, a more mature technology, the ‘tars’ (benzene, toluene, xylene, coal tar) are useful fuels and chemicals. The oxygenated ‘tars’ from biomass have only minor use. With current environmental and health concerns, we can no longer afford to relegate ‘tars’ to the nearest dump or stream. The high gasification temperature above 1273 In primary approach, catalysts are mixed with biomass prior to gasification to promote tars elimination reactions within the gasifier. This approach is most preferred as it eliminates the need of hot-gas cleaning. In secondary approach, catalysts are placed in a reactor downstream of gasifier that operates under conditions different from gasifier. This approach is mainly used for reforming of methane and higher hydrocarbons. Three different types of catalysts are generally used for catalytic biomass gasification: (i) dolomite, (ii) alkali and other metals and (iii) nickel. The inexpensive dolomite is most preferred primary catalyst as it is easily disposable and can substantially reduce tars. On the other hand, usage of alkali metals (carbonates of Na, K and Cs and borax) as primary catalyst poses serious disposal problems. The nickel being most widely used industrial catalyst for steam reforming is mainly used for hot gas cleaning. The catalytic biomass gasification using steam attracted substantial consideration in recent times for production of synthesis gas with relatively higher hydrogen contents for applications of both highly efficient electric power generation and feedstock for FTS Biomass-to-liquid (BTL) is normally referred to synthetic fuels produced from biomass derived synthesis gas using FTS. The BTL technology enables production of large varieties of synthetic fuels including gasoline, diesel, heating oil, jet fuel, synthetic natural gas, methanol, dimethyl ether, ethanol The integrated biomass gasification and BTL technology progressed significantly as one can observe from technological initiatives by giant industries in the world. The Sasol׳s high temperature FTS based on fused-iron catalyst to produce gasoline range hydrocarbons in a bubbling fluidized-bed reactor is most promising one Fast pyrolysis of biomass has tremendous prospective over BTL because of its simplicity, lesser equipment requirements (only reactor) and hence lesser capital investments The pyrolysis is the thermal disintegration of organic materials at modest temperatures into solid, liquid and gas in absence of oxygen or in presence of significantly less oxygen required for complete combustion A representative distribution of products from a fast pyrolysis reactor operated to maximize yield of bio-oils is 65 The bio-oils can also be used as liquid transportation fuels. However, high water and oxygen contents, immiscibility with petroleum fuels, low heating value (~40–45% of hydrocarbon fuels), poor storage stability due to unsaturated compounds and high corrosiveness due to organic acids mainly acetic and formic acid leads bio-oils unacceptable as transportation fuels Steam reforming: The steam reforming of whole bio-oils or water soluble fractions of bio-oils is a potential approach for production of synthesis gas using metal catalysts supported on metal oxides Hydrodeoxygenation: HDO of bio-oil is carried out in presence of high hydrogen pressures (75–300 Zeolite upgrading: The zeolite upgrading is carried out in the temperature range of 573–873 The suitability of a process for practical consideration is primarily governed by yields and characterics of the products. The principal product from HDO is oils ( The catalytic pyrolysis of biomass has enormous forthcoming potential to improve composition of bio-oils thereby avoiding costly upgradation Sooner fast pyrolysis is going to be leading thermochemical biomass processing technology due to its favorable credentials as one can see from recent technological advancements in this area. In 2008, UOP and Ensyn Corporation created a joint venture called Envergent Technologies for conversion of forest and agricultural waste to bio-oils through the RTP The transesterification of triglycerides with methanol is a promising chemical conversion process for production of biodiesel. The biodiesel have been widely accepted all over the world as potential bio-fuel with properties suitable for blending with petrodiesel. The blending of biodiesel with petrodiesel offers benefits of reduction of engine emissions (hydrocarbons, CO, particulate matter and SO The transesterification is carried out in presence of either alkali, acid (homogeneous and heterogeneous) or enzymes (lipase) as catalyst under mild temperatures (323–353 The selection of appropriate feedstock is very much important as it accounts for 60–80% of cost of biodiesel production The triglycerides and methanol should be substantially anhydrous to prevent soap formation by hydrolysis of triglycerides followed by saponification of resultant fatty acids. The triglycerides should be free of FFA (acid value less than 1) to reduce consumption of NaOH by saponification reaction and minimize soap formation The biodiesel is mainly contaminated with residual catalysts, water, unreacted alcohol, free glycerol, soap and mono- and di-glycerides. The presence of mono- and di-glycerides are due to incomplete triglyceride conversion to esters and cause escalation of pour point and cloud point Physicochemical properties of biodiesel primarily depend on fatty acid composition of triglycerides. The cetane number of biodiesel is generally higher than petrodiesel due to presence of oxygen and long hydrocarbon chain in its structure The diversion of large fractions of arable lands for cultivation of oils crops is key bottleneck for successful realization of biodiesel. The microalgae as a source of triglycerides have enormous potential for complete replacement of transportation fuels with nominal sacrificing of arable lands. The rapid biomass growth rate, high oils productivity per hectare, high oils contents and non-requirement of arable lands are primary reasons for such extraordinary promises Microalgae fixes solar energy in the form of biomass and oxygen using CO Despite having enormous potentials, commercial scale production of microalgae is currently limited due to excessive cost of production The economics can be further improved by recovering oxygen and utilizing residual biomass in an integrated biorefinery to produce bulk chemicals, food and feed ingredients ( The fatty acid composition of algal oils is highly influenced by specific growth conditions and types of algal strains The steps involved in the production of alcoholic bio-fuels from starchy biomass are enzymatic hydrolysis of carbohydrates, fermentation of resultant sugars and products separation/purification. However, access of carbohydrates of LCB is hindered by protective plant cell wall composed of lignin that requires additional expensive pretreatment step in the process of its conversion to alcoholic bio-fuels. Brief overviews of these steps are outlined below. The pretreatment of LCB is required to remove lignin and hemicellulose, increase porosity and disrupt crystalline structure of cellulose which is otherwise inactive for subsequent enzymatic hydrolysis The type and severity of pretreatment methods are generally selected based on nature and chemical compositions of biomass, cost involved and degree of recovery of carbohydrates. The mechanical comminution is generally not preferred because of huge energy requirements. The high temperature pretreatment is inappropriate for agricultural residues and hardwoods with low lignin and high pentose contents to prevent thermal degradation of pentose sugars The enzymatic hydrolysis is most commonly used for starchy biomass in spite of slower rate than acid hydrolysis due to its high specificity, mild reaction conditions and lesser propensity of formation of inhibitory products The solid residue containing mainly cellulose and remaining hemicellulose and lignin recovered after pretreatment of LCB are hydrolyzed to monomeric sugars either enzymatically (pH=4.8 and 318–323 In separate hydrolysis and fermentation, hydrolysate containing monosaccharides are fermented by yeast or bacteria to either ethanol The fermentation of hexose and pentose sugars is combined in single unit commonly known as co-fermentation to reduce process complexity To reduce capital investments, saccharification and fermentation are generally integrated in single unit commonly known as simultaneous saccharification and fermentation (SSF) with hydrolysis being rate determining step The concentration of alcohols in fermentation broth is normally very low. For example, fermentation product of SSF typically contains 4–4.5% ethanol The foremost weakness of the methods being currently used for pretreatment of LCB is their inability to segregate biomass into its constituent fractions (cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin) preserving their chemical natures The bio-ethanol is recognized as one of the most promising bio-fuels in the world. At present, ethanol alone accounts for ~94% of global bio-fuels production with Brazil and US together contributing ~78% of world׳s ethanol production At present, commercial ethanol production is predominantly based on edible sugar and starchy biomass; for example, sugarcane in Brazil, corn grains in USA and wheat and sugar beets in European Union countries. The world׳s largest producer of sugars and sugarcane, Brazil has been producing bio-ethanol from sugars and combined heat and power from sugarcane bagasse in large scale The key challenges of ethanol as fuel are its incompatibility with existing internal combustion engine and gasoline infrastructures, corrosiveness and toxicity to ecosystems, high hygroscopicity and complete miscibility with water. The corrosive properties limit its blending with gasoline to limited extent only to avoid corrosion of metallic components in tanks and deterioration of rubbers and plastics in existing internal combustion engine. The blending with gasoline is associated with increasing risk of soil and groundwater contamination due to its miscibility with water. The complete miscibility of ethanol with water also increases solubility of ethanol–gasoline blend. The ethanol phase separates from gasoline once water contamination exceeds saturation limit The ethanol provides wonderful opportunities to produce hydrocarbon fuels and varieties of chemicals besides its applications as fuel/fuels additives that led to consider it as one of the top priority platform chemicals in integrated biorefinery ( In 2005, David Ramey first drove his unmodified car across USA fueled exclusively by butanol The bio-butanol is produced by ABE fermentation of carbohydrates using solventogenic clostridia. The ABE fermentation is usually carried out in a series of batch fermentaters (residence time up to 21 days) with periodic addition of seed culture forming acetone, The excessive costs of sugar and starchy biomass, products inhibition of fermenting microorganisms and energy intensive products recovery are key bottlenecks for commercialization of ABE fermentation. The products inhibition of fermenting microorganisms results low butanol titer in the fermentation broth. Low butanol titer forces reduced sugars loadings and increased water usage which in turn results large processing volumes. The economics of ABE fermentation can be improved by use of world׳s most abundant and cheap cellulosic biomass. The recent economic analysis for production capacity of 10,000 At present, The incentives of bio-butanols as fuels and chemicals feedstock motivated giant industrialists to develop commercial processes for its production from biomass as well as its downstream conversion. The most notable is Butamax™ Advanced Bio-fuels – a joint venture of BP and Dupont. They are currently developing technology for production of butanol from corn using genetically engineered yeast In biorefinery, the lignin remains as most unutilized fraction of LCB so far. The lignin generated as by-product in pulp and paper industry are generally used as low-grade fuel for boiler to generate heat or steam to power pulping process Several approaches are also adopted for conversion of lignin to fuels and chemicals. The lignin is chemically very stable high molecular weight phenylpropane biopolymer (600–15000 The solvolysis in presence of hydrogen donating solvents such as formic acid and 2-propanol is another approach for simultaneous depolymerization and HDO in single step to produce mixture of monomeric alkylated phenols and aliphatic hydrocarbons compatible with gasoline/diesel commonly known as lignin-to-liquid (LtL) oil The lignin being phenolic in structure can be considered as a perfect feedstock for aromatics. Thring et al. studied zeolite upgrading of Alcell The existing liquid transportation fuels are composed of mixture of hydrocarbons with different molecular weights, chemical structures and degree of branching (C The hydrocarbon biorefinery takes advantages of existing infrastructures (including engines, fueling stations, distribution networks and storage tanks) and production systems of petroleum refineries and petrochemical industries. There will be no penalty in fuel mileage as hydrocarbon fuels derived from biomass are energy equivalent to petroleum derived fuels. The hydrocarbon fuels and building block chemicals are also produced in traditional biorefinery. For example, synthesis gas is produced by gasification of LCB or steam reforming of alcoholic bio-fuels or bio-oils. The synthesis gas is subsequently transformed to hydrocarbon fuels and organic chemicals through FTS. The bio-oils produced by fast pyrolysis of LCB are upgraded to liquid transportation fuels by HDO. The biogas consisting mainly of methane and CO The triglycerides contain aliphatic hydrocarbon backbone of 8–24 linear carbon atoms with majority being 16 and 18 The HDO of triglycerides is most preferred technology to produce diesel range hydrocarbons in high yields commonly known as green diesel. This technology allows use of existing petroleum refinery infrastructure with possibility of co-processing. In recent times, significant research progress has been made on HDO of various triglycerides (sunflower oil, rapeseed oil, jatropha oil, waste cooking oil, etc.) and fatty acids and their esters over different metals catalysts (Pt, Ni, Pd, Ni–Mo, Co–Mo, Pt–Pd, Pt–Re, Ni–W) dispersed on various supports (γ-Al Recently, UOP developed a two-stage hydrorefining process called UOP/Eni Ecofining™ for green diesel production from plant-derived non-edible oils ( The novel concepts of production of hydrocarbon fuels and organic chemicals in the biological plants itself are gradually nucleating to circumvent cost-intensive processing of biomass in industrial plants. This approach is not quite unusual as natural rubber (polyisoprene) is being traditionally produced from plants itself. Biosynthetic pathways is thus an attractive approach to produce short-chain, branched-chain and cyclic alcohols, alkanes, alkenes, esters and aromatics The energy intensive separation of ethanol and butanols from dilute aqueous fermentation broth is one of the major challenges in the process of production of alcoholic bio-fuels. Alternatively, aqueous sugars can be converted to hydrogen by aqueous phase reforming (APR) or alkanes that spontaneously separates from aqueous phase by APD/H Huber et al. demonstrated production of alkanes from aqueous sorbitol using Pt/Pd supported SiO Recently, Huber et al. developed a four step catalytic process for conversion of biomass-derived carbohydrates to liquid alkanes (C Recently, Kunkes et al. catalytically converted aqueous glucose and sorbitol to hydrophobic organic liquid containing mixtures of monofunctional organic compounds (such as alcohols, ketones, carboxylic acids and alkanes containing 4–6 carbon atoms) as well as heterocyclic tetrahydrofuran and tetrahydropyran using Pt–Re/C catalyst at 503 The aqueous phase catalysis can also be used to produce liquid hydrocarbons through platform chemicals. For example, Bond et al. recently developed an integrated two step approach to convert γ-valerolactone (GVL) to alkenes with molecular weights appropriate for application as transportation fuels ( Serrano-Ruiz et al. catalytically converted aqueous levulinic acid into liquid hydrocarbon transportation fuels ( The manufacturing costs primarily governed by (1) feedstock cost, (2) processing cost and (3) scale of production. Lange recently evaluated economics of fuels from various feedstocks (LCB, sugar and starchy biomass, vegetable oils, crude oils and natural gas) based on first two factors The scale of production also controls overall manufacturing costs in chemical process industry significantly. The two-fold increase in plant capacity is known to reduce manufacturing cost by 20–25% Tao and Aden analyzed manufacturing costs of bio-fuels from various feedstocks for USA during 2006–2007 for plant size of 0.17 The minimal project investment is required for production of biodiesel. The project investment is highest for bio-fuels from corn stover. The huge project investment required for bio-butanol is largely attributed to complex downstream separation process. For conversion of wood chips by thermochemical process (gasification) to ethanol, it was reported that tars reforming and synthesis gas conditioning is largest cost contributing factor that accounts for 28% of overall cost The biorefinery offers plenty of opportunities to produce an array of fuels and organic chemicals from biomass. The biorefinery can be envisaged through various biomass conversion technologies including thermochemical conversion of LCB through gasification and fast pyrolysis, chemical conversion of triglycerides by transesterification with methanol and biochemical conversion of carbohydrates to bio-ethanol and bio-butanols or HDO, microbial processing and aqueous phase catalysis in hydrocarbon biorefinery. The biomass gasification provides an avenue to produce range of fuels and organic chemicals through synthesis gas. The biomass gasification however seems to be economically unviable due to huge capital investment. The catalytic gasification is a potential alternative with enhanced efficiency. The fast pyrolysis is a promising thermochemical conversion process of LCB due to its simplicity, low capital investments and economic viability at small scale. The transesterification of vegetable oils is a potential technology for production of biodiesel. The requirements of huge quantity of vegetable oils together with their edible nature are primary bottlenecks of this technology. The highly productive microalgae offers an abundant source of triglycerides for biodiesel if technological progress results cost-effective harvesting and extraction of oils from microalgae. The alcoholic bio-fuels are generally produced through fermentation of carbohydrates of sugar and starchy biomass. The production of alcoholic bio-fuels from world׳s most abundant, cheap and non-edible LCB are still limited due to higher costs of production. Sooner hydrocarbon biorefinery is going to be the dominating technology if technological advancements result competitive production cost.