Ceric ion induced graft copolymerization of N,N-dimethyl acrylamide (DMA) and acryl amide (AM) were carried out onto the hydroxyethyl starch (HES). These grafted copolymers were used for the removal of metal ions from their aqueous solutions. Flocculation performances of the synthesized graft copolymers were evaluated in 1.0wt% silica suspensions. A comparative study of the flocculation performances of the synthetic graft copolymers was also made. The different factors affecting metal ion absorption, namely pH, treatment time, temperature and polymer dose were studied. A comparative study of the metal ion removal capacity of the two synthetic graft copolymers was also made in five metal ions namely Ni(II), Zn(II), Cu(II), Pb(II) and Hg(II). The metal ion removal capacity follows the order Hg(II)>Cu(II)>Zn(II)>Ni(II)>Pb(II) in both the two synthetic polymers. Between the two graft copolymers, graft copolymer based on AM shows better performance than that based on DMA in all the metal solutions. But the flocculation performance of DMA based graft copolymer showed better performances than that AM based graft copolymer. The former also performed best when compared to the commercial flocculants in the same suspension.Heavy metal ions like mercury (Hg), lead (Pb), cadmium (Cd), chromium (Cr), etc. are highly toxic and cause environmental pollution Water-soluble synthetic and natural macromolecules are the most efficient materials used as flocculants in the process of water clarification. An attempt has been made in the past decades to combine the best properties of synthetic and natural polymers by graft copolymerization technique. It was also concluded that by grafting flexible polyacrylamide chains onto the various polysaccharide backbones it is possible to develop efficient and shear stable flocculating agents for waste water treatment in industrial effluents and mineral processing It was reported that dextran-g-polyacrylamide is a good remover of Fe(III), Al(III), Ni(II) and Co(II) Keeping this view in mind the present work is undertaken to prepare some sorbents for the removal of heavy metals from heavy metal contaminated aqueous waste streams and some flocculating agents, by grafting poly-acrylamide (PAM) and poly N,N-dimethyl acrylamide (PDMA) chains onto the hydroxyethyl starch backbone. The present investigation is also undertaken to investigate the effect of methyl groups on the ‘N’ atom of the amide group in the metal removal and flocculation performances of the graft copolymer based on polysaccharide and N,N-dimethyl acrylamide in detail. HES is a derivative of amylopectin, containing only branched chains of glycoside molecules, devoid of a linear component. Its structure is given in our previous communication Hydroxyethyl starch (HES) and dimethyl acrylamide (DMA) were procured from Aldrich Chemical Company, USA. Acrylamide, ceric ammonium nitrate (CAN), acetone and sodium nitrate were procured from E. Merck Ltd., Mumbai, India. Copper(II) acetate monohydrate [Cu(OAc) The detail synthetic procedure was given in our previous communication The molecular weight and molecular weight distribution of HES-g-PAM and HES-g-PDMA was determined using GPC (Model: 2414, supplied by water (I) Pvt. Ltd., USA). The flow rate was fixed at 0.6 Graft copolymers were characterized by intrinsic viscosity measurement, FTIR, NMR spectroscopy and thermal analysis. The results were given in our previous article 20     The pH of the metal ion solution is kept constant at 5.5 since at higher pH the metal ions are precipitated as metal hydroxide. Stock solution of copper(II) ion, nickel(II) ion, zinc(II) ion, lead(II) ion and mercuric(II) ion were prepared by dissolving Cu(OAc) Desorption of the metal ions was carried out by boiling with acetic acid Standard Jar test The Molecular weight and molecular weight distribution of HES, HES-g-PAM and HES-g-PDMA were measured in GPC and the results are shown in The adsorption of different metal ions on to the HES-g-PAM and HES-g-PDMA were studied at different pH (1–6) separately. The results are shown in The adsorption of metal ions was studied by increasing the polymer dose (both HES-g-PAM and HES-g-PDMA) from 0.5 to 4.0 The adsorption of metal ions was carried out by HES-g-PAM and HES-g-PDMA at different time duration (3–24 Both the two graft copolymers were used in desorption study. The results (adsorption and desorption) are shown in The metal ion removal capacity of HES-g-PAM and HES-g-PDMA in optimum condition for all the metal ions is shown in The flocculation performances of HES-g-PAM and HES-g-PDMA were compared in 1.0 The major mechanisms of flocculation of polyelectrolytes are surface charged neutralization and bridging. Surface charged neutralization occurs, if the charge of flocculant is opposite in sign to that of the suspended particles. For neutral flocculants, the major mechanism of flocculation is the polymer bridging Again, in the amide functionality ( The flocculation performance of HES-g-PDMA was compared with two commercially available flocculants Telfloc 2230 and Magnafloc-1011 in silica suspension. The result is shown in PDMA and PAM were successfully grafted onto the hydroxyethyl starch back bone by the ceric ion induced redox polymerization technique in aqueous solution and were also used for the flocculation studies in 1.0