This paper describes some of the important microbiological and engineering challenges in scaling up biobeneficiation of bauxite. A soil bacterium Paenibacillus polymyxa was recently shown to selectively remove calcium and iron impurities from low grade bauxite (<50% Al), for abrasive and refractory applications, respectively. An industrial scale formulation of Bromfield medium (called ISF-2), based on cane sugar and tap/mine water, is developed to successfully culture P. polymyxa under septic conditions. The culture is found to be efficient in removing calcium from bauxite ore, carried out as cascade operations in total recycle slurry reactors. In cascade leaching experiments with pre-grown culture, calcium removal was observed to occur solely by indirect mechanism in an initial rapid phase lasting few minutes, followed by a gradual phase comprising of direct attack as well as indirect mechanisms. An alternative mechanism of indirect leaching is proposed based on solubilisation of accessible calcium in the culture metabolite, up to a saturation solubility limit. The saturation solubility theory gives an explanation for the need to perform cascade experiments, and also successfully predicts the possibility of pulse leaching experiments. Some of these recent advances are likely to enable successful commercialisation of bauxite biobeneficiation.The use of microorganisms in leaching and beneficiation of lean grade ores and minerals is widely considered an efficient, economical and environmentally benign alternative to conventional hydrometallurgical operations. Biohydrometallurgy is commercially exploited in the recovery of copper and uranium, and is also used for increasing the recovery of finely disseminated gold from refractory ores like pyrite and arsenopyrite Bauxite is the main source of the world's most abundant metal aluminium, and low-grade bauxite (<50% Al) is used in the manufacture of alumina-based abrasives and refractories. Abrasive applications require that calcium content in the bauxite ore should not exceed 0.5% (expressed as %CaO), and refractory applications require that Fe  We have recently reported scaling up of bauxite biobeneficiation from shake flask experiments to demonstration bioreactors, designed for flexibility of operation and easy adaptability by the mining industry Bauxite ore samples were obtained from Orient Abrasives from their Jamnagar mines in Gujarat, India. The raw bauxite was crushed, ground and screened to select the −200+300 mesh (53–74 μm) size fraction, with the chemical and mineralogical composition shown in The Bromfield medium Two industrial scale formulations (ISFs) of Bromfield medium were developed to commercialise the biobeneficiation process. The expensive carbon source in MBM, analytical grade sucrose, was replaced with a cheaper equivalent, viz. molasses in ISF-1 and cane sugar in ISF-2. In their paper, Typically, a well-grown culture in ISF-2 (under septic conditions described above) was found to have an initial value of DI around 3. A value of DI>2 throughout the course of biobeneficiation was considered acceptable in these studies. A minimal selective Bromfield agar/medium (MSBA) was also developed in this study to sub-culture the pure strain of Ten percent of an active inoculum (from the late exponential phase) containing at least 10 A 4-l column glass bioreactor (ID 48 mm and length 1.2 m) was designed to demonstrate bioleaching and biobeneficiation experiments in a larger scale, as shown in It has been reported The leached residues of uncascade operations contain 2.24% CaO and 2.5% CaO, for experiments conducted with 5% and 10% (w/v) pulp density respectively. As these results do not meet the requirements of the abrasive industries (<0.5%), further improvement in calcium removal is sought by replacing the leaching medium periodically (cascade operation). The bacteria pre-grown in ISF-2 (in the absence of bauxite) are used as the leaching medium in cascade experiments. The target of 0.5% CaO in the leached ore is reached after four cascade operations, for the case of 5% pulp density. It is observed that beneficiation occurred in two distinct phases: the initial phase of rapid removal of calcium (Phase I) which lasts for a few minutes, followed by a gradual calcium removal phase (Phase II). The initial rapid phase (less than few minutes) is too short for any direct attack mechanism to take place, and it results from the action of a well-grown culture (pH≈2) coming into contact with the ore. The instantaneous dissolution of calcium in the metabolite causes the rapid removal of calcium from the ore, and the pH of the leach liquor shoots from 2 to about 5.5 (typically). The ability of metabolite to dissolve calcium reduces as pH rises to near neutral levels. However, higher pH favours bacterial growth in the culture (in spite of some growth inhibition due to the ore), as it still has about 10 g/l of sugar available as carbon source (as shown in  The mechanism of biobeneficiation is hitherto not well understood, and is generally thought to occur by a combination of direct attack and indirect mechanisms An enormous saving in time is possible by assembling a series of Phase I cascades (without Phase II), to achieve the result almost completely due to solubilisation (indirect leaching) mechanism. This is called pulse leaching experiment, and The following major conclusions could be made based on this study. An industrial scale formulation of Bromfield medium based on cane sugar and tap/mine water (ISF-2), can be successfully used to culture the soil bacterium, The above culture is found to be efficient in the removal of calcium from bauxite ore in large-scale biobeneficiation experiments, carried out in total recycle slurry reactors. Cascade leaching experiments are found to be necessary to achieve the target of 0.5% CaO in bauxite ore. In cascade leaching experiments with pre-grown culture, calcium removal is observed to occur solely by indirect mechanism in an initial rapid phase lasting few minutes, followed by a gradual phase comprising of direct attack as well as indirect mechanisms. The indirect mechanism of biobeneficiation can be alternatively interpreted on the basis of solubilisation of accessible calcium in the culture metabolite, up to a saturation solubility limit, Ca*. The saturation solubility theory also gives an explanation for the need to perform cascade experiments and successfully predicts the possibility of pulse leaching experiments. It is essential to scale-up the laboratory process with respect to various parameters for possible commercial utilization. For this purpose, it becomes essential to isolate the microorganisms from the ore deposits and water sources in the mines for large-scale cultivation. The authors gratefully acknowledge Orient Abrasives Limited (OAL), New Delhi, for sponsoring this work. Special thanks are due to Mr. P.P. Khanna, Executive Director of OAL, for supplying us with ore samples and valuable ideas from time to time. One of us (Vasan) would like to thank the United Engineering Foundation, New York, for their conference fellowship.