Herein, the construction of a three-parameter smooth hyperbolic failure criterion for cohesive-frictional materials is presented. The criterion has the form of a hyperbola on the Rendulic plane and of an elliptic hyperboloid with a threefold symmetry in the Haigh–Westergaard principal stress space. The effect of the intermediate principal stress on the strength of the material is taken into account. Also, by adjusting appropriately the three parameters of the criterion, well-known failure criteria such as Rankine and von Mises may be derived as special cases. Finally, the proposed criterion is numerically calibrated and validated against standard and true triaxial data sets.Cohesive-frictional materials like rocks, soils, concrete, etc. are some of the most common materials encountered in geotechnical constructions. Needless to say that it is crucial for engineers and constructors to know beforehand their mechanical behavior in order to build safe and durable constructions. It is also valid that these materials exhibit yield, peak and residual strengths. The peak strength of a brittle material is one of the most important parameters that the engineers should know and it defines the peak stress the material can withstand under prescribed loading conditions before it fails. Several failure criteria have been proposed to predict the failure strength of cohesive-frictional materials. One of the most important criteria is the Mohr–Coulomb criterion Cohesive-frictional materials present a brittle behavior at tensile stresses which can be described well by Rankine models and a more ductile behavior at high confinement stresses which can be described well by the Drucker–Prager model In this paper a three-parameter failure criterion (model) for cohesive-frictional materials is constructed by following a step-by-step procedure. The proposed model exhibits a Rankine behavior at tensile stresses and a Drucker–Prager behavior at high confinement. The failure surface represents a hyperbola on Rendulic stress space and an elliptic hyperboloid with a threefold symmetry in the Haigh–Westergaard principal stress space (cf. Let us consider compression stresses as negative and tensile stresses as positive quantities. Moreover, it is assumed that Consider an axisymmetric stress state defined by Combining Eq. From the above Eq. Working similarly for the tensile meridian (for this case the Lode angle takes the value Up to this point the failure criterion is neither smooth on the deviatoric plane nor it considers the effect of intermediate principal stress. The former issue is explained in The effect of the intermediate principal stress may be illustrated if we transform Eqs. The transformation of Eq. Working similarly for the tensile meridian, the constants of the quadratic equation may be derived in the following manner: As is illustrated in At this point, the model still does not take under consideration the effect of the intermediate principal stress. In fact, the slope of the asymptote of the tensile meridian is the lower limit where we have no effect of the intermediate principal stress. If we increase arbitrarily this slope, we will include the effect of The introduction of a free inclination variable The two principal meridians, namely the compression and tensile meridians, will be considered in order to accomplish the final form of the failure criterion and derive a smooth surface on Haigh–Westergaard stress space. Let Instead of using a constant value for eccentricity, we will transform it into a function of the mean pressure Recapitulating, the proposed failure model is given by the main model Eq. (28) combined with Eqs. (9) and (10) for Tc, Eq. (30) for r(θ,e), Eq. (34) for e(p), Eqs. (12) and (13) for Several well-known criteria may be derived or approximated by the proposed model by adjusting appropriately the three parameters Due to the nonlinear nature of the equations of the model that is appropriate to describe inherently nonlinear granular materials such as rocks, concretes etc, a numerical calibration scheme should be employed. The following objective function should be minimized: For demonstration purposes, we will use two different data sets as example cases. The first data set refers to representative standard tests conducted on Dionysos marble ( The calibrated three-parameter failure surface of Dionysos mable is shown in Although the proposed model fits very well standard test results, the behavior of the failure surface for Lode angles In order to demonstrate the behavior of the proposed model on true triaxial data, we will employ data of Mizuho trachyte. Representative test data for Mizuho trachyte have been presented by Al-Ajmi and Zimmerman A smooth hyperbolic failure criterion suitable for cohesive-frictional materials has been constructed in a step-by-step formal procedure. The model is developed on the Rendulic and The authors would like to thank the financial support from the