The undeveloped Mike CuAu(Zn) deposit on the Carlin trend of Nevada, USA, currently held by Newmont Mining, hosts an unusual suite of oxide Cu and Au minerals. This study evaluates the possibilities for economic recovery by 1) comparing the Cu and Au extraction achieved from the supergene ores by six different lixiviants, and 2) identifying which minerals cause low recovery for each lixiviant and why. Gold is present as auricupride and electrum and copper exists as conichalcite (CaCu arsenate), native Cu, cuprite, chrysocolla, and minor malachite, with locally significant copper in jarosite, hematite, and goethite. The reagents tested were sulfuric, sulfurous, and methanesulfonic acids to recover Cu, cyanide and thiourea to recover Au, and glycine to recover both. No reagent recovered both Cu and Au effectively, although sulfuric and methanesulfonic acids recovered most of the Cu and cyanide and thiourea recovered most of the Au. Glycine recovered nearly all of the Au and >50% of the Cu from the cuprite- and native-Cu-dominated ore type, but did not recover much Cu or Au from any of the other ore types. This supports the hypothesis that Cu2+ catalyzes Au dissolution in glycine, and thus effective Au leaching by glycine from oxide CuAu ores may be contingent upon the solubility of the Cu minerals in glycine.
                  Post-leaching QEMSCAN analysis indicates that conichalcite and Cu-bearing Fe oxides failed to dissolve completely in all reagents and were the principal causes of low recovery. In addition, native Cu dissolved only partly in thiourea, and chrysocolla dissolved only partly in thiourea, glycine, or cyanide. Other observed mineralogical changes include the total loss of dolomite and partial loss of alunite and iron oxide from all samples, with apparent gains in alunite and jarosite.Oxidized copper-gold ores are problematic to leach. The sulfuric acid used to leach Cu oxides does not dissolve Au, and the cyanide used to leach Au is consumed by Cu minerals. In the case of the supergene ores at the Mike deposit, a large and currently undeveloped Cu The Mike prospect, held by Newmont, is a buried Cu Mike was discovered in the Maggie Creek district in 1989, and its resource – eventually calculated at >8.5 M oz. Au, 1027 M lbs. Cu, and 809 M lbs. Zn – makes it one of the largest single resources on the Carlin Trend ( Mike deviates from the conventional Carlin deposit model in exhibiting widespread high-temperature alteration in the ore-hosting rocks and in having high Cu and Zn grades (averaging 0.34% and 2.13% respectively) ( The original silty carbonate host rocks probably consisted of calcite, micas, quartz, and clays, but have been metamorphosed and metasomatized to calcite, dolomite, quartz, K-feldspar, clinopyroxenes, amphiboles, and biotite ( Supergene alteration converted these to conichalcite (CaCu(AsO Suggested methods for treating mixed, oxidized Cu Sulfuric acid leaching is the principal modern technique for leaching Cu from its oxides. Copper is liberated by reactions such as: and for malachite and chrysocolla respectively, and analogous reactions for other complex oxides of Cu. Most supergene Cu minerals are highly soluble in sulfuric acid, commonly leading to Cu recoveries of >85%. The exceptions are native Cu and cuprite. The first mole of Cu in cuprite dissolves readily in acid, but the second mole of Cu dissolves slowly, and native Cu not at all, unless an oxidant such as O  Sulfurous acid (aqueous SO for malachite, and analogous reactions for other Cu species. For cuprite, the hypothesized reaction is: As with sulfuric acid leaching, Au minerals are not soluble in sulfurous acid and this reagent was tested solely for its effectiveness at Cu leaching. Cyanidation is the dominant method of Au extraction in the mining industry today. For native Au, electrum, or auricupride, it works by the mechanism: Cyanide is also capable of dissolving Cu from most supergene oxide minerals by the reactions: In most circuits the high solubility of most oxide Cu minerals in cyanide is more a problem than an asset, since each kg of Cu dissolved consumes at least 2.32 kg of NaCN, plus another 0.4 kg if the minerals contain Cu as cupric ion ( ( Thiourea, SC(NH The oxidant in this reaction is shown as Fe Glycine (amino acid, C where H Copper minerals dissolve by: Cuprite, native Cu, malachite, and azurite are completely glycine-soluble in theory, while chrysocolla yields <20% dissolution in glycine in existing studies ( Of all the reagents tested in this study, methanesulfonic acid (MSA), CH The Cu may exist as cupric methanesulfonate, Cu(CH Newmont conducted an internal study of sulfuric acid leaching on 10 samples of the Mike ore, finished in 2006 ( Newmont's leaching tests included bottle roll and column testing with sulfuric acid. Bottle roll tests were conducted with 500-g test charges of −75 μm (200 mesh) pulverized samples, rolled at 40% solids for 24 h. The leaching solution was 10 g/L sulfuric acid with pH maintained below 2.4. For column leach tests, composites crushed to −1.27 cm (−½”) were agglomerated and acid-cured for five days with 30–50% of the acid consumption obtained from bottle roll testing. After agglomeration, the samples were loaded into a 20.4-cm-diameter (8″) column, which was then leached with 10 g/L sulfuric acid at a flow rate of 10 L/h/m Copper extraction from column and bottle roll tests ranged from 31.2 to 73.1% for bottle roll and from 67.1 to 86.5% for column leach tests. Bottle roll Cu recovery did not correlate with the results of Cu QLTs, whereas column leach test data did correlate with the fraction of QLT copper measured. Bottle roll and column leach tests Cu recoveries for the different samples did not correlate. Net acid consumptions for bottle roll tests were 10.6 to 36.2 kg/t, compared to 4.1 to 55.9 kg/t for column leach tests. Microscopic examination of the residues showed that a significant amount of Cu remained in the residue as native Cu and as blue-green and dark black/blue grains whose mineralogy was not examined. ICP and core log data that Newmont provided included data on cyanide-soluble Au and Cu based on 1-h shaker tests for each core interval sampled. Based on these data, the Au in the supergene zone is typically 85 to 95% cyanide-soluble, compared to Cu cyanide solubility of generally <30%. This may reflect consumption of the limited amount of cyanide in the system rather than the insolubility of the Cu ore minerals. Six samples of different supergene ore types were collected during summer 2016. Where available, the coarse rejects were taken as sample material; for the drill hole REB-00150, no coarse rejects were available and quarter-core was used instead. Each sample in this study represents a single 6.06 m (20′) assay composite. Samples and location information are given in Sample preparation and mineralogical work were done at the Freeport-McMoRan Inc. Process Technology Center in Tucson. Each sample was stage-crushed to 100% passing 2000 μm (10 mesh) using a roll crusher and dry test sieve. Half the crushed material was rotary-split into roughly 200-g aliquots, with two additional 3 g splits of each sample for QEMSCAN and two additional 10 g splits for assaying. The remaining half of each sample was stage-crushed to 75 μm (200 mesh) and divided into 200-g splits, with one additional 10 g split for laser particle size analysis. No mineralogy splits were taken from the 200-mesh material. Assay samples were pulverized to −200 μm and dissolved using 3-acid microwave digestion with nitric, hydrochloric, and fluoboric acids, then analyzed with ICP-OES, including sulfur. Silicon was determined by HF digestion with AA finish. Sample REB-00133 had to be re-assayed for Au owing to recoveries consistently >100%. Two 1-g samples of REB-00133 pulp remaining from the assay split were digested in aqua regia on a hot plate for 40 min and analyzed for Au on an Agilent 7700× ICP-MS. The mineralogical data gathered for head samples and leach residues in this study were collected by QEMSCAN (Quantitative Evaluation of Mineralogy by Scanning Electron Microscopy). The QEMSCAN identifies mineral grains by matching the measured EDS spectrum and backscatter brightness of each pixel to specifications in a mineral database. The QEMSCAN splits used in this study were converted to 27-mm epoxy mounts without graphite, held under vacuum, and hardened in an oven to dry before polishing down to 1-μm grit. Surface smoothness was checked visually with an inverted microscope. The head samples were carbon-coated and examined in a Zeiss Leo 1450-series QEMSCAN at a beam current of 5 nA and accelerating voltage of 25 keV. Backscatter brightness was calibrated against quartz, pure copper, and pure gold standards before each analytical run. A standard mineral list was loaded and modified in order to import mineral backscatter and EDS peak intensities. The quantitative mineralogical evaluation was based on 5000 particle mineralogical analyses with a field spacing of 300 μm and bulk mineralogical analyses (line scans) with 1800 μm field size and 10-point spacing. Pixel size was 5 μm. All samples except REB-00187 were resectioned and reexamined, with an additional resection for REB-00189. Follow-up analysis of iron oxides, jarosite, and alunite used a Quanta 400 SEM with an accelerating voltage of 20 keV. This revealed that the Fe oxide minerals (goethite, hematite, and jarosite) typically contain 1–5% Cu and As. The Fe oxide mineral compositions in the QEMSCAN mineral list were accordingly modified to include 2/3 of the average Cu and As in each. QEMSCAN assays recalculated on this basis reconciled with chemical assays to within 10% for Cu and As in all samples except REB-00189, which exhibited a significant nugget effect. The remaining systematic overestimation of Fe by QEMSCAN for all samples was ascribed to gravitational settling of the relatively dense iron oxide minerals to what became the top of the epoxy mount, an inference supported by the lower QEMSCAN Fe content in resected samples than in the original measurements. Residue sample mounts were analyzed on an FEI Quanta 400 field emission QEMSCAN with line scans at 900 μm field size and 4 μm spacing. The mineral database and identification criteria were the same as for the head samples. Bottle roll tests were conducted under the conditions specified in Each 200-g split was charged into a clean 1.9-L (½-gallon) open glass bottle and partly filled with deionized water. Leaching and conditioning reagents were added as powders. After measurement of pH (± Eh), the bottles were rolled. At 2 and 6 h, the rolling was stopped and a roughly 10-mL sample of leach liquor was filtered and pipetted into a test tube. The pH (±Eh) was measured and reagent was titrated for cyanide, thiourea, and glycine (other acids were not titrated, but sulfuric acid concentration was inferred by pH). Reagent concentration and pH were adjusted as necessary, except for sulfurous and methanesulfonic acids, for which no further reagent was added and pH was allowed to rise above 2. The detailed procedures for each bottle roll test are in Appendix A. Kinetic samples were diluted 10, 100, and 1000 times using standard solutions identical to the leaching solutions, and were then analyzed by AA on a single-lamp Perkin-Elmer atomic absorption spectrophotometer. To avoid overestimating Au recovery from thiourea leaching due to the spectral interference of Fe Major Cu ore minerals are native Cu, cuprite, malachite, chrysocolla, and conichalcite, with locally significant Cu in jarosite and goethite ( The results of the bottle roll tests are shown in Cyanide recovered >70% of the Au from all samples except REB-00189, where recovery was <50%. Thiourea was nearly as effective, consistently leaching >60% regardless of head Au or Cu grade or mineralogy ( Extrapolated reagent consumption for the four reagents (sulfuric acid, cyanide, thiourea, and glycine) that were added over the course of the bottle roll tests is shown in QEMSCAN analysis of 2000-μm leach residues shows several consistent changes ( None of the reagents tested will be able to recover both Cu and Au efficiently in one step from all ore types in this study. If only Au recovery is necessary, the best process is probably a single-step leach with either cyanide or thiourea, accepting a high reagent consumption in either case. If economic considerations dictate the recovery of both metals, the best option is a combined process that recovers Cu first, then Au, to minimize base metal interference with the gold-recovering reagent. Although the preliminary tests described here show that both sulfuric acid and MSA might yield acceptable Cu recovery, sulfuric acid is preferable because it is cheaper and more widely used. Either thiourea or cyanide could then be used to recover the Au. Cyanide would have lower reagent consumption but would require neutralization and re-agglomeration of the heap, whereas leaching with thiourea would require no additional pre-treatment and has been tested on a lab scale before ( That no single reagent effectively recovers Cu and Au from oxides is unsurprising given the accumulated literature on the subject (e.g., Copper mineralogy is the most important factor in Cu recovery for all reagents. With the exception of Cu sequestered in iron oxides, the most refractory of the ore minerals is conichalcite. This can be seen by comparing the results of samples REB-00187 with REB-00150 and REB-00188, which contain about the same amount of Cu but have different proportions of conichalcite and widely varying recoveries ( The effects of cuprite and native Cu, which are abundant only in REB-00189, are unclear owing to the nugget effect observed in the QEMSCAN and assay results ( That sulfuric acid is one of the best reagents for recovering Cu from oxides is no surprise. Its performance in this study is consistent with the results of other studies as well as general industry observations, although recoveries from cuprite- and native Cu-bearing samples were higher than expected and higher than observed in Newmont's bottle roll tests (section 3.2). The ore mineralogical changes shown in According to the sparse literature on the subject, sulfurous acid is supposed to be at least as effective as sulfuric acid at dissolving complex copper oxides, and has been suggested as a lixiviant for Fe oxides as well ( One notable feature of the sulfurous acid leaching kinetic charts ( Cyanide did not recover >25% of the Cu in any sample and performed particularly poorly in samples containing conichalcite, which is consistent with Gold recovery by cyanide was within analytical error of 100% except in sample REB-00189, where it reached 50% in the first six hours and rose no higher. Either cementation of Au onto the native Cu in the sample or competition with Cu for cyanide could have caused this. In their study, Of all the reagents examined, thiourea performed the worst in extracting Cu, recovering <10% of the Cu from all samples except REB-00187, which appears to be an anomaly given that recovery from other chrysocolla- and conichalcite-bearing samples was poor ( The poor performance of thiourea in recovering Cu, virtually irrespective of ore mineralogy, is consistent with the results obtained in other studies, most of which found thiourea an ineffective lixiviant for Cu without pre-treatment. In the conichalcite-dominated samples, Cu recovery by glycine is comparable to recovery by cyanide and thiourea (  Glycine also performed significantly worse than cyanide or thiourea at recovering Au in all samples but REB-00189, and possibly REB-00187 and -00188 (see discussion in section 6.5, below). One possibility is that the low recovery is due to glycine destruction by the 3% H The fact that glycine recovered Au from only one of the samples (REB-00189) merits some discussion. Copper ore mineralogy was the only significant difference between this sample and the others, and REB-00189 was also the only sample in which glycine leached most of the Cu. This supports the suggestion of The results of leaching with MSA show patterns largely similar to the performance of the other two acids. Kinetic charts ( Reagent consumption is an important factor in choosing a lixiviant for any system. Glycine consumption was the highest and most variable among all lixiviants, reaching the equivalent of 22 kg/t in REB-00185 with >10 kg consumed in all samples. There are no reagent consumption data in the existing literature on glycine, so it is not certain whether the glycine consumption measured in this study is normal. However, Thiourea, at 5 to 17 kg/t, is consistent with reported high consumption. Recorded thiourea consumption in the literature ranges from 4 to 47 kg/t and has long been one of the main obstacles to widespread industrial application ( Sulfuric acid consumption does not correlate with Cu recovery but is relatively stable around an affordable 14 kg/t for most of the samples. This is consistent with the results of Newmont's bottle roll sulfuric acid tests, which indicated a consumption of 15–17 kg/t for most samples, with a few exceptions. One exception is REB-00188, where acid consumption reaches 20.4 kg/t due to a dolomite content of 1.2% ( Some of the mineralogical transformations observed, such as the loss of dolomite in acid leaching media, are expected from the chemistry of the leach solution and the known solubilities of minerals and match the leaching results. The apparent increase in jarosite and muscovite is harder to explain. Some of it may be proportional increase due to loss of mass in the sample by dissolution of the soluble minerals, not an absolute mass gain. However, observed volume loss for the residues is <5%, so any change it induced in the proportions of the minerals is probably within the bounds of QEMSCAN error and heterogeneity of the splits. Aluminum is effectively insoluble under leaching conditions, and its 5% change from heads to residues indicates that elemental and mineralogical changes <5% are not significant. The only major changes in composition, apart from the loss of the elements in Cu ores, are those resulting from the apparent 30% increase in jarosite content in most of the high-jarosite samples, the loss of Fe oxides, and the apparent increase in muscovite. Jarosite precipitation is consistent with leach chemistry ( The QEMSCAN also identified more muscovite or sericite in the residues than in the heads. Muscovite generally forms in leaching systems by acid degradation of K-feldspar. There is no consistent loss of K-feldspar in the QEMSCAN residues, and a few samples show slight gains, virtually eliminating the possibility that K-feldspar decomposed to muscovite during leaching. This leaves QEMSCAN error, or problems with identification due to reagent adsorption, as the likeliest explanations. Apart from the dissolution of Cu minerals, no other mineralogical changes recorded by QEMSCAN are both consistent and significant. The one unresolved issue is the apparent increase in K, which (unlike S) was not present in any of the reagents used and whose concentration in the samples was presumably fixed. Contamination is a possibility, but the presence and magnitude of the K increase is too inconsistent for it to be likely. Because the residues were not analyzed for Au, circuit balance or reconciliation used only the Cu assays. Accountability for each −10 mesh leach test was calculated as g Cu in the leach solution at 24 h plus g Cu left in the residue, divided by g Cu in the head ( Some potential error is associated with each step in the analytical and experimental process. A significant amount of it probably comes from QEMSCAN. There is not much in the literature about the expected errors in a QEMSCAN or automated mineralogical analysis. Some sources of error can be inferred, if not quantified, based on the procedures and principles of sample prep and QEMSCAN. One well-known factor is the tendency of dense minerals to settle to the bottom of the mold while the epoxy hardens; then the bottom of the mold becomes the top of the mount, and it has a disproportionately high concentration of dense minerals. This may explain the consistent overestimation of Fe concentration by QEMSCAN. QEMSCAN also leaves significant ambiguity in the identification and differentiation of certain groups of minerals, particularly the different iron oxides and the hydrous silicates ( Possible errors in leach testing are many and varied; Dilution for AA analysis is another potentially significant source of error in the Cu measurements, with about 5% cumulative error. This is supported by a comparison of ICP and AA results for Cu concentration in samples leached with thiourea. Results match very well at low concentrations, but with higher Cu concentrations the error increases and always shows the AA underestimating Cu with respect to ICP. This error is augmented by error derived from wavering AA readings, which were not constant but fluctuated by about 0.003 absorbance units over the course of any given measurement. Although every effort was made to use the readings from the middle of this range, they could nevertheless overestimate or underestimate the absorbance values. This is not likely to add significant error for ions in high concentration in solution, but it probably creates a large error in all of the lower Au measurements, for which absorbance readings may be as low as 0.005. Combined with the statistical calculations for the very small amount of Au in a 200-g split of 0.7 g/t Au ore, this is probably responsible for the apparent >100% Au recovery by cyanide and glycine in REB-00187 and REB-00188 ( The objective of this study was to evaluate the effects of six lixiviants (sulfuric acid, sulfurous acid, cyanide, thiourea, glycine, and methanesulfonic acid) on the different ore types in the oxidized, As-rich Cu Conichalcite and chrysocolla were mostly dissolved by the acids, although Cu recoveries from the conichalcite-dominated ore type were <70%. Glycine, thiourea, and cyanide failed to dissolve conichalcite or chrysocolla. Native Cu and cuprite were effectively leached by sulfuric and methanesulfonic acids, moderately well leached by sulfurous acid and glycine, and barely recovered by thiourea. Cyanide dissolved cuprite and native Cu, but was consumed by both before recovering much Cu. No reagent tested dissolved >20% of the Cu in Fe oxides. Gold recoveries were highest by thiourea and cyanide, except in the cuprite- and native-Cu-dominated ore type, where cyanide was consumed by Cu and Au recovery was consequently low. Glycine recovered <30% of the Au from the high-grade samples, and appeared to perform well at Au extraction only in the cuprite- and native-Cu-dominated ore type, which was also the only sample in which it recovered >25% of the Cu. This suggests that glycine requires catalysis by Cu   Supplementary data to this article can be found online at