The effect of the ratio between pigment volume concentration (PVC) and critical pigment volume concentration (CPVC), denoted hereafter by Λ, on the thermal and mechanical properties of an epoxy primer was investigated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), dynamic-mechanical analysis (DMA), stress–strain tests and measurement of Persoz hardness.
                  Paints based on epoxy resin were prepared at different Λ values (0.73, 0.80, 0.88, 0.93, 0.98, 1.08, 1.15 and 1.24). It was concluded that thermal and mechanical properties can be greatly affected by the PVC/CPVC ratio and in a complex manner.The critical pigment volume concentration (CPVC) was first clearly defined and experimentally measured in the seminal work of Asbeck and Van Loo from 1949    At PVC below the CPVC, a dry coating film is a continuous coating, a composite consisting of pigment particles randomly embedded in a continuously connected matrix of polymer. Above the CPVC, there are void structures in the film due to insufficient polymer, but the pigment particles can still be thought of as being continuously connected. The polymer is still continuously connected globally, but voids will cause the polymer to lose local connectivity, and thus the sharp drop-off in mechanical properties of the coating just above the CPVC. A new phase, air, is now present in the film and its properties drastically affect those of the film, especially with regard to density, mechanical, thermal, transport properties and optical properties The main aim of the present work was to study the effect of varying the PVC/CPVC ratio of an epoxy coating system by means of different characterization (mechanical and thermal) techniques. A primer was formulated using a type I epoxy resin based on Bisphenol A; an aliphatic polyamine was added in the component B of the formulation and a tertiary amine was used as a catalyst. The The pigment used in the study was talc and calcium carbonate mixture including silica-based ion exchange compound as corrosion inhibitor. A primer without pigments was prepared in order to establish better properties in comparison with pigmented paints. Obviously, in this case the primer contains resin, crosslinking agent and catalyst only. Characteristics of the different mixtures that were formulated are shown in Cold-rolled low-carbon steel test panels were used in order to ensure uniform substrate surfaces for testing purposes. All test panels were degreased with acetone, and paints were deposited by means of a graduated application bar. The systems were allowed to cure under ambient air conditions for 1 week prior to testing. Paint dry film thickness was determined by using an Elcometer and the thicknesses were maintained within the 50±5 Samples used to perform TGA, DSC, DMA and stress–strain tests were not obtained by material deposition on any metallic substrates. They were usually obtained as free polymer films by just leaving the material to dry and cure over a non-adhesive polymer substrate. In order to determine whether any residual organic solvent had been trapped because of pigment addition, thermogravimetric tests were carried out for each of the primers formulated, which had been left to cure for 1 week. A Mettler thermogravimetric analyzer connected to a Balzers mass spectrometer was used. Samples of approximately 15–20 A Perkin Elmer DSC7 differential scanning calorimeter was employed for isothermal and dynamic scans in order to determine the reaction heat of curing of samples with different Stress–strain curves of cured primers with different A dynamic-mechanical Analyzer (Perkin Elmer DMA) was employed to perform mechanical measurements from −100 to 150 The procedure for the measurement of hardness of organic coatings by pendulum damping test (according to ASTM D 4366-95  There is an initial weight loss until 100  Isothermal and dynamic scans were carried out on uncured samples in order to determine curing reaction kinetics. Results did not offer good results, probably due to the presence of solvent in all these samples. Good results were only obtained when DSC scans were performed on cured samples. In all these tests some residual enthalpies (Δ It can be seen in It is known that the When primers are formulated with increasing When primers with a PVC above the CPVC are tested, a significant increase in the When When When  The main dynamic-mechanical (or With further increases in PVC (and when PVC>CPVC), the maximum of the loss tangent shifts to much higher temperatures (  There are two processes that can affect these results: a mechanical effect due to reinforcement of pigment particles, and epoxy binder changes in crosslinking density and rigidity. When However, an important decrease in There is also an increase in the heterogeneity of the types of matrix chains that constitute the epoxy binder as the  It can be clearly observed that the pigment volume present in the primer has a big effect on the mechanical properties. As PVC increases the coating becomes more and more rigid and fragile, and less ductile ( As PVC increases until CPVC there are not too many changes in Young’s modulus (the same effect as the storage modulus). However, the coating is much less ductile (as can be observed in the stress–strain curves and in the Changes can be due to two effects that act in opposite directions: on the one hand, a reinforcement process due to pigment particle addition and, on the other hand, a decrease in the crosslinking density of the binder combined with a loss of adhesion between particles. When Primer formulators are especially interested in getting the maximum adhesion between the organic coating and the metal substrate in order to ensure better anticorrosion primer properties. Since high mechanical parameter values such as One possible reason for formulating at high PVC is to try to enhance the curing process. The thermal and mechanical characteristics of different paints based on epoxy resin and prepared at different It has been determined that as The authors are grateful to Ms. Eva Romero, Mr. David Roures and Mr. José Ortega for their assistance during experiments and to project MAT2000-0123-P4-03 for the financial support.