Bismuth vanadate (BiVO4) was synthesized by the co-precipitation method at 200°C. The photocatalytic activity of the oxide was tested for the photodegradation of rhodamine B under visible light irradiation. The analysis of the total organic carbon showed that the mineralization of rhodamine B over a BiVO4 photocatalyst (∼40% after 100h of irradiation) is feasible. In the same way, a gas chromatography analysis coupled with mass spectroscopy revealed the existence of organic intermediates during the photodegradation process such as ethylbenzene, o-xylene, m-xylene, and phthalic anhydride. The modification of variables such as dispersion pH, amount of dissolved O2, and irradiation source was studied in order to know the details about the photodegradation mechanism.In the search of compounds with photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation, several efforts have been carried out in the last decade. For example, the anatase polymorph of TiO Among the different studied oxides with activity under visible light irradiation, BiVO As it is well known BiVO BiVO BiVO The structural characterization was carried out by powder X-ray diffraction using a Bruker D8 Advanced diffractometer with CuK The surface area of the photocatalysts was determined by N The photochemical reactor employed in this work consisted of a borosilicate glass beaker surrounded by a water-jacket to maintain the reaction temperature at 25 During the course of the photodegradation reaction, the effect of some variables such as dispersion pH, dissolved O The dye mineralization degree was monitored by analyzing the total organic carbon content (TOC) in the solutions with different irradiation times. The TOC analysis was performed by adding acidified potassium persulfate reagent to the samples for oxidation, followed by a digestion process at 105 BiVO Recently, Yu et al.  The BET analysis revealed a surface area of 1.5 The BiVO According to this result, the dispersion at pH 10 was selected to carry out experiments with bubbled O To obtain information about the intermediate products of the mineralization process, dispersions of rhB/BiVO The degradation of a dye by light irradiation can happen by three mechanisms: (a) by means of a photolysis process induced by the luminous energy from a light source, (b) by means of a photosensitization process where the light irradiation excites an electron from the dye and then it is injected into the conduction band of the semiconductor with the concomitant oxidation of the dye, and (c) by means of a true heterogeneous photocatalysis where the promotion of an electron from the valence band to the conduction band by light irradiation produces active sites (holes) for the oxidation of the dye. As it can be observed in According to this rhB degradation pathway, the step described by Eq. Nevertheless, the positive effect of alkaline pH observed on the photodegradation process cannot be explained on the basis of a photosensitization process. As it was previously mentioned, when the rhB/photcatalyst dispersion was irradiated with UV light, a small contribution to the photodegradation process was observed. This indicates that the true heterogeneous photocatalysis mechanism (c) takes place simultaneously with the photosensitization process (b), although in a minor scale. Under this scheme, the alkaline pH of the dispersion promotes a process where the charge separation in the semiconductor bands plays an important role in the photocatalytic activity of the material. The pathway degradation by heterogeneous photocatalysis can be described throughout the following equations: Due to the relatively low band gap of BiVO According to these ideas, it is possible to elucidate that the photochemical reaction mainly takes place by the light absorption of dye molecules, and to a lesser extent, by the excitation of BiVO BiVO We wish to thank Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León (UANL) for its invaluable support through the PAICYT 2007-2008 projects and CONACYT for the 81546 project support. We also want to thank Departamento de Ecomateriales y Energía, Facultad de Ingeniería Civil (UANL) for its assistance on the characterization of materials.