In this research, the separation of Li, Ni, and Co by solvent extraction was studied from synthetic Li-ion battery waste leachate. The purpose was to propose a process for producing all the metals with over 99.5% purities, as the purity demands for battery grade metals are high. Emphasis was also placed on obtaining pure Li raffinate in the early stage of the process, as societal interest in Li is growing rapidly. Thus, the purpose was to first extract Co and Ni selectively yielding pure Li raffinate, and consequently separating Co and Ni as pure products in the stripping stage. The equilibrium behavior of the separation system was studied by constructing the pH isotherms as well as loading and stripping isotherms. Bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) and (2-ethylhexyl)phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (PC-88A) were used as extractants, both as unmodified and modified with 5%v/v TOA or TBP. Based on the equilibrium results, bench-scale continuous counter-current separation experiments were designed and conducted using 1.0M Cyanex 272 modified with 5% v/v TOA. Co and Ni were loaded in two stages from the sulfate feed solution containing 2.8g/L of Li, 14.4g/L of Co, and 0.5g/L of Ni. In this step, over 99.6% yields for Co and Ni were achieved, giving 99.9% pure Li raffinate. However, 17–26% of Li was co-extracted, but efficient scrubbing with NiSO4 was designed with equilibrium experiments and demonstrated in continuous operation. In the stripping step, 99.5% pure aqueous Ni solution and 99.2% pure organic Co solution were obtained using two counter-current stages. Adding one more stage increased the Ni and Co purities to 99.7 and 99.6%, respectively. In addition to the high purities of the metals, the suggested process has fewer process steps compared to previously suggested flowsheets for similar fractionation.Li-ion batteries typically contain 2–15% Li, 15–30% Co, and up to 10% Ni After mechanical and possibly some other pretreatment, battery waste is usually leached with acid The solvent extraction fractionation of Co, Ni, and Li from H As The general approach in all the processes described in Organophosphorus reagents bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex In addition to the academic research literature, the methods for recovering valuable metals from battery waste by hydrometallurgy have been extensively patented. For example, in Sonu et al. In this research article, we propose a process in which all three valuable metals are produced with very high yields and purities (>99.5%). The battery manufacturers state that they prefer to use the purest raw materials available The novelty in this work lies in simplifying the process so that the whole multicomponent separation process could be done in a single loading-scrubbing-stripping solvent extraction circuit instead of having separate circuits for Co and Ni extractions. Moreover, none of the previously suggested processes ( Details of the chemicals used in the experiments are given in Synthetic aqueous feed solution for the experiments was made by dissolving the corresponding sulfate salts to purified water. The composition (Co 14 All metal analyses, both from the batch experiments and pilot runs, were carried out from 14% or 1 The effect of pH on the extraction of Co, Ni, and Li with Cyanex Loading isotherms of Co and Ni were constructed for the same four organic phases as the pH-isotherms. The reagents were pre-neutralized with NH To investigate Li scrubbing, an equilibrium study was done for Cyanex 272 modified with 5% TOA at two equilibrium pH values (i.e., 6.0 and 6.5). 0.3 Stripping isotherms were constructed for all four organic phases. The organic phases were prepared by extracting simulated sulfate leachate of Li-ion battery waste with a 1:1 phase ratio in a pH of 6.5 (Cyanex 272) and 7.0 (PC-88A), and thus the metal contents could be assumed to be similar to the scrubbing isotherms. This organic phase was mixed with phase ratios O/A 1:1, 1:1.5, 1:2, and 1:3. Acidities of the stripping solutions (0.025 Continuous counter-current solvent extraction for the fractionation of metals in Li-ion battery waste leachate was performed in bench-scale pilot equipment provided by SX Kinetics Inc. The same equipment has been previously used for studying purification of Li brine The temperatures and pH values of each mixing stage were monitored online. The pH control was done by pre-neutralization of the organic phase using aqueous ammonia (25%), or the dropwise addition of concentrated H The selective loading of Co and Ni to the organic phase, the scrubbing of Li, and the selective stripping of Ni were studied in separate experiments. Three runs were made to the loading step, one for the scrubbing, and five for the stripping. In addition, the scrubbing of co-extracted Li was studied with one continuous run. The extraction runs all had two counter-current stages, in the scrubbing run, one stage was used, while in two of the stripping runs three stages were used. The other varied run parameters were the phase ratio and the pH. The exact run parameters are given with the results in In all four studied organic phases, modified and unmodified 1 The previously described observations about the weaker extraction of metals in presence of TOA modifier are consistent with the literature. According to Suzuki et al. The known fact in the hydrometallurgical industry, that Cyanex 272 has better Co/Ni selectivity than the PC-88A, was confirmed with the current data ( In Another remarkable conclusion from the loading curves in As indicated from the pH isotherm data in To study the number of needed stages and phase ratio O/A, stripping isotherms for Ni with H Purpose of the McCabe-Thiele analysis shown in Unity was chosen as phase ratio for the McCabe-Thiele analysis in The purpose of the continuous counter-current experiments was to suggest an improved flowsheet for the previously given approach where the metals (Co and Ni) are recovered one by one, leaving Li to the raffinate. In this process, there is need for loading, scrubbing, and stripping steps in each metal’s recovery. In this work an approach, in which the fractionation of these three metals is achieved in a single process having loading, scrubbing, and two stripping steps, was explored ( Although the PC-88A had a higher loading capacity, Cyanex 272, modified with 5% TOA or 5%TBP, was chosen as the organic phase for the continuous counter-current experiments due to its superior Co/Ni selectivity. It was observed immediately in the continuous runs that without the modifier the operation is physically impossible. This is because the organic phase becomes very viscous, and consequently the phase disengagement is very poor without a modifier. On the other hand, a disadvantage of adding the modifier is lowered extraction capacity of the organic phase (see equilibrium results in Section In the first and second loading runs ( As expected, the extraction of Co to the organic phase was easy and practically complete in all the loading runs ( Based on the scrubbing isotherms presented in Section In total, four continuous counter-current bench-scale runs were made to study the selective stripping of Ni from the organic phase ( Based on the pH isotherms and stripping isotherms presented in Section Although the results of the two-stage runs were satisfactory, it was decided to test whether the three-stage operation mode would produce even better purities ( A solvent extraction process for the fractionation of Co, Ni, and Li from the sulfuric acid leachate of Li-ion battery waste was designed. The most suitable reagent, operating pH, phase ratio, and number of equilibrium stages were determined based on batch equilibrium experiments. The loading, scrubbing, and stripping steps of the process were verified by bench-scale continuous counter-current experiments. In the proposed process, Co and Ni are selectively extracted together, yielding 99.9% pure Li While Cyanex 272 was chosen as the extractant, PC-88A was found to be not significantly worse. It was shown that with Cyanex 272 undesired formation of a viscous organic phase can be eliminated by adding 5% v/v TOA as phase modifier. Two-stage extraction at pH of 6.8–7.1 with a phase ratio A/O B.Sc. Tommi Huhtanen, B.Sc. Marko Hirvelä, and B.Sc. Henri Vainio are acknowledged for their experimental assistance.