Numerous fruiting bodies of Mycena species were collected from reed-thatched houses in Northern Germany. The fungi were isolated via spore sowing, purified and then characterized in regard to their ligninolytic enzyme pattern. All fungal isolates were able to decolorize the anthraquinone dye Remazol Brilliant Blue R (RBBR) confirming a ligninolytic enzyme activity. In addition, various Mycena species degraded carboxymethyl cellulose and birch wood xylan to varying extents. The strains produced laccase and in some cases manganese peroxidase, which are considered to be key enzymes involved in lignin degradation. The addition of comminuted reed resulted partly in a considerable increase of the laccase activity in liquid cultures. In extensive long-term experiments on solid media with reed as substrate the Mycena species Mycena arcangeliana, Mycena epipterygia variation epipterygia, Mycena galopus variation leucogala and Mycena polygramma caused a significant weight loss of reed between 7.8 and 17.2 % within 70 d. Because of this, we believe that these Mycena species can be classified as reed-decomposing fungi that may affect the quality of reed roofs.The water reed Ampicillin, 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) diammonium salt (ABTS), benomyl, carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), Orange G, Remazol Brilliant Blue R (RBBR) and xylan from birch-spelt were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich Chemie GmbH (Steinheim, Germany). Experiments were carried out with the isolated Fruiting bodies were collected from reed-thatched houses with macroscopic visible fungal colonization in Mecklenburg–Western Pomerania between October 2011 and January 2012. After removing the stipes, pilei were stuck on the cover of MEA plates. For exclusion of bacterial growth MEA was supplemented with ampicillin (30 mg l The screening for ligninolytic, cellulolytic and hemicellulolytic enzymes on solid media is an effective method to classify the test fungi as white-rot or brown-rot fungi. The test system is based on the supplementation of specific model substances resembling the structure of lignin (RBBR, Orange G), cellulose (CMC) or hemicellulose (xylan from birch spelt). If the test fungi are capable of degrading the model substances, the cultivation media either decolorize (RBBR, Orange G) or clear after substrate specific staining (CMC, xylan). All plates were inoculated with one plug (Ø 1.1 cm) of 14 d MEA cultures and then incubated at 25 °C for 12 d. The screening for ligninolytic enzymes was carried out on nitrogen-limited basal medium (NLBM) according to Tests for the determination of the cellulolytic enzyme activity were performed on MEA containing 1% CMC. The visualization of cellulolytic enzymatic activity was achieved by floating the plates with Congo red solution (1 mg ml Xylanolytic enzyme activity was investigated on basal medium according to The enzymes laccase and manganese peroxidase are considered to be two of the major enzymes involved in lignin degradation. In order to determine the production of these ligninolytic enzymes plate screening tests on NLBM medium supplemented with either the laccase substrate ABTS or the manganese peroxidase substrate MnCl In addition to the qualitative indication of ligninolytic enzymes in the plate screening tests, the laccase activity was investigated quantitatively for its dependence on the addition of reed. For determination of laccase activity three plugs (Ø 1.1 cm) of 14 d MEA preparatory cultures were transferred to 40 ml basal medium ( In order to determine the ability of degrading reed, the strains were grown on NLBM with reed samples as nutrient source. 7 cm long internodal reed samples were dried for 2 h at 100 °C in a hot-air sterilizer. Then, the weight of the samples was determined (initial weight). After double sterilizing the segments within 24 h, samples were inoculated with test fungi on NLBM plates. Plates were incubated for 45 and 70 d at 25 °C. Subsequently, mycelia of the test fungi were manually removed from the reed stalks, which were afterwards dried for 4 h at 100 °C until weight constancy was reached (final weight; Hofmann et al., 2014 manuscript in preparation). Loss of weight (%) was calculated according to the formula below: Strains that caused >5% weight loss of the reed samples in the degradation test within 70 d were classified as reed decomposers. In the course of this study nine randomly selected thatched houses in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania with macroscopic visible fungal growth were checked for fungal fruiting bodies. Several fruiting bodies were found on the roofs of all buildings ( All fungal strains, except All Brown spots indicating the oxidation of MnCl All isolates were cellulolytic as they degraded CMC after 14 d incubation ( 8 out of 9 newly isolated In addition to the qualitative analysis of the laccase activity of the newly isolated fungi in terms of plate screening tests on solid media, a quantitative spectrophotometric determination of the laccase activity in liquid media with or without reed supplementation was carried out ( The addition of sterilized reed to the cultures led to increased laccase activities in 4 out of 6 After 14 d incubation laccase activity was only measured in 4 out of 6 control cultures ( In this study, we investigated the growth of fungi on thatched houses in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania in Northern Germany. Nine of the examined thatched roofs carried fruiting bodies of fungi. Interestingly, fruiting bodies of To fully understand the phenomenon of the microbial decay of thatched houses in Northern Germany it is insufficient to study only potentially reed degrading microorganisms. Thus, the reed quality and environmental influences such as temperature or pH fluctuations, humidity, insulation as well as anthropogenic input of nitrogen and phosphate which affect the fungal growth as well as the extent of reed degradation should be taken into consideration. We found out that In this study, fruiting bodies of species of the genus This work was supported by the We thank Prof. Dr. Robert Jack for providing language help.