Scheelite was successfully prepared by solid-state calcination synthesis using wolframite [(Fe,Mn)WO4] and calcium carbonate as materials in air atmosphere. The effects of processing parameters, such as calcination temperature, holding time and calcium carbonate dosage on conversion ratio of wolframite were investigated. The conversion of wolframite increased with increasing of temperature, holding time and calcium carbonate dosage. The results demonstrated that 97.58% of wolframite was converted to scheelite in 2h at temperature of 800°C under the condition of calcium carbonate stoichiometric ratio of 1.3, and the corresponding reaction products are scheelite, iron oxide and manganese dioxide.Tungsten minerals that occur in sufficient abundance to be of economic significance are wolframite [(Fe,Mn)WO In order to solve the problem of wastewater emission existing in current tungsten hydrometallurgical extraction approach, Jiangxi University of Science and Technology developed a new environmentally friendly technology of processing scheelite, known as “closed circuit hydrometallurgical extraction of tungsten from scheelite in ammonium invariable system” In this work, various operating conditions were studied in detail in order to select the optimized processing parameters. The wolframite used in the study was from Ganzhou in Jiangxi Province of China and was ground in a ball grinder. After crushing and grinding, the particle size of the ore was mainly distributed around 0.074 Synthesis of scheelite experiments were carried out in a muffle furnace under air atmosphere. The temperature was set at the predetermined value. When the temperature rose to the predetermined value, then the desired amount of wolframite and calcium carbonate were added into the furnace at the same time. After a desired time, the calcination product was taken out form the furnace, and then was analyzed by chemical method and characterized by X-ray powder diffraction. The respective mass fraction of wolframite and scheelite in the calcination product cannot accurately analyzed by phase analysis method (XRD). Based on the fact that scheelite can be completely decomposed (leaching yield 99.5%) with a mixture of ammonium phosphate and ammonia water under the conditions of stoichiometric ratio of ammonium phosphate 4.0, temperature 190 The effects of calcium carbonate dosage, calcination temperature, holding time on the conversion ratio of wolframite were carried out. To investigate the effect of calcium carbonate dosage on conversion ratio of wolframite, experiments were carried out under the conditions of stoichiometric ratio of CaCO To investigate the effect of calcination temperature on conversion ratio of wolframite, experiments were carried out in the range from 600 In order to study the effect of holding time on the conversion ratio of wolframite, experiments were carried out in the range from 0.5 Under the optimum calcination conditions (calcium carbonate stoichiometric ratio 1.3, calcination temperature 800 Synthesis of scheelite can be successfully prepared using wolframite and calcium carbonate by solid-state calcination synthesis. The conversion ratio of wolframite reached 97.58% under the optimum conditions of calcination temperature 800 This work was supported by a grant from the