The P-graph (process graph) framework is an effective tool for process-network synthesis (PNS). Here we extended it to multi-period operations. The efficacy of the P-graph methodology has been demonstrated by numerous applications. The unambiguous representation of processes and the availability of the axioms defining combinatorially feasible structures facilitates the development of efficient algorithms to determine maximal structures, solution structures, and optimal structure for processes. However, it is presumed that single-period operation prevails. It implies that the operating conditions and the load of each operating unit remain unchanged, i.e., steady-state operation. This is usually true for the chemical industry but often not in agriculture or where seasonal effects are important. The current work proposes a multi-period operation wherein the load of operating units varies from period to period to accommodate demand, assuming operating conditions remain steady in each period. A modeling technique is proposed to represent operating units in the multi-period operation. The different periods are connected by “fictitious” streams, which ensures, that the unit is sized properly.A process system aims at producing certain products from a set of raw materials through a sequence of processing steps which usually involve chemical and physical transformations. The major developments and trends of the past two and a half decades in process system engineering in general and process synthesis in particular have been comprehensively reviewed by Process synthesis is intended to design the basic structure of a process system. Nevertheless, a multitude of alternative feasible network structures are often able to produce the desired products from a process comprising multiple operating units, because of the combinatorial nature of how these operating units are assembled. Normally, process synthesis seeks the optimal network structure in terms of some objective function which can be cost, profit, revenue, and sustainability among others. The determination of the optimal network structure is most often referred to as process-network synthesis (PNS) to emphasize the fact that the operating units in a process system almost always give rise to a complex structure instead of a simple one. PNS, also referred to as flowsheet design, is a critical component of process system engineering. Its significance is attested by the numerous publications in the technical literature. Computer-aided flowsheet design methods are available ( The current work aims at extending process-network synthesis (PNS) using the P-graph (process graph) framework, (see, e.g., The P-graphs are capable of representing the network structure of a process system unambiguously. As illustrated in  Every demand is represented in the structure. A material represented in the structure is a raw material if and only if it is not an output from any operating unit represented in the structure. Every operating unit represented in the structure is defined in the synthesis problem. Any operating unit represented in the structure has at least one directed path leading to a product. If a material belongs to the structure, it must be an input to or output from at least one operating unit represented in the structure. An operating unit produces its output materials assuming that all of the input materials are present. An operating unit has structural as well as parametric properties. Thus, the input materials are consumed, and the output materials are produced according to the rates given in the arcs leading to and from the respective operating unit. The input and output materials, the aforementioned rates, and the cost function, tc, collectively define an operating unit. The total cost is the aggregation of the capital and operating cost. Both of them have a fix part and a proportional part. The capital cost has an additional parameter the payout period. Note that an operating unit may have upper and lower capacities. The maximum available raw materials may also be constrained, and the minimum rate of manufacturing of each product must be specified. Usually both products and raw materials have prices. The resulting MILP mathematical model is generated automatically from the structural model. It contains a continuous and a binary variable for each operating unit. The former signifies the capacity of the unit, the latter marks the existence of the same unit. The mathematical model ensures, that at any material node, the sum of the outgoing flows is equal to the sum of the incoming flows, i.e., the mass balance is obeyed. Another constraint makes sure that if an operating unit does not appear in a solution then the corresponding capacity variable should be zero. The mathematical model is capable of determining the n-best optimal solutions. The P-graph framework was developed originally for traditional chemical processes, manufacturing the desired products predominantly by resorting to continuous operations. Nevertheless, due to the versatility and flexibility of the P-graph framework, they have been deployed for a wide range of problems involving synthesis, e.g., separation-network synthesis ( Multi-period operation is totally unlike batch operation. The former deploys continuous-flow processing units, i.e., operating units, for which steady-state conditions can be maintained. In stark contrast, the latter deploys batch processing units, where the operation entails the execution of 3-step action involving feeding raw materials at the outset of operation, performing operation, and discharging products at the termination of operation. This 3-step action is repeatedly performed as often as necessary. Conventionally, a continuous chemical or allied process maintains steady-state operating conditions from the outset to the completion of any production run or session. Thus, it can be regarded as a single-period operation. As originally defined for P-graphs, any operating unit is presumed to function continuously with a full (100%) load in terms of the feed rate of raw materials throughout a single period: it is sized or scaled to meet the demand, also remaining invariant throughout the period. Due to the correspondence between the size and load of the unit, no distinction has been made between them; instead, the term, capacity, has been used. In other words, the capacity implies the capability of an operating unit to process sufficient feed to produce the product for meeting the demand in any specific time period, e.g., one year. Operation with unchanging load is usually observed for processes in the traditional chemical and allied industries, but tends to be not the case for processes involved in the agricultural or food industry due to the prevailing seasonal variations. If sufficient storage space is available, the input to and/or the output from an operating unit can be stored; as such, the rate of production from the unit can be maintained steady, rendering it possible to be operated continuously with a constant load. If not, various time periods need to be defined. The products manufactured may vary in amount from period to period. The types of raw materials, i.e., feeds, and products might also vary between periods. A motivational example is presented herein to illustrate the notion of multi-period operation. The example involves a single task, the peeling of 30  The cost data of the example are compactly expressed algebraically in the following equations; For ease of comparison, the single-period operation is considered first. The single-period operation involves only one period, i.e., Consequently, In contrast to the single-period operation, the multi-period operation involves 3 periods of 5, 5, and 2 months as depicted in Any Hence, The multi-period operation is more expensive than the single period one 170 In the previous section the multi-period operation of an operating unit has been investigated, and the question is how to represent this unit in the P-graph framework. Surprisingly, the answer is not in the extension of the framework with completely new components but in the modeling of the multi-period unit with traditional operating units. First, three distinct operating units, O The remaining task is to ensure that the capacity of the equipment is the same as the largest of the capacities of the operations. As Let us apply this technique to the apple peeler, Practically, the operations and the physical realization of a multi-period unit have been separated. The operating cost of the multi-period unit is associated with the operations; the capital cost is associated with the equipment. Eq. With the demands and the representations of the apple peeler, E, and its manifestations in the three periods, O In summary, the P-graph framework has been shown to have the flexibility to represent unsteady state, i.e., multi period, operations as sequence on steady state operations, each having a characteristic period of arbitrary length. These steady state operations are then connected to each other by “fictitious” streams. The fact that the period of each steady state operation can be varied as needed makes it possible to represent in principle any unsteady state operation, even ones far from steady state by making the periods arbitrarily small. St. Margarethen is a small town in Burgenland, Austria. The town, as the rest of Austria, considers environmental protection seriously. Thus, the use of alternative energy sources are carefully weighted ( Corn cannot be stored for long because it spoils quickly. As a result, the demand for corn processing changes throughout the year. Thus, a multi-period design method is needed which can take this into account. The PNS framework with the proposed representation for multi-period operation is such a method. The first step in the solution process is information gathering where available resources, required products, and available operating units are identified together with their parameters. This is followed by a decision about the time periods. In this case, three time periods are defined, one for winter, one for summer, and one for the corn harvest (termed the corn period). The lengths of the first two periods are 3600 One important issue when sizing equipment is that it can often have a minimum operating capacity such that operation below this limit is impractical. For instance, centrifugal pumps are ineffective below a certain minimum flowrate. This becomes important in the case of unsteady state operations because a particular unit could in principle be operating below its minimum capacity during certain periods. This issue was explored in The available units, materials, and their connections are represented in The first multi-period unit is a biogas plant which provides heat (i_heat_corn, i_heat_summer, i_heat_winter) by burning the biogas. The biogas production is considered as part of the plant, thus, it does not appear as a separate raw material. This multi-period unit is modeled with four regular units (one for the equipment and three for the operations in the different time periods) as described in the previous section. Some plants in the area provide residual heat (r_heat_corn, r_heat_summer, r_heat_winter), which are available as raw materials for the system. These raw materials are connected to i_heat_corn, i_heat_summer, and i_heat_winter through converter units. A converter unit, e.g., heat_conv_summer, does not create any real processing step; it is a modeling tool. In this case, r_heat_summer which is a raw material is added to i_heat_summer which is an intermediate through this unit. Now i_heat_summer has two possible sources: the biogas plant and leftover heat from another plant. Similar converter units are used to connect the usual forest wood, r_forest_wood, and the fast growing wood, fast_growing_wood, to material wood, i_wood. The converter units are not displayed in Both corn, r_corn_wet, and wood, i_wood, have to be dried. The drying of the corn is more important, thus, the corn period is dedicated only to this task. Wood can be dried in the summer and the winter periods. Consequently, the dryer has to be treated as a multi-period unit. Actually, there are two potential dryers. One is already installed, and it has no additional investment cost. The other one is needed only if the first one is not enough. In practice, one cannot buy a dryer unit of arbitrary size. A simple dryer unit costs 170,000 In summary, the solution of the problem with the ABB algorithm resulted in objective value 366,195 The concept of the multi-period operation of an operating unit in PNS problems has been introduced, and a method to represent it within the P-graph framework has been developed. The method basically represents multi-period, i.e., unsteady state, operations as sequence of steady state operations connected by “fictitious” streams. This concept is important because often in practice raw materials cannot be stored indefinitely or the majority of the product is required in a certain time period. Consequently, a process-network is needed in which the load of the operating units can change from period to period. A modeling technique has been proposed to represent multi-period units. The main idea is to differentiate the operations of a multi-period unit in the different time periods, and the equipment of the same multi-period unit. The investment cost is associated to the equipment and the operating cost is associated to the operations. It is ensured that equipment has been sized properly, i.e., the multi-period unit can operate properly in each period including the peak period. The elegance in this modeling technique is that the parts of the multi-period unit are represented by traditional operating units. The representation and operation of the multi-period units have been explained through examples, the advantages and drawbacks of this representation have been detailed. The method has been applied to a case study. An important future extension of the theory presented here is to modeling continuously changing operations, e.g. batch operations. In this case the operating profile can change more or less continuously, but this can be easily treated as series of suitable small periods each of which can be assumed to be a steady state. The reasons for the significance of this work are twofold. First, prior to this work, the P-graph methodology was not applicable to multi-period operations. Hence, there are no previous P-graph results to compare against. Second, the introduction of the multi-period operation made it possible to apply the P-graph framework the agriculture and renewable production, which are increasingly important topics. We acknowledge the financial support of the This research was realized in the frames of TÁMOP 4.2.4. A/2-11-1-2012-0001 “National Excellence Program – Elaborating and operating an inland student and researcher personal support system” The project was subsidized by the European Union and co-financed by the European Social Fund. The authors acknowledge the help with the economic data of the case study from Michael Narodoslawsky and his team at the Technical University of Graz. The authors acknowledge the continued contribution with the development of the P-graph methodology from Professor L. T. Fan.