The aqueous electrophoretic deposition (EPD) of a diamond/diamond laminate with two alternating grades of diamond was investigated. Diamond particles of average particle size 0.5μm and 2μm were deposited in an alternating manner onto tungsten carbide substrate. The layered diamond deposit was sintered with the carbide substrate in a high-pressure, high-temperature press. The sintered deposit was examined for evidence of alternating residual stresses. Differences of cobalt content in the 0.5 and 2μm layers were observed by image analysis. The sintered diamond laminate demonstrated only minimal crack deflection during three-point bending.The hardness, wear resistance and thermal conductivity properties of polycrystalline diamond (PCD) have made the material attractive in cutting, mining and oil drilling applications. It is known that the wear resistance of PCD composites is inversely proportional to the particle size of the diamond powder which is to be sintered. Meanwhile, fracture toughness increases with increasing grain size It is known that layered PCD shows an increase in fracture toughness Limited literature exists on the electrophoretic deposition of diamond. Zhitomirsky To date, no literature data could be found on the use of EPD as a shaping technique to create a multi-layered diamond deposit. Similarly, no data exists on the sintering of diamond deposits obtained through EPD. Thus the focus of this project was to determine if a layered diamond structure could be made using EPD and whether the sintered laminate showed crack deflection during fracture. In laminates, the increase in toughness usually arises from the incorporation of weak interlayers Diamond powders of average particle size 0.5 Zeta-potential measurements performed on the 0.5 The laminate deposit was made by consecutive deposition. The electrodes were submerged into suspensions D1 and D2 in an alternating manner until the desired number of layers was achieved. The deposition rate for the diamond laminate made, shown in The laminate was sintered in a high-pressure, high-temperature press. SEM pictures of the sintered, cut and polished laminate are shown in The laminate sample was notched and subjected to 3-point bending until failure ( Interestingly, crack deflection was found for a pre-existing crack. Due to the absence of cobalt in the crack, it can be assumed that it had developed during the cooling stage of the sintering cycle. This crack was found at the top of the sample opposite the carbide–diamond interface. Thus, it was sufficiently far from the compressive forces of the carbide substrate to show crack deflection. Similar to the slight deflection seen in Comparative data of layered PCD is limited. Griffin et al. Diamond/diamond laminates with two alternating grades of diamond were electrophoretically deposited onto tungsten carbide substrates using an aqueous suspension. The layered diamond deposit was successfully sintered with the carbide substrate. Differences of cobalt content in the 0.5 and 2 The authors would like to thank the