Many experimental results have demonstrated the apparent discrepancy of a rock material between its flexural tensile strength measured using various bending methods and its tensile strength measured using direct tension method or Brazil disc (BD) method. To understand the physical mechanism for such discrepancy, numerical simulation using the realistic failure process analysis (RFPA) is carried out in this work to simulate the tensile failure of heterogeneous rocks. Direct tension and semi-circular bend (SCB) tests are simulated using RFPA for rock materials with different levels of inhomogeneity, which is characterized by the homogeneity index of the Weibull distribution used in RFPA. The numerical results show that the discrepancy in the tensile strength values is caused by the inhomogeneity of the rock material. Furthermore, non-local failure criterion is adopted to calculate the characteristic length of the rock materials used in the simulation. It is shown that below a certain value of the homogeneity index, both the characteristic length and discrepancy between two types of tensile strengths of rock decrease with increase of the homogeneity index up to a critical value, at which the discrepancy disappears and the rock material is essentially homogeneous.As a typical brittle material, rock has a much lower tensile strength in comparison with its compressive strength ( As an important mechanical property, the tensile strength of rocks can be measured in laboratory by various direct and indirect methods ( It is noted that the failure of specimens for SCB and direct tension tests is both caused by the tensile stress. However, the flexural tensile strength from the SCB method is higher than the tensile strength from the direct tension and BD methods for the same material under the same loading rate ( To understand the discrepancy between the rock tensile strengths from direct and indirect tension tests, the non-local failure model has been used ( Rock has been recognized as a heterogeneous material for a long term. To analyze the statistical variation in the bulk failure strength of heterogeneous materials, Briefly, RFPA is a finite element code used to model the observed evolution of damage and induced seismicity by the progressive failure. In RFPA, the collapse in quasi-brittle materials due to the progressive failure allows linear elastic elements to fail in a brittle manner as long as their peak strengths are reached ( Microscopically, rock is a grain-scale heterogeneous material with various minerals. In RFPA, the solid or structure is assumed to be composed of many mesoscopic elements with the same size. In order that the continuum mechanics and linear elastic finite element method (FEM) can be used to simulate the failure process of rocks involved in nonlinear and discontinuum mechanics, the Weibull probability function is introduced to characterize the local failure strength in RFPA ( Mathematically, the parameter In RFPA, it is assumed that the material constitutive response is brittle and nonlinear. The brittle response here means that the material breaks without significant plastic deformation at failure. The element fails when the stress exceeds its strength, resulting in a microcrack in the material. The constitutive model used in RFPA is illustrated in When the damage accumulates to a certain value, rock failure occurs ( In numerical simulation of direct tension test using RFPA, a cylinder rock specimen with 50 mm in diameter and 100 mm in length was employed (  As seen in SCB test was conducted to obtain the flexural tensile strength of various materials ( The direction of load In this study, As shown in  The simulation results are plotted in The above result indicates that the microscopic properties of material ( The non-local fracture criteria can be generally expressed as follows ( Some general forms of the most popular non-local fracture criteria for 2D cases were given by If the maximum value of This criterion has been used to reconcile the difference between static flexural tensile strength and uniaxial tensile tests ( According to Eq. We also calculated the flexural tensile test using a linear elastic model as we did in the analysis for real laboratory tests. The tensile stress gradient along the potential fracture path (i.e. the loading axis through The values of In order to further understand the correlation between  The relationship between the inhomogeneity index and the material characteristic length ( The three terms in Eq. According to Eqs.  In this paper, RFPA was used to investigate the discrepancy between the rock flexural and direct tensile strengths. The Weibull distribution was applied in the numerical simulation and the parameter The numerical results showed that when the material is inhomogeneous or heterogeneous, the experimentally observed discrepancy between the flexural and the direct tensile strength was reproduced. Therefore, this discrepancy was induced by the heterogeneity of the rock material. This discrepancy disappeared with the homogeneity index Furthermore, the non-local fracture criterion used to explain the difference between these two tensile strengths was studied using the data from the numerical experiments. The relationship between the homogeneous index and characteristic length was established and three stages were proposed for such relationship. The material characteristic length can be viewed as an indirect measure of the material inhomogeneity according to this one-to-one relationship. This relationship thus provided a physical meaning for the homogenous index in the Weibull distribution for heterogeneous materials. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This work was supported by the