Retinoic acid (RA), the main active metabolite of vitamin A, regulates vertebrate morphogenesis through signaling pathways not yet fully understood. Such process involves the specific activation of retinoic acid and retinoid X receptors (RARs and RXRs), which are nuclear receptors of the steroid/thyroid hormone receptor superfamily. Teleost fish are suitable models to study vertebrate development, such as skeletogenesis. Cell systems capable of in vitro mineralization have been developed for several fish species and may provide new insights into the specific cellular and molecular events related to vitamin A activity in bone, complementary to in vivo studies. This work aims at investigating the in vitro effects of RA (0.5 and 12.5μM) on proliferation, differentiation and extracellular matrix (ECM) mineralization of two gilthead seabream bone-derived cell lines (VSa13 and VSa16), and at identifying molecular targets of its action through gene expression analysis. RA induced phenotypic changes and cellular proliferation was inhibited in both cell lines in a cell type-dependent manner (36–59% in VSa13 and 17–46% in VSa16 cells). While RA stimulated mineral deposition in VSa13 cell cultures (50–62% stimulation), it inhibited the mineralization of extracellular matrix in VSa16 cells (11–57% inhibition). Expression of hormone receptor genes (rars and rxrs), and extracellular matrix-related genes such as matrix and bone Gla proteins (mgp and bglap), osteopontin (spp1) and type I collagen (col1a1) were differentially regulated upon exposure to RA in proliferating, differentiating and mineralizing cultures of VSa13 and VSa16 cells. Altogether, our results show: (i) RA affects proliferative and mineralogenic activities in two fish skeletal cell types and (ii) that during phenotype transitions, specific RA nuclear receptors and bone-related genes are differentially expressed in a cell type-dependent manner.Retinoic acid (RA), the main active metabolite of vitamin A (VA), plays a crucial role in morphogenesis, cellular differentiation and proliferation processes Despite numerous studies using mammalian systems, cellular and molecular processes governing bone and cartilage homeostasis in vertebrates are still not fully understood and new models have been sought. Teleost fish are suitable models for studying vertebrate skeletogenesis for both comparative Expression of steroid/thyroid hormone receptors RARs and RXRs is ubiquitous RA may also have a direct effect on fish skeletogenesis through the activation of RARs and RXRs in skeletal cells. To test this hypothesis and get new insights into the underlying mechanisms of RA action in bone, we investigated the effects of RA on cell proliferation, differentiation and mineralization using two skeletal cell lines; one chondrocyte-like (VSa13) and another osteoblast-like (VSa16), developed from the vertebra of the gilthead seabream ( Gilthead seabream VSa13 and VSa16 cell lines were cultured at 33 Retinoic acid effects on bone-derived cell lines VSa13 and VSa16 were assessed through the supplementation of all- CellTiter 96 non-radioactive proliferation assay kit (Promega) was used to determine toxic and proliferative effects of RA on VSa13 and VSa16 cells. For cytotoxicity assay, cells were grown to confluence in 96-well plates and then treated with 0, 0.1, 0.5, 2.5, 12.5, 62.5 and 312.5 ECM mineralization was induced in confluent cell cultures grown in 24-well plates by supplementing culture medium with 50 Total RNA was extracted from VSa13 and VSa16 cell cultures as described by Cell proliferation and extracellular matrix mineralization are the mean values of at least 6 and 4 independent assays, respectively. qPCR values are the mean of at least 3 independent assays run in triplicate. Data were checked for normality (Kolmogorov–Smirnov test) and homoscedasticity of variance (Bartlett's test). Gene expression data that did not exhibit a normal and/or equal variance were In order to evaluate how RA affects phenotypic transitions in VSa13 and VSa16 cells, cell proliferation was assessed along 12 days of culture, where cells were not confluent at the start of the trial and reaching full confluence at the end (12 days after). In contrast, cell differentiation process took place during the first week ( Cytotoxicity tests revealed that RA concentrations higher than 12.5 Relative gene expression in vehicle-treated cells was not significantly different from that in untreated cells (data not shown), therefore only vehicle data are presented. In VSa13 cells, while Analysis of ECM related genes revealed that, VSa13 and VSa16 showed different gene expression profiles along cell differentiation (after 1 week of mineralization induction) and mineralization (3.5 weeks after mineralization induction; Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2). In brief, and regarding RA nuclear receptors (Supplementary Fig. 1), while In contrast, ECM mineralization-related genes exhibited bigger gene expression fold changes along differentiation and mineralization processes (Supplementary Fig. 2). In VSa13 cells, RA (at 12.5 Expression patterns of Despite numerous studies using mammalian systems, cellular and molecular processes governing bone and cartilage homeostasis in vertebrates are still not fully understood and new models have been sought. Recently, fish have emerged as a suitable model and a promising alternative to the more complex mammalian systems to study vertebrate development (reviewed by Levels of cytotoxicity associated with RA in seabream cell lines were in accordance with their reported teratogenicity and membranolitic capacities in mammals In agreement with While reduced proliferation of VSa13 and VSa16 cells upon RA treatment is in contradiction with data reported in chick chondrocyte culture by Regarding RA treatments during ECM mineralization, opposite effects have been observed in VSa13 and VSa16, two cell lines that were previously associated with chondrocyte and osteoblast phenotypes, respectively In the present study, gene expression profiles of the molecular players (RA nuclear receptors and ECM-encoding genes) analyzed under control conditions (cells not treated with RA), further confirmed that VSa13 and VSa16 are indeed different skeletal cell lines, already suggested in their previous characterization work RA modulates gene transcription by binding, through the nuclear receptors RARs and RXRs, to RARE or non-RARE binding sites Available RXRs are known to act as silent partners in heterodimers with RARs In teleost fish, RXRβ plays ubiquitous roles in early development Present results have demonstrated an effect on the expression of Although broad physiological roles in the whole organism have been recently described for osteocalcin (BGLAP) It has been proposed that osteopontin (SPP1) is also involved in the modulation of hydroxyapatite crystallization Collagen accounts for approximately 90% of the ECM proteins in skeletal tissues. The presence of a RARE in the This work highlights the suitability of fish mineralogenic cell lines VSa13 and VSa16 to identify molecular pathways and related cellular events involved in proliferation, differentiation and ECM mineralization under the control of RA; and a complementary tool to We would like to express our gratitude to Karl B. Andree for their enriched English correction performed on this manuscript. This work was partially funded by grant Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: