Few publications focus on the influence of hydrophobic minerals such as graphite or coal on entrainment behaviour of hydrophilic gangue, although they coexist with one another in flotation pulp. This paper presented an experimental study on entrainment behaviour of sericite in the absence and presence of hydrophobic microcrystalline graphite, and explained the poor flotation selectivity of microcrystalline graphite ore.
                  For sericite and microcrystalline graphite single mineral, batch flotation tests and contact angle measurements were conducted, the results indicated that hydrophilic sericite was easy to entrain into concentrate and this process was strongly affected by its particle size; the particle size and solid concentration of hydrophobic graphite intensely affected water recovery of concentrate. Batch flotation tests of artificial mixtures composed of sericite and microcrystalline graphite were also carried out. The results indicated that the particle size and concentration of hydrophobic graphite significantly affected the recovery of water, the entrainment factor of sericite, and the recovery of sericite in concentrate. The serious entrainment or entrapment of sericite in the presence of hydrophobic microcrystalline graphite leads to poor selectivity in microcrystalline graphite ore flotation.Natural graphite is found in three commercial varieties: crystalline flake, microcrystalline or amorphous, and crystalline vein or lump ( Sericite is one of the main gangue minerals in microcrystalline graphite ore, it is also the main contaminant of flotation concentrate (FC The separation efficiency between the valuable mineral and fully liberated and dispersed gangue is dependent on the degree of entrainment ( In order to investigate the entrainment behaviour of sericite in the absence of graphite and the effect of hydrophobic microcrystalline graphite on water recovery, batch flotation tests and contact angle measurements of single minerals were carried out. To study the effect of hydrophobic microcrystalline graphite on the water recovery and entrainment factor of sericite, batch flotation tests of artificial mixtures composed of sericite and microcrystalline graphite were also carried out. In the end, the poor flotation selectivity of microcrystalline graphite ore was explained. The sericite single mineral sample was obtained from Xiangyang city in Hubei province, China. Firstly, large pieces of sericite with high purity were picked out, and then crushed to − Microcrystalline graphite single mineral sample was obtained from Lutang Graphite Mine of South Graphite CO., LTD, in Beihu District, Chenzhou City, Hunan Province, Lutang Graphite Mine is the richest reserve of microcrystalline graphite in China. It was processed by the same method as sericite. According to the standard method (GB/T 212-2008) in China, the proximate analysis (volatile matter, fixed carbon, and ash) of microcrystalline graphite single mineral was done in the Changsha Research Institute of Mining and Metallurgy in Hunan Province, China. The air dried basis volatile matter (V The kerosene and emulsifier (OP-10) with analytical grade used in those experiments were purchased from Kermel Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd in China. The collector emulsified kerosene was prepared at a concentration of 1 Single mineral flotation tests of sericite and microcrystalline graphite were conducted in an XFD-type laboratory flotation machine (1.0 The crystalline structure and mineral composition of single mineral samples were determined by X-ray diffraction using a Philips X' Pert Pro Alpha 1 diffract meter, with Cu Kα radiation (λ The assessments of wettability of single minerals were carried out on GBX MiniLab ILMS. The assessment of wettability of blocky single mineral was carried out by measurement of the advancing contact angle of block at room temperature, based on measurement of the height h of a large water drop on the polished surface of block. The contact angle of powder single mineral was measured using the Washburn technique ( To determination of the entrainment of sericite in the presence of hydrophobic graphite, batch flotation tests of artificial mixtures composed of sericite and microcrystalline graphite particles were carried out. Based on the big difference in floatability between hydrophobic graphite and hydrophilic sericite, when all of the microcrystalline graphite was recovered into concentrate, the recovery of sericite could be determined. To investigate the effect of graphite concentration on the entrainment of sericite, the particle size of artificial mixtures was −  the water recovery in concentrate (%); the weight of unused tap water (g); the weight of tap water left (g); the wet weight of plastic basin with concentrate (g); the dry weight of plastic basin with concentrate (g). the recovery of sericite in graphite concentrate (%); the dry weight of tailing (g); the dry weight of sericite in artificial mixture feed (g). the degree of entrainment (entrainment factor)of sericite. The single minerals were subjected to wet sieving (− The cumulative yields of − Froth flotation is a process of separating valuable minerals from gangues by taking advantage of difference in their surface wettability. In order to assess the wettability of sericite and microcrystalline graphite, the contact angles of single minerals were measured. The results were shown in The average contact angle of sericite powder was 16.78°, and that of sericite block was 16.58°, suggesting that it was a hydrophilic mineral, which agreed with the result of The effect of kerosene dosage on the wettability of sericite and microcrystalline graphite powder was shown in To investigate the entrainment behaviour of sericite in absence of hydrophobic microcrystalline graphite, batch flotation tests of sericite single mineral were conducted. Experimentally it has been found that entrainment is a strong function of particle size ( In this section, no kerosene was added, concentration of MIBC was fixed at 10 Particle size of sericite also affected the recovery of water, the results in A linear relationship was observed between the recovery of water and the entrainment of sericite. Hydrophobic minerals significantly influence the foam structure and the recovery of water in concentrate ( The concentration of microcrystalline graphite was fixed at 5%, the influence of particle size on the recovery of microcrystalline graphite and water was investigated (given in Pulp concentration is a major operation parameter in flotation and in this section, the relationship between concentration of hydrophobic graphite and water recovery was studied, with the size fraction of graphite being fixed at − To determine the effect of hydrophobic microcrystalline graphite on the entrainment behaviour of sericite, batch flotation tests of artificial mixtures were carried out. To determine the effect of concentration of hydrophobic microcrystalline graphite on the entrainment behaviour of sericite, batch flotation tests of artificial mixtures were carried out. The results were shown in The recovery of water was in direct proportion to the concentration of graphite. Compared the water recovery in artificial mixture flotation with that in graphite single mineral flotation (given in The concentration of graphite strongly affected not only the recovery of water, but also the entrainment factor of sericite, which was shown in Interestingly, the values of entrainment factor of sericite in artificial mixture flotation were 1.04 (graphite concentration: 10%), 1.16 (graphite concentration: 15%), and 1.24 (graphite concentration: 20%), respectively, all of them being greater than one. The result was similar with that of Bo Wang who studied the behaviour of mineral matter in fine coal flotation using saline water, and found that the calculated ash e With increasing of concentration of graphite, both water recovery and entrainment factor of sericite significantly increased, thus, the amount of sericite reported into concentration by entrainment or entrapment sharply increased. Similar results could be found in the publication of Similar in graphite single mineral flotation, the water recovery in artificial mixture flotation was significantly influenced by particle size of microcrystalline graphite (given in The degree of entrainment of sericite was a strong function of particle size; it depended on not only the particle size of sericite, but also the particle size of hydrophobic microcrystalline graphite. In batch flotation tests of sericite single mineral, for − Particle size of microcrystalline graphite strongly affected the recovery of sericite into concentrate. The results were shown in In short, the particle size of hydrophobic graphite particles strongly affected the froth structure, the water recovery in concentrate, the entrainment factor of sericite, and the recovery of sericite in artificial mixture flotation. To investigate the effect of entrainment of sericite on flotation selectivity of microcrystalline graphite, batch flotation tests of artificial mixture composed of sericite and microcrystalline graphite particles were carried out. For sericite and microcrystalline graphite, the same size fraction was chosen. The concentrations of sericite and graphite were 2.5% and 15%, respectively. The results were revealed in For the purpose of identifying the effect of sericite's entrainment on the enrichment ratio E Equivalent FC Concentration of microcrystalline graphite in pulp, wt.%; Concentration of sericite in pulp, wt.%. In this section, FC The grade of concentrate in artificial mixture flotation, wt.%; The grade of feed in artificial mixture flotation, wt.%; Equivalent FC The enrichment ratio in artificial mixture flotation; The recovery of sericite, %. In the equation, (100 For − In order to liberate microcrystalline graphite from gangue minerals, the commercial microcrystalline graphite ore was usually ground to more than 90% or even 100% pass through − To investigate the entrainment behaviour of sericite in absence and presence of hydrophobic microcrystalline graphite, and explain the poor flotation selectivity of microcrystalline graphite, batch flotation experiments of single mineral and artificial mixtures of microcrystalline graphite–sericite, as well as contact angle measurements were conducted. In batch flotation tests of single mineral, sericite was easy to recovery by entrainment because it is readily to finely grind, the particle size of sericite affected not only the recovery of water, but also the e In batch flotation of artificial mixtures, the particle size and concentration of hydrophobic graphite significantly affected the recovery of water, the entrainment factor of sericite, the recovery of sericite in graphite concentrate. The results indicated that sericite could easily report into concentrate by entrainment or entrapment with the aid of hydrophobic microcrystalline graphite. Entrainment of sericite had a significant impact on the selectivity of microcrystalline graphite in the batch flotation tests. As the particle size of the artificial mixtures was reduced, the enrichment ratio was sharply decreased because of the increased entrainment of sericite. When the particle size of sericite and microcrystalline graphite was − The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the