Soil food webs are mainly based on three primary carbon (C) sources: root exudates, litter, and recalcitrant soil organic matter (SOM). These C sources vary in their availability and accessibility to soil organisms, which could lead to different pathways in soil food webs. The presence of three C isotopes (12C, 13C and 14C) offers an unique opportunity to investigate all three C sources simultaneously. In a microcosm experiment we studied the effect of food web complexity on the utilization of the three carbon sources. We choose an incomplete three factorial design with (i) living plants, (ii) litter and (iii) food web complexity. The most complex food web consisted of autochthonous microorganisms, nematodes, collembola, predatory mites, endogeic and anecic earthworms. We traced C from all three sources in soil, in CO2 efflux and in individual organism groups by using maize grown on soil developed under C3 vegetation and application of 14C labelled ryegrass shoots as a litter layer. The presence of living plants had a much greater effect on C pathways than food web complexity. Litter decomposition, measured as 14CO2 efflux, was decreased in the presence of living plants from 71% to 33%. However, living plants increased the incorporation of litter C into microbial biomass and arrested carbon in the litter layer and in the upper soil layer. The only significant effect of food web complexity was on the litter C distribution in the soil layers. In treatments with fungivorous microarthropods (Collembola) the incorporation of litter carbon into mineral soil was reduced. Root exudates as C source were passed through rhizosphere microorganisms to the predator level (at least to the third trophic level). We conclude that living plants strongly affected C flows, directly by being a source of additional C, and indirectly by modifying the existing C flows within the food web including CO2 efflux from the soil and litter decomposition.Primary production of plants is the main carbon (C) input to the soil ( Based on their importance for utilisation by soil microorganisms, these three C sources can be ordered as follows: root exudates, litter, and SOM ( Soil microorganisms are the major primary decomposers and the nutritional basis for the entire soil food web ( In model food web systems, the litter based C channel seems to be the most important ( The importance of the root carbon channel is often underestimated, possibly because it is more difficult to study experimentally compared to the leaf litter channel. The root carbon channel may be more important for endogeic earthworms ( The third C channel is the recalcitrant organic matter in soil. Due to its recalcitrance based on predominance of high molecular weight substances and their binding on clay minerals and sesquioxides it is hardly available for microorganisms. However, many studies have shown that soil microorganisms (bacteria or fungi) slowly decompose SOM with rates of 0.1 to 2% per year (review in Previous studies have shown that food webs with increasing complexity may differently influence C fluxes (e.g. Three different C isotopes: Therefore, our objective in this study was to trace C from three sources having different availability in the food web. This is especially important, since the presence of additional C sources may strongly shift the utilization of C from other sources and their pathways through the various food web levels. The soil was sampled from the Ap horizon of a loamy Haplic Luvisol (long-term field experimental station Karlshof of Hohenheim University). The soil was originated from loess, it contains no CaCO Maize ( Microcosms were established in gas tight plastic vessels (Polycarbonate filtration device “CombiSart”, volume 250 The NaOH traps were exchanged every forth day. At the same time new air was supplied to microcosms to avoid anoxic conditions. The experiment lasted 30 days after addition of litter and soil organisms, and was terminated because roots occupied almost the whole microcosms. The effects of three factors were investigated: (1) presence of a growing plant; (2) presence of litter; and (3) food web complexity in an incomplete factorial design with three replicates for each treatment. The first factor, presence of a growing plant, was investigated by comparison of unplanted soil with soil planted with maize ( Food web complexity was managed by addition of different organisms in order to establish model communities at four levels of complexity: No addition of organisms: autochthonous microflora and microfauna only. Addition of bacteriovorous nematodes ( Treatment 1 plus addition of predatory mites ( Treatment 2 plus addition of an anecic earthworm ( In some microcosms, During the experiment, the CO After the experiment was terminated, we carefully cut off the maize shoots at the soil surface level. Remaining The remaining soil in the vessels was vertically divided into two parts: one was for extraction of soil fauna, the other for analysis of organic C, δ The other soil fauna was extracted by two methods: Nematodes from a subsample of 40 Microbial biomass was determined by the fumigation extraction method ( The The activity of  The test design was three factorial (plant, litter, and food web complexity). For some dependent variables (CO Microbial biomass in the microcosms and CO In treatments with litter, we traced After removing the residues of A considerable amount of In summary, the pathways of litter C as estimated by The general effect of food web complexity on litter C in CO In comparison to the strong effect of maize plants to litter C pathway, the effect of food web complexity was more subtle. Faunal activity distributed the litter-derived carbon from the surface to deeper soil layers, whereas the presence of plants arrested the litter-derived carbon in the upper soil. The carbon from root exudates (with C Carbon from root exudates appeared in bacteriovorous nematodes and, with an only slightly weaker signal, in the omnivorous predatory mite. Despite the low resolution of the In our microcosm experiment, we demonstrated that the presence of a growing plant had major effects on carbon pathways in the system. The effect of food web complexity was of minor importance. The fact that plants increased the microbial activity and biomass is well known from laboratory and field studies ( Our experiment revealed an important effect of a growing maize plant on belowground C transformation. Plants enhanced CO The results support the concept of basically separated C channels: the root exudate channel reacted within 4 weeks to the growing plant dramatically: both respiration and biomass was increased; whereas there was no positive effect on litter degradation. The litter channel, on the other hand, was not closely connected to the plant. Those microorganisms that benefited from the rhizosphere effect, mainly bacteria, were not involved in litter decomposition. Microorganisms (presumably fungi, the slow decomposers) incorporated litter-derived C but had a low turnover rate and did not mineralise it during the experiment. In contrast to this finding, long-term field studies showed a stimulating effect of rhizosphere activity on litter decomposition in forest soils ( The amount of litter-derived carbon incorporated in soil organic matter was low, both in the presence and absence of plants, but was almost 4 times more in the former. This means that the elevated microbial biomass processed more litter-derived carbon to the long term storage in the soil organic matter. In contrast to the beneficial effects of anecic earthworms on CO The food web complexity level that contained bacteriovorous nematodes, mainly fungivorous collembola, predatory mites, and endogeic earthworms had one significant effect on the vertical distribution of litter-derived C in the soil. In the food web complexity treatment we could again observe the separation of the litter channel. The litter channel is dominated by fungi and fungi interacted positively with the grazing microarthropods in the second complexity level. This positive effect was compensated by anecic earthworms that disrupt fungal hyphae nets. We observed higher δ Fungal hyphae could also incorporate root derived C ( In a 4 weeks experiment simulating agricultural system with three different C sources and 4 complexity levels of the belowground food web, we demonstrated that there were two factors mostly responsible for carbon pathways in the soil: plants and anecic earthworms. Both had beneficial effects on microorganisms and increased sequestration of litter-derived carbon in the soil system, mainly in microbial biomass. Food web complexity We thank Annemarie Kissling for providing large numbers of nematodes from laboratory cultures. Monika Segl organized the measurements of