The efficiency of copper leaching is improved by bacteria attached to chalcopyrite. Therefore, the study of the attachment mechanism to control leaching is important. The adhesion of three species of leaching microorganisms including Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans and Leptospirillum ferrooxidans to chalcopyrite was investigated by using atomic force microscopy (AFM). The forces were measured with tip-immobilized cells approached to and retracted from the mineral. The results show that both the surface charge and the hydrophobicity of bacteria cells influence the adhesion force. Furthermore, the adhesion force decreased in case the extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) had been removed. In addition, the data indicate that the amount of attached cells increased with increasing adhesion force.It is difficult and expensive to extract copper through chalcopyrite by using traditional methods because it is often associated with other minerals such as pyrite, calcite, etc. Bacteria adsorbing on mineral surfaces enhance bioleaching of chalcopyrite and other minerals. The bacterial EPS mediate this contact and are the prerequisite for initial attachment of bacterial cells To measure the interaction force might be a direct way to gain some more insight on the interface-action and the bacterial attachment to mineral. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is a useful tool for imaging microbial cells as well as for force measurement. Functionalized probes were used to measure the force between bacteria cells and a solid material Thus, here the adhesion forces between chalcopyrite and cells of three bacteria  One drop of 1% polyethyleneimmine (PEI; MW The harvest of bacterial cells was carried out in the mid-exponential phase. To remove the precipitates, the grown culture was initially filtered through Whatman 42 filter paper. The filtrate was then centrifuged at 10,000 In order to get EPS-deficient cells, EDTA was used to remove EPS A pellet of cells was manually transferred onto PEI-coated tips for immobilization. They were further treated with an additional drop of 3% glutaraldehyde and the tip bacteria were incubated at 4 Chalcopyrite samples were obtained as museum grade. They were cut into coupons with 10 Zeta potential was measured with cells harvested in the mid-exponential phase. Cells were washed and resuspended in iron-free 9 Contact angle of the chalcopyrite grains was measured by immersing them in double-distilled water with a telescopic goniometer. The bacterial cell layers were prepared by giving a drop of bacteria suspension onto porous membranes with a pore size of 0.22 After harvesting cells as before, bacteria were suspended in 100 A Nanoscope V Multimode AFM (Digital Instruments) in contact mode was used to measure the interaction forces. Experiments were conducted in a fluid cell filled with iron-free 9 For the force measurement, two parallel cell probes were used for each measurement. Force measurements were taken after each cell probe was immersed in a solution for at least 5  The approach and retraction curves for The retraction curve ( Adhesion forces between EPS-deficient cells and chalcopyrite were also measured. The results are listed in The changes among the three species caused by EPS removed were not identical. The absence of EPS made the cells of The amount of three leaching bacteria and their EPS-deficient cells attached to chalcopyrite can be found in The forces between three types of leaching microorganisms and chalcopyrite have been directly quantified by Atomic Force Microscopy using force–separation curves. Following results were gotten: The interaction forces between cells and chalcopyrite surface are controlled by electrostatic forces and hydrophobic forces. The electric charges of the surfaces control the electrostatic force, while the contact angles indicate the hydrophobic forces.  The adhesive force is closely related to primary attachment: the higher it is, the more cells attach. EPS are important for bacterial attachment. Removing EPS reduces adhesion force as well as attachment. This work was supported by the