In this study, recovery of chromium and magnesium from spent magnesia-chrome refractories was developed by acid leaching combined with alkali precipitation and evaporation. The optimized conditions for leaching were found to be particle size of −74 + 38 μm, hydrochloric acid solution of 5.0 mol/L, liquid-solid ratio of 5:1, leaching temperature of 343 K, leaching time of 90 min and agitation speed of 400 rpm. Under these conditions, 95.14% Cr was remained in the residual in the form of chromite, which could be directly used for metallurgy. Subsequently, more than 90% Cu, Pb, Bi and Si can be removed from the leachate through adjusting the pH to 7.0 by magnesium hydroxide. Then, magnesium chloride hexahydrate can be obtained from the final solution by evaporation. Detection analyses showed that the production of chromite and magnesium chloride hexahydrate could be used as industrial raw material. What’s more, kinetics of magnesium leaching was also studied, and the results revealed that leaching magnesium from the spent magnesia-chrome refractories was in accordance with pseudo-second-order model and the corresponding apparent activation energy was 68.75 kJ/mol.Refractory materials are indispensable support materials for high-temperature industrial fields such as non-ferrous metals, steel and building materials The melt in the non-ferrous metal smelting furnace has a low melting temperature and strong fluidity, and is easily infiltrated into the interior of the magnesia-chrome refractory material, so that the refractory material has a short service life and a high replacement frequency General enterprises will select the refractories containing more metals by hand sorting. This part of the refractories will be ground as ingredients to smelt, and the rest of the waste refractories are used as building materials or storage The spent magnesia-chrome refractory bricks used in this study were obtained from a lead refining furnace lining provided by a lead smelting plant in Hunan, China. The sample was ground followed thoroughly mixed for analysis of raw materials. The chemical composition was analyzed by X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF; Rigaku, model ZSX Primus II). The results as shown in The morphological characteristics of the raw materials was detected by optical microscopy (Leica DMRXP). From the optical micrograph given in X-ray diffraction (XRD; Rigaku Rapid IIR diffractometer) pattern of the raw materials shown in The flowchart of recovery of chromium and magnesium from spent magnesia-chrome refractories by acid leaching combined with alkali precipitation and evaporation is shown in The leaching experiments were carried out in a 500 mL beaker placed in water bath pot equipment The precipitation experiments were carried out in the same equipment for leaching. Leachate was sampled for chemical composition by ICP before precipitation. Then, take 200 mL of leachate add to the beaker to precipitate impurities at room temperature for 30 min. The leachate was adjusted to a specific pH by magnesium hydroxide. Next, the filtrate was measured for volume and sampled for chemical composition by ICP. Finally, the precipitation rate of the impurity metal ions (θ) was calculated in Eq. After precipitation, evaporating the final solution to get a crystal. Chemical analysis and XRD were used to the obtained crystal to determine its composition and structure. Magnesium oxide is the main form of magnesium presented in the spent magnesia-chrome refractories, which can be leached easily by acid. Most of the impurity metals are oxides and easy to react with acid. Magnesia-chrome spinel and chromite are the main form of chromium presented in the wasted magnesia-chrome bricks, which are indissoluble in acid solution. Therefore, the separation of magnesium and chromium can be achieved by acid leaching, magnesium and impurity metals were leached into the leachate and chromium remains in the leach residue. Hydrochloric acid, nitric acid and sulfuric acid are the three acids commonly used in industry. In order to figure out which acid is more conducive to separation of magnesium and chromium, the experiments were carried out under the conditions: acidity of 5 mol/L, particle size of −74 + 38 μm, liquid-solid ratio of 5:1, leaching temperature of 343 K, leaching time of 90 min, agitation speed of 400 rpm. The results shown in The effect of particle size on the magnesium leaching and chromium recovery was investigated using a series of particle sizes (−200 + 125 μm, −125 + 74 μm, −74 + 38 μm, −38 + 0 μm). Other conditions were fixed as: HCl concentration, 5 mol/L, liquid-solid ratio, 5:1, leaching temperature, 343 K, reaction time, 90 min, agitation speed, 400 rpm. The results given in It is well known that H Leaching experiments at various liquid-solid ratio from 1:1 to 9:1 were carried out to clarify the effect of liquid-solid ratio on the leaching process, at the conditions: particle size, −74 + 38 μm, HCl concentration, 5 mol/L, leaching temperature, 343 K, leaching time, 90 min, agitation speed, 400 rpm. It can be seen from The effect of leaching temperature on the leaching process was investigated under the conditions: −74 + 38 μm of particle size, 5 mol/L of HCl concentration; 5:1 of liquid-solid ratio, 90 min of leaching time and 400 rpm of agitation speed. The results are shown in At the particle size of −74 + 38 μm, hydrochloric acid concentration of 5 mol/L, liquid-solid ratio of 5:1, temperature of 343 K, agitation speed of 400 rpm, the effect of leaching time on the leaching of the sample was investigated. The results presented in Agitation speed is a key factor by reducing the boundary layer diffusion resistance and increase the diffusion rate of reactant in a hydrometallurgical process The optimal experiment was carried out based on the previous experimental results, the conditions were fixed as: particle size, −74 + 38 μm, HCl concentration, 5 mol/L, liquid-solid ratio, 5:1, leaching temperature, 343 K, reaction time, 90 min, agitation speed, 400 rpm. Leaching efficiency of the sample and the chemical composition of the residue were shown in The leachate obtained from the optimal experiment contains a lot of impurity metal ions. As can be seen from the The effect of pH on precipitate impurity metal ions from leachate was studied at various pH from 3.0 to 8.0. The results presented in After precipitation most of impurities are removed from the solution, the precipitation can be returned to the smelting system to recover Bi, Pb and Cu. Mg A series of leaching experiments were conducted at different temperatures (313 K, 323 K, 333 K and 343 K) for various time to further investigate the kinetics of leaching process However, the fitting curves shown in According to the results shown in Based on the date of  Recovery of chromium and magnesium from spent magnesia-chrome refractories was developed by acid leaching combined with alkali precipitation and evaporation. The optimum leaching conditions were established as: particle size of −74 + 38 μm, HCl concentration of 5 mol/L, liquid-solid ratio of 5:1, temperature of 343 K, reaction time of 90 min and agitation speed of 400 rpm. 95.14% Cr was enriched in the leaching residue with a form of chromite. The residue meet the requirement of chrome ore for metallurgy. 85.05% Mg and more than 93% Cu, Pb, Bi were leached into the leaching solution under the optimized leaching conditions. Cu, Pb, Bi and Si can be removed from the leachate through adjust the pH to 7.0 by magnesium hydroxide, while Mg still remained in the solution. The magnesium chloride hexahydrate crystal gained from the mother solution by evaporation is of good quality and meets the standard of the industrial magnesium chloride. The kinetics of the leaching process was studied by statistical and graphical methods. Leaching magnesium from the spent magnesia-chrome refractories was in accordance with pseudo-second-order model and mainly controlled by the surface chemical reaction. The corresponding apparent activation energy was 68.75 kJ/mol. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of this research by