Empirical allowable vibration levels for surface structures generated by underground explosions are usually given in terms of peak ground particle velocities. Those allowable vibration criteria do not take the structural type, site conditions and ground vibration frequency contents into consideration. This paper performs a damage assessment of surface structures subjected to ground stress wave excitation on the basis of a nonlinear dynamic analysis of structures. The ground excitations are generated numerically by a commercial software autodyn. The validity of the numerical simulated ground motions is proved by comparing the attenuation law of their peak particle velocities (PPV) with those obtained independently in field tests. A damage index defined in earthquake engineering, based on a linear combination of the maximum deformation (ductility) and the hysteretic energy dissipation (loading history), is used. A parametric study of the effects of structural type, charge distance, site conditions, as well as the explosion conditions is performed by using three typical reinforced concrete (RC) structural models designed on the basis of British Standard 8110. A safe inhabitant distance for surface structures is estimated and results are compared with those obtained on the basis of empirical allowable vibration criteria.It is difficult to identify the characteristics of threshold ground motion induced by an underground explosion that will cause damage to surface structures. The general conclusion in mining engineering is that the peak particle velocity (PPV) is the best index for assessing damaging ground motions to structures Damage assessment of structures under earthquake excitation has been widely performed, and many assessing methods have been developed It is known that the properties of ground stress wave from an underground explosion are different from those of seismic waves. Ground stress wave usually contains high-frequency energy and its energy distributes over a wider frequency band. Because the distances concerned are of an order of hundreds of meters, its amplitudes are much higher and the duration is much shorter than those of seismic waves, for which the distances concerned are of an order of tens or hundreds of kilometers. When analysing the structural responses in earthquake engineering, vertical ground motion is neglected in most cases because the dominant frequency of seismic motion is always very small, and it is close around the fundamental frequency of a structure and generally activates the first vibration mode in a horizontal direction. Vertical ground motion generated by an underground explosion, however, can not be neglected because of its large vertical amplitudes and wider dominant frequency band. High-frequency ground motion may activate higher vibration modes of a surface structure including vertical vibration. The vertical component of ground shock could be much larger than its horizontal component at the area closer above the detonation. In this paper, a parametric study of surface structure response and damage to underground explosion-induced ground shock is performed. Ground stress waves are generated by a commercial finite difference software,  The charge weight used in the present study is 100 ton TNT with a 10 kg/m As a calibration of the numerically simulated wave motion, the simulated PPV are compared with the PPV obtained from independent field tests Nonlinear dynamic structural responses are solved by a step-by-step integration procedure using the Newmark-β method. At time The viscous damping matrix [ The proportionality factors, The most important task is to determine the nonlinear stiffness matrix [ The yield moment from equilibrium is The hysteretic model is required by structural dynamic analysis. Roufaiel and Meyer In the present study, a nonlinear structural dynamic analysis procedure is developed according to the above hysteretic model. The objective of the present study is to predict the strength reserve and dynamic response characteristics of a structure with a specific index of damage to its components and to the entire structure. The damage index is widely used in earthquake engineering, which is defined as a value normalized with respect to the failure level, such that a damage index value of unity corresponds to the subjectively defined failure Damage in reinforced concrete structures is usually concentrated in small areas. Even in the case of significant damage, only a few joints are affected. Hence, if a global damage index is to be obtained as an average of the local damage, it is necessary first to define the locations at which the local damage will be evaluated, and then to use an appropriate weighting function so that more weight is given to the more critical areas. In the present study, the global damage is obtained as a weighted average of the local damage at the ends of each element, with the dissipated energy as the weighting function. The definition of the global damage index is given by Structures are idealized as plane frames subjected to simultaneous horizontal and vertical ground excitations. All the mass of the structure is lumped at the ends of each element. The The two-storey frame ( The concrete grade is C30 with The dead load includes selfweights of the components like columns, beams and slabs at each floor. The imposed load of 2.5 kN per square meter is specified. The soil–structure interaction effect is included in the analysis of structures located on a soil site by adding springs and dashpots to each support. The two low-rise buildings are supported by shallow foundations, and the 24-storey high-rise structure is supported by piles. The stiffness coefficients of the foundations The first two natural frequencies of the two-storey building model are calculated as 4.71 and 16.38 Hz, which is far below the dominant ground vibration frequencies as shown in response spectral curves in As can be seen, at a surface distance of 50 m, the first storey columns are severely damaged and the most significant damage occurs at the bottom of the columns. Some minor damage also occurs in beams and the second storey columns, indicating that all the structural members undergo inelastic deformations. At a surface distance of 150 m, the damage to the first storey columns are still the most severe as compared to the other structural members, but the damage indices are less pronounced due to the attenuation of ground motions. When the structure is located on the site with a 20 m thick soil layer, damage to its members is most severe. This is because of the amplification effect on ground motions by the soil layer, as shown in The first two natural frequencies of the factory model shown in The natural frequencies of the high-rise building are much lower than the two low-rise buildings, as 0.56 and 1.53 Hz for the first two modes. Therefore, the response of high-rise buildings to ground shock is quite different from that of low-rise buildings. For cases when the structure is located on a soil site, the response characteristics are different if the soil layer thickness is different. The storey damage indices have rather large values when the structure is located at a surface distance of 50 m. The severe damage in the flexible frame located on a soil site is probably due to the relatively low stress wave frequency contents and very high amplitudes. As defined in When the three structures are sited on a rock surface, the surface distance corresponding to the severe structural damage index is about 50 m for the two-storey structure, and about 70 m for the other two structures. If structures are built at a surface distance larger than 70 m, only minor structural damage is expected. It should be noted that PPV=0.23 m/s occurs at about a surface distance When the three structures are located on a soil site, their damage indices are larger. Depending on the soil layer thickness, the surface distance corresponding to the severe structural damage index varies from 90 to 110 m for the low-rise structures, and from 110 to 170 m for the high-rise structure. It should be noted again that only very minor damage will occur to the three structures when PPV is about 0.06 m/s, which occurs at a surface distance of approximately 280 and 250 m when the soil layer thickness is 20 and 40 m, respectively. Nonlinear dynamic structural analysis has been carried out in the present paper to study the damage of structures subjected to an accidental underground explosion. Ground motions generated by the commercial software