Cu0 nanoparticles (NPs)-doped TiO2 nanofibers (NFs) were prepared as an effective photodegradation of three azo dyes as well as an antimicrobial agent under visible light. Fabrication of one dimensional zero-valent Cu nanoparticles-doped TiO2 nanofibers with high aspect ratio have been successfully synthesized by simple and low cost; electrospinning technique followed by hydrothermal process. The photocatalytic activity of introduced nanofibers was evaluated by performing of three azo dyes. Catalytic NFs show a superior photodegaradation activity under visible light as well as good antimicrobial activity. Moreover, photocatalyst nanofibers appeared good stability, which was used for three cycles without regeneration.Water is an essential constituent for human and life. However, the huge volume of pathogenic microorganisms and toxic organic pollutants in water effluent from many industries has a carcinogenic property Advanced oxidation processes have been suggested as an effective alternatives for the treatment of toxic organic pollutants, especially, the coloring waste water which produced from different industries. This industrial wastewater creates an aesthetic pollution problem and a major perturbance to aquatic life. photolytic techniques is capable of decomposed toxic organic pollutants into ending non-toxic substances without causing the secondary pollution problems Among the advanced oxidation processes, is photo- As a wide band gap semiconductor, TiO Among metal NPs; Copper NPs have some of salient characteristics such as, relative abundance, low cost as compared with the noble metals, low toxicity and good environmental compatibility, and biological important equivalent to silver nanoparticles (FAQS organization). It is one of the relatively small groups of metallic elements essential to human health. The copper is considered safe for humans since it is used in the intrauterine devices and serves as a cofactor in respiration In this study, we prepared zero-valent Cu NPs-doped TiO Titanium isopropoxide (TIPP), poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP), methyl red dye, reactive black 5 dye, and reactive orange 16 dye were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Copper(II) nitrate trihydrate was obtained from Junsei Chemical Co., ltd. Formic acid was got from Showa, Japan. Analytical grade of ethanol and de-ionized water were used as the solvent. The Tryptone Soy broth was purchased from Torlak, Belgrade was purchased from the Korean Culture Centre of Microorganisms (KCCM). The tested strains Electrospun titania NFs was prepared by sol–gel process as previous work Hydrothermal process was used to prepared metallic copper NPs-doped titania NFs. Typically, prepared 0.025 The Photo-catalytic degradation of MR, RB5, and RO16 was carried out in a simple photo reactor. The reactor consists of simple laboratory glass bottle 70 Antibacterial activity of zero-valent Cu NPs-doped TiO The surface morphology of the NFs was studied by a JEOL JSM-5900 scanning electron microscope (JEOL Ltd., Japan) and field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, Hitachi S-7400, Japan). The phase and crystallinity of the catalyst were characterized using a Rigaku X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku Co., Japan) with Cu Cu-doped TiO      The more detailed morphological characteristics of as-synthesis NFs were further examined by TEM and HRTEM imaging as shown in  To support the formation of metallic copper in TEM and XRD; The XPS analyses were used to determine the valance state, chemical bonding, and the surface composition and oxidation state of the materials because it is sensitive to give information of surface layer up to 10 The presence of shake-up satellite lines lies from 940.05 to 945.25 The PL Emission spectra were used to reveal the efficiency of trapping, migration, transfer and separation of charge carriers, and to investigate their lifetime in semiconductor, since PL emission results from the recombination of electron/hole pairs in semiconductor It is worth noting that azo dyes are difficult to be completely eliminated using the conventional photo-catalyst even with using different sources of lights and long time. Furthermore, it has been reported in the literature that the photocatalytic activities of catalysts depend on many factors, such as crystallinity, surface properties, absorption properties, and so on To study efficiency of produced Cu In recent years, copper surface showed a pathogenic agent may come in contact, i.e., metallic copper touch surfaces, may help diminish surface-related hygiene problems. Moreover, copper surface provides greater killing efficiency for a wide range of microbes in laboratory settings and hospital trials We have demonstrated that copper nanoparticles directly embedded on electrospun titania nanofibers during hydrothermal process. Synthesized nanofibers exhibited higher photocatalytic activities to different azo dyes under visible light attributed to red shifts to longer wavelengths of the nanofibers, large surface area, and high crystallinity. Moreover, nanofibers were appeared a good antimicrobial may be due to the decomposition of cell membrane due to dual effect of copper nanoparticles and titania nanofibers. We proposed this formation process as a simple and inexpensive way to prepare metal-doped metal oxide for removal toxic organic pollutants and antimicrobial. This work was supported by the IT R&D Program of