Pulverised Fuel Ash (PFA) is combined with Ordinary Portland Cement (OPC) powder and water to form cementitious grouts for use in various aspects of nuclear waste encapsulation. Whilst specific PFA supplies in the United Kingdom currently deliver adequate grout performance it is also clear that some alternative supplies result in inferior performance, leading to concern over the long term availability of suitable raw material. This paper presents the results of an investigation into the characteristics of PFA that affect critical aspects of grout performance and identifies strategies that could be used to ensure high quality PFA supplies in the future.
                  A key grout performance characteristic is the requirement to produce a high level of fluidity without generating a significant volume of bleed water after setting. This must be achieved within a set operating envelope which precludes the use of Superplasticisers and limits water content. Specific sources of PFA (individual power stations) have previously been identified as having an adequate performance and therefore form the current supply. Some other sources are generally known to produce materials that result in very poor performance or exhibit large performance fluctuations over time. The identification of physical and/or chemical characteristics of PFA that influence grout performance is therefore essential in ensuring a consistent long term, high quality, supply for encapsulation plants.
                  A wide range of PFAs have been characterised encompassing the current supply, known poor quality supplies and potential future supplies. After preparation into grouts, using standard industry acceptance criteria, PFA characteristics such as particle size distribution and unburned carbon content have been used to create simple performance models. Whilst unburned carbon and aspects of the particle size distribution each appear to influence grout performance, the relatively weak models developed from each parameter alone indicate that a combination of these factors control final performance. Suitable processing techniques, which could be employed to upgrade previously unsuitable supplies, were then identified and practically tested at laboratory scale. One such technology is based on the established mineral processing technique of froth flotation. This technique is demonstrated as being able to reduce unburned carbon present in PFA whilst retaining a desirable particle size distribution in the reduced carbon product. Using this approach the performance of a number of PFAs, which would normally be rejected under acceptance criteria, were upgraded to produce grout fluidity levels in excess of the best known current supplies. The mechanisms which lead to the performance enhancement are discussed and used to identify other processing techniques that might be used to upgrade PFA in the future.
                  Froth flotation offers a route to upgrade previously unsuitable PFA supplies for use in waste encapsulation grouts. Fluctuations in grout performance can be reduced whilst the significant performance advantages over standard materials leads to the potential for reducing grout water content, which itself has a number of desirable process implications in waste encapsulation.The encapsulation of intermediate and low level wastes from the United Kingdom nuclear industry has been carried out for a number of years. Pulverised Fuel Ash is frequently used as a major component in cementitious infill grouts as it can promote high fluidity, with a controlled bleed volume, in comparison to other components such as blast furnace slag. High fluidity is required to promote efficient mixing, full coverage and void filling whilst bleed volume must remain low so as not to create additional waste streams. The heat generated during hydration must be low so that, when placed in large volumes, product quality is not reduced through crack development. The various encapsulation processes employed in the UK use in excess of 10000 tonnes of PFA per year. A continued supply of material that meets these critical performance requirements is therefore crucial for future operations. PFA is a fine powder derived from the combustion of pulverised coal at power stations. Its physical and chemical properties can vary significantly due to different coals and also as a result of changes to combustion regimes, e.g. the retro fitting of low NO The rheological behaviour of various fly ash–cement–water systems has been the subject of numerous studies. It is often suggested that PFA characteristics such as carbon content, fineness, particle size distribution and particle shape influence the flow properties of the PFA-cement mixtures. For example particle size distribution has been linked to paste fluidity/workability Over 30 samples of PFA from United Kingdom sources were characterised in this study. The sources selected encompassed the current encapsulation supply, the standby supply and potential alternatives. Unless stated otherwise the samples are run-of-station grade material. In addition to these samples some larger samples were subsequently taken for the practical assessment of treatment technologies. Grout preparation was carried out in accordance with existing in-house acceptance testing procedures. This small scale grout mixing test had previously been designed to replicate the mixing regime used at plant scale but with a reduced grout volume. For comparative purposes the mix composition and water content were kept constant. Grout fluidity was measured using a ‘Colflow’ channel. This flow measuring apparatus is a painted steel, u-section channel with a length scale along one edge. A test portion of grout is decanted into a bunged tundish located above one end of the channel. Following the removal of the bung the horizontal distance which the grout flows is recorded. Bleed volume was determined by measuring the volume of free water remaining on the surface of a volume of set grout after a specified time. Characterisation of the fly ash samples included total carbon content, and particle size analysis. Total carbon concentration of samples was determined using a UIC Coulometrics Inc. CO Fly ash is generally comprised of a mixture of solid and hollow spherical mineral matter (primarily Quartz, Mullite and Hematite) and angular, often porous unburned carbon particles. The grout fluidity and carbon concentration of the samples are shown in The measured particle size distributions for the range of samples showed a wide degree of variability both in terms of average parameters and also the general character of the distribution. The link between the Rosin–Rammler distribution width of the fly ash component and the resulting grout fluidity is shown in Particle size and carbon distribution are inherently linked for fly ashes. Typically, carbon concentrations were highest in the coarser (> A number of processes were tested to determine their effect on grout performance. These processes built on the information gathered during characterisation of the raw materials. For example, the screening of ashes to remove the coarsest particles alters the particle size distribution whilst also reducing the carbon levels to some extent. Raw materials were screened to < Froth flotation was also assessed as a treatment technique. A Denver Size by size analysis of the reduced carbon product demonstrated that carbon was recovered from across the entire particle size range. The overall particle size distribution of the treated products was broadly similar to the raw material. In addition to the data presented here some blending experiments were carried out. It was found that when different fly ashes were blended the grout performance for the mixed product was an average of the performance of the individual components, with no beneficial synergistic effects. In all of the treatment approaches it was found that fluidity was linked to bleed volume. High fluidities were generally achieved at the expense of the production of additional bleed. Grout performance is highly sensitive to the characteristics of the feed PFA. Froth flotation provides a route to upgrade the material and has been successfully demonstrated for three UK run-of-station fly ashes. The mechanisms for the performance enhancement are likely to be connected to the packing ability of the dry powder system. Broad particle size distributions lead to efficient packing. In this way the water added to the system is used more effectively as a lubricant between the particles as opposed to solely occupying pore spaces. Removing the low density, non-spherical, porous carbon particles, whilst largely retaining the particle size distribution, results in a higher bulk density of the treated material. This can effectively reduce the bulk volume of PFA added to a mix and facilitate the increase in fluidity. The high fluidities measured for grouts containing PFA treated with a froth flotation process could be of benefit to encapsulation processes in a number of ways. The material could be used directly in place of the standard PFA supply at similar water contents, although this might lead to an unacceptable bleed volume in certain applications. Alternatively, the water content of the mix could be reduced to a point where an acceptable level of fluidity is available and also where the reduced water is advantageous in terms of limiting long term waste corrosion. Reduced water content also leads to reduced bleed volumes and more durable, less porous products. A further approach would be to reduce the top-size of treated material through screening, as demonstrated in this paper, to reduce fluidity, and therefore bleed volume. Future work is focusing on broadening the range of sources for raw materials, process scale-up and detailed investigation of the enhancement mechanisms. The requirement to treat PFA in a wet state, as in flotation, necessitates further processing prior to final use such as dewatering and drying. The development of dry processes which can generate similar quality products would be desirable. Future technologies with these capabilities might include microwave treatment where the unburned carbon is preferentially heated and combusted whilst the mineral component remains intact.