Stable control of grinding process is of great importance for improvements of operation efficiency, the recovery of the valuable minerals, and significant reductions of production costs in concentration plants. Decoupled multi-loop PID controllers are usually carried out to manage to eliminate the effects of interactions among the control loops, but they generally become sluggish due to imperfect process models and a close control of the process is usually impossible in real practice. Based on its inherent decoupling scheme, model predictive control (MPC) is employed to handle such highly interacting system. For high quality requirements, a three-input three-output model of the grinding process is constructed. Constrained dynamic matrix control (DMC) is applied in an iron ore concentration plant, and operation of the process close to their optimum operating conditions is achieved. Some practical problems about the application of MPC in grinding process are presented and discussed in detail.Ball mill grinding is a fundamental operation process, and in many respects the most important unit operation in a mineral processing plant. Grinding process represents almost half of the total operating costs associated with the mining operation, and the product particle size greatly influences the recovery rate of the valuable minerals and the volume of tailing discharge in the subsequent processes. Low qualified rate of product particle size can cause unacceptable economic loss and could be harmful for pollution control. For effective concentration or subsequent mineral liberation, grinding process has to maintain the following outputs (or controlled variables) stable, mainly including the product particle size distribution, circulating load and mill solids concentration, etc The control of grinding processes is a challenging problem due to two basic reasons. First, a large number of variables involved have strong couplings among them. If regulating one controlled variable is attempted with one manipulated variable, the other controlled variables will, more likely than not, be influenced in an undesired fashion. Second, the existence of large time delays, time-varying parameters and nonlinearities are some of the other difficulties encountered by the control engineers. Many research papers have been published on the development of control strategies for grinding process. Traditionally, the grinding processes are controlled by multiple single-input single-output (multi-SISO) PID controllers which are usually decoupled to avoid multivariable interactions One difficulty of this kind of control lies in the choice of the proper input–output pairing. When manipulated variables are not properly selected, interactions between controlled and manipulated variables can result in undesirable control loop interactions, leading to poor control performances Although robust control Presently MPC has become the most widely used multivariable control algorithm in the chemical process industries and in other areas This paper presents an application of multivariable model predictive control scheme to a ball mill grinding process. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: A three-input three-output model of grinding process is constructed in The grinding process studied in this paper operates in a closed loop as shown in The tumbling action of the balls within the revolving mill crushes the feed to finer sizes. The slurry containing the fine product is discharged from the mill to a classifier. The slurry is separated into two streams: an overflow stream containing the finer particles and the circulating stream containing the larger particles. The overflow is the desired product. The circulating is recycled back to the ball mill for regrinding. The product particle size is specified as 72% passing 200 mesh screens. As mentioned above, simpler control variables' pairing was studied by earlier researchers, and the circulating load and the product size were usually taken as controlled variables. However, in the process studied, in order to keep these two controlled variables around their set-points, mill solids concentration is another key intermediate controlled variable that should be also stably controlled. For example, the change of ore hardness or feed size can be first identified by the variation of mill solids concentration, thus some control strategy of controlling mill solids concentration by manipulating of the fresh solids feed can be carried out in advance before the particle size has been influenced. Too high mill solids concentration could eventually lead to blockage in the mill, while too low solids concentration undoubtedly causes inefficiency in grinding To sum up, the controlled variables in this process are the product particle size, mill solids concentration and the circulating load. Three manipulated variables are available: the fresh ore feed rate, mill feed water flowrate and dilution water flowrate. The principal disturbances affecting the system are the ore hardness, feed size, etc. The relationships among the variables in grinding process can be shown in For many processes it is a time consuming work to develop fundamental process models, while developing a transfer function based model is quiet desirable by performing a plant test. The most common plant test is to make a step change in the manipulated input and observe the measured process output response. Then a model is developed to provide the best match between the model output and the observed plant output For the purpose of control study and industrial application many experiments have been conducted in the process around the normal operating point to show whether the increase in a particular manipulated variable increases, decreases or has a complex relationship with the controlled variables and whether the action is slow or fast.  As shown in Two important rules should be complied with when conducting the experiment in the industrial process: The step changes in ore feed rate or water flowrates should be limited to the ranges of 5% to 15% of the normal values. If the step change is too small, the measured output may not change enough to develop a reliable model. On the contrary, if the step change is too big, the output variable may change too much which will cause economic lost. Also, if the step change is too large, nonlinear effects may dominate. That is, the operating condition may become significantly different than the desired condition Adequate times of the same experiment, usually more than 5, are needed to guarantee the accuracy of the results Similarly, the responses of particle size to mill feed water as well as the responses of the other two controlled variables to the three manipulated variables are obtained in the same way respectively, and they are omitted here for space. Let It's obvious that strong interactions exist between the manipulated and controlled variables. As for conventional multi-loop PID controllers as shown in The underlying philosophy of DMC scheme DMC scheme is based on finite step response models which are obtained by making a unit step input change to a process operating at steady state as mentioned above. The step response model is the vector of step response coefficients, Mathematically, the control problem is posed as a minimization of a quadratic objective function of the future prediction errors subject to constraints on future manipulated variables and controlled variables. Let the process dynamics of the MIMO system be represented by the following convolution model: Due to the measurement noise, and the unmodelled load disturbance effects as well as the plant-model mismatch, the predictive output should be corrected by the real output Note that Δ Magnitude and rate constraints on the manipulated variables and the controlled variables are expressed as followed: Manipulated variable constraints: Manipulated variable rate constraints: Controlled variables constraints: MPC scheme is implemented in a receding horizon framework. At any sampling instant, the optimization problem is formulated over the prediction horizon and a future manipulated variable trajectory is calculated that minimizes the objective function satisfying all the constraints. Only the first move is applied to the plant and this step is repeated for next sampling instant. The desired closed loop behavior and MPC tuning parameters have a straight forward relationship. If tighter control of some specific controlled variables is desired, it can be achieved by choosing a corresponding higher weight in the factor The system based on this control strategy was put into operation in an iron ore concentration plant in 2004. All the signals coming from the sensors of the grinding process are collected in a SCADA (Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition) system. This system is based on hierarchical concepts, organized in functional and geographical groups. All the signals received are saved in a database. Also, control strategies can be programmed on it and it has two displays directly connected to the grinding console.  In order to illustrate the regulating procedures when great disturbances occur to the control system, the responses of the three manipulated variables are also presented. As shown in It is evident that the product particle size, as shown in Although great improvement has been achieved by DMC strategy compared with that by PID control, there still exits space for the qualified rate to increase as discussed below. Several parameters should be properly tuned in DMC since they affect the close-loop performance, such as model length, prediction horizon, control horizon, manipulated input weighting, etc. The following tuning and weighting factors are used while applying the MPC scheme to control the grinding process: Prediction horizon The manipulated variables are limited to acceptable values established by the normal operation of the plant for safety or economic reasons. The constraints introduced on the manipulated variables in the grinding process are shown in Employing too harder constraints on the manipulated variables, however, may cause considerably sluggish response of the controlled variables. During the early time of industrial commissioning, feed rate is constrained between 68 t/h and 74 t/h for a relatively stable mill throughput, the responses of particle size in 2 h are shown in The reason why the qualified rate of product particle size cannot reach 100% in real practice is mainly due to model mismatches caused by the great disturbances, such as the changes in feed particle size and ore hardness, etc. Although the tuning procedure (for example, choosing a longer prediction horizon) makes the controller insensitive to plant-model mismatches, stable control of grinding circuits is still occasionally interrupted by great disturbances as shown in From the point of view of process control, the variation causes the changes in model parameters and leads to severe nonlinearities because any process models are constructed around a particular operating point. However, conventional DMC scheme employs an explicit model to predict the future behavior of the process over an extended prediction horizon. Although the performance of MPC is proved satisfactory under moderate variations of model parameters, if there is large modeling error of the controller, the closed-loop response is getting poorer, even the stability cannot be guaranteed In principle, grinding processes mainly aim to achieve maximum throughput at a specified product particle size. It can be interpreted as that the fresh ore feed rate should be increased as much as possible while maintaining product particle size stable. It seems that the fresh ore feed rate should be considered as a controlled variable. However, the fresh ore feed rate has to be taken as a manipulated variable because it is the only final determinative variable affecting product particle size. As shown in In order to solve this problem, fresh ore feed rate is taken as a manipulated variable while moderate constraints are imposed on it. As shown in As a manipulated variable, ore feed rate will be decreased when ore hardness is high for example, leading to a low mill throughput. On the contrary, when ore hardness is low, MPC will automatically increase fresh ore feed rate, which will remedy, from another point of view, the decrease of mill throughput. This procedure has been demonstrated by the almost same average fresh ore feed rate under DMC and that under PID control as shown in During the testing time, the DMC scheme must be switched off to manual mode when any measurement errors happen or sensors (such as on line particle size analyzer, density meters, etc) are in maintenance or in calibration. Some measures have been taken to solve these kinds of problems. When a measurement error (such as abrupt too low flowrate) is detected the control system will exert a “frozen” action to keep the present output and give alarms immediately. As to the most important variable, namely product particle size, a soft sensor is developed in the control system to infer current product particle size when maintenance or calibration work is being carried out on this equipment. Other problems concern the actuators applied in the control system, such as fresh ore feeders and control valves, etc. As for ore feeders, there are four or five swaying feeders for every grinding circuit in this plant. Two feeders work in normal condition while the left are for redundancy. If ore blockage or mechanical problems occur to a swaying feeder, a redundant feeder will be automatically switched on to reject this kind of operational failures. Since recycled water is utilized in the concentration plant and the water is usually not clean enough, a water filter equipment is adopted to filter the impurities in case the control valves are blocked. Moreover, V-shape ball valves are also employed in the water pipes in case of blockage since they have better shearing function compared with direct-acting valves. It should be pointed out that the upper limits constrained on the mill feed water and dilution water flowrates are sometimes higher than the current maximum real output. That is, although the control valve has been totally opened the mill feed water cannot reach the high limit because the water pressure is lower than normal value. The fluctuations of water pressure cause main disturbance to water flowrate and then leads to a poor control performance of product particle size. These kinds of problems can be solved by enlarging water pipes and installing a water pressure control system, such as variable-voltage variable-frequency (VVVF) inverters. Model predictive control is employed to handle the highly interacting multivariable system of grinding process. A three-input three-output model of grinding process is constructed for the high quality requirements of the process studied. Constrained dynamic matrix control is applied in an iron ore concentration plant. Compared with conventional decoupled multi-loop PID controllers, the run results of DMC scheme demonstrate its better performances in process control. DMC schemes can handle manipulated variable constraints explicitly and operation of the circuits close to their optimum operating conditions is achieved. The run results show that the proposed DMC scheme is an effective way to control ball mill grinding process. The authors are indebted to many collaborators who have contributed to the work on the experimental work and system commissioning in industry. In particular, the staffs in Fudao industrial control network company and the engineers of the concentration plant are grateful acknowledged for their valuable assistance. Funding for process modeling and control research is provided by project 8508002025 and 8508002049, Southeast University.