To solve some complicated function optimization problems, the SIRQV algorithm is constructed based on the SIRQV epidemic model. The algorithm supposes that some animal individuals exist in an ecosystem; each individual is characterized by a number of features; an infectious disease exists in the ecosystem and spreads among individuals, the disease attacks a part of features of an individual at each time. Each infected individual may pass through such states as susceptibility (S), infection (I), recovery (R), quarantine (Q) and vaccination (V), which can synthetically decide the physique strength of an individual. Individuals in the algorithm have 5 states such as S, I, R, Q and V, and 13 state transitions, each of which is equivalent to an operator. the 13 operators are logically organized together by the disease transmission logic of the SIRQV epidemic model so as to form a good cooperation and sufficient information exchange among individuals. The algorithm uses the activation, average, combination, reinforcement and assimilation operator to exchange feature information among individuals. The reinforcement operator transfers feature information from some strong individuals with higher individual physique index (IPI) to a weak individual with lower IPI index so as to make the latter grow better; the average operator ensures an individual to obtain average feature information from other individuals so as to reduce the probability that the individual drops into local optima; the activation operator expands an individual’s search scope by increasing its vitality; the combination operator has the characteristics of both the activation operator and the average operator; the assimilation operator enables the search to possess of jumping ability along dimension direction; the REINIT operator has exploration and exploitation ability to overcome sticky state of individuals and enhance precision of global optima; the growth operator enables the algorithm to converge globally. Results show that the algorithm has characteristics of strong search capability and global convergence, and has a high convergence speed for some complicated function optimization problems, especially for some function optimization problems with high condition number.Consider the following function optimization problem: If objective function To solve these kinds of optimization problems, the generally-applied optimization method is called the heuristic search method Therefore, construction of operators in the heuristic search is very important, because these operators determine how to make search at next step, that is to say, how enlightenment information thrown out by current alternative solutions can be efficiently used to calculate the search strategy at next step. Because one gives up searching for the best search direction, there is no need to compare pros and cons of each operator in a heuristic search algorithm. In fact, this kind of comparison cannot be executed. As we know, that an operator has good search performance at this time does not mean that it also has good search performance at another time; that an operator has good performance for this optimization problem does not mean that it has good performance for another optimization problem. So, how to improve search performance of a heuristic search? One of heuristic search algorithms, a population-based intelligence optimization algorithm’s search strategy is to start a large number of individuals to make search at the same time Through comparison we find: the search process in any traditional gradient-based optimization algorithm depends on a single alternative solution and good performance of a single operator, while the search process in a population-based intelligence optimization algorithm depends on numerous alternative solutions, a large number of operators, and cooperation among individuals. Therefore, for a population-based intelligent optimization algorithm, the key to enhance the search performance does not rely on good performance of a single operator, but depends on cooperation among numerous operators. This feature of population-based intelligence optimization algorithm is quite different from that of traditional gradient-based optimization algorithms. Nowadays, the developed population-based intelligence optimization algorithms include as follows: genetic algorithm (GA) To solve the above-mentioned problem, on the basis of rich materials provided by nature, designing a population evolution scene that has rich connotation and complicated survival competition relationship among individuals will be the powerful tool to enhance the performance and adaptability of a population-based intelligence optimization algorithm to solve some complicated optimization problems. Live drama scene of population, which is composed of many individuals, can be easily used to develop different kinds of operators, because it provides a variety of methods for sufficient information exchange among numerous individuals. The scene that an infectious disease outbreaks in an animal population and each animal individual in the population competes for survival is just an animal life drama with rich connotation and complicated and natural information exchange among animal individuals resulting from transmission of an infectious disease, the scene can be also described properly with a mathematics model, and thus it provides a great convenience for logic structure design, development of operators and cooperation among operators. This article is just to use such a scene to create a new population-based intelligence optimization algorithm. In article The SIS epidemic model The SIRQV epidemic model we have used in the article is used to describe an infectious disease like hepatitis, dengue and so on. For example, when a man catches a dengue, he may be quarantined as soon as possible; when he is cured, he can only possess of immunity of 6–8 months. Therefore, the SIRQV epidemic model is quite different from the SIS epidemic model. The SIRQV epidemic model built based on the Kermack–Mckendrick bin model The SIRQV epidemic model can give a very good description on epidemic rules of an infectious disease among animal individuals. When solving the optimum solutions of optimization problem (1), we suppose there are many animal individuals in an ecosystem, an individual is looked as an alternative solution of optimization problem (1), a feature (organ) of an individual that can be attacked by an infectious disease is looked as a variable of an alternative solution, the physique strength of an individual is expressed by the individual physique index, the index corresponds to the objective function value of optimization problem (1). Good alternative solutions, namely strong individuals, have higher individual physique indices, poor alternative solutions, namely weak individuals, have lower individual physique indices. When the infectious disease spreads among individuals, it makes each individual transfer from one state to another state; state transitions can cause individuals to exchange feature information among them so as to affect individuals' individual physique index. Because an individual is always infected randomly, a randomly search in the solution space of optimization problem (1) is achieved. Not only is the SIRQV epidemic model helpful for describing information exchange among many alternative solutions of optimization problem (1), but also the efficient treatment strategy of part variables can be adopted because an infectious disease always attacks a small part of organs of an individual. As a result, the model will have a unique advantage for solving complicated function optimization problems. The advantages of SIRQVA over SISA are as follows: SISA has only two states: S and I; while SIRQVA has five states: S, I, R, Q and V. Because the individuals who stay at the same state can be considered into a classification of population, SISA can only provide two classifications of individuals, while SIRQVA can provide 5 classifications of individuals. As we know, diversity of population is very important for a population-based optimization algorithm, so SIRQVA provides more diversities of population than SISA does. SISA has only 4 state transitions, while SIRQVA has 13 legal transitions. A state transition can be described into an operator. So, SIRQVA has much more operators than SISA does, thus in SISA we have no opportunity to create such an operator that possesses of jumping ability along dimension direction; the opportunity that an individual to obtain average feature information from other individuals in SISA is lower than that in SIRQVA; the opportunity that an individual to obtain strong feature information from other stronger individuals in SISA is lower than that in SIRQVA also. SIRQVA provides more opportunities to form dynamic classifications of individuals, and what is more, individuals in one classification can transfer logically into another classification according to the epidemic rules of SIRQVA. Based on (2) and (3), we can know that SIRQVA provides sufficient information exchange among individuals and among different classifications of individuals. SIRQVA provides better dynamic synergy (or cooperation) mechanism among individuals and among different classifications of individuals. As we know, the reason a population-based optimization algorithm can not find global optima of an optimization problem is that the algorithm drops into local optima and can not jump out from them forever. So, SIRQVA provides more classifications of individuals and more state transitions than SIS does, or SIRQVA provides more diversities of population, more sufficient information exchange and better dynamic synergy than SIS does, it means that SIRQVA can not easily drop into local optima when comparing with SISA, Even though SIRQVA drops into local optima, it will be more opportunities to jump out from them than SISA is. For SIRQVA, the article has solved the following 3 problems emphatically: How to transform the SIRQV epidemic model into a function optimization algorithm which can solve some complicated optimized problems. How to enable the operators in SIRQVA to reflect sufficiently interaction among individuals so as to reflect the thought of the SIRQV epidemic model. How to prove the global convergence of SIRQVA. To enable SIRQVA to adapt many kinds of optimization problems, the objective function of optimization problems (1) is rewritten as follows: Malignant infectious diseases have tremendous influence on public health and economic development, from Edward Fenner’s work about smallpox We divide an animal population in an ecosystem into 5 bins: susceptible individuals form class S, infected but not isolated individuals class I, isolated individuals class Q, cured individuals that possess of short term of immunity class R and vaccinated individuals class V; The number of individuals in each class is expressed with italicized letters According to In Formula To quickly solve some complicated function optimization problems, we need to simplify appropriately the above SIRQV epidemic model, assuming that there are no birth, migration, natural death and death due to illness for individuals in the considered ecosystem within a given period of time, namely Suppose that the total number of individuals in the ecosystem is 1 unit, namely Because we take the population in the ecosystem as individuals, we can apply Formula From Formula In Formula The meaning of taking values of parameters in We use the stochastic method to determine the parameters of the SIRQV epidemic model, both sharply reducing the number of parameters (the reduced number is from 8 Suppose an ecosystem has If an individuals who stays at state S makes effective contact with those individuals who stay at state I, then it will catch the infectious disease; An infected individual will be quarantined firstly, namely it moves into state Q; an individual who stay at state Q will stay at the state until the infected individual is cured. An individual who stay at state Q will not spread its disease to any other individuals; Some of individuals who contract the disease may be cured by themselves before they are isolated; If individuals who stay at state Q are cured, they will enter into state R and obtain a certain period of immunity. Individuals who stay at state R will be not infected for a period of time, so they can not transmit the infectious disease to others at this period of time; The immunity of the individuals who stay at state R may be lost after a period of time, the individuals who lose their immunity will enter into state S again; when these individuals contact effectively with the infected individuals, they will become ill again; The individuals staying at state S can obtain the immune ability after accepting vaccination, but the immune capacity will still be lost after a period of time; The individuals staying at state V may lose their immunity and get infected at just the time when they make effective contact with those individuals who stay at state I. Steps (1)–(7) are derived from There are 8 state transitions in Steps (1)–(7), 5 state transitions which keep their states unchanged are S The above-mentioned scenario is mapped onto the process of searching the global optimal solutions of optimization problem (1), its meaning is as follows. The search space of optimization problem (1) corresponds to the ecological system, an individual in the ecological system corresponds to an alternative solution of optimization problem (1), the set of alternative solutions Physique strength of an individual can be expressed by IPI (individual physique index, IPI), IPI corresponds to the objective function value of optimization problem (1). Good alternative solutions, namely strong individuals, have higher IPI values, poor alternative solutions, namely weak individuals, have lower IPI values. For optimization problem (1), the IPI value of individual At time Except 13 legal state transitions listed in In the random search, if IPI of individual According to the scene design of SIRQVA, the implementation process of SIRQVA is described as follows:  (3.1) If state S is selected, then it means that at period (A) If at period (B) If at period (C) If at period (3.2) If state I is selected, then it means that at period (A) If at period (B) If at period (C) If at period (3.3) If state R is selected, then it means that at period (A) If at period (B) If at period (C) If at period (3.4) If state Q is selected, then it means that at period (A) If at period (B) If at period (3.5) If state V is selected, then it means that at period (A) If at period (B) If at period At time Individual In order to make clear how to update Suppose there are 100 individuals in an ecosystem, the example is as follows: When Now we take individual 8 as an example to illustrate the updating method of When Then we use Formula Now there are two different situations that need to be explained:  Suppose { For individual 8, we need to determine which state the individual will stay at when Now that when Why does the state transition S Because there are 20 infected individuals in the ecosystem, we think that it is some individuals of the 20 infected individual who have transferred their states values of some infected features to individual 8! Therefore, we randomly select For example, on Monday, Dr. John is healthy; on Tuesday, Dr. John is infected with Ebola. We think Dr. John must have contacted with some persons who have been infected with Ebola. In order to make Dr. John really infected by Ebola, we use the composite blood of 3 infected persons to inject into the blood vessel of Dr. John. Certainly, Dr. John is infected with Ebola.  Suppose { For individual 8, we need to determine which state the individual will stay at when Now that when Why does the state transition S Because there are 22 susceptible individuals in the ecosystem, we think that it is some strong individuals of the 22 susceptible individual who have transfer their good state values of some features to individual 8! Therefore, we randomly select For example, on Monday, Dr. John is healthy; on Tuesday, Dr. John is still healthy. We think Dr. John must have contacted with some strong healthy persons who have not been infected with Ebola. In order to make Dr. John is really healthy, we use the composite materials of 3 strong healthy persons to transfer to a feature of Dr. John. Certainly, Dr. John still keeps healthy. The composite materials may be vigor, the fitness method, the physical training method and so on. In conclusion, the basic strategy of updating We determine the state of each individual at time Based on the state of each individual at time Based on the type of state transition of individual 8, we update Finally, the following problems must be solved: How to calculate the composite state values of some randomly selected features of the How to determine the number ( How to determine the probability ( Problem (2) and (3) will be solved in Section For state transition S For state transition S Based on the explanations about state transitions and the method of updating By decomposing At time When an individual transfers from state At time When an individual stays at state At time If a final state has several source states that can transfer to it, it will appear the same information transition; Randomly select The set of susceptible individuals: The set of infected individuals: The set of cured individuals: The set of quarantined individuals: The set of vaccinated individuals: Randomly select The set of strong susceptible individuals: The set of strong infected individuals: The set of strong cured individuals: The set of strong quarantined individuals: The set of strong vaccinated individuals: Activation operator HY( That the difference between the weighted sum of state values of certain feature of some randomly selected individuals and that of state values of the same feature of some other randomly selected individuals is endowed to the corresponding feature of individual Average operator PJ( The average operator can make an individual obtain the average feature information of some other individuals who have stayed at other states, thereby reducing the probability that the individual drops into local optima. Obviously the state transition S For the state transition S For the state transition S For the state transition R For the state transition I Combination operator HC( Obviously, the combination operator has both the characteristics of the activity operator and that of the average operator. The Q Reinforcement operator ZQ( Strong individuals who have higher IPI values can use the reinforcement operator to transfer strong feature information to weak individuals who have lower IPI values, enabling the weak individuals to grow toward better direction. The reason is that when an individual is at a state of susceptibility, quarantine, vaccination or recovery, it always makes its own physical be enhanced by keeping in good health, health care, training and other ways; when an individual is at a state of illness, it always enhances its physique through medical treatment and nutritional supplement so as to achieve the goal of conquering disease. Obviously, the state transition I Assimilation operator SQ( The assimilation operator is used to the state transition I Growth operator. For an individual, compare its new generation with its current generation, replace the current generation with the new generation if the latter are better than the former; otherwise keep the former unchanged. For the optimization problem (1), the growth operator can be described as follows:  SIRQVA has 5 states and 13 legal state transitions; each state transition corresponds to an operator. The 13 operators are logically organized together by the disease transmission logic of the SIRQV epidemic model so as to form a good cooperation and sufficient information exchange among individuals. The 13 operators are divided into 5 catalogues: The activation operator, describing state transition S The average operator, describing state transitions S The combination operator, describing Q The reinforcement operator, describing state transitions I The assimilation operator, describing state transition I In addition to the 13 operators, the growth operator enables the algorithm to converge globally. Through the following five ways the different disease states affect an individual’s IPI and change its features: The state transitions S The state transitions I The state transition S The state transitions Q The state transition I When dimensionality of search space is very high, the content of initial solutions within unit volume is extremely low; obviously it is very difficult to obtain uniform distribution. For example, if 100 initial solutions are distributed within an By following the law of probability statistics, the orthogonal table is created according to certain principle such as the orthogonal Latin square. Usually an horizontal orthogonal table is written as L Suppose random variable  Especially we have The meaning of proposition (2) is that the best result among these simple samples is superior to the result of proportion Suppose that the dimensionality of the search space of optimization problem (1) is  Step 1: calculate discrete points for each variable Step 2: use the orthogonal Latin squares generating method to produce initial solution  Algorithm INIT created with the orthogonal Latin square can obtain properties of good balance dispersion and neat comparability, but it rejects symmetry; because Algorithm INIT randomly select an alternative from When an individual makes search, if the current position of the individual keeps unchanged for a long time, we think that the individual has stayed into sticky state. Two situations may cause sticky state: one is that an individual drops into a local optimum solution; the other is that current position of an individual can not be updated by the information thrown out by other individuals. When all individuals drop into sticky state, search will stop automatically; global optimum solution will keep unchanged forever. On the other way, when some problems have high condition numbers, enhancing precision of global optima is always difficult when individuals easily drop into sticky state. At this time, a reinitialization-redistribution of individuals is necessary. Suppose from period  If Step1 (Decrease the interval of each decision variable): decrease the interval Step2 (Operation reinitialization: Reinitialize a very big number of individuals): take each variable Step3 (Operation redistribution: redistribute a small number of individuals): find the new best individual Reinitialization of a very big number of individuals is used to find the approximate position of global optima; in the vicinity of the approximate position of global optima, redistribution of a small number of work individuals is easy to find the global optima quickly and accurately by the algorithm SIRQVA. Conclusively, operation reinitialization is good at enhancing precision of an optimum solution, while operation redistribution is good at breaking sticky state of an individual. To make clear the principle of REINIT, we use the following example to illustrate the working process of REINIT. When When The process repeats When When When the current optimum solution is very closer to point o, the point o can be included in the scope of search space S Conclusively, the varying series of search space at each run of REINIT is as follows: After REINIT is executed, the current optimum solution will become much closer to point o; the series always varies cyclically: when REINIT is activated at the first time, the search space is  Initialize the following parameters: (a) Let Produce 5 random numbers: Calculate the state of S, I, R, Q and V of individual Execute the following operations:    The strategy of taking values of the parameters in SIRQVA is shown in The time complexity of SIRQVA is evaluated as shown in The characteristics of SIRQVA are as follows: The evolutionary process is a Markov process. From the definition of the activation, average, reinforcement, assimilation and combination operator, we know that the new generation of an alternative solution relates only with the current state of the alternative solution, has no relation with the process how the alternative solution evolved to its current state; The evolution has the characteristic of “each-step-is-not-bad”. From the definition of the growth operator, we know this. The evolution process is Markov chain, it means that production of a new generation of individuals relates only with the current generation, the older generations need not to be restored, therefore, the space complexity of SIRQVA reduces to be minimal. Starting from current position, there are three search directions for selection at next step: moving toward better direction than the current position; staying at the current position; moving toward worse direction than the current position. Paper However, if starting from current position, only two search directions are retained for next step: either moving toward better direction than the current position, or staying at the current position. This search strategy is called “each-step-is-not-bad”, then paper Because SIRVQA possesses of characteristics of Markov chain and each-step-is-not-bad, according to the conclusion obtained by paper SIRQVA has the global convergence under the meaning of probability, namely SIRQVA is constructed based on only the information that when In this section, the following work is achieved: Use Michalewicz function to carry out parameters selection and performance analysis of SIRQVA; Use some basic Benchmark Functions to carry out comparison between SIRQVA and other population-based optimization algorithms; Use some compound Benchmark Functions to carry out comparison between SIRQVA and other population-based optimization algorithms. The parameters in SIRQVA are set according to We use Michalewicz function E0 to test the performance of SIRQVA, the function is as follows: The function has In order to make clear that the parameters setting of SIRQVA gives influence on evolving process of SIRQV when it solves Michalewicz function, a deep research is made into the important parameters such as the number  From For objective function value, when the number of individuals For CPU time, when the number of individuals Therefore, we can conclude that when the number of individuals increases, the accuracy of the optimum solution increases at most circumstances, but when the number of individuals arrives at certain maximum value, the accuracy of the optimum solution does not increase any more and the consumed CPU time increases greatly, so it is necessary to give a suitable number of individuals for each run.  From For objective function value, when For CPU time, when Therefore, we can conclude that if  From For objective function value, when For CPU time, when Therefore, we can conclude that when the suitable value of  From When When Therefore, if    We use 20 famous basic Benchmark Functions to test the performance of SIRQVA, these Benchmark Functions are E0–E19, as shown in We use SIRQVA to solve the basic Benchmark Functions E0–E19 listed in When solving E3 and E6, REINIT is used, the trigger frequency is within [0,4000]. From We choose 8 population-based optimization algorithms to make comparison; these algorithms include SIS epidemic model-based optimization (SISA) When calculating, the parameters of the 8 population-based optimization algorithms are initialized according to The mean optimum objective function values of Benchmark Functions E0–E19 are shown in For each basic Benchmark Function, the mean optimum objective function value in In order to evaluate the actual performance of SIRQVA and the 8 population-based optimization algorithms listed in Based on the above-mentioned rule, the performance score of each optimization algorithm for each Benchmark Function is shown in From The average score of SIRQVA for each Benchmark Function is 1.0. The curves of convergence rate of SIRQVA and the other 8 population-based optimization algorithms listed in When solving Benchmark Function E0, from From When solving Benchmark Function E2, from Similar analysis on the other Benchmark Functions can be obtained from The Benchmark Functions that we minimized are functions that described in CEC05 Each of the Benchmark Functions possesses of very high condition number, it means that when a very little change of optimum solution will cause a great change of its objective function value. F15–F25 are hybrid functions, they are constituted with some basic Benchmark Functions listed in All functions are displaced in order to ensure that their optima can never be found in the center of the search space. In two functions, in addition, the optima cannot be found within the initialization range, and the domain of search is not limited (the optimum is out of the range of initialization). This suite is composed of the following functions.(1) 5 unimodal functions F1: Shifted Sphere Function. F2: Shifted Schwefel’s Problem 1.2. F3: Shifted rotated high conditioned elliptic function. F4: Shifted Schwefel’s Problem 1.2 with noise in fitness. F5: Schwefel’s Problem 2.6 with global optimum on bounds.(2) 20 multimodal functions(2.1) 7 basic functions. F6: Shifted Rosenbrock’s Function. F7: Shifted rotated Griewank function without bounds. F8: Shifted rotated Ackley’s Function with global optimum on bounds. F9: Shifted Rastrigin’s Function. F10: Shifted rotated Rastrigin’s Function. F11: Shifted rotated Weierstrass Function. F12: Schwefel’s problem 2.13.(2.2) 2 expanded functions F13: Expanded extended Griewank’s plus Rosenbrock’s Function (F8F2) F14: Shifted rotated expanded Scaffers F6.(2.3) 11 hybrid functions. Each one (F15–F25) has been defined through compositions of 10 out of the 14 previous functions (different in each case). F15: Hybrid composition function. F16: Rotated version of hybrid composition function F15. F17: F16 with noise in fitness. F18: Rotated hybrid composition function. F19: Rotated hybrid composition function with narrow basin global optimum. F20: Rotated hybrid composition function with global optimum on the bounds. F21: Rotated hybrid composition function F22: Rotated hybrid composition function with high condition number matrix. F23: Non-continuous rotated hybrid composition function F24: Rotated hybrid composition function. F25: Rotated hybrid composition function without bounds. When For the sake of comparison, we use CASE A to make comparison between SIRQVA and the other 8 population-based algorithms with the 25 compound Benchmark Functions. At first, we use SIRQVA to solve the 25 compound Benchmark Functions; the results we have obtained are illustrated in We used the 8 population-based optimization algorithms listed in The mean optimum objective function values of F1–F25 are as shown in Using the same method mentioned in Section From The average score of SIRQVA for each Benchmark function is 1.0. The curves of convergence rate of SIRQVA and the 8 population-based optimization algorithms listed in When solving Benchmark function F1, from The ranking of solution accuracy of these algorithms is as follows: When solving Benchmark function F25, from Fig. B(y) we can know that only SIRQVA can solve F25; the 8 algorithms listed in Similar analysis on other Benchmark Functions can be obtained from Fig. B, we do not repeat any longer here. Operator REINIT includes two operations: reinitialization and redistribution, as mentioned in Section At stage of operation reinitialization, a large number of individuals are used to reinitialize a search space, After reinitialization, if a new global optimum solution is found, it means that the activation of REINIT is effective, we call it the effective triggering point, the current global optimum solution is updated into the newly-found global optimum solution; else the current global optimum solution keeps unchanged. The property of REINIT is called as the exploitation ability of REINIT. At stage of operation redistribution, a small number of individuals are used to reinitialize the search space determined by the current global optimum solution. After redistribution, a normal search is made by SIRQVA. The positions of the work individuals are always updated no matter whether the current global optimum solution is updated or not. Therefore, sticky state of search may be broken. The property of REINIT is called as the exploration ability of REINIT. During searching process of SIRQVA, the identification of effectiveness of REINIT is illustrated in It is noteworthy that all assigned triggering points can always change positions of work individuals. Therefore, it can help a search to overcome sticky state.   When an optimization problem can be solved without the help of REINIT, if the operator is invoked forcibly, then the convergence rate of solving the problem may be decreased because continuous triggering of REINIT can consume much CPU time.  For the 20 basic Benchmark Functions E0–E19, SIRQVA and SISA can solve all these Benchmark Functions; DE can solve 18 Benchmarks; SaDE can only solve 16 Benchmarks; other algorithms can only solve 11–14 Benchmarks. For the 25 compound Benchmark Functions, SIRQVA can solve F1–F25. The 8 population-based optimization algorithms listed in For compound Benchmark function F8, its condition number is very much higher than that of the other compound Benchmark Functions. This is to say, for the theoretical global optimum solution SIRQVA possesses of 5 states (S, I, R, Q and V) and 13 state transitions, as listed in If the condition number of a Benchmark function is very high, a little change of its global optima will cause a great change of its objective function value. The REINIT operator is very effective for dealing with the optimization problems with high condition number, because increasing the number of initialization individuals greatly within the area next to global optima can enhance substantially the probability of locating global optima accurately. SIRQVA uses a small number of work individuals to make search for global optima, the search speed can increase greatly. For each individual in a population, if it does not move toward any worse position than its current position, then the algorithm converges. When comparing with other population-based intelligent optimization algorithms, SIRQVA has the following advantages: Individuals involved in SIRQVA are ones in a population, its related operators are constructed by use of the SIRQV bin model, these operators need not to depend on the actual optimization problems to be solved, and also do not need the support of pathology knowledge, therefore, SIRQVA can obtain generally-used operators. The construction method of the immune operator in SIRQVA is quite different from AIA SIRQVA uses 13 state transitions to make information exchange from many different ways, the information exchange among individuals are comprehensive and abundant, not only can it make individuals move to global optima quickly, but also it reduces the probability individuals drop into local optima, and it can expand the scope of search. Because an infectious disease attacks a small part of features of an individual, when individuals staying at different states make information exchange, only a small number of features join in computation, however, their IPI index can be improved also. Because features selected for processing decreases greatly, when solving complicated optimization problems, especially some high dimensional optimization problems, it can greatly enhance the convergence rate. REINIT has the following advantages: (a) if a search drops into sticky state, REINIT will be activated automatically so as to make the search escape from sticky state, else REINIT will be in sleep; (b) when a search arrives at the adjacent scope of global optima, REINIT can obtain global optima with high precision because a great number of individuals join in search within a very narrow scope. During iterating, strong individuals continue to grow, while weak individuals stop growing, it ensures the global convergence of SIRQVA. Up to now, many infectious diseases have been created, these infectious diseases can be described by epidemic dynamic models, according to the thought of SIRQVA, each of these infectious diseases described by epidemic models can be easily transferred into a population-based optimization algorithm. The future work includes: How to determine accurately the search scope of REINIT so as to make the initialization be very effective? How to develop some operators that enables information exchange to be much more sufficient? How to use the theory of the SIRQV epidemic model to further improve the performance of SIRQVA? How to embed the independent virus describing factor into some operators in SIRQVA? The article is supported by the   Among the 25 well-defined Benchmark Functions listed in Then normalize the weight: If  For Benchmark function F15, Rastrigin’s Function: Weierstrass Function: Griewank’s Function: Ackley’s Function: Sphere Function: Therefore, from Formula From Formula If If Therefore, from the above discussion we can know that for Benchmark function F15, its optimum solution is