This paper presents a framework for analysis of plant-wide processes from a network perspective. Using the concept of dissipativity, the conditions for plant-wide input–output stability and performance are developed, based on the dissipativity of individual subsystems and the topology of the network of the plant-wide process. Dynamic supply rates, expressed as quadratic differential forms, are proposed not only to render dissipativity based analysis less conservative but also allow the dynamic plant-wide performance criteria to be specified in terms of desired closed loop supply rates. The links between the plant-wide supply rate, finite 
                        
                           
                              L
                           
                           
                              2
                           
                        
                      gain in an extended input–output space and weighted 
                        
                           
                              H
                           
                           
                              ∞
                           
                        
                      norm are explored in this paper. These results lay a foundation for a supply rate-centric approach to plant-wide distributed control.Largely driven by increasingly tight economic and environmental requirements, modern chemical plants are becoming increasingly complex, often with dozens of process units with material recycling and energy integration. From a process control point of view, recycling streams can be understood as positive feedback loops within the process network, which have a deleterious impact on control performance ( Some existing approaches for control of plant-wide processes deal with the interactions between unit processes as uncertainties, as presented in Distributed control structures have gained attention in recent years. For example, an approach requiring minimal communication between controllers is presented in One promising approach to plant-wide analysis is based on a network perspective, decomposing a plant-wide process into individual process units interacting through a network with a known topology (e.g., Dissipativity theory, introduced in Results on the application of dissipativity theory to large-scale systems analysis and decentralized control design has been reported in the literature. For example, in This work presents a new approach to plant-wide stability and performance analysis and design based on network decomposition and the dissipativity of the subsystems. Both the plant-wide stability and performance specifications (in the form of weighted The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section The key concept used in this paper is dissipativity, which is defined in the context of behavioral systems theory as follows: A controllable system is said to be dissipative with storage function In this paper we are concerned with the case where  Let The conditions for asymptotic stability is given below:  The asymptotic stability is a notion of input–output stability used in the remainder of this paper. It implies that for vanishing input, the output and its derivatives asymptotically converge to zero. This is equivalent to the classical definition of input–output stability. It implies the asymptotic Lyapunov stability of the state space of the  See The above result is extended to general interconnected systems in Section  Consider a system with transfer function  See Consider a heat exchanger model ( The problem considered here is the analysis and control of large-scale systems with subsystems interconnected through a fixed network topology to meet given plant-wide In this work, only unidirectional flows in the process network are considered. This is justified in practice where flows between units are usually forced by pumps or compressors. As shown in To consider distributed control, the controllers are represented as two port systems with both local and remote inputs and outputs as shown in The entire plant-wide process system of The topology of the interconnections between process units is represented by the matrix The controller network is represented in a similar way. The individual controllers are stacked diagonally to form Assume that a QDF supply rate of the Assume that the supply rate of the The relation between the storage function of the The interconnection relations are shown in    The result is easily shown by adding the two dissipation inequalities, Once the interconnection topologies For the process and control networks shown in      The proof follows that of  It is clear from Both plant-wide stability and performance conditions can be represented as certain input–output gain conditions, conveniently represented by the dissipativity condition given in      The plant-wide dissipativity properties are determined from the individual subsystems and controllers (and the interconnection topologies) using The plant-wide A computationally simpler result for our purposes can be obtained for the case where the matrix    See The above results allow the plant-wide performance and stability criteria to be encoded in a desired supply rate that the closed-loop plant-wide process It is well known that for the existence of a non-trivial system satisfying a given supply rate the number of non-negative eigenvalues of the matrix inducing the supply rate is greater than or equal to the dimension of the inputs to the system. One method of ensuring this is to require the controller supply rate to admit a  See   Note that Combining the above results, the following result provides a convex algorithm (based on LMIs) for determining the required controller dissipativity properties to achieve given levels of plant-wide performance.    The result follows easily by combining the previous results in this paper. To achieve the desired plant-wide performance, the In this paper, a supply rate centric approach to analysis of plant-wide processes is presented. Plant-wide stability and performance criteria are represented in a unified form of desired closed-loop plant-wide dissipativity properties. In this setting, the network of processes is controlled by a network of controllers. Plant-wide stability and performance conditions are based on the dissipativity of individual subsystems and interconnection topologies. This leads to a very general and flexible framework for plant-wide control where different control structures and types, e.g. closed form control ( In this approach, the individual process models are only used to verify their dissipativity, not directly in control analysis and design. As the supply rate of plant-wide system is a linear function of the supply rates of each individual process unit and controller, the proposed approach allows the plant-wide control and analysis problems to be formulated in a Dynamic QDF supply rates are used to capture much more detailed dynamic system properties than traditional constant  Note that dissipativity with respect to  The half-line dissipativity of the system coupled with  The system   The argument is constructed based on the positive (semi-)definite case. The negative (semi-)definite case is completely analogous. It is clear from the form of the polynomial that if all coefficient matrices are positive semidefinite (and the As above, using this reasoning iteratively, it can be seen that Condition