Purpose
                  This study was conducted to evaluate reports of clinical outcomes of isolated capitellar fractures.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  We conducted a systematic review of medical databases reporting clinical outcomes of patients undergoing nonoperative and operative management of isolated capitellar fractures.
               
                  Results
                  We identified 28 studies for inclusion comprising 174 patients. All included studies were level IV evidence. Capitellar fractures were more common among women than men and were more likely to involve the nondominant arm. Type I fractures (84%) were more common than type II (14%) and III fractures (2%). Operative and nonoperative management both led to satisfactory clinical outcomes. No significant difference in outcomes was observed in those undergoing operative management compared with those undergoing closed reduction and immobilization.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Nonoperative and operative management of isolated capitellar fractures leads to satisfactory clinical outcomes as determined by postoperative range of motion, improvement in pain, and a return to previous levels of function. No statistical difference in outcomes was observed between those undergoing operative management compared with those treated with closed reduction and immobilization.Isolated fractures involving the humeral capitellum are rare injuries that account for approximately 1% of all elbow fractures. There is little high-level evidence regarding the clinical outcomes of isolated capitellar fractures. To address our hypothesis, we conducted a systematic review of multiple medical databases, including PubMed, Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL), SportDiscus, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials. The search was performed on January 25, 2012. All authors independently performed the search. Search terms included Inclusion criteria included English language studies reporting clinical outcomes of patients after isolated traumatic capitellar fractures. Isolated capitellar fractures were defined as a humeral capitellar fracture without trochlear involvement. Capitellar fractures involving the lateral most aspect of the trochlea were retained for analysis based on the original description of capitellar fractures by Bryan and Morrey. Exclusion criteria included non-English studies, studies failing to report clinical outcomes, studies reporting outcomes in patients with osteochondritis dissecans involving the capitellum, studies reporting outcomes in patients with Panner disease, and studies describing surgical techniques, studies in animal models, and studies determined to be level V evidence. Studies that included operative as well as nonoperative cohorts were excluded unless data for operatively managed patients were analyzed and reported separately. Studies failing to document the extent of trochlear involvement were excluded. Studies reporting outcomes of patients with coronal shear fractures involving both the capitellum and trochlea were excluded unless the study also reported separate data on patients with isolated capitellar involvement. All studies with a mean clinical follow-up of less than 1 year were excluded. The initial search yielded 1257 citations via PubMed. Application of inclusion criteria yielded 28 studies for inclusion ( Six variables were considered for this study as prognostic factors for each outcome variable: (1) patient age in years, (2) nonsurgical vs surgical treatment, (3) length of patient follow-up in months, (4) injury classification type I, II, or III according to Bryan and Morrey, (5) excision vs fixation, and (6) surgical fixation with Kirschner wire placement, small fragmented screw, Herbert screw, suture, cortical lag screw, headless screw, or bioabsorbable rod/pin. Statistical analysis was performed using STATA 9.2 software (StataCorp, College Station, TX, USA). Before we built the model, the assumption of normal distribution for all of the variables was determined using the likelihood ratio test. The significance level used was We found 28 studies that met all inclusion criteria. The analyzed studies used 5 different classification systems, including those of Bryan and Morrey, Five studies Five studies One study Clinical outcomes in patients undergoing open reduction and internal fixation were reported in 22 studies. Age was a positive predictor of increased pronation/supination postoperatively ( A significant difference ( No statistical difference was observed in postoperative range of motion ( The method of fixation was not associated with the presence of postoperative pain ( The management of isolated capitellar fractures has historically included operative and nonoperative techniques. We hypothesized that operative management of isolated capitellar fractures would lead to better clinical outcomes, including functional postoperative range of motion, minimal to no residual pain, and a return to previous levels of functioning compared with closed reduction and immobilization. Our findings did not support this hypothesis, because no statistical difference in postoperative range of motion, presence of pain, or joint instability was observed between patients undergoing operative or nonoperative management. Although numerous studies As understanding of the complex nature of these fractures has increased, operative management is perceived to result in reproducibly good outcomes. Because of the limited number of patients and heterogeneous reporting of outcomes, no comparison could be made between patients undergoing excision or fixation of the capitellar fragment according to fracture classification. This is important, because the role of simple excision in managing these fractures has historically been limited to smaller fragments or fragments with significant comminution, as seen with the type III fractures according to that of Bryan and Morrey, Advocates of open reduction and internal fixation state the need for retaining the capitellar fragment to avoid valgus deformity and lateral instability of the elbow. Kirschner wire fixation has traditionally been treatment of choice due to the often-large cartilaginous fragment with little or no subchondral bone. Challenges associated with fragment fixation are related to the lack of capitellar soft tissue attachment and limited dedicated blood supply, predisposing to fragment instability and avascular necrosis. This review found metallic screw fixation was the most commonly used technique. Although several different types of screw (cannulated, cortical lag, cancellous, headless, and Herbert screws) were used, no direct comparison between the different screws could be made due to the heterogeneous reporting of clinical outcomes. In general, screws providing stable fixation without penetration of the articular cartilage or the need for interval removal are thought to be preferable to fixation techniques that violate the articular cartilage or result in additional risks associated with planned reoperations. Other predictors of clinical outcomes analyzed in the current study include the effect of age and length of follow-up on postoperative range of motion, development of osteoarthritis, and the presence of pain. Our findings suggest that age is a reliable positive predictor of pronation/supination motion. Otherwise, there were no reliable predictors of any of the previously mentioned outcome measurements and indicates that age should not play a role in determining the appropriate treatment plan. Similarly, length of follow-up also failed to predict the development of osteoarthritis for any of the analyzed treatment modalities and indicates that the development of osteoarthritis at final follow-up remains dependent on accurate anatomic reduction of the fragment using open or closed techniques. If anatomic reduction is not achievable due to fragment comminution or small fragment size, making fixation impractical, excision remains a viable option, with no difference in clinical outcomes compared with those undergoing fixation. Limitations of the current study are related to the studies included and analyzed within this review. All of the studies were level IV evidence and are subject to the inherent biases associated with this type of study. The included studies, all retrospective, possessed significant heterogeneity with respect to patient age, mechanism of action, interval between injury and treatment, classification, medical imaging, clinical follow-up, and reporting and evaluation of clinical outcomes. Significant differences regarding the reporting of trochlea involvement existed across studies. Although we excluded studies that failed to document the extent of trochlea involvement, the inherent subjective bias associated with the classification of fractures may have lead to the inclusion of patients with trochlea involvement. These sources of selection, performance, transfer, and detection bias limit the conclusions drawn by this study and the direct application to current clinical practice and management. Despite these limitations, the current study represents the largest study to date comparing the clinical outcomes after operative and conservative management of traumatic capitellar fractures and serves as a platform from which future studies can be directed. Nonoperative and operative management of isolated capitellar fractures leads to satisfactory clinical outcomes as determined by postoperative range of motion, improvements in pain, and a return to previous levels of function. No statistical difference in outcomes was observed between patients undergoing operative management and those undergoing closed reduction and immobilization. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.