Background
                  Locking compression plates have become increasingly popular in orthopaedic surgery. However, the gold standard of treatment for distal fibular fractures remains fixation with a non-locking one-third tubular plate. It has been reported that locking plates in distal fibular fractures are associated with an increased complication rate.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  The objective of this study is to assess the complication rates of locking versus non-locking plates in patients who underwent surgical fixation of distal fibular fractures.
               
                  Materials & methods
                  A retrospective analysis of closed distal fibular fractures that underwent surgical repair over a 2-year period with either a locking or non-locking plate was undertaken, analysing the groups for both wound and overall postoperative complications.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 160 patients were treated over 2 years, of which 129 and 31 patients were treated with non-locking and locking plates respectively. There was no significant difference between the non-locking and locking plates overall complication rates (13.5% versus 15.4%, p
                     
                     =
                     0.76) or wound complication rates (3.97% versus 3.85%, p
                     =1.00).
               
                  Discussion
                  Distal fibular fractures managed with locking plates do not have a higher complication rate in comparison to those managed with non-locking plates.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  III (case control study).The incidence of ankle fractures has been steadily increasing over the past few decades and now represents an estimated 10% of all fractures The aim of our study is to assess the complication rates of locking plates versus non-locking plates for the treatment of distal fibular fractures. The primary outcome measure we sought to compare was the postoperative surgical wound site status, and the secondary outcome was to define any other complication that might ensue as a result of distal fibular fracture fixation. A retrospective analysis of all consecutive patients between January 2012 and December 2014 who underwent surgical fixation of a closed ankle fracture was undertaken. Data was collected from patient charts and electronic records from a single institution. Surgical fixation of the fibula was performed with either a locking or non-locking plate as determined by the operating surgeon ( In regards to operative technique and postoperative treatment, all procedures were performed under general anaesthesia with intravenous antibiotic (second-generation cephalosporin) prophylaxis administered during induction of anaesthesia. Following fracture reduction and insertion of a lag screw, a locking or non-locking neutralization plate was placed on the lateral aspect of the distal fibula. The locking plates used in the study were low profile precontoured periarticular titanium alloy plates ( The primary outcome was the status of the surgical wound sites, which were analyzed for any evidence of infection and graded as either minor or major. Minor wound infections were treated with oral antibiotics and reviewed in the outpatient setting. Major wound infections were classified as requiring re-admission, intravenous antibiotics and possible wound debridement. Secondary outcomes included any other complications related to the surgery. Minor complications were recorded such as prominence or irritability of metal, ankle swelling, and ankle pain (not requiring analgesia). Major complications were classified as failure of the metal work, non-union, mal-union, removal of metal or revision surgery. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version 22.0 for Windows A total of 160 patients were treated with ankle fractures classified as AO/OTA 44B or 44 The use of locking plates in periarticular fractures has steadily increased in the past few decades. They confer greater stability to fracture fixation in the presence of osteoporotic and or comminuted fractures Health care systems worldwide are faced with the growing challenges of balancing the geriatric trauma patient, elevated patient expected outcomes and concomitantly improving cost-savings. Complications related to ankle surgery can incur a large additional financial burden with an estimated average cost of $25000 extra per case Our study is a non-randomised retrospective review, and as such has inherent limitations. While the overall number of patients was 160, the locking plate group was small with 31 patients. A selection bias based on both age and fracture suitability also exists, and the subsequent group heterogeneity may impact the results. It is also important to highlight that while we have been able to mobilise patients with comminuted or fragility fractures immediately postoperatively, primarily due the stable fixation achieved with the use of locking plates, this would not be possible with a non-locking fracture fixation. The differing postoperative protocol may contribute to the subsequent complication rate and therefore affect the eventual outcome. The use of locking plates for the treatment of distal fibular fractures is not associated with an increased wound complication rate. In addition, our study did not demonstrate any significant difference in minor or major complications between the non-locking or locking plate fixations. None. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. None.