The effect of Cd2+ on the current efficiency, surface morphology and crystallographic orientations of the electrodeposited nickel from sulfate baths of varying compositions was investigated. The results indicated that Cd2+ had no significant effect on the current efficiency but there was a noticeable change in the surface morphology and deposit quality. The X-ray diffraction studies revealed that the (200) plane was the most preferred orientation and was not generally affected by the presence of Cd2+ in the electrolytic bath.The electrodeposition of nickel has been studied extensively by several investigators, with respect to current efficiency and deposit structural characteristics It is well known in the literature Thus clear information on the effect of Cd The rectangular electrolytic flow-through cell used in this work was similar to that described previously The nucleation overpotential (NOP) of nickel electrodeposition on a stainless steel substrate was determined by using the same technique as reported in our previous study The electrodeposition potential for nickel (II) in the pure nickel sulfate bath was found to be −0.85 V versus SCE. Addition of Na The effect of the presence of Cd In the absence of Cd Nickel deposits obtained at different Cd The contamination of the nickel deposit by cadmium in the four baths follows the order; Bath III<Bath IV<Bath II<Bath I. It was found that the nickel deposits obtained from Bath I contained the highest cadmium impurity at all the Cd  The presence of sodium sulfate in the pure nickel bath (Bath II) results in a morphology consisting of randomly oriented fine crystallites grown in the form of blocks of irregular shape ( Nickel sulfate solution containing boric acid (Bath III) produced a nickel deposit with sharp faceted crystals of different sizes spread uniformly throughout the cathode surface ( The presence of both boric acid and sodium sulfate (Bath IV) in the electrolyte resulted in a compact morphology where sharp edged crystallites of varying size (1–10 μm) were randomly oriented ( The effect of Cd The electrodeposits obtained from Bath II, showed crystal growth in the (200) and (111) directions similar to the deposits from Bath I (without Cd The preferred crystal orientations of the nickel deposit obtained from Bath III appeared to be quite different from the other baths. In this case, the order of preferred crystal orientation was (200) (220) (311) (111) with the (200) plane being the most preferred plane. Addition of 2 mg dm The presence of both sodium sulfate and boric acid (Bath IV) in the electrolyte promoted the crystal growth in the directions of the (111) and (200) planes as in the case of Bath II. Addition of 2 mg dm It is interesting to note that in all the baths at lower concentrations of Cd  The presence of Cd The presence of boric acid produces brighter nickel electrodeposits. Boric acid increases the NOP of nickel with a negative shift in the nickel electrodeposition potential. The contamination of the nickel deposit by cadmium in the four baths follows the order: Bath III<Bath IV<Bath II<Bath I. The degree of contamination in the nickel deposit is less when boric acid is also present in the electrolyte. Although definitive correlation between the surface morphology and crystal orientation of the electrodeposited metal is not evident from the present study, the (200) plane was the most preferred crystal plane and was not affected by the presence of Cd The authors thank P. Fallon for assistance in SEM, K. Seymour for XRD and T.B. Issa for general assistance throughout the work. The authors (Mohanty, Tripathy and Das) thank Dr. R.P. Das and Dr. V.N. Misra, Director, Regional Research Laboratory, Bhubaneswar for encouragement. The financial support of the A.J. Parker Cooperative Research Centre for Hydrometallurgy is acknowledged.