The influence of material properties on the separation grade efficiency of cyclones has long been ignored by researchers. This experimental study investigates the behaviour of two powders of similar density, Kaolin and SAE, in a small scale Stairmand cyclone with inlet velocities of 15, 30 and 45ms−1. Initially evidence of agglomeration of fine particles occurring within the cyclone body is observed; however, as the inlet velocity increases, particle attrition dominates the behaviour of fine particles in the grade efficiency graphs. Both powders respond similarly to increased flow rates; however, Kaolin exhibits a greater tendency to agglomeration and attrition, which is manifested in the difference between the respective grade efficiency curves, thus demonstrating the complex effect of material properties on cyclone efficiency.Reverse-flow cyclones, in the most fundamental respect, are a class of separator that removes particles from an air flow through utilising the effects of the centrifugal force. Robust in structure, relatively inexpensive to construct and requiring little maintenance, cyclones are used for the removal of harmful or nuisance air-borne particulates or liquid droplets. Several studies of small scale reverse-flow cyclones have been undertaken by examining the effects of cyclone design and air flow rate on collection efficiency During a recent collaboration between Cheng and the authors of this paper, data indicative of particle breakage occurring within miniature cyclones for use in dry powder inhalers was observed and reported The characteristic air flow pattern of a reverse-flow cyclone consists of an inner and an outer vortex, both spiralling in the same sense, with the outer vortex descending into the cyclone, reversing its direction and exiting the cyclone through the vortex finder located in the cyclone roof It is well established that as the concentration of dust within an air flow increases the overall separation efficiency of the cyclone increases while the pressure drop decreases. This improvement in the cyclone performance has been noted to commence at dust loadings as low as 0.00014 The mechanism by which increased dust loading improves the overall separation efficiency is not clearly understood; however the two main arguments revolve around theories of critical dust loading and particle agglomeration, with both effects taking place in or immediately after the cyclone inlet. Hoffmann & Stein Muschelknautz & Trefz introduced and developed the concept of critical or limit dust loading In contrast to the concept of critical load, Mothes & Löffler Agglomeration, or coagulation, is the primary inter-particle occurrence between aerosol particles. When aerosol particles collide due to their relative motion, the particles may adhere to each other and form larger particles known as agglomerates. Kinematic coagulation arises when the relative motion of the particle is the result of an external force, such as the centrifugal force as is the case with cyclones Data indicative of particle de-agglomeration occurring in small scale reverse-flow cyclones for use in dry powder inhaler (DPI) was observed and reported by Cheng The study of particle attrition within mineral processing cyclones seems to be sadly lacking. As Reppenhagen et al. Particle attrition in FCC cyclones is due to particle–particle collisions and particle–wall collisions; however FCC cyclones operate under very high solid loadings Further to Reppenhagen's observation regarding cyclone theories, the authors are not aware of a cyclone model based on mineral processing experiments that addresses attrition, which is included among others As mentioned in the The experimental capabilities and results of five studies of small scale cyclones are briefly reviewed below. In four of the studies neither agglomeration nor attrition was noted by the researchers; however as mentioned previously the study by Cheng Kim & Lee Moore & McFarland Xiang, Park & Lee Of particular interest is the study carried out by Zhu & Lee Using the test rig equipment as described in Despite the wide ranging technology deployed and use of various aerosols the study of small scale cyclones, with the exception of Cheng's investigations, has been unable to demonstrate either agglomeration or attrition of particles. There has been greater success with laboratory scale cyclones as the following section shows. Work carried out by Hoffmann et al. Paiva's investigation into particle agglomeration in cyclones Ji et al. These three examples show that using different experimental equipment both on and off line particle counting, the agglomeration of particles in both solid and liquid aerosols has been observed in cyclones operating with 10–25 In contrast to the numerous mineral processing cyclone investigations, some of which are reviewed above, attrition of FCC catalysts has been noted in several studies The experimental equipment essentially consists of a vibrating feeder to dispense the catalyst particles into the inlet of the cyclone, a cyclone, a downstream 25 The study by Reppenhagen To the best of the authors' knowledge, no study of cyclone processing minerals, liquid aerosols or polystyrene latex particles, other than that of Cheng, has demonstrated particle attrition, where the term attrition is used in its widest sense to describe the production of fines through either abrasion or fragmentation. Such studies are plentiful and have been undertaken over several decades. As such Reppenhagen is justified in the assertion that attrition is the preserve of FCC catalyst processing cyclones. However the present study demonstrates that given the correct air flows, mineral and liquid aerosols in cyclones are susceptible to attrition and as such their associated material properties affect the grade efficiency of the cyclone. The tangential-inlet is a design commonly used for reserve-flow cyclones In addition to the cyclone, two FDM rectangular sections of lengths 0.025 The particle counter is a Palas Welas digital 3000 white light aerosol spectrometer used to determine particle size and particle number Two custom-made Venturi tubes with 14 The laboratory temperature, atmospheric pressure and relative humidity were checked and recorded frequently, mainly to enable greater accuracy in calculating the air flow within the test rig through the air density and the standard equation for Venturi tubes Two test powders are used namely Kaolin-light (also known as Kaolinite, Al Both materials have a similar density of approximately 2600 In an additional experiment Di-Ethyl-Hexyl-Sebacat (DEHS), (C Inlet velocities of 15, 30 and 45 Pressurised dry air was used to clean all equipment between SAE fine and Kaolin tests to prevent contamination. The bin or hopper below the cyclone was not cleaned out after tests of the same dust type. This allowed tests to be undertaken to show if re-entrainment was occurring. To determine whether dust loadings at very light loads affected the separation performance, two feed rates for the RBG particle dispenser were determined for each powder and each flow rate. The feed rates chosen reflected the minimum and maximum particle counts from the particle sensors that remained statistically robust for the 0.2–10 The separation grade efficiency for Kaolin and SAE for inlet velocity 15 The effects of agglomeration can best be illustrated by the upstream and downstream particle distributions and relating these to the grade efficiency graphs. Experiments showed that increasing the flow rate gradually lowers the position of the minima. On reaching an inlet velocity of 30 On reaching an inlet velocity of 45 The grade efficiency graphs for Kaolin and SAE fine, The upstream and downstream distribution for Kaolin with an inlet velocity of 45 It could be argued that the increase of fine particles may reflect a re-entrainment of previously collected particles from the cyclone walls or bin. To test this theory at the end of each experiment for a given flow rate, the dust feed was disconnected from the test rig and the flow rate maintained. Upstream and downstream particle sampling was carried out as previously described. No part of the test rig was cleaned prior to these experiments. The results are shown in terms of number distribution as separation efficiency has no meaning with a zero dust loading. The distribution diagrams are shown for Kaolin being present in the bin, with similar characteristics also found for SAE. As the test powders with an inlet velocity of 45 The results infer that less than 5% of fine particles leaving the cyclone were re-entrained from the cyclone walls or bin with an inlet velocity of 45 The most obvious source of error in any separation grade efficiency experiment is the sampling technique and particle counting equipment. The particle counter used in this experiment was the Palas Welas 3000 and previously Ji et al. The two test aerosols used to produce the data shown in the previous subsection, were both solids. Using a similar test rig but with the RBG 1000 particle generator replaced by an atomizer aerosol generator, the ATM 220, DEHS was dispersed into the air flow of the test rig to examine the behaviour of a liquid aerosol. The same methodology was applied as to the previous experiment. From the evidence given above, agglomeration has been shown to occur in a small scale reverse flow cyclone processing Kaolin, SAE fine and DEHS, with an inlet velocity of 15 Five studies of small scale cyclones were briefly reviewed in Attrition has been investigated in cyclones processing FCC catalysts and operating with inlet velocities between 15 and 25 The attention of the study now turns to analysing whether the particle agglomeration and attrition occur in the upstream piping, that is after the upstream sampling port but before the cyclone, in the cyclone's inlet or solely in the main body of the cyclone. The configuration of the test rig is now as shown in   From the evidence it is proposed that there is agglomeration of small particles to form larger particles occurring in the pipe and some unclassified separation occurring in the inlet section; however the main contribution to the fine agglomeration that forms the hook in The experiments for 360 and 540 Turbulence can affect the separation performance of a cyclone by enabling particles, which would otherwise have sufficient mass to be successfully captured, to be carried sufficiently close to the vortex finder through which they are able to escape. However for turbulence to contribute to agglomeration or attrition it has to create conditions that either allow particles to come close together, kinematic agglomeration, or has to produce shearing forces significant enough to break particles apart. The Reynolds number can be used to characterise the turbulence of a flow within a cyclone, with the cyclone body diameter used as the characteristic length and by considering the inlet velocity From studies reviewed in this paper there appears to be little correlation between agglomeration, attrition and Reynolds number. For example the cyclone used in this study demonstrated attrition with an associated Reynolds number of 12,000, whereas Hoffmann noted agglomeration occurring (in a 0.45 The dust loadings for Kaolin were approximately 0.0001 As shown in the previous subsection, unclassified separation occurred at the inlet for the 15 The pressure drops across the cyclone, taken from pressure taps at the inlet and vortex finder, are shown in On close examination of the graphs in The picture for the SAE fine is less clear, with little difference between the production of particles through attrition with respect to loading and a far narrower range of particle diameters being produced by attrition for the 30 Reppenhagen and Werther Kaolin, with a low Mohs hardness and a flexible tenacity, has demonstrated a greater tendency to agglomeration and attrition than SAE, with high Mohs hardness and brittle tenacity, for all inlet velocities and dust loadings used in this study. Despite their similar densities and general behaviour at different inlet velocities, it appears that difference in material properties affects the fine particles within a small scale cyclone. This study has investigated particle behaviour and separation efficiency of a 40 The hooks or minima in the cyclone separation grade efficiency graphs corresponding to fine particle agglomeration were observed at an inlet velocity of 15 With increased inlet velocities of 30 and 45 Attrition and agglomeration within cyclones were found to be largely dependent on inlet velocity, with the particle properties playing a secondary role. Although Kaolin and SAE fine followed similar trends throughout the study, Kaolin was clearly more prone to both agglomeration and attrition. This difference in particle behaviour is the most likely explanation of the difference in the grade efficiency curves. The relation between dust loading and attrition was also examined, with increased dust loadings of Kaolin producing a smaller percentage of fine particles through attrition relative to the upstream particle count, than a lighter load. However this relationship was not upheld with SAE fine, suggesting that material properties contributed more to attrition than dust loading alone. From a review of experimental results from several cyclones studies it is concluded that in cyclones processing the relatively brittle FCC catalyst, attrition will occur with inlet velocities between 15 and 25 As the accuracy of particle counting equipment available to researchers continues to improve, the understanding of the complex nature of particle and air flow interaction will continue to develop. This study which has revealed some of the influence of material properties on the grade efficiency graphs of a small scale Stairmand cyclone in comparison to the traditional S-shape efficiency curve synonymous with cyclones appears over simplified and lacking in the detail which makes this area of research so fascinating. Gratitude is expressed for the support of  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at