The performance data of hydrocyclones in circuits containing a gravity induced mill (hereafter referred to as a stirred mill) were evaluated to understand their performance in the circuits and the current operational practices. There are many studies conducted to understand and evaluate the hydrocyclone performances in the semi-autogenous mill (SAG) and ball mill circuits. The literature on hydrocyclone operation in stirred milling circuits is still limited. A database consisting of various hydrocyclone sizes, operating conditions, classification duties, and commodities was developed based on extensive circuit surveys. The database was used to evaluate the hydrocyclone performance. Among the key operational issues observed were poor circuit control strategies, improper hydrocyclone sizing and operation in the roping condition. Analysis of long-term operational data indicated that hydrocyclone feed solid density is an essential operating variable that needs to be controlled to maintain the cut size. An increase in hydrocyclone feed density leads to an increase in cut size. Almost 50% of the hydrocyclones (in the database) were operating in the roping condition. Besides the hydrocyclone feed solid density, high amounts of fine particles (−25μm) in the hydrocyclone feed also caused the roping condition. Further research is required to operate the hydrocyclone in a spraying condition when the feed has high solid-density and a high content of fines. Plitt’s cut size model was fitted to the data set to evaluate its capability to be used in the stirred mill’s hydrocyclone. The analysis shows the Plitt’s model can predict the cut size when the hydrocyclone is in spraying mode. This result indicates that Plitt’s model can be used for the regrind duty hydrocyclones. An empirical model was developed relating the hydrocyclone feed density and the Plitt onset roping hydrocyclone underflow density. This model can be used to predict the roping condition. Finally, the impact of hydrocyclone performance on circuit performance was compared through the size specific energy of the mill. High size specific energy values were observed when the hydrocyclone is operating in the roping condition. These findings are based on the real operating condition, and it shows the importance of operating the hydrocyclone optimally to achieve overall circuit efficiency.In the modern mineral processing circuit, classification is the link between the milling and separation (i.e. flotation, leaching or physical separation). The hydrocyclone is a well-accepted technology in the mineral processing concentrators due to its simplicity, small size and ability to cope with high feed flow rate ( The gravity induced stirred mills are widely used for the fine grinding duty as they are considered to be an energy efficient grinding technology compared to the tumbling mills. Currently, the stirred mills are operating in secondary, tertiary and regrinding duties from low to high feed rate (i.e. 30–800 The stirred mills have a narrow efficient operating window. If the operating condition of the stirred milling circuit is not within the efficient operating regime (for example, due to poor feed quality or hydrocyclone operating conditions), then the overall circuit efficiency may be reduced ( Typically, the stirred mill circuits are operated in the closed circuit configuration where the hydrocyclone underflow stream is feeding the mill, and the mill discharge combines with the circuit feed for classification in the hydrocyclone. The hydrocyclone classification efficiency dictates the quality of the mill feed. Issues relating to classification efficiencies such as roping and excessive fines bypass to underflow stream affects the mill-feed quality. For example, the roping condition is caused by low rotational speed and high-solid density in the underflow stream where the underflow discharge appears like a rope. Roping is an unstable operation that leads to coarser cut size, minimises the bypass of fines to the underflow and may result in blockage of the underflow stream. Conversely, excessive fines bypass is caused by an incorrectly sized or worn spigot ( The aim of this paper is to assess the performance of hydrocyclones that are installed in gravity induced stirred mill circuits. The hydrocyclone performance data were obtained from the circuit audits that were performed at five mineral processing concentrators. These hydrocyclones were operating in the secondary, tertiary and regrind duties for gold-copper, silver-lead-zinc, copper-gold, gold and iron ore. The circuit audit was carried out for one hour under steady state conditions. Samples were collected at 15 The dimensions and operating variables of a hydrocyclone affect its product properties i.e. particle size distribution, mass split, and solid density. These product properties affect the subsequent processes, for example, the hydrocyclone underflow quality may affect grinding efficiency while the cyclone overflow affects the separation process i.e. flotation or leaching. It is essential to operate the hydrocyclone efficiently for the subsequent process enhancement. Although the hydrocyclone is a mature technology in the mineral processing circuits, there are still design and operational issues that affect the overall grinding circuit performance. The issues include inconsistent water addition to the hydrocyclone feed sump, hydrocyclone size, feed density control, pressure and roping. Hydrocyclone feed slurry density is controlled through water addition at the sump. Normally, the hydrocyclone feed line has a nuclear density gauge which is connected to the distributed control system (DCS). If the feed density increases, then the water addition at the hydrocyclone feed sump is increased to reduce the density of hydrocyclone feed. Conversely, if the slurry density is low, then the water addition is reduced or shut off to increase the hydrocyclone density.    The hydrocyclone feed flow rate and pressure are almost consistent, but the hydrocyclone feed density increases. The increase in the feed density was followed by a rise in the water addition for maintaining the density. The key observation is an increase in cut size as the density increases. The cut size steadily increases as the hydrocyclone feed density increases but after a certain value, the cut size increases drastically. Normally, drastic cut size increase is observed during the roping condition. Selection of the hydrocyclone is an essential part of grinding circuit design. Improper hydrocyclone selection leads to poor grinding circuit operation. For example, large diameter hydrocyclones have been installed in low throughput regrind circuits with only two hydrocyclones in operation during full plant production. This hydrocyclone selection is a poor design choice and has led to inefficient operation of the total grinding circuit. Eqs. The feed density has a major effect on the hydrocyclone performance. Based on these results, it is essential to keep the hydrocyclone feed density at the appropriate level to maintain throughput, achieving desired cut size and maintaining desired solid density of mill feed. It is essential to use the data obtained from the density gauge to maintain the classification efficiency and throughput. The authors have seen a number of grinding circuits that have a malfunctioning or poorly calibrated density gauge.   This section is reporting the effect of hydrocyclone pressure and diameter on the cut size. The 10″ hydrocyclone was used for the secondary grinding duty in two different circuits. The targeted hydrocyclone overflow P80 (80% passing size) in the first circuit is 90 The 6″ hydrocyclone is being operated at high pressure to obtain the cut size around 20  Recently, most of the high throughput concentrators are installing large hydrocyclones to cope with high feed flow rate. This approach has been extended to downstream processes in the regrind circuit where some sites have installed larger hydrocyclones and practise a poor control strategy that leads to poor circuit performance. Small hydrocyclones with an increased number of units (to cope with high feed flow rate) are a better option to achieve a finer cut size and fine hydrocyclone overflow particle size. Conversely, smaller hydrocyclones require many units to cope with high feed flow rate. Trade-off studies between large hydrocyclone operated at high pressure or small hydrocyclone operated at moderate pressure for a given application are essential for future stirred mill circuits. This section has demonstrated the operating regime of the hydrocyclone for secondary, tertiary and regrinding applications. As mentioned in the previous section, roping is an adverse condition for the overall grinding circuit performance due to poor classification. This condition leads to coarser circuit product to the flotation plant. The roping condition occurs when the viscosity of the slurry is high in the hydrocyclone. The increase of viscosity is influenced by two factors i.e. increases in % solids and the amount of fines. The database consisted of 45 sets of industrial hydrocyclone data where 22  Another aspect which is not covered in this paper that should be taken into consideration is hydrocyclone feed temperature. The viscosity of the internal medium in a hydrocyclone is affected by solid density, amount of fines and temperature. The temperature becomes a significant issue when the location of concentrator results in extreme changes in temperature.   As mentioned earlier in this paper the hydrocyclone underflow is feeding the grinding mills in a typical reversed closed circuit configuration. The operating condition of the hydrocyclones and the quality of the product affect the mill performance. The hydrocyclone data analysis indicated that water bypass to the hydrocyclone underflow stream and the presence or absence of the roping condition affect the overall hydrocyclone performance. These two operating variables were used to develop the hydrocyclone operating criteria. There are two models used to predict the roping condition i.e. Plitt and SPOC Roping Models (as shown in Eqs. The mill performances were gauged based on the size specific energy values as shown in Eq. These results emphasised the importance of good hydrocyclone operating conditions to maintain the mill feed quality. In most cases, the emphasis is given to the hydrocyclone overflow streams that are feeding the flotation and assuming that the mill can grind the poor quality feed. This assumption may be relevant to the tumbling mills as they are more forgiving compared to the stirred mills. Stirred mills operate efficiently in a narrow operating regime. If the mill is operated outside this regime, then the overall milling efficiency plummets. Assessment of hydrocyclone performances in the gravity induced stirred milling circuits was carried out on the extensive data that were collected during the circuit performance audit. The data set consists of a wide range of hydrocyclones sizes (6″–26″) in secondary, tertiary and regrind circuits of typical commodities. The key discussions in this paper include the selection of hydrocyclone, issues in the circuit – inappropriate water addition, the effect of hydrocyclone operational variables (feed density and pressure), roping and impact of hydrocyclone operating condition on milling efficiency. The analysis also indicated that some hydrocyclones were over or undersized for a given operation. This phenomenon has led to poor hydrocyclone performance and control as well as affecting the total circuit efficiency. One of the key issues in the hydrocyclone operation is poor water addition control at the hydrocyclone feed sump. Normally, the expert control system in the circuit is programmed to keep the hydrocyclone feed sump at a constant level by varying the water addition. This control strategy is poor as it affects the consistency of hydrocyclone feed solid density. Furthermore, long-term operational data that were analyzed show that hydrocyclone feed solid density needs to be kept constant within an efficient regime for hydrocyclone operation. If the feed solid density is high, it may affect the hydrocyclone cut size and lead to the roping condition. There is an interaction between hydrocyclone size and pressure where larger hydrocyclones are being operated at a higher pressure to achieve the same fine cut size. Smaller hydrocyclones can operate at lower pressure to achieve finer cut size. Good control and stable pressure can be achieved by installing many small hydrocyclones to achieve finer cut size, but the trade-off is high maintenance effort and cost. Roping is one of the main issues observed in many hydrocyclone operations. The roping mode exists in almost 50% of the hydrocyclone operations in the data set. Roping is caused by highly viscous feed entering the hydrocyclone for classification. Slurry viscosity is contributed by high solid content, amount of fines and temperature. In this assessment the amount of −25 An empirical model was developed that relates the hydrocyclone feed density (v/v) with the onset Plitt roping solid density. This model can be used as a guide to predict the hydrocyclone feed solid density at which roping commences. Finally, the data analysis also indicates that hydrocyclone performance affects the mill grinding efficiency. Based on these findings, it is essential to operate the hydrocyclone efficiently to maximise the overall benefits of the gravity induced stirred mill circuit. The authors would like to thank