Ion exchange experiments have been done to separate Pt(IV) and Rh(III) from chloride solution. Loading of the two metals into anion exchange resins, such as AG1-x2, AG1-x8 and AGMP-1 resin, was investigated in the HCl concentration range from 0.1 to 5M. The concentration ratio of Pt and Rh in the chloride solution was fixed at 10:1. It was found that the loading of Pt into the resins followed Langmuir isotherm. The resins employed in this study had selectivity for Pt over Rh. The concentration of HCl had a pronounced effect on the loading of the two metals and Pt was effectively separated from Rh at low concentration of HCl. Batch experiments indicated that AG1-x8 resin was the most effective in separating Pt and Rh in our range. Continuous experiments with AG1-x8 resin verified that complete separation of Pt from Rh was possible. The loaded AG1-x8 resin was successfully regenerated by elution with thiourea.Platinum group metals (PGMs) are extensively used in automobile, chemical and electronics industry owing to their specific physical and chemical properties. Among PGMs, about 34% of Pt, 55% of Pd and 95% of Rh are consumed in the production of auto catalysts ( Separation of Pt and Rh from chloride solution have been investigated by solvent extraction ( In this study, an optimum condition to separate Pt(IV) and Rh(III) from chloride solution has been investigated by using ion exchange resins, such as, AG1- Stock solutions of platinum and rhodium were prepared by dissolving the necessary amount of PtCl Commercial resins, AG1- Batch ion exchange experiments were carried out in a shaking incubator (HB-201SF, Hanbaek Scientific Co.) using 100 In continuous experiments, 4 The concentration of metal in the aqueous phase was measured by ICP-OES (Spectro arcos). The concentration of metal in resin was obtained by mass balance. Equilibrium loading of Pt from HCl solution was investigated by using AG1- According to the product catalog by Bio-Rad, the cross-linkage of AG1- In order to investigate the loading behavior of Pt on these resins, adsorption of Pt was analyzed by using Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms. Both isotherms are frequently used to describe the adsorption of metal ion during ion exchange ( Since Pt exists as PtCl Adsorption of Rh from HCl solution was investigated by using AG1- When the concentration of HCl is 1 According to the results of batch adsorption experiments of Pt and Rh from individual solutions, there is a possibility to separate Pt and Rh from chloride solution by using one of these anion exchange resins. Our results show that the loading capacity of AG resins for Pt is higher than that for Rh in our range. In order to separate Pt and Rh from a mixed chloride solution, AG1- The adsorption behaviors of Pt and Rh by AG1- The separation factor obtained by the resins at 1 In order to investigate the effect of concentration of Pt and Rh on the adsorption of these metals, the concentration of Pt was varied from 0.001 to 0.005 In order to regenerate the loaded resin, elution conditions were investigated by employing different eluents. In the published papers, NaCl, Na According to the results in In The elution results indicate that NaCl had low ability to elute Pt and Rh from the resins. The use of 2 Batch experiments with AG1-x8 indicate that it is possible to separate Pt from Rh by adjusting HCl concentration of the mixed solution. Therefore, continuous experiments were done by employing glass column. In these continuous experiments, the amount of resin was fixed at 4 According to the result obtained from Separation of Pt and Rh from the mixed chloride solution was investigated by using AG1- This work was supported by a grant from the fundamental R&D Program for Core Technology of Materials funded by the