Inverse gas chromatography has great potential in allowing an enhanced understanding of mineral surfaces, and the interactions between particles and air and water in mineral processing separations, such as flotation.
                  Two minerals of different degrees of natural hydrophobicity were investigated, namely galena and quartz. The surface energy was determined as a function of surface area, with the quartz sample displaying a higher work of adhesion, implying a higher degree of hydrophilicity. This was then compared to microflotation experiments. The higher work of adhesion to water for the quartz than galena (114.54mJm−2 compared to 101.71mJm−2 @ 5% coverage; 86.78mJm−2 compared to 71.69mJm−2 @ 38% coverage) was related to a lower recovery of quartz (6.94%) than galena (27.63%) through collectorless flotation.Flotation is a separation process that utilizes the differences in the physico-chemical properties, such as wettability, of different minerals to facilitate their separation. It is one of the most widely used processes in the mining and mineral processing industry with hundreds of millions of tonnes of ore processed annually using flotation. The process is an important ore concentration step used to separate the valuable material in an ore from the waste material (gangue). The wettability or wetting characteristic of a material is a measure of the interaction of the material surface with water. A wettable material is hydrophilic while a non-wettable material is hydrophobic. The most common method of characterising wettability is by the measurement of contact angles. The idea of observing a three phase contact angle created by a fluid sitting on a smooth surface in air was first proposed by Thomas Young in 1805 The γ values denote surface tension (or energy) [mJ The wettability of a particle surface is vital in the flotation process with the degree of wettability of a material being determined by its surface energy. However, as noted by Sun & Berg, the database of the surface energy of solids is extremely small, especially when compared to that of liquids The total solid surface energy (γ Recent work on surface energy suggests that the specific surface energy (γ The work of adhesion, W W As indicated by Eq. Conventional gas chromatography (GC) is used to determine the composition of an unknown volatile vapour mixture. The vapour is passed through a column containing a packed bed of a known solid, and the elution peaks of the components of the vapour detail what they are. In inverse gas chromatography (iGC), a known volume of a known vapour is passed through a column containing particles under investigation. The elution peak obtained gives information on the surface properties of the material. In order to determine the dispersive component of the surface energy, a series of non-polar probes must be used to obtain a linear relationship between the net retention volume (V The solid mineral sample under investigation is the stationary phase while a carrier gas, such as helium, acts as the mobile phase The iGC technique is widely used in the study of polymers (both synthetic and biological), polymer blends, glass, pharmaceutical powders, carbon fibres and solid foods. Common properties measured include polymer crystallinity, phase transition temperatures, solid surface area, adsorption characteristics, diffusion parameters and Acid–Base characteristics. Gamble et al. used the iGC technique to investigate the surface energy characteristics of an active pharmaceutical ingredient From Schultz et al. Dorris & Gray developed a technique to determine the dispersive surface energy using the carbon number on the alkane chain Inverse gas chromatography has been used in limited studies of mineral surfaces, and as yet the wetting characteristics have not been investigated. Bandsoz et al. used iGC to investigate the surface properties of clays from a Wyoming bentonite sample, including the effect of adding polymers to the surface of the samples There have been a few exceptions, including the effect of temperature on the free energy of adsorption of probes onto a hematite sample The two minerals investigated in this project were galena and quartz. These two materials were chosen because galena is a sulphide mineral with a certain degree of natural hydrophobicity (and a major mineral in lead production) while quartz is naturally hydrophilic. Therefore, a difference was expected in both the measured surface energies and flotation responses of these materials. Crystals of galena and quartz were obtained from Ward's Scientific (United States of America). The samples were in the form of large crystals and were crushed in a jaw crusher (Svedala Industries Inc.) and ground in a drum mill (Siebtechnik) to obtain a particle size of 100% passing a screen with a 106 The N Inverse gas chromatography was carried out using the Surface Energy Analyser, SEA (Surface Measurement Systems Ltd., UK). The samples were placed in presilanised glass columns, with an internal diameter of 4 The dispersive surface energy was determined by passing known volumes of alkane probes through the column, with a helium carrier gas, allowing sufficient time for the entire probe vapour to elute through the column. The alkanes used were nonane, octane, heptane and hexane, all HPLC grade (Sigma Aldrich). Both the Schultz and Dorris–Gray Theories were used, with the Schultz Theory being presented in the A microflotation cell was used for lab-scale flotation to determine the flotation response of a mineral. The cell was a variation on the Partridge–Smith flotation cell 55  For the following sections, the surface energy reported was calculated using the Schultz Method.  It can be seen that the surface energy of the quartz sample is higher than that of the galena, over the entire surface of the sample, from  The ratio of the specific component of the surface energy to the total surface energy has previously been related to the hydrophilicity of a surface (Eq. As can be seen, over the entire surface analysed, the quartz has a higher degree of hydrophilicity. Therefore, as with the data on the work of adhesion, it would be expected that the quartz would have a greater affinity to water than the galena. This would then lead to a lower recovery in flotation. The results of the collectorless microflotation experiments are shown in The microflotation results match those expected from the measurement of the surface energy, with the mineral having the higher work of adhesion to water (quartz) being more hydrophilic and having a lower recovery. Further work will increase the understanding of the heterogeneous nature of mineral surfaces and the impact on flotation. This could be extended to investigating the probability of poorly liberated minerals attaching to air bubbles, thereby allowing gangue minerals to be recovered through true flotation, thereby decreasing the grade of the concentrate. This is the first time that inverse gas chromatography has been applied to investigate the wetting of mineral surfaces as applied to flotation. The fact that the surface heterogeneity will also be a useful method of determining the flotation of incompletely liberated particles, as the surface chemistry of these would differ considerably over the particle surface. Further investigations will also be undertaken into the role of surface energy and work of cohesion between solids in the flotation of slimes. The surfaces of galena and quartz have been shown to be heterogeneous in nature, through measuring the surface energy at different surface coverage. The quartz sample analysed has a greater work of adhesion to water, and a greater degree of hydrophilicity at all measured coverages and an expected lower recovery after microflotation. Inverse gas chromatography has shown to have potential in determining the wetting characteristics of mineral surfaces, and will prove to be a powerful tool in characterising mineral surfaces. The authors would like to acknowledge the