Floating solids suspension in water has been studied using up-pumping pitched blade turbines (PTU). Studies were performed to determine optimum geometry and hydrodynamic characteristics of agitated systems for floating solids suspension. The impact of floating solids concentrations and particle size on the mixing time, t
                     m, the just completely suspended impeller speeds, N
                     JS, and the power consumption were examined. The effects of impeller diameter and its off-bottom clearance as well as the impeller blade angle on mentioned parameters were also observed. The mixing time of suspended system was measured by a conductivity technique using the sodium chloride solution as tracer, whereas, power consumption was measured by the torque table. The efficiency of PTU impellers was compared to that of other, more conventional impellers. Obtained results point to the fact that the PTU may be a viable option if the floating slurry process requires the state of complete solids suspension and its longer time maintenance.constant in mixing rate equation ( exponent in baffle width (m) solids concentration (kg impeller clearance from bottom, (m) particle diameter (m) agitator diameter (m) (=0.17 gravitational acceleration (m height of liquid from bottom of vessel (m) mixing rate constant (s impeller speed (rps or rpm) impeller speed at just suspended conditions (rps or rpm) dimensionless mixing time Power number (= Reynolds number (= impeller power draw (W) power consumption per unit mass at just suspended conditions (W vessel diameter (m) mixing time (s) volume of the liquid in the mixing tank (m volume of tracer (m blade width (m) location of conductivity probe (m) location of injection point (m) blade angle (째) viscosity of liquid (N density of liquid (kg density of particle (kg mass fraction of solid (kg/kg) Mixing and dispersion of solids in liquid is a process frequently encountered in industrial practice. In many cases successful suspension of solids have a significant influence on the quality and/or quantity of the final product. Most industrial solid/liquid mixing systems involve suspension of solids particles heavier than the liquid, and these suspensions have received extensive research attention. However, there are several applications where solids are lighter than the liquid and require pulling down action to produce homogeneous slurries. The suspension of floating solids is of particular interest in the fields of minerals processing, fermentation and sewage treatment, but so far only a few papers have been published about suspending of this kind of solids The complete drawdown of floating solids by agitated liquids in stirred tanks can be achieved by two different mechanisms. It was found that in the full-baffled tanks, where the formation of the vortex was suppressed by the presence of the baffles, the intensity of turbulence is primarily responsible for particle dispersion. In this case, energy dissipation and position of the impeller with respect to the liquid surface were found to be the controlling parameters. When alternative baffle configurations were used instead, it was found that the liquid swirl in tanks provides a mechanism for pulling down the floating particles into the bulk In designing equipment for this kind of suspension, it is necessary to satisfy many requirements such as the degree of mixing, the reaction rate, an acceptable power input. Often, not all these operations are compatible and some degree of optimization is necessary In practice, the suspension of floating solids is usually achieved with axial-flow impellers whose discharge flow is directed at the base of the mixing tank. Since the floating solids keep at the liquid surface before mixing the main aim of this paper was to define the efficiency of up-pumping pitched-blade impellers in floating solids suspension applications. The up-pumping performance characteristics had been kept unsuitable for a long time, and little design information is available in the literature. Recently, the up-pumping mode of agitation has been growing in popularity, particularly in gas dispersion operations This work focuses on the effect of floating solids concentration and particle size, as well as system configuration on the mixing time, the just completely suspended speeds, and on the power consumption. This paper also presents an efficiency comparison of this impeller type with other, more conventional impeller types. In this way, it was attempted to throw some light on some phenomena recorded during dispersion of floating solids and to establish how these particles change in mixing behavior of the liquid phase. The experimental set-up is shown schematically in The impeller speed was varied between 200 and 800 The work studied the suspensions of different concentrations of polyethylene particles (PEHD; Mixing time values, Visual observations of the distribution of suspended solids in the bulk and of floated layer at the surface of the liquid were also made to aid data interpretation. The critical impeller speed for the complete suspension of floating solid particles was determined using visual method of Joosten Apart from the mixing time, power consumption was measured as well, since, it is one of the more important parameters in establishing the efficiency of reactor system geometry. Power consumption was measured using a torque table, that is, power input of the impeller was calculated from the torque and the impeller speed.  Mixing time measurements were made over a wide range of solid loading The presence of floating solid particles in the liquid leads to a pronounced decrease of the liquid circulation velocity, which directly affects the extension of the mixing time. This extension of mixing time with respect to liquid alone was recorded for the whole range of impeller speeds examined. At some solids concentrations and mixing intensities it amounts to over five times that for the liquid alone. When floating solids are present in the liquid, dependence curves Results of studies show that an increase of the solids bulk concentration affects a rise of In addition, the effect of particle size on analyzed parameters was also examined ( The results given in Joosten et al. Thring and Edwards Our results, on the contrary, show that these parameters affect The next set of measurements was performed to establish the optimum geometry of the PTU impeller in floating solids suspension applications. As first, the effect of impeller diameter was studied. The studies were carried out with four different diameters of PTU positioned at a distance of 0.106 Results were shown as the relationship between dimensionless mixing time and Reynolds number ( From The comparison of different impeller diameters on the basis of power consumption is shown in The measurements have shown that the just-suspended speed decreases with increasing impeller diameter to tank diameter ratio. On the other hand, just-suspended power requirements increase with increasing The value of obtained exponent is markedly lower than that obtained by Armenante et al. The location of the impeller, that is, its off-bottom clearance may also affect the Nt  The power consumption is also the function of the impeller off-bottom clearance. With an increase of off-bottom impeller clearance the dimensionless The dependence of Then, with the greater PTU impeller off-bottom clearance the The impeller blade angle to the horizontal axis It may be noted that the PTU having an angle of 90째 is the straight-bladed turbine (SBT). This kind of impeller will be used for maintaining the continuity of the discussion on the effect of blade angle. For a given impeller of fixed diameter and blade width, the projected blade width (on the vertical Blade angles of PTU impeller affects also the In this sense we were looking for the possibility of the use of PTU impellers for floating solids suspension. It is really a specific case of suspension where all the solids are located on the liquid surface at the beginning of mixing and where impeller discharges liquid axially towards the surface. The time required to achieve a certain degree of uniformity of such a system is one of the most frequently specified process requirements This relation is applicable to the case of blade angle of 45째. With the change of blade angle the The efficiency of PTU-45째 in systems with floating solids was also compared to the axial pitch-blade impeller of the same geometry, pumping downward (PTD) as well as with the radial impeller with four straight blades (SBT) (  This is obviously due to the liquid flow in the tank affected by different impeller types. Namely, in the case of SBT impeller, the liquid flow is generated by the impeller travels in the radial direction and splits into two streams. Each stream creates a circulations loop, one below and one above the impeller. Only a part of the energy supplied by the impeller, which is associated with higher loop, is available for suspension. PTD impeller pumps the flow downward towards the bottom of the tank, and after bumping changes direction, rises to the liquid surface and is now available for the solids suspension. PTU impeller directs the liquid flow towards the surface of liquid and is directly available for suspension. The length of the liquid path and the number of direction changes are greater in the case of PTD flow than in PTU flow. In addition, turbulence is generated above the impeller in the case of PTU flow, whereas the turbulence is generated below impeller in the case of PTD flow. Therefore, a PTU impeller may be taken as more efficient when the state of complete suspension of floating solids in a system should be obtained and maintained. The following conclusions may be drawn from the results of studies of suspension of floating solids with up-pumping pitched-blade impeller. The presence of floating solids in the liquid significantly affects the mixing time of the liquid. With PTU application, in some cases, an increase of the mixing time of suspension as related to the mixing time of liquid alone may amount to as high as five times. The mixing time of suspension increases with an increase of mean bulk concentration of solids and their particle size. However, these parameters do not markedly affect the impeller speed required for complete suspension Measurements of the mixing time as affected by the impeller speed may be suggested as a method for the determination of critical impeller speed for complete suspension of floating solids, With an increase of impeller diameter as well as with an increase of blade angle, the value of dimensionless mixing time decreases, but the impeller power consumption increases. However, with an increase of the off-bottom impeller clearance the power consumption is reduced. If a process requires a state of complete floating solids suspension and its longer time maintenance, the up-pumping pitched blade impeller may be considered as a viable option.