Friction stir processing (FSP) is applied in the treatment of low cost commercial purity Al (CP-Al) containing iron impurity element with the aim of optimizing the electrochemical properties and discharge performance of CP-Al as the anode of Al-air battery. FSP induced severe plastic deformation effects not only significantly refines CP-Al grains which have an average size of 3 μm but also leads to the fragmentation and the reduction in the amount of Al-Fe phase. Due to the above reasons induced by FSP, the corrosion resistance of CP-Al is increased, which is proved by hydrogen evolution rate test, potentiodynamic polarization measurement and EIS test; on the other hand, more negative corrosion potential values of CP-Al are obtained, indicating both the electrochemical activity and corrosion resistance of CP-Al are enhanced simultaneously. FSP make the discharge performance of CP-Al anode more stable and the average values of discharge potential, energy density as well as utilization of CP-Al anode are significantly increase from 1.054V/1251 mWh g−1/39.8% to 1.116V/1674 mWh g−1/50.3% at 20 mA∙cm−2. Meanwhile, the power densities of two batteries with C-Al and FSP-Al anodes are 44.38 and 47.17 mW cm−2 at 50 mA cm−2, and the difference of which reached a maximum of 2.79 mW cm−2. The improvements in electrical properties and discharge performance of CP-Al anode can be attributed to the microstructural refinement and the decrease in self-corrosion of CP-Al induced by FSP.With the increasing consumption of fossil energy and the aggravation of environmental pollution, metal-air battery has aroused great interest in the field of energy because of its unique advantages of high theoretical energy density, rich energy storage and low cost compared with numerous primary and rechargeable batteries such as Li ion, Ni-Cd and lead-acid batteries [ However, Al can be automatically oxidized by oxygen in air and in aqueous solution to form a protective alumina film on the surface of Al. Accordingly, the corrosion potential of Al anode shifts positively, and then the discharge performance of Al electrode can be limited greatly, causing a significant loss of the available energy [ The high cost resulted from the usage of HP-Al with microalloying, however, significantly limits the commercialization of Al-air battery. As we all know, the commercial purity Al (CP-Al）has an obvious price advantage compared with the HP-Al. There is no doubt that using the CP-Al as the anode material can make the cost of Al-air battery reduce dramatically. As mentioned above, iron as the main impurity element is always present which can lead to the degradation of both anodic discharge performance and corrosion resistance of CP-Al in the alkaline electrolyte [ It is well known that the microstructure of Al anode directly affects its properties. Generally, microstructural refinement and homogenization of Al alloys are beneficial for the improvement in both discharge performance and corrosion resistance [ In this research, the CP-Al containing iron impurity element was used as the raw material. Both the microstructural evolution and the electrochemical behavior as well as the battery performance of the CP-Al treated with FSP treatment in an alkaline electrolyte were investigated. The aim of this study is to provide a novel method for enhancing the comprehensive properties of low cost CP-Al anode by using FSP treatment. A 350 g CP-Al ingot was melted in a graphite crucible in an electrical resistance furnace. The CP-Al melt was remained stable at about 760 °Cfor 20 min, and then 0.5 wt% C The cast CP-Al ingot was cut into slices with a thickness of 5 mm, and then which were subjected to the single-pass FSP using a professional FSW machine (FSW-LM-BM16) with the following processing parameters: tool rotation rate of 1180 rpm, traverse speed of 60 mm/min and thickness reduction of 0.2 mm. The stir tool was made of tungsten carbide, consisting of a flat shoulder 16 mm in diameter and a 2.8 mm long probe. The probe was tapered from 4.5 mm at the shoulder to 2 mm at the probe tip, and the schematic of FSP is shown in Samples with an area larger than 1cm The microstructures of FSP-Al sample and C-Al sample were examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, SU3500) equipped with an energy dispersive spectroscope (EDS) device for identifying the components in the samples. In order to observe the grain size of the C-Al sample, the sample was anodized with a Baker’s reagent (5 ml HBF The self-corrosion rates of the samples were evaluated by hydrogen evolution rate test. The samples were wrapped in epoxy with an exposed area of 1 cm The electrochemical tests were carried out with three electrodes system at room temperature (∼25 °C) by Electrochemical Workstation (DH7000, DongHua Company). A mercuric oxide electrode (Hg/HgO) served as the reference electrode and a Pt sheet was used as the counter electrode. The solution used in this study was 4 M NaOH. The samples were ground and polished. The working electrodes of open circuit potential (OCP) measured with an exposed area of 1 cm For the Al-air battery test, self-designed full battery assembly was used in this research, and the schematic of the Al-air battery is shown in In addition, I-V and I-P discharge curves of Al-air batteries based on the different anodes in 4M NaOH electrolyte were also measured. It should be noted that the above self-corrosion test, electrochemical test and discharge test were performed in triplicate to ensure good reproducibility of the data.   The self-corrosion of the Al anode in an alkaline electrolyte leads to the production of hydrogen. The hydrogen evolution reaction of Al anode in Al-air battery is closely associated with the microstructure of Al (alloys). Generally, the finer microstructure grain leads to the lower hydrogen evolution rate because of the more homogeneous microstructure, since the internal potential difference of Al anode with finer grains is smaller and the occurrence of corrosion reaction is more uniform. On the other hand, the presence of the Al-Fe phase leaded to severe pitting corrosion which could result in an increase in the amount of hydrogen produced [  Electrochemical formation of hydroxides layer described in reaction (5) proceeds on the electrode surface upon migration of OH  In order to explain the observed phenomena of the anodes, the two anodes at open circuit potential impedance measurements were performed. R The discharge behaviors of the C-Al anode and FSP-Al anode at the current density of 20 mA∙cm The discharge performances of the two samples were evaluated by the average discharge voltage (ADV), CD, ED and ƞ. After calculation, the values of ADV, CD, ED, ƞ of the C-Al anode and the FSP-Al anode were 1.054 V/1187 mAh g    As we all know, corrosion usually begins at the grain boundary because of the minimum elastic modulus, the lowest intensity and the worst interatomic bonding force. After FSP treatment, much more grain boundaries were generated due to the grain refinement. Thereby, the FSP-Al anode could react with electrolyte more evenly from the grain boundary, leading to the formation of smaller sized corrosion pits. Furthermore, local corrosion easily started and propagated at the regions enriched by iron element. FSP treatment was able to break the Al-Fe phase, and then the corrosion pits caused by local corrosion induced by the iron element could become smaller and shallower. FSP treated low cost commercial purity Al (CP-Al) containing iron impurity element was used as the anode in Al-air battery in this research. The effects of FSP on the microstructure and electrochemical behavior as well as the battery performance of the CP-Al were investigated. The following conclusions are drawn. FSP could effectively refine CP-Al grains, and the average size of which was decreased from 500 μm to 3 μm. In addition, the usage of FSP leaded to the fragmentation and the reduction in the amount of Al-Fe phase. FSP could improve the corrosion resistance of CP-Al in 4M NaOH solution, which could be attributed to the refinements of α-Al grains and Al-Fe phase as well as the reduction in the amount of Al-Fe phase. More negative corrosion potential values of CP-Al were obtained after FSP treatment, indicating that FSP could effectively increase the electrochemical activity of CP-Al sample. In addition, surface analysis of the discharged samples directly indicated that FSP treatment could effectively increase the corrosion resistance of CP-Al by preventing the further development of corrosion pits during the discharging process. Both the electrochemical activity and corrosion resistance of CP-Al could be enhanced simultaneously treated by FSP. FSP could significantly improve the battery performance of CP-Al anode. FSP made the discharge performance of CP–Al anode more stable and the average values of discharge potential, energy density as well as utilization of CP-Al anode were significantly increased from 1.054V/1251 mWh g Xiaobo Zheng: Investigation, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing-original draft. Ting Zhang: Methodology, Formal analysis. Hejie Yang: Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Qiaoling Zheng: Methodology, Formal analysis. Yimin Gao: Formal analysis, Discussion. Zhiwei Liu: Conceptualization, Supervision, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Writing-review & editing. Wen Wang: Metho67dology, Formal analysis, Writing-review & editing. Kuaishe Wang: Methodology, Formal analysis, Discussion. We decla/re that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted to the Journal of Electrochimica Acta. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the