The environmental and public concern over the continued use of cyanide in the recovery of gold has grown in recent times due to a number of recently publicised environmental incidents. Of the alternative lixiviants, thiosulfate appears to be the most promising, though the considerable amount of research conducted on thiosulfate leaching of gold over the last three decades has not resulted in its commercial introduction. Perhaps the largest contributing factor to this is the poor understanding of the thiosulfate leach solution chemistry, especially the oxidation of thiosulfate in the presence of copper(II) and oxygen. It has been shown in this research that the oxidation of thiosulfate in the presence of copper(II) and oxygen is very complex with the rates of copper(II) reduction and thiosulfate oxidation being significantly faster in the presence of oxygen. The higher initial rate of copper(II) reduction indicated that oxygen increases the rate of copper(II) reduction to copper(I) by thiosulfate, though the mechanism for this remains unclear. The rates of thiosulfate oxidation and copper(II) reduction were also shown to be affected differently by the presence of anions. This is consistent with thiosulfate oxidation occurring via two mechanisms, with one of these mechanisms involving the oxidation of thiosulfate by copper(II) and the other involving the oxidation of thiosulfate by the intermediate superoxide and hydroxide radicals formed as a result of copper(I) oxidation by oxygen. The effect of various parameters on the rate of thiosulfate oxidation and the copper(II) concentration are also shown.Due to a number of recently publicised environmental incidents, there has become growing environmental and public concern over the continued use of cyanide as a lixiviant for gold recovery. Of the alternative lixiviants, thiosulfate appears to be the most promising, though the considerable amount of research conducted on thiosulfate leaching of gold over the last three decades has not resulted in its commercial introduction. Perhaps the largest contributing factor to this is the poor understanding of the thiosulfate leach solution chemistry. The importance of the leach solution chemistry has been clearly identified by the Newmont mining company who concluded that the solution chemistry was very complicated, having piloted thiosulfate heap leaching for a number of years without commercial success ( It has been shown recently that the presence of copper(II) in the thiosulfate leach solution does not solely act as the oxidant, but also significantly enhances the gold oxidation reaction ( In the presence of oxygen, the regeneration of copper(II) from copper(I) is known to occur readily according to the simplified reaction (copper ligands ignored) shown in Eq. Since the oxidation of thiosulfate directly by oxygen is known to be slow ( the final reaction products were identified as trithionate and sulfate and not tetrathionate; no decrease in the copper(II) concentration was observed for solutions maintained saturated with oxygen; and the oxygen consumption was found to be independent of the initial copper oxidation state, as the copper(I) was rapidly oxidised to copper(II). Thus, the concluding statement by The objective of the work in this paper was to study in detail the kinetics of thiosulfate oxidation in the presence of oxygen for thiosulfate leach solutions applicable to gold leaching. This was achieved using a thiosulfate analysis technique previously published ( All experiments were carried out using solutions prepared from analytical grade reagents and distilled water. The concentration of the copper(II)–ammine complexes were monitored using UV–Vis spectrophotometry. The solution was stirred within a jacketed vessel (100 ml) maintained at a constant temperature ±0.1 °C and purged with gas of known oxygen concentration before commencing experiments. Evaporation and volatilisation losses of ammonia were minimised by first equilibrating the sparged gas with a solution at the same temperature and having the same ammonia concentration as the experiment being conducted. A concentrated copper(II)–ammonia solution was injected into the vessel and after a short mixing time the solution was continually pumped through a UV cell. The UV cell was housed in a temperature controlled jacketed cell holder within a GBC UV–Vis spectrophotometer. The solution absorbance at 605 nm was recorded at regular time intervals via a computer. Other solution species gave zero absorbance at this wavelength. In order to convert absorbance readings to a copper(II) concentration the kinetics data was extrapolated back to zero time at which point the copper(II) concentration is known. The variation in the copper(II) absorbance with thiosulfate concentration was also corrected for using a linear correction between the extrapolated initial absorbance and the final absorbance. The thiosulfate concentration was monitored by withdrawing a sample at regular time intervals for analysis using a method previously developed by the authors ( For experiments in which the copper was initially present as copper(I), a concentrated ammonia solution was injected into the vessel containing a solution of thiosulfate and copper(I). Unless otherwise specified, the solutions used in each of these experiments initially contained 0.4 M ammonia, 0.1 M sodium thiosulfate, and 10 mM copper(I) thiocyanate. In order to convert absorbance data to copper(II) concentrations the zero time absorbance for the same solution initially containing copper(II) instead of copper(I) was used. An initial experiment was conducted using a freshly prepared thiosulfate leach solution initially containing copper(II) in order to investigate the effect of oxygen on the copper(II) concentration in solution. It can also be seen from One of the most important aspects of the data shown in  However, the initial rate of copper(II) reduction in the presence of oxygen is significantly faster than that observed in the absence of oxygen ( The presence of anions has been shown previously to significantly reduce the rate of copper(II) reduction by thiosulfate ( The effect of anions on the initial rate of thiosulfate oxidation is also shown in The effect of the initial copper oxidation state on the rate of thiosulfate oxidation by oxygen was also investigated. The thiosulfate concentration profiles in The oxidation of copper(I) complexes by oxygen has been studied extensively ( The mechanisms for reaction 3 however are not clear. Based on kinetic results it is firmly established that the autooxidation of copper(I) complexes occurs via inner sphere mechanisms involving dioxygen adducts formed according to Eq. The Cu It has been known for about a century that the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide to oxygen and water is dramatically accelerated by the presence of metal ions, with the decomposition being the order of seconds in the presence of copper(II) ( The addition of 50 mM hydrogen peroxide to a 0.1 M thiosulfate and 0.4 M ammonia solution (no copper) was found to result in less than 30% oxidation of thiosulfate after 1 h. Obviously this reaction does not occur at an appreciable rate. However, in the presence of copper(II) a very fast reaction occurs on the addition of peroxide. This is shown in Reaction mechanisms consistent with the results presented in this paper for thiosulfate oxidation and copper(II) reduction in thiosulfate leach solutions are shown in Even though it is shown in A detailed study of the individual reactions involved in thiosulfate leach solutions in the presence of oxygen is beyond the focus of this paper. However, the copper(II) concentration and the rate of thiosulfate oxidation are of vital importance to the gold–thiosulfate leaching process. The [Cu(II)]:[Cu(I)] ratio is also important as this essentially determines the potential at which gold leaching occurs. Hence, understanding the effect each of the various parameters have on the copper(II) concentration, the [Cu(II)]:[Cu(I)] ratio and the rate of thiosulfate oxidation allows the conditions for gold leaching to be optimised.  It is evident from Shown in Presented in Obviously, in oxygenated solutions, any benefit of increasing the thiosulfate concentration on the gold dissolution process needs to be optimised against the decrease in copper(II) concentration and the [Cu(II)]:[Cu(I)] ratio. The effect of copper concentration on the rate of thiosulfate oxidation and the copper(II) concentration is shown in  Also shown in The common use of ammonium thiosulfate in leaching studies results in a lower solution pH according to the equilibrium shown in Eq.  Clearly, the results presented in this paper highlight the complexity of the thiosulfate leach solution chemistry, especially in the presence of oxygen. The rate of thiosulfate oxidation and copper(II) reduction were found to be significantly faster in the presence of oxygen. The initial rate of copper(II) reduction was higher in the presence of oxygen indicating that oxygen increases the rate of copper(II) reduction by thiosulfate to copper(I), though the mechanism for this remains unclear. The rates of thiosulfate oxidation and copper(II) reduction were also shown to be affected differently by the presence of anions. This indicated that thiosulfate oxidation may occur via two mechanisms. The main mechanism for thiosulfate oxidation was shown to be consistent with thiosulfate oxidation by the intermediate superoxide and hydroxide radicals formed as a result of copper(I) oxidation. A reaction scheme was also presented that is consistent with these results. The thiosulfate oxidation rate was shown to be largely dependent on the oxygen addition rate (this being related to the oxygen mass transfer from the gas to the liquid). The ammonia and thiosulfate concentrations though were found to have little effect on the thiosulfate oxidation rate. Surprisingly, the presence of anions only had a small effect on the overall rate of thiosulfate oxidation compared to the significant decrease observed in the copper(II) reduction rate. Thus, a possible advantage the presence of anions offer is the higher sustainable copper(II) concentration and hence a higher [Cu(II)]:[Cu(I)] ratio which is desirable for gold leaching. The sustainable copper(II) concentration and thus the [Cu(II)]:[Cu(I)] ratio was also increased by increasing the ammonia concentration but decreased with increasing thiosulfate concentration. Surprisingly, the [Cu(II)]:[Cu(I)] ratio was found to increase with increasing total copper concentration, though the rate of thiosulfate oxidation also increases.