This 6-year study was conducted to determine the effect of three leguminous cover crops on the growth and yield of abaca and measure the contribution of the cover crops in restoring and conserving the inherent fertility of the soil. In the later years of the experiment (2000–2002), cover cropping with Desmodium ovalifolium and Calopogonium muconoides significantly increased the stalk and leaf lengths, and stalk circumferences. Fiber yield also significantly increased in plots with C. muconoides as plant cover. Among the cover crops used, D. ovalifolium showed the highest biomass production of 8.9 and 8.6tons/ha in the 1999 and 2000 data gathering, respectively. Highest N content in the tissues among the covercrops used was noted in C. muconoides. Accumulation of soil organic matter was observed in plots with D. ovalifolium while higher total N in the soil was found in plots cover cropped with C. mucunoides. Among the cover crops tested, Centrocema pubescens is not an effective companion crop for abaca. However, lower erosion rates were noted in plots planted with cover crops.Abaca ( In the international trade, abaca is called as Manila hemp. In Philippines, abaca serves as among the dollar earners. The abaca fiber is traditionally used in cordage, pulp and paper and fibercraft industries. The superior quality and versatility of the fiber make it suitable for the production of thin papers of high porosity, disposable non-woven products and a host of other specialty paper products. In the cordage industry, abaca fiber is mainly used in making cables, cords, ropes, strings, twines, marine cordage and binders. The supply of abaca fibers cannot meet the increasing market demand. Increased production through improved husbandry should be properly integrated. Hence, improved abaca-based cropping systems are needed to sustain productivity. One of which is the use of cover crops in order to provide plant cover for soil to help reduce erosion. Cover crops could be considered as backbone of any perennial or annual cropping system that seeks to be sustainable ( Cover cropping is best suited to perennial crops with wide interrows such as rubber, oil palm, coconut, coffee, sisal and citrus. Weed control is required during establishment of the cover crops. But once established, they compete strongly with weeds and may themselves require control to be kept from climbing on the associated crops ( Basically, leguminous cover crops fix atmospheric nitrogen. The amount of nitrogen fixed is directly related to the amount of dry matter produced by the cover crop. Dry matter accumulation of early planted cover crops increased by 26–269% during the spring growth period, ranging between 0.6 Cover cropping could also influence the productivity of the subsequent crop such as, corn specifically on the grain N uptake ( The experiment was established on January 1996 at the experimental area of the National Abaca Research Center, Leyte State University, Visca, Baybay, Leyte (10°41′ N, 124°41′ E). In this site the average precipitation is 2,514.50 The experiment was laid out in a simple randomized complete block design with three replications. The different treatments were designated as T Abaca variety Inosa was used in the study because of its wide acceptability to the farmers and being the major source for the pulp and paper manufacture. Seed pieces of this variety were collected from the nursery area and were planted at a distance of 2.0 Growth and yield parameters such as stalk length and circumferences (cm), length and width of leaves (cm), and fiber yield (kg In order to assess the contribution of the cover crop in restoring and conserving the fertility of the area, biomass production, soil loss and aggregate stability were gathered annually. Biomass produced by each cover crop was determined using a 50 Physico–chemical properties of the soil evaluated include the percentage of soil fraction >2 During the early stage of growth (i.e. vegetative stage), cover cropping did not significantly influence the performance of the abaca plant. However, during the later years of the experiment (2000–2002), cover cropping significantly influenced some growth parameters of the abaca plant ( Fiber yield performance of the abaca was significantly influenced by different covercrops used in year 2001 ( The above ground biomass of the different cover crops varied with species ( The higher biomass accumulation of Results in the tissue analysis of the different cover crops used revealed that the highest nitrogen content was noted in Cover crops can help improve soil structure because they protect soil from rainfall impact and extreme temperature fluctuations, their roots hold soil particles together, create bio-pores in dense soil, and organic molecules are released and fungal networks are produced when the cover crop is decomposed. In this study, improvement of the soil aggregates among the different cover crops used was noted ( Another important major benefit obtained from cover cropping is the increase in organic matter in the soil. It was noted that cover cropping increased soil organic matter in the latter stage of growth of the abaca plant compared to the plots without soil cover ( A considerable increase on the total N content of the soil was also noted on plots planted with cover crops ( Generally, the portion of green manure nitrogen available to the succeeding crop is about 40–60% of the total amount contained in the legume ( Erodibility in the area was also evaluated as influenced by the different cover crops used. Cover crops can help protect the soil from erosion by protecting it from intensive rainstorms as well as providing a physical barrier to runoff. In this study, abaca planted in plots with With these findings, it is possible that The authors wish to thank the technical assistance provided by Dr. Rotacio Gravoso in critiquing the manuscript. Likewise we would also acknowledge the services extended by Ms. Asio for the soil and tissue analysis and Mr. Salapa for encoding and analyzing the data.