Propagation of hydraulic fracture (HF) in the presence of natural fracture (NF) fundamentally differs with fracture propagation in reservoirs without natural fracture. Natural fracture can significantly affect the behavior and length of propagating hydraulic fracture. In this study, a series of true triaxial hydraulic fracturing tests on large size synthetic rock specimens with a single pre-existing natural fracture was conducted in the laboratory scale in order to investigate the propagation behavior and length of hydraulic fracture in naturally fractured reservoirs. The parameters of laboratory experiments were scaled based on the scaling analysis to simulate hydraulic fracturing process at the field conditions. For the purpose of controlling the hydraulic fracture propagation behavior, different values for approaching angle, 
                        
                           θ
                        
                      (30°–90°) and horizontal differential stress, 
                        
                           Δ
                           σ
                        
                      (1.5–10 MPa) were considered. Four modes of interaction between hydraulic fracture and pre-existing natural fracture were found including (1) net-crossing, (2) net-opening, (3) crossing-opening and (4) opening-crossing. Modes of crossing-opening and opening-crossing were introduced as two new behaviors of hydraulic fracture propagation. These interaction modes play a significant role on the length of growing hydraulic fracture. It was observed that by increasing the approaching angle and differential stress, the hydraulic fracture propagation behavior change from opening (net-opening and opening-crossing) to crossing (crossing-opening and net-crossing) and, consequently, the length of hydraulic fracture increases from a minimum of 9.10 cm to a maximum of 14.30 cm. The fracture initiation (break-down) pressure decreases with the increase of differential stress from 1.5 MPa to 10 MPa. Besides, increasing the differential stress and approaching angle results in a decrease in the pressure fluctuations of hydraulic fracture propagation.Cohesive strength of fracture plane Young’s modulus Plane strain modulus Void ratio Friction coefficient of fracture plane Fracture toughness Defined in Eq.  Dimensionless toughness parameter Sample tensile strength Total fracturing time Fracturing fluid flow rate Angle of approach between hydraulic and natural fractures Unit weight of the mortar sample Horizontal differential stress Poisson’s ratio Uniaxial compressive strength Minimum principal horizontal stress Maximum principal horizontal stress Vertical principal stress Normal stress Shear stress Porosity Fracturing fluid viscosity Defined in Eq. Hydraulic fracturing treatments are an efficient stimulation method in the development of unconventional hydrocarbon reservoirs with low permeability such as gas and oil shales, tight gas sands, coal bed methane, etc. One of the main purposes of hydraulic fracturing is to generate a complex fracture pattern in the formation, which serves as good paths for flowing gas and/or oil into the well from the reservoir rock. Creating a complex fracture pattern in unconventional reservoirs may be a common occurrence, whereas the presence of natural fracture in the reservoir rock can provide opportunities to increase the fracture complexity Lamont and Jessen In recent years, many other researchers have also experimentally worked on mechanism of hydraulic fracture propagation in layered, fractured and non-fractured reservoirs Reviewing the previous experimental investigations, it is found that scaling laws in most hydraulic fracturing tests conducted in the laboratory either ignored or incompletely applied. Prior to performing hydraulic fracturing process in field conditions, it would be valuable to consider scaling laws in order to obtain a reasonable relationship between the results of laboratory physical simulation experiments and field operations. In order to simulate the hydraulic fracture operations at field scale, it is necessary to scale lab parameters (i.e. in-situ stresses, fluid injection rate, fracturing fluid viscosity, total fracturing time, etc.) by applying scaling laws. It can help to have sufficient time to record pressure vs. time data and to determine the hydraulic fracture behavior during its propagation corresponding to the test. In addition to fracture behavior, predicting the fracture length is another important parameter in hydraulic fracturing operations in the fractured reservoirs. Fracture mode/behavior can have a significant effect on the fracture length, resulting in a complexity fracture network in the reservoir. In this study, the behavior and length of hydraulic fracture propagation at its intersection with a pre-existing natural fracture is studied based on scaled laboratory tests to better understand hydraulic fracturing operation in a fractured reservoir composed of homogeneous elastic rocks. By scaling the laboratory parameters based on scaling laws on different test samples in order to simulate a real condition of the oil field, in addition to introducing the new interaction modes between hydraulic fracture and natural fracture, for the first attempt, the fracture propagation length was determined during hydraulic fracturing process. For conducting the hydraulic fracturing experiments a physical simulation test system was used ( Cubic mortar samples with the dimensions of 30 cm were constructed ( To simulate the pre-existing natural fracture, a printer paper with dimensions 10 cm (length) in 10 cm (width) in 0.11 mm (thickness) was carefully cast in mortar blocks. The distance between the pre-existing natural fracture and the wellbore was considered to be 5 cm ( In order to perform the scaling analysis, physical and mechanical properties of the mortar samples are required. For this purpose, cylindrical samples were first used for conducting a range of rock mechanical tests (i.e. Uniaxial compression test, Brazilian test, Fracture toughness test, permeability test, etc.) based on the International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM) and the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) standards to measure these properties. The hydromechanical properties of mortar samples were presented in One of the main factors in experimental design is dimensional analyses which are known as scaling laws. The scaling analyses can help to establish a reasonable correspondence between the results obtained from laboratory experiments and field scale operations. To the best of author’s knowledge, several scaling laws were introduced to scale the parameters of hydraulic fracturing in the laboratory to perform representative filed operations The laboratory parameters of hydraulic fracturing are scaled according to the scaling laws in terms of energy rates associated with injection flow rate, fluid viscosity, separation or aperture of fractures in rock. Besides, the total fracture propagation time is a dominant factor which must be obtained from the scaling analysis for the hydraulic fracture to propagate through the sample. The scaled time of an experiment begins with the time of fracture initiation and will continue to the final step of fracturing fluid injection. Leak-off, toughness, and viscosity can be generally considered as three extreme boundaries of dominated fracture propagation regimes in the field for the initiation and propagation of a real hydraulic fracture The fracture propagation regime in a small-scale laboratory experiment for a penny-shaped fracture (radial fracture) is most likely toughness-dominated at the final stages of fracture advance after a specific time period According to the study done by Detournay In this equation, t is the experiment time and With regard to domain between toughness- and viscosity- dominated propagation regimes based on the dimensionless toughness parameter, k, applying the hydro-mechanical properties of the mortar samples in Eq. (1), dimensionless toughness, k is calculated to be 0.97 with a fluid viscosity of 5500 cP and a fluid injection rate of 0.5 ml/min (or 8.3e The presence of conductive pre-existing natural fracture in the test specimen causes another scale factor to be applied to the stresses. This is because the fracture aperture is dependent on the average stress level. In other words, when a pre-existing natural fracture is considered in the sample, the hydraulic fracture test should be scaled with the stress level to ensure that it remains open and fracturing fluid flow into pre-existing natural fracture. Therefore, a key point in the hydraulic fracturing experiments is in-situ stresses simulation, which should be careful in extrapolating the laboratory results to field scale operations. Zhou et al. As mentioned above, synthetic fractured block samples were designed and constructed in approaching angles of 30° to 90° (mortar blocks with pre-existing natural fracture were constructed in approaching angles of 30° to 90°). Therefore, for considering the simultaneous effect of approaching angle and in situ stresses on hydraulic fracture propagation, a series of 12 laboratory hydraulic fracturing experiments were carried out in a normal faulting stress regime ( Two parameters of in-situ stress and pre-existing natural fracture were selected for conducting the sensitivity analysis on the geometry and propagation behavior of hydraulic fracture in naturally fractured and layered reservoirs. For investigating the simultaneous effect of differential horizontal stress (  (A) Mode I (Net-Crossing Mode); in this case, hydraulic fracture after initiating in the direction of maximum horizontal stress ( In this fracturing mode, due to the high approaching angle (θ) and horizontal differential stress ( (B) Mode II (Crossing-Opening Mode); in this case, hydraulic fracture both crossed and opened the pre-existing natural fracture but dominant mode of hydraulic fracture propagation is crossing. Hydraulically induced fracture propagated in the direction of In tests 6# and 7# that the value of differential stress was the same with tests 2# and 4#, respectively, is observed that by decreasing the approaching angle, the propagation behavior of hydraulic fracture both was changed to crossing-opening from net crossing and the length of hydraulic fracture was decreased which is due to the changing in fracture propagation mode, while by increasing the differential stress in test 7# ( (C) Mode III (Net-Opening); this case is completely opposite to the mode I. When hydraulic fracture intersected with the pre-existing natural fracture and could not cross it, it is arrested. By increasing the fluid pressure at the intersection point relative to the normal stress ( The pressure vs. time curves resulting from the hydraulic fracture propagation behavior during various experiments was shown in When the interaction between hydraulic fracture and pre-existing natural fracture was relatively low (i.e. test 3# compared to other tests), the breakout of the fluid from the pre-existing natural fracture tip occurred in a less time, resulting in the length of hydraulic fracture was a little longer than the tests 5#, 8#, 11# and 10#, respectively. Also, in tests 10# and 11# with the same approaching angle (θ = 30°), the length of hydraulic fracture in test 11# was a little high due to its low interaction compared to test 10#. Thus, the effect of differential stress on the propagation behavior and length of hydraulic fracture was noticeable besides the approaching angle. Net-opening mode was happened when both the approaching angle and differential stress was decreased. On the other hands, the interaction between hydraulic fracture and pre-existing natural fracture was increased when the approaching angle and the differential stress was decreased. Based on the obtained results, the effect of differential stress in this mode (Net-opening mode) is noticeable related to previous modes (modes I and II) as by decreasing differential stress in test 3# compared to test 4# (crossing mode) with the same approaching angle (θ = 75°), fracture behavior was changed to opening from crossing. This issue was observed in test 5# compared with tests 6# and 7# with the approaching angle of 60°. (D) Mode IV (Opening-Crossing); Opening-crossing mode was observed in tests 9# and 12# ( In the present study, a series of servo controlled tri-axial fracturing tests was carried out on large size synthetic rock specimens with a single pre-existing natural fracture under different orientations and differential stresses at the laboratory scale. Laboratory parameters were scaled based on scaling laws in order to obtain a reasonable relationship between laboratory and field results. The results obtained from the laboratory tests ( Dominant behaviors of hydraulic fracture propagation during the different tests were net-opening and net-crossing, respectively, which were previously reported by several researchers The approaching angle and the differential stress were two effective parameters in determining each mode of hydraulic fracture propagation at its intersection point with pre-existing natural fracture. These two parameters, in addition to determining the type of fracture behavior, played an important role on the propagation pressure of hydraulic fracture. Unlike the approaching angle, the differential stress had a significant effect on the fracture initiation pressure. The break-down pressure (BDP) or the fracture initiation pressure (FIP) was mainly a function of differential stress and as this value increased, the fracture initiated at a lower pressure. Besides the differential stress, the fracture propagation pressure (FPP) was mostly influenced by the approaching angle. By decreasing the approaching angle, which resulted in high interaction between hydraulic and pre-existing natural fractures, the fracture propagation pressure curve indicated a high undulation or fluctuation after fracture initiation during hydraulic fracturing tests. The findings in this research can be used as a reference for predicting and interpreting the creation of complex fracture patterns in naturally fractured reservoirs as well as optimizing the design of hydraulic fracturing operations. The most important results obtained from the present study are summarized as follows: Four modes of hydraulic fracture propagation (net-crossing, net-opening, crossing-opening and opening-crossing) are observed at interacting with pre-existing natural fracture which “crossing-opening” and “opening-crossing” are two new interaction modes between hydraulic and natural fractures. The dominant behavior of hydraulic fracture propagation in the experiments is opening mode (net-opening and opening-crossing) and its deviation from the main path in the direction of maximum horizontal stress. This behavior can be significantly changed to crossing (crossing-opening and net-crossing) with the increase of the approaching angle and the differential stress. The length of hydraulic fracture propagation varies depending on the type of fracture mode at its intersection with pre-existing natural fracture. The maximum hydraulic fracture length of 14.30 cm is related to test 2# with net-crossing behavior, while the lowest hydraulic fracture length of 9.10 cm is related to test 9# with opening-crossing behavior. In opening-crossing mode, the hydraulic fracture length is less than net-opening mode due to the less interaction between hydraulic and pre-existing natural fractures at their intersection point that results in crossing the pre-existing natural fracture after its opening. Furthermore, in crossing-opening mode, due to the high interaction between hydraulic and pre-existing natural fractures at their intersection point that results in opening the pre-existing natural fracture after its crossing, the length of hydraulic fracture is less than net-crossing mode along the main its path. The approaching angle and the differential stress are not only effective in determining the fracture behavior and length but also affect the initiation pressure (except the approaching angle) and propagation pressure of hydraulic fracture. Increasing the differential stress from 1.5 to 10 MPa reduces the fracture initiation (break-down) pressure. It can also reduce the pressure fluctuations of hydraulic fracture propagation along with an increase in the approaching angle. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The author would like to thank the Department of Mining Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University, for their cooperation in providing the needed data and instruments.