Background/purpose
                  Studies have supported a higher prevalence of periodontal disease among areca quid chewers than non-chewers. However, few studies have stated the effects of areca quid on periodontal tissues. The aim of this study was to investigate the inhibitory effects of arecoline, the major alkaloid of areca nut, on murine immortalized cementoblast cell line (OCCM.30).
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Cytotoxicity was judged using tetrazolium bromide reduction assay. Cell migration was evaluated by Transwell assay. In vitro mineral nodule formation was assayed by von Kossa staining. Cell differentiation was examined by alkaline phosphatase activity with substrate assay. The production of osteoprotegerin was evaluated using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
               
                  Results
                  Arecoline demonstrated cytotoxicity to cementoblasts in a dose-dependent and time-dependent manner (P < 0.05). Arecoline attenuated cell migration in a dose-dependent manner (P < 0.05). Arecoline treatment markedly suppressed cementoblast-mediated biomineralization in vitro compared to untreated cells at Day 8. Arecoline was found to inhibit alkaline phosphatase activity in a time-dependent manner (P < 0.05). In addition, arecoline decreased the secretion of osteoprotegerin in a dose-dependent manner (P < 0.05).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Taken together, these results suggest that arecoline could inhibit cell growth, migration, and differentiation in cementoblasts. Areca quid chewers might be more susceptible to the destruction of periodontium and less responsive to regenerative procedure during periodontal therapy.Periodontitis is characterized by persistent gingival inflammation, breakdown of the attachment apparatus surrounding teeth, and destruction of alveolar bone. The etiology of periodontal disease is multifactorial and may be associated with life style, environmental factors, and oral habits. The habit of areca quid chewing is widespread in Taiwan, Southwest Asia, and India. Areca nut is the endosperm of the fruit of Cementum is a mineralized tissue, similar in composition and properties to bone, that is synthesized by cementoblasts during tooth root formation. Cementoblasts are responsible for tooth root-cementum formation during periodontal development and regeneration. No study has evaluated the effects of arecoline on cementoblasts. In the present study, the effects of arecoline on murine immortalized cementoblast cell line (OCCM.30) were determined through measuring cytotoxicity, cell migration, mineralization, and the activities of differentiation-related proteins alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and osteoprotegerin (OPG). An immortalized murine cementoblast cell line (OCCM.30) was a generous gift provided by Dr. Somerman's Laboratory (University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA). OCCM-30 cells were established by the isolation of tooth root-surface cells from transgenic mice containing a SV40 large T-antigen under the control of the osteocalcin promoter. 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT; Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO, USA) solution was prepared in 5 mg/mL phosphate-buffered saline just before use and filtered through a 0.22-μm filter.  Von Kossa staining of the mineralization nodules was used to demonstrate osteogenic differentiation. Cells were seeded in six-well plates in DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum for confluence. Cells were cultured in mineralizing medium (DMEM containing 5% fetal bovine serum, 50 μg/mL ascorbic acid, and 10mM β-glycerophosphate) with or without 20 μg/mL arecoline. Mineral nodule formation was determined on Day 8 by von Kossa staining. ALP activity was evaluated by using a substrate assay as described previously. The protein concentrations of OPG were measured using-enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Three replicates of each concentration were performed in each test. All assays were repeated three times to ensure reproducibility. SPSS version 13.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) was used for statistical analysis. Statistical analysis was carried out by Student's The effect of arecoline on OCCM.30 cells measured by MTT assay for 24 hours and 48 hours incubation periods is shown in The inhibitory effect of arecoline on migration by OCCM.30 cells was examined with Transwell assay. The migration ability of cells was subsequently quantified in In order to better understand the effect of arecoline on the mineralization of OCCM-30, we carried out von Kossa staining to measure calcium nodule formation of cementoblasts. A representative experiment is shown, where results were reproduced in three separate experiments. In examination of cells by phase contrast microscopy, nodule formation by untreated control cells was noted was as early as Day 5. As shown in The effects of arecoline on ALP activity were determined by substrate assay. As shown in The effect of arecoline on expression of OPG in OCCM.30 cells was measured by ELISA ( Arecoline in the millimolar concentration range might be important for the long-term effects of areca quid chewing in the periodontium. In this study, arecoline exhibited cytotoxicity to OCCM.30 cells. Previous studies have shown that arecoline is a cytotoxic agent to human gingival fibroblasts, Previously, arecoline has been detected in saliva obtained during areca quid chewing in concentrations up to about 140 mg/mL. In this study, we presented the evidences for arecoline-induced cytotoxicity on cementoblasts by inhibiting cell growth and migration. The mechanism responsible for the growth retardation by arecoline may be as follows. Arecoline inhibits of DNA OCCM.30 cells maintain their cementoblastic phenotype and mineralization, OPG is a naturally occurring inhibitor of osteoclast differentiation. Recently, OPG was found to be secreted and expressed in OCCM.30 cells, Our results indicate that arecoline is a cytotoxic agent to cementoblasts by inhibiting cell growth, migration, and differentiation. Impairment of any factors might alter the normal metabolism of periodontal tissues as well as periodontal therapy. This indicates that areca quid chewing might be another risk factor in the pathogenesis of periodontal diseases. However, the pathological mechanism of periodontal diseases triggered by various areca nut constituents might be an important issue for advanced studies. The authors have no conflicts of interest relevant to this article. This study was supported by research grant from