Tamarind seed kernel powder (TSKP) is a cheap starchy biodegradable material that has not been tested before for its flocculating properties. Sedimentation of clay slurry has been studied using this material. We have also done experiments with chemical grade starch and its blends with TSKP and compared their performance with that of potash alum for sedimentation of the clay slurry. The sedimentation phenomenon showed constant and falling rate zones. Sedimentation velocity, mass flux and concentration have been calculated at different time intervals for all the flocculants. Among the three types of natural flocculants, starch showed the highest rate constant in the constant rate zone and TSKP offers faster sedimentation in the falling rate zone. Thus TSKP, starch and their blends are potentially attractive environmentally benign flocculants. A qualitative explanation of the flocculating property of TSKP has been given.Flocculation is routinely used for municipal and industrial wastewater treatment as well as for mineral beneficiation. Drinking water is often clarified by synthetic flocculants risking toxicity of the product water. The effectiveness of inorganic flocculants such as alum or poly aluminium chloride is strongly pH-dependent and the finished water may have high residual aluminium concentrations. Significant quantities of sludge are produced as well. Organic flocculants are essentially polymeric in nature. Both synthetic and natural water–soluble polymers are used as flocculants. Some of the important examples of synthetic polymers are poly-acrylamide, poly-acrylic acids, poly-styrene sulphonic acids etc which are not readily biodegradable. The growing concern for environmental and ecological issues warrants the use of the biodegradable flocculants in wastewater and industrial effluent treatment. Among the natural and biodegradable materials which are used as flocculants without any chemical modification are starch, guar gum, chitin and algin. The first two are polysaccharides and are used for mineral processing applications (flocculation of red mud; flocculation for cell harvesting, Tamarind seed kernel powder (TSKP) has been procured locally. Typical composition of TSKP powder is: moisture 11.4–22.7%, protein 15–20.9%, fats and oils 3.9–16.2%, crude fiber 2.5–8.2%, carbohydrate 65–72.2% mainly as xyloglucan and total ash content of 2.4–4.2% ( There are a few methods of measuring the sedimentation rate of a suspension. In the gravimetric method ( The important experimental parameters are slurry consistency (generally expressed in volume% solids) and the concentration and dosing of the flocculant. The quantity of the solids required to make the slurry of a particular consistency (vol.%) has been calculated from the bulk density. Slurries of different consistencies were prepared by mixing measured amounts of clay and water. The slurry was shaken and homogenized after dosing of the flocculant (1% aqueous solution) and then allowed to settle. In case of the blend of TSKP and starch, 0.1% solutions of each were thoroughly mixed before use. The pH was maintained at 5.7 (a pH of 3.5 was used for the alum solution, in addition) and the experiments were carried out at a temperature of 30  For the constant rate zone, the In the falling rate zone, the It appears from These phenomena may be qualitatively explained by the chemical and structural characteristics of clay and the flocculants. Clay minerals are mainly hydrous aluminium phyllosilicates characterized by two-dimentional sheets of corner-sharing SiO The straight chains of a polymeric flocculant are more approachable for the clay particles whereas the branched chains are more prone to the bridging action ( Though this branching helps in bridging, there is also a possibility of intra-molecular hydrogen bonding within the xyloglucan molecule itself rather than the inter-molecular one with clay. Besides, the steric hindrances of the branched structure make TSKP chains less approachable to the clay sheets. From An improvement in the rate in this zone is more attractive than in the constant rate zone. The starch-flocs are predictably light-weight and less porous compared to that of TSKP-flocs, and therefore they do not allow water to pass through its network easily. The consolidation rate is therefore less leading to a smaller value of falling rate constant comparable to the non-flocculated one. The blend of starch and TSKP expectedly shows intermediate values of rate constants in both the regions. After sedimentation of suspension of a uniform initial concentration starts, the concentration increases towards the bottom till a maximum concentration is reached. In other words, the sedimentation velocity eventually decreases to zero when sedimentation stops. It was interesting to note that an order of magnitude change in the sedimentation velocity has been achieved by addition of flocculants compared to the unflocculated sedimentation. Among the flocculants tested, alum exhibits the highest sedimentation velocity and flux starting from the same initial concentration of 10 In the present study, sedimentation rates of dilute clay-slurries have been studied for various aided and non-aided systems. The aim was to determine the effectiveness of TSKP as well as its blend with starch as a flocculant compared to a common settling aid such as alum. The sedimentation curves showed a constant rate and a falling rate zone in all the cases. The experimental data on movement of the sedimentation front and its calculated rate of fall indicate that the performance of TSKP and its blend was the same order of magnitude as potash alum in terms of the rate constants in constant and falling rate periods. Thus the present study establishes the potential of TSKP as a flocculant. Since TSKP is biodegradable, abundantly available and cheap, its use can be profitably considered for large scale sedimentation of turbid water. Ms. Paromita Das, undergraduate student Department of Polymer Science and Technology, Shri Kaushik Ganguli, Department of Chemical Engineering, Calcutta University.