The paper focusses on improving the energy utilization of a cement grinding circuit by changing the flow sheet of the process. The circuit was comprised of ball mill, static classifier and dynamic classifier and in the current flow sheet the fine product of static classifier is sent to feed stream of dynamic classifier. However, it was experimentally proved that sending static fine to the final product silo had several benefits. In order to quantify the benefits, 250kg of static fine stream was collected then mixed with the final product and series of tests i.e., compressive strength, particle size, chemical assays and water demand, were undertaken. The results showed that mixing static fine with final product increased the 28-day strength by 2.3%, 4.3% and 4.8% for CEM I, CEM II and CEM IV type cements respectively. Improved strength results were attributed to having wider size distributed product (reduced slope value) that decreased the water demand of the cement. Such an increase in strength enabled to coarsen the final product at the same quality figures. Therefore, in the next phase of the study, the grinding circuit was simulated as the static fine stream would be sent to final product silo that indicated the production rates of the circuit could be increased by 9.7% for CEM II, 7.4% for both CEM I and CEM IV types.Cement manufacturing is an energy intensive process. It is estimated that the energy utilized within the industry corresponds to 10–15% of the total industrial energy consumed by the countries Cement process is comprised of many sub operations, which are; quarrying, crushing, raw milling, burning, cooling and cement grinding. Of these, the grinding process accounts for about 50% of the total energy consumption (110–150 Improvements within an existing circuit can be achieved both by investing in recent technologies (innovations) and optimizing the equipment or circuit flow sheet with the aid of modelling and simulation tools. To date, serious innovative solutions have emerged where the energy consumption decreases significantly Modelling and simulation tools can be used for process optimization but this requires accurate model structures development. So far modelling studies performed by many researchers have focussed on design features of the machines as well as the material characteristics, i.e., work index, size distribution and breakage distribution have been taken into consideration The study aimed at changing the current flow sheet of a cement grinding circuit with the aid of a simulation tool to improve the specific energy utilization of the circuit. In this context, not only the size distribution but also the quality analysis was taken into account and used in simulation studies. The study focussed on the static separator fine stream, which was originally sent to feed stream of the dynamic classifier, but the possibility of directing it to final product silo was considered for different cement types (CEM I 42.5R, CEM II B-M (L-W) 42.5R, CEM IV B (P-W) 32.5R). These studies concluded that such a change could improve the specific energy consumption of the overall circuit for each type of cement. As emphasized, the study focussed on modifying the existing flow sheet of a cement grinding circuit based on the analysis of the results. Within the scope, initially, sampling campaigns were arranged that involved sample characterization, mass balancing, modelling and simulation studies. The simplified flow sheet of the cement grinding circuit together with the sampling points is shown in The circuit is comprised of a pregrinder (HPGR), one compartment ball mill a 3rd generation dynamic air classifier, a static classifier and an electro filter to separate air and static fine particles. In this circuit, coarse and fine streams of the static classifier are directed to the dynamic classifier feed stream because of not having the desired specifications of the finished product. The target product size of the circuit is adjusted by changing the operating conditions of the dynamic air classifier where the fines report to the silo and coarse particles are circulated back to the ball mill repeatedly. The technical specifications of the equipment in the circuit are given in The experimental studies included the determination of Bond work indices, particle size distributions, water demand, chemical compositions as well as 28-day strength (for finished product) of the samples ( Prior to performing the modelling and simulation studies, all of the flow rates around the circuit were calculated and the measured size distributions were corrected as it may have contained experimental errors. In this regard, mass balancing studies were performed via JK-SimMet software Since the ball mill employed in the circuit is an air swept mill, there are several researches defining the methodology of the modelling studies for these mills. Benzer The mathematical model for a steady state ball milling operation (Eq.  The success of the model fitting studies for ball milling was evaluated by comparing the predicted and experimental product size distributions. In modelling of both static and dynamic air classifiers, efficiency curve approach was applied. Efficiency curve or “Tromp curve” explains what portion of the material in the feed subjects to the underflow or overflow streams at a given size fraction Until now, various mathematical expressions have been developed to define the curve Where; The actual efficiency to overflow Fraction subjected to real classification; (100-Bypass) Parameter that controls the initial rise of the curve in fine sizes (fish-hook) Parameter that preserves the definition of Sharpness of separation Size Corrected cut size In model fitting of air classifiers, as in the ball mill modelling, the parameters giving the minimum errors in size distributions were accepted and used in the simulations. One of the fitting results showing the agreement between the experimental and predicted size distributions are depicted in The results of the mass balancing were evaluated by plotting the measured and the calculated passing values. The results of the mass balancing studies were initially used to evaluate the grinding and the classification performances of the circuit. In this context, energy consumption and size reduction relationship was developed for the entire circuit and the ball mill; in addition, classification performances of the static and dynamic classifiers were evaluated for different product types. These results were then used in comparing the simulation outputs.  As given in The size distributions and the energy values were used in determining the operational work index (Wi In a closed grinding circuit, performance of the classification operation is one of the major parameters influencing the efficiency of the whole process. The performance curves of the classifiers, static and dynamic, at different product types are shown in As can be seen from Where; Air flow used in the classification process. Rotor speed of the classifier. The amount of (− The ratio of flow rate of dynamic classifier coarse to final product. Quality of the end product is the main concern of the cement manufacturing processes that has to be taken into account. Since the intention of this study was to send the static fine product to the final product silo, the proposed application was firstly investigated from cement quality point of view. For this purpose, samples having different proportions of static and dynamic fine streams were prepared then subjected to series of characterization tests to investigate whether such a change had resulted in quality improvement. Following the quality tests, the correlations between the chemical assays and the 28 From Having improved strength results was attributed to change in the slope of the size distribution curves and water demand of the cement mortar. As reported in the literature, the wider the distribution of the cement the better the quality, if the position parameter of RRSB is the same All of the evaluations proved that combining the dynamic fine and static fine streams have improved effect on 28-day strength results. That means that the target size of the finished product can be coarsened. In other words, production rate of the circuit can be increased at the same cement quality. In cement grinding circuits, the target size is expressed by 45 In terms of ball mill modelling, as indicated in the methodology section, The results of the modelling studies performed both for static and dynamic classifiers are summarized in The study aimed to modify the flow sheet of the cement grinding circuit with the aid of simulation tool so as to improve the energy utilization. In this regard, fine product of the static classifier was considered to be sent to the finished product silo as improved strength results were obtained from the quality analysis ( The first simulation study aimed to identify the changes in the flow rates and the product fineness in case the two streams were combined. As indicated in the quality analysis results, mixing the two streams increased the 28 The results given in As a consequence of the simulation studies, the minimum improvements in the specific energy utilization of the circuit were calculated by considering the quality analysis results. It should be emphasized that there could still be room for energy improvement when the proposed flow sheet is applied by the plant. This study aimed at improving the energy utilization of a cement grinding circuit by changing the production flow sheet without compromising the cement quality figures. Within the scope, a grinding circuit having HPGR, ball mill, static and dynamic air classifiers was sampled at different cement types, performance evaluation studies were carried out, model structures were developed then circuit simulations were performed. The focus was given on directing the static separator fine stream to the final product silo, which was originally sent as feed to the dynamic classifier ( The experimental results revealed that changing the flow sheet of the existing circuit could improve the quality of the finished product hence the target size of the final product could be coarsened and production rate of the circuit could be increased at the same quality figures. From the historical trends of the plant, it was determined that for 1 The author would like to thank Hacettepe University Mining Engineering Department for providing the laboratory facilities, Hacettepe Comminution Group members for their contributions in tiring experimental studies, the reviewers who contributed, and plant staff of Cement Plant for their assistance in the laboratory works.