Biochar has been found to interact with N transformations in soil but the mechanisms remain largely unknown. In this study we investigated the priming effect of combined biochar and urea inputs on soil inorganic N pools through an isotope tracer approach. Biochar was applied in combination with urea in two complementary laboratory experiments: (i) in the first one, three 15N-labeled organic amendments (wheat straw (WS)), its biochars produced at 350 °C (B350) and at 550 °C (B550) were added to soil in combination with unlabeled urea; (ii) in the second experiment the three same, but unlabeled, amendments were added to soil in combination with 15N labeled urea. This system allowed partitioning between three N sources: native soil N, biochar-derived N and urea-derived N. In addition, CO2 fluxes were measured to follow total C mineralization in soil and N2O emissions were monitored. The proportion of N that mineralized from biochar was always below 0.5% of the added N. The co-addition of urea increased the concentration of NH4
                     + derived from B350, but not from B550, demonstrating the lower mineralization of N in biochars produced at 550 °C. Whereas the addition of WS led to a rapid immobilization of N, we found that despite their high C:N, none of the biochars, applied at a rate of 1.5%, immobilized inorganic N in soil. On the contrary, significantly higher NH4
                     +concentrations derived from native soil organic N (SON) and urea were found throughout the incubation when B550 was added. This effect can be attributed to an apparent priming effect since a net decrease in CO2 fluxes was recorded when biochar was added to the soil. The addition of glucose (a low molecular weight carbon source) stimulated an increase in CO2 fluxes in all treatments along with a net N immobilization in soil. However, both biochars significantly reduced C readily available to microbes, as proved by lower soil CO2 fluxes, and limited the immobilization of NH4
                     + induced by glucose addition. Our results suggest that biochar may partially offset the mineralization of easily available organic C, buffering the immobilization of inorganic N in soil when labile organic compounds (e.g. root exudates, fresh manure, etc.) are incorporated.The interaction of biochar with soil N dynamics has attracted increasing attention over the last few years ( To date, most biochar studies have looked at the net changes in the extractable pool of inorganic N forms in soil ( Whereas C priming is receiving increasing attention in biochar studies ( In order to discriminate the different N-sources and identify (and quantify) N priming effects, the use of N isotope techniques is essential ( Some studies have reported decreased N mineralization or N immobilization (a negative priming effect) in soil after biochar amendment ( Therefore, we investigated the mechanisms by which biochar influences soil native N and added N transformations. We hypothesized that: (i) the amount of N mineralized from high temperature slow pyrolysis biochar is negligible and that the addition of an external N source would increase N mineralization from uncharred organic matter and low-temperature biochar, but not from high-temperature biochar; (ii) whereas low-temperature biochar and uncharred organic matter might induce N immobilization in soil, high-temperature biochar would not and (iii) when extra N is added, uncharred organic matter and low-temperature biochar might induce a positive priming effect on soil native N, but high-temperature biochar would not. A loam soil (Typic Dystrudept; Six organic amendments were used for the incubations: Wheat straw (WS)  Biochar produced from WS by slow pyrolysis at highest heating temperature (HHT) of 350 °C (B350) Biochar produced from WS by slow pyrolysis at HHT of 550 °C (B550)   The preparation of both labeled and unlabeled organic amendments was as follows: wheat plants ( A dual-isotope approach ( Experimental units consisted of 50 g soil (oven dry weight basis) in 100-mL polypropylene jars. The wheat straw and biochars application rate was 1.5 g 98.5 g Each experiment lasted for 42 days and consisted of three phases, each phase comprising 14 days ( In In In A complete overview of the treatments, experimental conditions and timing during the incubation is provided in Fluxes of CO Parallel soil incubations were set up for each destructive soil sampling (3 replicates per treatment). Soil extractions were carried out at days 4, 14, 18, 28, 32 and 42. Soils were thoroughly homogenized before sampling. Moist soil (1:10 w:v, dry weight basis) was shaken with 0.01 M CaCl The Filters from micro-diffusion as well as dry soil, straw and biochars were analyzed using an automated C/N analyzer-isotope ratio mass spectrometer PDZ Europa ANCAGSL elemental analyzer interfaced to a PDZ Europa 20-20 isotope ratio mass spectrometer (Sercon Ltd., Cheshire, UK). The Thus, experiment 1 (with unlabeled urea) was used to calculate biochar (or wheat straw) derived N and experiment 2 (with labeled urea) was used to calculate urea-derived N. Soil native N was calculated as the difference between the total mineral N measured and the mineral N of input-derived N. The priming effect (PE) was calculated as the change of the mineral N produced from SOM ( The priming effect (PE), being the variation in mineral N derived from SOM degradation, was calculated as follows: Gas fluxes were calculated assuming a linear increase during the accumulation (closed) period, an approach that was verified prior to the experiments. Cumulative CO Mineral N data were subjected to an analysis of variance (ANOVA) using a general linear model (SPSS version 17.0, Chicago, Illinois). Within each incubation phase the combination amendment by sampling date was considered as a single treatment. Means were separated according to the LSD Sidak test with p < 0.05. Normality of distribution and homogeneity of variance were verified using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov and Levene tests, respectively. Data are presented as mean values of three replicates with relative standard errors, except for gas measurements, where data represent the mean of four replicates. As measured by isotopic analysis, the proportion of N that mineralized from biochars or wheat straw was very low ( As hypothesized, the amendment-derived-N declined in the order: WS > BC350 > BC550 throughout the three phases, which is in accordance with C mineralization data ( The inorganic N originating from the amendments represented only a small fraction of total mineral N in soil (  In phase 2, the addition of urea alone significantly increased soil native NH Glucose addition ( The addition of WS led to a strong immobilization of soil native N (both NH  Addition of glucose immobilized urea-derived NH As expected, WS addition led to the highest CO The addition of glucose at day 29 produced a sharp increase in CO Total N N in biochar is mostly contained in aromatic moieties ( Not many studies have directly looked at the mineralization of slow pyrolysis biochar-N in soil. A common proxy is the study of mineralization of pyrogenic organic matter (PyOM) resulting from wildfires. For example, Temperatures of pyrolysis and retention times have been found to influence biochar N availability ( As hypothesized, the addition of urea in phase 2 favored the mineralization of B350-N, but not of B550-N. Although there are no studies analyzing the impact of N fertilizers on biochar-N mineralization, some studies looked at the impact of N addition on biochar C mineralization by Our results suggest that addition of available N may favor the mineralization of low-temperature biochars, but this effect might be restricted for high-temperature biochars. To our knowledge there are no isotope studies analyzing the effect of N addition on the mineralization of slow-pyrolysis biochars produced at high temperatures (550 °C or higher). To date, no studies have looked at soil N priming by biochar addition, i.e. the effect that the addition of biochar to soil may have on the mineralization of N already present in soil (native N), or on N recently added with fertilizers. In our study, B550 consistently increased native NH One of the most interesting findings of our study is the interaction of biochar with glucose and its effect in both native and urea derived N concentrations in phase 3. Glucose addition prompted an increase in CO Several studies have reported a negative priming effect on the mineralization of the most readily mineralizable SOC fractions when biochar was co-applied with easily mineralizable carbon sources ( The sorption of organic compounds to biochar surface has been reported not only in soil, but also in composting settings with much higher organic C loads ( In a recent study Our study gives a new perspective on using biochar amendment to modulate N availability to crops under different N fertility management: First, the positive priming effect observed in biochar amended soils implies higher availability of native mineral N to plants, allowing the reduction of external N inputs to crops. The fact that it is an “apparent priming effect” indicates that the mineral N is not a consequence of higher SON mineralization, but of higher retention of the SON mineralized in soil, in particular NH We found that wheat straw biochars produced at 350 and 550 °C and applied at a rate of 1.5% did not immobilize inorganic N in soil. Moreover, significantly higher native NH The authors are very grateful to M. Sánchez-García for her valuable help with laboratory work. This study was performed under the framework of the project # The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at