To predict the time taken for the start-up process of NDDCTs with different geometric parameters and initial conditions under windless condition, dimensional analysis is used to first determine the significant variables governing the transient start-up process. Buckingham Pi theorem is subsequently adopted to identify the relationship between the air mass flow rate through the tower and the time-taken during the start-up process of NDDCTs. Then, numerical tests are carried out to investigate the start-up process of NDDCTs with different geometric parameters including the tower height H, (H = 20 m, 40 m, 60 m and 80 m) and base diameter D, (D = 8 m, 10 m and 12 m) over a range of initial condition, i.e., when the temperature difference between the heat exchanger and the ambient air ΔT, varies from = 20 K to 40 K. The numerical results demonstrate that the base diameter will not affect the time taken during the start-up process of NDDCTs in the absence of cold air inflow, i.e., when no cold air intrudes into the tower from the top. However, the time taken for the start-up process of an NDDCT rises with the increase of the tower height, but is shortened with the increase of air-heat exchanger temperature difference. Finally, an accurate mathematical model is established based on both dimensional analysis and numerical tests to predict the start-up time leading to 
                        
                           t
                           =
                           α
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          H
                                          
                                             Δ
                                             
                                                T
                                                2
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 0.3
                              
                           
                        
                     .area (m inertial factor (kg m drag coefficient base diameter (m) Froude number height (m) permeability (m steady state time heat flux (w) source terms temperature (K) heat transfer coefficient (W/(m characteristic velocity (m/s) Courant-Fredrichs-Lewy number specific heat (J/(kg K)) gravity acceleration (m/s heat transfer coefficient resistance coefficient thickness (m) mass flow rate (kg/s) pressure (pa) time (s) coordinate velocity (m/s) dynamic viscosity (N s/m kinematic viscosity (m factor (s (K thermal expansion coefficient (1/K) non-dimensional time error ratio density (kg/m non-dimensional mass flow rate difference downstream air ambient draft flow reference heat exchanger inside logarithmic mean Renewable energy use is increasing for a number of reasons including concerns on climate change Cooling towers reject heat from CSP power plants. Thermodynamics rules favour wet cooling towers over dry cooling towers in terms of power block efficiency Past studies on NDDCTs primarily focused on the evaluation of thermal performance Almost all of the studies above were carried out when NDDCTs worked at steady state. As mentioned before, when the CSP plant works in a dispatchable mode to compensate for the intermittency of other renewables in the power grid, the NDDCTs may have to be called upon to start and stop frequently. Better control of this process requires an understanding of the transient start-up process of NDDCTs, which most previous research ignored. Dong et al. The handful of papers on transient start-up process of NDDCTs were focused on a specific tower. However, start-up time taken for NDDCTs with different sizes or different initial conditions cannot be predicted without time-consuming numerical analysis or experiments. The current paper addresses this gap and proposes a mathematical model to predict the NDDCT start-up time with different geometric parameters and initial conditions. It was earlier suggested that the significant variables governing the steady-state flow in NDDCTs under windless condition were the averaged air flow velocity The heat exchanger pressure drop for air flow across a finned-tube bundle of thickness The permeability The dominant resistance against the air flow is offered by the heat exchanger bundles The air mass flow rate is related to base diameter, If the dimensionless relationship between mass flow rate So far, the variables governing the transient start-up process of NDDCTs are clear, including 11 parameters: mass flow rate In light of the Buckingham Pi theorem, As two dimensionless variables are desired with four basic dimensions [mass ( The velocity, which is dependent on the balance between natural draft and resistance, decides the start-up time of NDDCTs. Therefore, The matrix of dimensions for this case is shown as below, This conclusion helps simplify the numerical calculations to a greater extent, although the validation of derived dimensionless variables remains to be proven. Hence, Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) is employed to obtain the right-side of Eq. The geometry of the problem under consideration is shown in The unsteady, three-dimensional (3-D) Navier-stokes equations coupled with some simplified mathematical models are employed to investigate the transient performance of NDDCTs. The converged solutions for these equations could be obtained by a general-purpose CFD solver, Fluent The generalized scalar More details about the model could be found in The computational domain is set as a 150-m-height cylinder with a 72 m radius, which is discretized using structured hexagonal meshes. The boundary conditions are prescribed in The porous medium is modeled through the addition of a momentum source term of The start-up process pertinent to different NDDCTs is simulated using the commercial CFD solver, Fluent. The air is assumed to be incompressible with the Boussinesq approximation is adopted for the buoyancy-driven flow caused by the air density difference. The turbulent air flow is simulated by the two-equation RANS model, i.e., realizable k-ε turbulence model Grid independence has to be checked separately for every numerical case, since the tower size, either the height or the base diameter, changes. Here, only a single case ( For other cases with different heights or base diameters, the results of grid independence check are listed in On the other hand, grid does not only refer to spatial grid, time step is another grid for simulation. Thus, the typical case selected above ( As known, the meshing grid of 2.85 M nodes is selected by spatial size check for the case ( The main objective of this simulation is to establish the prediction model for the time taken for the start-up process of NDDCTs. The effects of both geometric parameters, such as base diameter, tower height and initial condition like temperature difference between heat exchanger and ambient air have been analyzed in detail. The following criterion is adopted to determine when the start-up process ends. To investigate the effects of the base diameter on the start-up process of NDDCTs, three different base diameters including 8 m, 10 m and 12 m are numerically tested. As indicated by Eq. The evolution of the averaged tower air temperature for different base diameters (8 m, 10 m and 12 m) is first discussed as illustrated in To investigate the reasons for the different evolutions of average air temperature in Why does cold air incursion occur only for the shortest NDDCT case considered here? The cold air incursion is related to a dimensionless number, Froude number, expressed as The cold air penetrates into the tower when As indicated by Eq. In summary, the variation of the base diameter will bring no influence on the length of the start-up process of NDDCTs if no the cold inflow occurs. However, when the cold air incursion phenomenon happens, it leads to a more complicated flow field inside NDDCTs. Of course, the criterion set previously to obtain the start-up time is no longer applicable. Thus, to focus on the impact of the height or temperature difference on the start-up process of NDDCTs, the cold air incursion cases will not be discussed in the following discussion. In this study, four NDDCTs with different heights including 20 m, 40 m, 60 m and 80 m are modelled to investigate the tower height effects on the start-up process. First of all, the evolutions of average air temperature inside NDDCTs of four different heights are plotted in On the other hand, the average air temperature of shorter NDDCTs during the start-up process is higher than that of taller NDDCTs as shown in This numerical study considers three different sets of temperature difference between the heat exchanger and ambient air to start up the NDDCTs, including 20 K, 30 K and 40 K. The evolution of the average air temperature inside the towers with different initial temperature difference is shown in The numerical results are in accordance with those predicted by our previous windless one-dimensional (1D) theoretical model The tower height and temperature difference affect the start-up process of NDDCTs in two different ways. As known, when the heat is imposed on the heat exchanger initially, the air flow inside NDDCT is dominated by natural convection. After the air inside the tower is heated up, the draft starts to dominate the air flow. Obviously, the effect of height only influences the air flow inside NDDCTs after the first cluster of plumes arrives at the top of tower. It means the effect of tower height on the start-up process is progressive. While the effect of temperature difference appears at the beginning of the transient start-up process, so it produces a higher air temperature at the first steps of the transient process by a higher temperature difference. The above analyses illuminate the effects on the start-up process of NDDCTs brought by every single factor like base diameter length, tower height and temperature difference between the heat exchanger and ambient air qualitatively. However, it does not offer a simple relation to predict the start-up time at different tower heights or temperature differences or even both. Thus, a predictive model for the start-up time is called for. In light of the results obtained by Buckingham Pi theorem in Eq.  To obtain an accurate prediction model for the start-up process of different NDDCTs including different tower sizes and different initial conditions, a generic equation expressing the non-dimensional mass flow rate as a function of the non-dimensional start-up time is expected. In other words, unlike what is shown in  The relationship between non-dimensional mass flow rate and non-dimensional time could be accurately rewritten, From As mentioned before, this predictive model is based on the heat exchanger of the Gatton NDDCT, so this mathematical prediction model can be expressed, using the particular metrics of that tower, as, Finally, to check the accuracy of our model, some more numerical cases are tested by varying the tower height and ambient-heat exchanger temperature difference, i.e., To study the start-up time for NDDCTs with different geometric parameters and initial conditions under windless conditions, dimensional analysis is conducted first to find out the significant variables governing the start-up process of NDDCTs. Then, the start-up time for NDDCTs with different geometric parameters ( Dimensional analysis finds out the significant variables governing the transient start-up process. The Buckingham Pi theorem is adopted to define the relationship between the non-dimensional mass flow rate and the non-dimensional time-taken during the start-up process of NDDCTs. Numerical investigations are carried out on NDDCTs with different tower heights, base diameters and temperature differences between the heat exchanger and ambient air. The results demonstrate that the base diameter will not affect the time taken during the start-up process of NDDCTs if no cold air intrudes into the tower from the top (with a given heat exchanger). An accurate mathematical prediction model is established based on both dimensional analysis and numerical tests, We declare that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that can inappropriately influence our work, there is no professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the position presented in, or the review of, the manuscript entitled. This research received funding from