This paper compares the catalytic behavior of several heterogeneous acid catalysts in the direct hydrolysis of an untreated softwood dust. Among the various catalysts investigated, some were characterized by a relatively high yield to monosaccharides, such as a Zirconium phosphate and the reference Amberlyst 15. Conversely, some catalyst types, i.e. Sn/W mixed oxide and Zirconia-grafted trifluoromethanesulfonic acid, were selective into glucose, since sugars derived from hemicellulose dissolution and hydrolysis were rapidly degraded. A detailed analysis of the reactivity of Zr/P/O was conducted, in the hydrolysis of both untreated and ball-milled microcrystalline cellulose; at 150°C and 3h reaction time, the catalyst gave high selectivity to glucose, with negligible formation of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural, and moderate cellulose conversion. After cellulose ball-milling, a notable increase in conversion was achieved, still with a high selectivity to glucose and very low formation of degradation compounds. The catalyst showed high affinity for β-1,4-glucans, as demonstrated by the activity in cellobiose hydrolysis into glucose.The conversion of lignocellulosic biomass into valuable chemicals is a strategic issue within the framework of the biorefinery concept, the aim of which is to develop a biomass-derived platform while avoiding competition with renewable resources focusing on satisfying food demand Because of this, pretreatments are needed, for instance by means of harsh hydrolysis conditions (high temperature and therefore high pressure) For these reasons, there is a great interest in developing solid acid catalysts which are effective in cellulose hydrolysis; potential advantages would be the easier separation of the solid catalyst from the hydrolysate, an absence of corrosion phenomena, and a lower cost for product purification. Ideally, the solid catalyst should be easily recoverable and reusable. Bifunctional approaches have also been reported, in which the hydrolysis is combined with hydrogenation (hydrolytic hydrogenation), in the presence of H Although some recently described soluble acids, especially those based on polyoxometalates, turned out to be very active in cellulose depolymerization and highly selective to glucose formation, most scientific efforts have gone in the direction of implementing solid acid catalysts for converting cellulose, either as such or after pretreatment. Typical conditions used include temperatures lower than 200 Another key issue in achieving highly efficient systems is the interaction between the cellulosic substrate and the active surface area of the solid catalyst; in this regard, the best results achieved so far make use of functionalized mesoporous carbon materials, whose polar surfaces allow adsorption of β-1,4-glucans, combined with high acid strength, high density, and water tolerance of sulfate groups in sulfonated materials In this context, a solid catalyst which might facilitate hydrolysis while avoiding energy-intensive pretreatments for the biomass, using reasonable catalyst-to-biomass ratio, and which can be recovered from the solid residue, would represent a considerable step forward toward the goal of developing a sustainable process for lignocellulose conversion. In this paper, first we compare various solid acid catalysts in the direct chemo-catalytic hydrolysis of an untreated softwood dust, and then we describe an easy-to-prepare catalyst based on Zr hydrogen phosphate, which shows good performance in the direct hydrolysis of the wood, as well as excellent performance in the hydrolysis of both untreated crystalline cellulose and cellobiose. Zirconium Phosphate. Zr/P/O was prepared as indicated by Kamiya et al. Sulfonated-Zirconium Phosphate. Sulf-Zr/P/O was prepared by suspending Zr/P/O in H Silica-Zirconia cogel. Si/Zr/O was prepared by dissolving 21 Sulfated Silica-Zirconia. Sulf-Si/Zr/O was prepared by impregnating Si/Zr/O with a 1.8 Nafion Trifluoromethanesulfonic acid grafted on Zirconia. TFA–ZrO Sn-W Mixed Oxide. Sn/W/O was prepared by dissolving Na Amberlyst 15 (supplier Sigma–Aldrich) was also used as a reference sulfonated system. High energy ball milling of cellulose was carried out using a SPEX CertiPrep 8000-series Mixer/Mill, using vials with tungsten carbide-lined body and two 7/16 in. tungsten carbide spheres. The hydrolysis of biomass was conducted in a stainless Teflon Catalytic performances were expressed similarly to what had been done by Marzialetti et al. Weight yield to oligomers was determined by mass balance, as the difference between the converted biomass and the sum of yields to monosaccharides and decomposition products. This method is not rigorous, since it assumes that no other byproducts are formed. Indeed, this latter assumption was valid as long as the hydrolysate, after filtration of the residual solid, was clear and therefore did not contain any further brownish degradation compounds (e.g. humins). In general, this was true during the first 5–6 Moreover, since a softwood sawdust was used as the starting biomass, it is possible to distinguish monosaccharides coming from either cellulose ( The average composition of the coniferous softwood used for hydrolysis experiments was: 65% polyglycosides (45% cellulose, 20% hemicellulose), 30% lignin, 5% others (extractable, resins, ash). Ammonia-TPD characterization was carried out on selected samples in order to determine the acidity; the instrument was a Thermoquest TPDR 1100. Samples were pretreated at 400 The quantitative analysis of P and Zr, both in catalyst and in the hydrolizate, was carried out by means of XRF (Panalytical Axios Advanced instrument). Diluted-acid pretreatment of biomasses is typically carried out with sulfuric acid, and is mainly aimed at removing the hemicellulose fraction; in fact, the removal of hemicellulose increases the digestibility of the cellulose in the residual solid The main parameters in acid hydrolysis are time, temperature, acid-to-biomass ratio, and water-to-biomass ratio. We carried out hydrolytic experiments using several solid acid catalysts (see Section The most active catalysts were TFA-ZrO For Sn/W/O and TFA-ZrO Oligomers were the prevailing products with TFA-ZrO As mentioned above, degradation compounds were the prevailing products with Zr/P/O, sulf-Zr/P/O, and sulf-Si/Zr/O. With all solid catalysts however, the yield to degradation compounds was greater than that of monosaccharides, the only exception being the Sn/W/O system.  Because of the relatively high yield to monosaccharides obtained, the good biomass conversion, the negligible formation of oligomers, and the similarity with the Amberlyst 15 reference catalyst, we focused on the Zr/P/O system, conducting a more detailed investigation of the catalytic behavior. The Zr/P/O system is described as a water-tolerant catalyst, which is active in acid-catalyzed reactions carried out in aqueous medium The Zr/P/O catalyst used was amorphous, and showed a surface area of 108  The maximum conversion achieved under the given conditions with the Zr/P/O catalyst ( The behavior of the Amberlyst 15 was similar to that shown by the Zr/P/O catalyst, albeit with some important differences ( With Amberlyst too, the yield to monosaccharides and decomposition compounds was very similar at the beginning of the reaction time, but then the latter became the prevailing products. The highest yield to monosaccharides was obtained after 1 As for the comparison with the diluted H Overall, the Zr/P/O and the Amberlyst 15 catalysts showed a similar behavior, the major difference being both the affinity with oligomers and the activity in the formation of consecutive decomposition products. A similar yield to monosaccharides (and specifically to glucose) was observed with these two catalysts, although the latter was achieved in different reaction times. Moreover, the Zr/P/O system was less efficient than the diluted sulfuric acid (which is also the case for all the heterogeneous systems described in literature), but could be used as an alternative to the latter for the pretreatment of the biomass, especially when the saccharide fractions from hemicelluloses are not aimed at fermentation, but at a degradation to furfural. We also studied the effect of a mechanical pretreatment of the biomass; the results obtained with and without the ball-milling treatment, after 3 Final experiments were aimed at checking the possibility of recovery and reuse of the catalyst; with regard to this, among the various catalysts shown in In order to figure out how the Zr/P/O catalyst was positioned as compared to the best system described in literature, we conducted hydrolysis experiments using microcrystalline cellulose, Avicel PH101. Various reviews compare the catalytic performance obtained with several systems, both homogeneous and heterogeneous With regard to the hydrolysis of the untreated cellulose, the best glucose yield reported in the literature so far was obtained with SO  Experiments carried out at 200 We then treated the microcrystalline cellulose with ball milling, for either 20 Comparing the results obtained in cellulose hydrolysis and literature data makes it possible to draw some conclusions. It is known from the literature that in order to be efficient in cellulose hydrolysis, solid acids must be able to adsorb β-1,4-glucans on the surface and interact with them by means of, for example, acid OH groups  It is now recognized that one main problem in catalysts bearing We first treated the Zr/P/O catalyst under the same experimental conditions used for hydrolysis experiments (150 We also carried out the recovery and reuse of the catalyst after the reaction with untreated cellulose. In this case, however, the recovery of the used catalyst was more difficult than it was with the lignocellulose, since the sedimentation rate difference between the catalyst and the cellulose was not such as to allow an easy separation between the two types of solid particles. Therefore, in this case, we burned the unconverted cellulose by means of a prolonged treatment in air (400 It may be concluded that the loss of P from the fresh catalyst led to some changes in the main catalyst characteristics, among which the most important was a reduced surface area. These changes might be the reason for the lower lignocellulose and cellulose conversion experimentally observed after 3 In this paper we compared the reactivity of several heterogeneous catalysts in the hydrolysis of a softwood sawdust. A Zr phosphate catalyst showed an interesting behavior, with a relatively high yield to monosaccharides, comparable to that achieved with Amberlyst 15, but still lower than that obtained with the conventional diluted sulfuric acid treatment. Furthermore, the Zr/P/O system could also be separated from the unconverted biomass, and reused after regeneration; it showed a decline in both activity and monosaccharide selectivity during the first reuse, but afterwards its behavior remained more stable. The hydrolysis of an untreated Avicel PH101 at 150  