The leaching process of copper from calcareous bornite using sodium persulfate as an oxidant in ammoniacal solution was investigated. The effects of agitation speed, leaching temperature, concentration of ammonia and ammonium sulfate, and dosage of sodium persulfate on the leaching rate of copper from bornite ore were determined. The results indicate that the leaching rate is nearly independent of agitation above 400rpm and increases with increasing temperature, concentration of ammonia and ammonium sulfate and dosage of sodium persulfate. The leaching kinetics was analyzed by a new variant of the shrinking core model (SCM) in which both the interfacial transfer and the diffusion across the product layer affect the leaching rate, and its apparent activation energy was found to be 15.6kJ/mol.Due to the continuous decrease in the high-grade copper ore deposits and the stringent requirement of environmental protection, the traditional metal recovery processes based on roasting have become less desirable ( Ammonia, as an effective lixiviant, has been extensively used in copper, nickel and cobalt industries for many years due to its inherent advantages over alternative reagents. One advantage is that the basic leaching solution alleviates corrosion problems encountered in the acidic systems. Another advantage is that ammonia leaching minimizes the major wasteful components such as iron, which can be removed as insoluble oxy/hydroxyl compounds during the leaching process. Oxidative-ammonia leaching, with oxygen as oxidant, was widely used in the processing of sulfide ores, especially chalcopyrite, sphalerite, and pyrite ( The dissolution kinetics of bornite ore was investigated in acidified ferric chloride solutions ( Our previous work ( Persulfate is well known as an efficient oxidizing agent ( The calcareous bornite ore was taken from Tang Dan, Yunnan province, China. It contained 30.79% Cu, 12.00% Ca, 6.48% Mg, 13.62% Fe, 15.00% S, 0.32% Mn, 0.20% Zn, 0.08% Cr and 0.17% Al. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the raw ore was shown in After the raw bornite ore was crushed and ground to less than 0.090 In each experiment, a flask containing 500 When the required temperature was reached, 2 The effect of stirring speed, concentration of ammonia and ammonium sulfate and dosage of sodium persulfate on the low-grade oxide copper/zinc ore containing sulfide ore was investigated in our previous study. It has been shown that persulfate in ammoniacal solution can oxidize the metallic ions of low valence in sulfides to ions of high valence which can form readily soluble complexes with ammonia in the leaching solution. The enhanced leaching of the ore in ammonia solution with the addition of sodium persulfate can be explained in terms of a synergetic mechanism involving complexing and oxidizing reactions. The unambiguous characteristic of the dissolution process of sulfides requires an additional study. Probably, these reactions can be written as follows: The effect of agitation on the copper leaching from bornite ore was studied in the range from 100 to 600 The leaching was carried out in the temperature range of 303.15–333.15 The effect of sodium persulfate dosage (n The effects of concentration of ammonia and ammonium sulfate on the extraction of copper were investigated as shown in The XRD patterns of the residue on the leaching conditions (temperature 313.15 The SEM–EDS of the residue after the bornite ore was leached for 2 The leaching process of copper from bornite ore is a solid–liquid multi-phase reaction, and the leaching reaction occurs on the interface of two phases. The most common kinetic model for solid–liquid reaction is the shrinking unreacted core model (SCM) ( When the chemical process is the rate-controlling step, the integral rate equation can be expressed as follows ( If the reaction rate is controlled by the diffusion through the solid layer consisting of insoluble core around the unreacted core, the integral rate expression can be written as follows ( According to Eqs. For the kinetic analysis in this work, the shrinking core models with chemical reaction and diffusion through product layer as the rate-controlling steps, Eqs. According to the model Eq. The variation of reaction rate with temperature is commonly described using the empirical Arrhenius law: Using the apparent rate constants obtained by the application of Eq. The activation energy (15.6 The dissolution kinetics of copper from bornite ore was investigated in ammoniacal solution with sodium persulfate. It was observed that the main parameters were determined as leaching time, temperature, concentration of ammonia/ammonium sulfate and dosage of sodium persulfate in the experiments. It was found that the agitation speed above 400 The dissolution kinetics of bornite in ammoniacal solution with sodium persulfate is controlled by the interface transfer and diffusion across the product layer of dolomite and hematite which both affect the reaction rate. This model equation is given as 1/3ln(1 The study was supported by the