The flotation of sulphide ore in the presence of fine serpentine has been always a problem due to “slime coatings”. To solve this problem, attempts were made for the first time to eliminate the slime coatings of serpentine in pyrite flotation using oxalic acid (OA) as the selective depressant. Micro-flotation test results indicated the pyrite could be well floated in the presence of serpentine by addition of oxalic acid. Based on a series of measurements, including collector adsorption studies, zeta potential measurements, XPS analyses and turbidity tests, it was found that after conditioning with OA, serpentine carried negative charge which was similar to pyrite, inducing repulsion forces between pyrite and serpentine. In this way, the slime coatings of serpentine on pyrite surface were eliminated and the flotation performance of pyrite was restored under the action of OA. All in all, OA can be potentially applied as the depressant to improve flotation performance of sulphide ore associated with serpentine.Forth flotation is a physicochemical method applied in mineral processing by utilization of different surface hydrophilic/hydrophobic properties between different minerals, which is always employed for the concentration of valuable minerals ( Plenty of previous researches have revealed that the slime coating is mainly attributed to the opposite surface potentials between sulphide minerals and serpentine ( Oxalic acid (OA) is a naturally derived organic dicarboxylic acid, which occurs widely in many plants (e.g. spinage, amaranth) ( Motivated by the above summary, in the current research, attempts were made to eliminate the adverse effect of serpentine on the flotation of pyrite using OA. The action effects of OA were evaluated via laboratory micro-flotation tests. Moreover, to obtain an in-depth understanding, relevant mechanism was investigated through zeta potential tests, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses, adsorption tests and turbidity measurements. The pure serpentine and pyrite were commercially obtained from Donghai, Jiangsu Province and Yunfu, Guangdong Province of China, respectively. These samples were hand-picked, crushed, ground into powders, and then screened. For pyrite, the particle size fraction of −150 μm + 74 μm was used for the flotation tests. As for serpentine, it was finely ground to obtain −10 μm particle size fraction. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses of Laboratory-scale micro-flotation tests were carried out to evaluate the effect of oxalic acid on flotation of pyrite in the presence of serpentine. In each flotation test, oxalic acid (OA, >99.5% purity), methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC, 99% purity) and potassium butyl xanthate (PBX, 98% purity) were used as the depressant, frother and collector, respectively. Ultrapure water with a resistivity of more than 18.2 MΩ × cm was used for all the flotation tests and measurements. All the micro-flotation tests were carried out on an XFG type mechanical agitation flotation machine equipped with a hanging plexiglass cell (effective volume: 40 mL). The impeller speed of the flotation machine was maintained at 1700 rpm. In each flotation test, 2 g of ultrasonic cleaned pyrite samples were added in the cell filled with 40 mL water under continuous agitation to form a uniform ore pulp. When needed, designed amount of serpentine was simultaneously added into the cell. The pH of the pulp was then adjusted to the required value by 0.1 M diluted hydrochloric acid or 0.1 M sodium hydroxide solution. After that, designed amount of OA was added into the pulp. Simultaneously, additional sodium hydroxide solution was added to maintain the pre-determined pH value. Subsequently, PBX and MIBC were successively added into pulp and conditioned for 3 min after each addition. Then, froth product was collected for 3 min through manual scraping. The froth product and un-floated part were separately filtered and dried to achieve constant weight in a vacuum drying oven under 60 °C. The recovery was calculated according to the weight distributions between the two products ( Zeta potential measurements were carried out using a Zeta Potential Analyzer (Coulter Delsa 440sx, Malvern, Instruments Ltd, UK). Potassium nitrate solution with a concentration of 1 × 10 For adsorption tests, 2 g of the samples were completely dispersed in 40 mL sodium hydroxide solution (pH value = 9). When needed, the desired amount of OA was introduced in the solution (the pH value of the solution was maintained at 9 by addition of 0.1 M sodium hydroxide solution). Then, certain amount of PBX was added into the above solution, followed by10 min agitation to ensure the achievement of adsorption equilibrium. The residual concentration of PBX in the solution was measure by a UV–visible spectrophotometer (Evolution 220, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). The amount of adsorption can be calculated through the initial and residual concentration of PBX. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were conducted with an ultrahigh vacuum electron spectrometer (K-Alpha 1063, Thermo Fisher, UK). For XPS samples, small amount of serpentine was dispersed in 40 mL OA solution by continuous agitation. After being agitated for 10 min, the sample was filtrated, rinsed and dried in a vacuum oven. Turbidity measurements were performed using a WGZ-3 type scattered light turbidimeter. To prepare testing mineral suspension, 100 mg of pyrite and 5 mg of serpentine were together dispersed in 100 mL 0.003 M potassium chloride solution under magnetically agitation. Then, desired amount of OA was added into the above suspension. After 15 min agitation, the suspension was standing for 3 min and 25 mL of the upper layer supernatant was pipetted out for turbidity measurements. The aggregation/dispersion degree of the supernatant liquor was qualitatively characterized by its turbidity value. Micro-flotation tests were performed to investigate the influence of serpentine on flotation performance of pyrite. Firstly, pyrite flotation recovery as a function of pH value with/without the addition of serpentine was researched. The results are presented in  Clearly, the results presented in Collector adsorption has significant influence on the surface hydrophobicity of the minerals. The change of pyrite flotation performance under different conditions may be closely related to PBX adsorption. Thus, adsorption tests were conducted to evaluate PBX adsorption effect on pyrite surface under different conditions, and the results are shown in Turbidity measurements were carried out to qualitatively characterize aggregation/dispersion between particles in pyrite-serpentine system under different OA concentrations. The higher turbidity value of the pulp represents the higher dispersion between particles. The measured results are illustrated in For further study, XPS analyses were carried out to examine the chemical state of serpentine before and after interaction with OA, and the results are presented in Zeta potential measurements were carried out to evaluate the effect of OA on the surface charge of serpentine and pyrite since the slime coatings greatly depended on electrostatic interaction. Moreover, Combined with the flotation results and characterization results, a schematic model is proposed in In this research, OA was employed as a potential depressant to eliminate the slime coatings of serpentine in pyrite flotation. Micro-flotation test results showed that the flotation of pyrite was significantly depressed by serpentine slimes via hetero-coagulation. However, the floatability of pyrite could be completely restored with the addition of OA. XPS and zeta potential results indicated that OA could be chemisorbed on the surface of serpentine. In this case, the surface potential of serpentine was reversely changed to identical with that of pyrite. This variation induced the transformation of the electrostatic attraction forces between serpentine and pyrite to electrostatic repulsion forces, and the elimination of the slime coatings. In this way, the flotation performance of pyrite depressed by serpentine was restored.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: