The present work examines the feasibility of ensuring solid state joining of two dissimilar powder metallurgical (P/M) parts, viz. electrolytically annealed copper powder and steel powder preforms. As the present work was a feasibility study, a simple compression test was chosen to document the inferences, related to the influence of: (a) volume ratio (copper to steel), (b) density ratio (steel to copper), and (c) strain, in achieving a good joint.
                  The copper P/M preform was press-fitted into a steel P/M preform and compressed between two parallel platens to various strains. The joints were then subjected to the tear test evolved exclusively in the present investigation for inferring the weld strength, both at pre-sintering and post-sintering conditions of these joints. Supporting evidences in terms of metallography (optical, SEM) were obtained to verify the joint.
                  Results revealed that a volume ratio (copper:steel) of 1:4 subjected to a cold plastic deformation ratio of ε=0.6 (with flow stress ratio≈1.0) and with a steel to copper density ratio of 0.98 ensured a very good mechanical bonding substantiated by large interfacial area, reflecting a weld strength ratio of 0.89 (weld strength ratio=weld strength/shear strength of copper P/M). From the fundamental studies carried out it could be concluded that lower the volume ratio of copper to steel, lower the density ratio of steel to copper and optimal the plastic deformation, it should be possible to get a sound joint of sintered P/M parts of electrolytically annealed steel and copper powder after post-sintering.The main aim of the present work is to characterise the cold solid state welding formed between steel and copper powder preforms under different combinations of the preform densities, volume ratios and strains. The widespread use of iron–copper system in the structural components industry urges to select this combination of metal powders for dissimilar metal joints. Joints between ferrous and nonferrous metals like copper are of interest to industry because they combine the strength and toughness of steel with the special properties like corrosion resistance, ductility and thermal conductivity of copper. The joining of ferrous to nonferrous metals is far more complicated than the joining of dissimilar ferrous metals, because of the wider variation in the physical, mechanical and metallurgical properties of the metal to be joined. Powder metallurgical (P/M) components have important applications in the automobile industries as double camshaft pulleys, chain sprocket for diesel fuel injection pump, crankshaft sprocket for chain drive and so on. All these components are mainly ferrous based and have about 3–5% copper in them. Thus, the choice of materials in terms of steel and copper powder was decided in the present work. The joint compacts generated, vide the present work, can be used in predominantly in auto industries as bushes, rollers in roller skates and as washers for dampening and for cable joining, after post-operations. More than industrial applications, the work concentrates on the characterisation of the joint. There have been investigations Welding by plastic deformation is characterised by gross plastic flow that promotes intimate contact and breaks up surface oxides. This is construed, as the principal factor in the formation of weld and diffusion is not essential. Processes in this category include friction welding, explosive welding, high pressure/roll bonding and forge welding. The most important physical characteristic of a P/M component, which makes it uniquely different in regards to joining, is The hollow preforms of steel and copper were to be compacted in a floating die assembly under different compacting pressures in order to achieve different resident densities of the preforms. The compacting pressures thus selected were 523.41, 1189.57 Compacts of steel powder were made with OD of 25 To arrive at the optimal combination of density ratio, volume ratio and strain, tear tests were performed, wherein the stress required to separate copper from steel were measured in terms of the load required to eject copper from the joined P/M compact. The interfacial area was measured and force recorded. Then the weld strength was evaluated. For studying the nature of the joint formed at the interface and characterising the bond in terms of surface porosities, shape and area of contact at the interface, optical and SEM metallographic examinations were done. The samples for optical microscopy were prepared by grinding and polishing the top of the sample. No etching was carried on the specimens either for optical or for SEM studies. The operating voltages and magnifications used in SEM are shown in the SEM micrographs. The results obtained from micrographic and weld strength investigations were compared to arrive at a meaningful inference. Steel and electrolytic copper powders were used for the present investigation. The properties of steel powder and copper powder used are presented in The copper preforms were turned to decrease the OD from 25 to 14.3 and 16.6 The final density range of copper preforms for 1:4 volume ratio is 80.17–90.00% and 80.24–87.64% for 1:2 volume ratio. The final density range of steel preforms is 86–94%. The copper preforms were press-fitted with the application of minimum pressure (3–5 Tear tests were performed to obtain the stress required to shear copper out of steel in the upset component. This was also carried out in a double action hydraulic press of 1000 The For copper: For steel  The bond is generated between the preforms due to radial flow of copper into steel and the restriction ensured by steel to this flow. As the density of copper increases or the steel to copper density ratio decreases, there is more effective radial flow of copper. As a result, effective deformation of both copper and steel at the interface is ensured, ultimately generating a good joint. Also, when density of copper is lower, the flow of copper is highly restricted by outer steel ring. Hence, there is no effective deformation at the interface. But when the density ratio approaches values less than unity this disadvantage is efficiently overcome (due to higher plastic Poisson’s ratio of copper) resulting in a good joint. This was also attributed to the high relative sliding of copper and steel at the interface (due to more radial flow of copper) under a high contact pressure. This in turn leads to more exposure of the virgin metal surfaces of copper and steel. From The flow stress ratios (steel/copper) had been found to have strong influence on ensuring a larger plastic deformation of softer material with respect to harder one. In the present work a flow stress ratio of unity (steel/copper=1.0; 516/508) at a low density ratio of steel to copper of 0.98 had ensured that for the applied identical stress, the plastic flow of copper is more than that of steel, thus the contact pressure had increased and resulted in good joint. The present trend was found to be in good agreement with an earlier work Reference to The weld strengths in case of volume ratio of (copper to steel) 1:2 (0.5), was found to be less than 1:4 (0.25) for all the strains studied. In case of samples with 1:2 (0.5) volume ratio, the force required to deform it to a desired strain is lower compared to that in 1:4 (0.25). Since the volume of copper is high in 1:2 (0.5), the total force required to deform the specimen is lower compared to 1:4 (0.25) for the same strain. Actually this axial stress ( The weld strengths were expected to increase as a result of sintering due to better diffusion and generation of necks at the previously mechanically bonded surfaces of steel and copper. However, contradicting results were observed after experimentation at a few conditions. The issues, which had affected the contradicting results, were: (a) differential thermal expansion leading to crack; (b) domination of void closure over thermal expansion or vice versa. For both volume ratios, the weld strengths were observed to decrease after sintering except for low strains of the order of 0.3. In case of 1:4 (0.25) volume ratio, at At higher strains, the densification is very high at the interface due to high contact pressure, which in turn increases the area of contact between steel and copper. This gave good weld strength in the as-deformed state. However, after sintering, due to differential thermal expansion of copper and steel, lateral cracks were generated in copper ( In case of 1:2 (0.5) volume ratio, the weld strength increased after sintering up to From the optical micrographs it was inferred that, copper to steel volume ratios of 1:4 (0.25) gave a better bond than that of 1:2 (0.5). It was also found that, as the strains increases the interface becomes more wavy before sintering. Even though at lower strains the interface looks wavy, it refers to the filling up of the surface asperities of steel by copper. But a characteristic wavy interface was observed at higher strains only. In a volume ratio (copper:steel) of 1:4 (0.25) the presence of pores at the interface confirmed the poor intimate contact between copper and steel. The pores were responsible for lower weld strength ( After post-sintering, the pores in copper were rounded ( The efficacy of sintering has been well brought out in the optical micrographs in the base metals of steel and copper performs as well as at the interface. It appears feasible to generate straining and sintering conditions in which the interfacial line is narrow or absent. The results obtained from weld strength calculations and microstructural studies on compression testing of two dissimilar P/M rings of copper and steel aided in arriving at the following conclusions. Weld strength decreased with increasing density ratios (steel to copper). At particular density ratio, weld strength increased with increasing strains. Also better joint was achieved in lower volume ratios (0.25) of copper to steel. The maximum weld strength at the above mentioned optimal conditions was 126.67 At lower density ratios of 0.98, i.e. higher densities of copper, there was a greater radial flow of copper, leading to high contact pressure at the interface generating a better mechanical bond. At this condition the flow stress ratio of steel to copper was nearer to unity, implying the onset of plastic deformation of copper. At higher strains ( At volume ratio of 1:2 (0.5), the constraint offered by surmounting steel ring for the radial flow of copper ring was less than that at volume ratio of 1:4 (0.25) leading to lower weld strength. Hence a lower volume ratio was observed to be the optimal condition for efficient joint. During post-sintering there was a differential thermal expansion of the two dissimilar metal preforms at the interface, which led to the generation of cracks in the softer metal (copper). The strengthening of the joint after post-sintering depends on the extent of pore closure and differential thermal expansion. In case of lower volume ratio, differential thermal expansion played a dominant role, and at higher strains and lower density ratios, pores at the interface aided crack formation leading to lower bond strength. For higher volume ratio pore closure predominated, leading to increased weld strength at all density ratios and lower strains. However, at higher strains and lower density ratios differential thermal expansion lead to decreased weld strength. The metallographic studies revealed the following: the flow of copper into the surface asperities of steel gave rise to the wavy nature at the interface. Compared to the bulk (both copper and steel) pores at the interface was lesser due to high contact pressure. After post-sintering there was rounding of pores, neck formation (at lower strains and lower density ratios), which lead to increased weld strength. However, in some cases (higher strains and lower density ratios) lateral cracks (SEM) were generated in the softer metal (Cu). Based on the present investigations, it could be concluded that, for efficient joining, the resident volume ratio of copper to steel 1:4 (0.25), a strain of 0.6, resident density ratio (Fe/Cu) of 0.98 and post-sintering followed by a coining operation would be optimal. It was also inferred that, the flow stress ratio of Fe/Cu should be nearer to unity with a value of 1.05 (516/508 The facilities created vide the sponsored project by Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi, No. D.O. No. III, 5 (21) 95/ET, were made use of in the present work. The principal investigator, Prof. P. Venugopal records his acknowledgement to the DST, New Delhi.