In this research, compost was used as raw materials in the production of biomass adsorbent granules using drum granulation technique. Different concentrations of aqueous sodium silicate solution were used as the binding agents. Chromium and Methylene Blue solutions were selected as model adsorbates for heavy metals and dyes, respectively. The results obtained showed that the concentration of sodium silicate used had a positive influence on the mechanical strength of the granules, increasing the concentration would increase the compressive strength of the granules. The adsorbent granules had sufficient strength to survive wet conditions they were subjected during the adsorption study. However, increasing the concentration has a negative influence on the adsorption properties of the compost granules for both Chromium and Methylene Blue.Wet granulation is a size enlargement process that has received attention in several industries such as mineral processing, detergents, pharmaceuticals, chemical and fertiliser industries. During the wet granulation process, different kinds of equipment, such as fluidised bed, rolling discs, drum granulator and high shear granulators, are used to supply rolling, tumbling or shear forces to raw starting materials and finally form loose agglomerates (also called granules) with the addition of liquid binders. Recently, the wet granulation technique for biomass agglomeration has attracted worldwide attention to make different granular products such as fuel materials, soil conditioners or fertilisers ( To the best of our knowledge that there has been no study of the production of biomass granules as an adsorbent for heavy metal removal. Adsorption as a separation process is widely applied in the manufacturing economy and everyday life. Adsorption performance is strongly influenced by mass transfer of the species between the solution and the adsorbent surfaces and also the adsorption reaction rate. In carrying out adsorption studies, a good contact between adsorbent and the liquid solution which need to be treated is fundamental. Therefore, for adsorbent granules, the selection of the binder remains a crucial step as the binder has to be relatively stable and keep the shape of the adsorbent granules in aqueous solution at least for the duration of the adsorption process. So far, different binders have been reported to make biomass granules. Using the starch - sodium alginate as a binder to make switchgrass granules was reported by Therefore, in this study, we focused on the investigation of (1) using different concentrations of inorganic silicate-based binders for the production of compost granules through a drum granulation process and also (2) evaluating the produced granules as potential adsorbents for removal of heavy metals and dyes using chromium and methylene blue (a basic cationic dye) as model adsorbates, respectively. Granules that were produced in our previous work were used in this study ( All experiments for initial testing were carried out at room temperature (24 The removal percentage of Cr (VI) was calculated according to, For the isotherm studies, chromium solution of pH 2 was used and a mass of 0.05 For the adsorption kinetics study, 100 The granulation experiments were a success and granules produced were all spherical with size going up to 15 The yield of the granule in the desire size range was also negatively impacted by the introduction of sodium silicate into the formulation. As can be seen in Even though the overall granule median size decreases with the increasing silicate concentration as discussed in the preceding sub-section, it is interesting to note that presence of the silicate in the formulation has a positive influence on the dry granule strength. Increasing the concentration of the sodium silicate increased strength of the granule exponentially as shown in However, it was noted that there was a noticeable slight change in the colour of the water which may be attributed to leaching of some compounds for the granules and this was not pronounced for the S3 granules ( The results from the trial adsorption of chromium (VI) on to the four different types of granules are presented in  The decrease in the adsorption capacity with increasing sodium concentration in the binder may be attributed to the coverage of the pores of the primary particles making up the composite granule as the silicate forms a glassy layer during the bond formation process. Besides the porosity of the granule results (not shown here) was found to decrease with increasing sodium silicate concentration. This makes the pores inaccessible to adsorbate molecules during the adsorption process thereby reducing the capacity of the granules. This effect is more pronounced when the adsorbate involved is a large molecule as is the case with methylene blue molecule. In the adsorption of MB, the presence of the silicate could also be altering the pH of the solution creating condition which are less conducive for adsorption of MB which favours alkaline conditions. Adsorption isotherm studies are important to define the fraction of adsorbate molecules that are divided between solid and liquid phases at equilibrium. In the current study, the isotherm results were examined using the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models. The Langmuir isotherm model can be written as: The Freundlich isotherm is the other empirical model which is commonly used to describe adsorption data. The Freundlich isotherm is expressed by the following equation: Non-linear regression was used to obtained parameters of Langmuir and Freundlich models using a custom-built code written in MATLAB and these are presented in The adsorption kinetics can be evaluated using pseudo 1st order kinetics equation which is written as: According to Ho and McKay if the sorption process is 2nd order chemisorption, the sorption rate can be expressed by the equation: In Eq. It can be shown that Eq. The results from the kinetics study of the uptake of Cr(VI) and methylene blue dye onto the compost granules performed at different temperatures with different granule samples were evaluated by non-linear regression of Eq. The temperature dependency of adsorption can be described by the Arrhenius equation which is written as: As can be seen from the plots presented in The estimated thermodynamics parameters; change in free Gibbs energy (ΔG), change in enthalpy (ΔH) and change in entropy (ΔS) for the removal of Cr(VI) and MB by S0 and S3 adsorbent granules are presented in Comparison of the chromium removal capacity of the compost granules with other different adsorbent materials reported in the literature ( This work investigated the feasibility of using granules produced from compost by drum granulation as adsorbent material for removal of heavy metals and dyes via adsorption. It can be concluded that compost granules have great potential for use as an absorbent material and have adsorption capacity that is comparable to other adsorbent material. The results show that the addition of sodium silicate enhances the strength of the granules however will reduce the adsorption capacity the granules. If the composite granules are to be used as an adsorbent for chromium or methylene, it is recommended the concentration of the sodium silicate should be limited to 1% as adding anything more than 1% will reduce the performance of the granule. The kinetic studies denoted that the adsorption of Chromium and methylene blue ions onto compost material followed the pseudo-second-order model and the equilibrium data fitted well with Freundlich isotherm model for methylene blue and Langmuir isotherm model for chromium. The thermodynamics results showed that the adsorption of Chromium and methylene blue ions onto compost material was spontaneous and the reaction was endothermic. Currently, desorption of the ions from the material to be reused for adsorption is being studied and further analysis would be provided in the future.