This chapter describes the production of high-grade concentrate from low-grade ore. Processing of sulfide minerals is emphasized because these minerals account for virtually all Cu concentration. Copper ores typically contain 0.5–2% Cu. They must be concentrated to ∼30% Cu before smelting. The universal concentration technique is froth flotation of finely ground ore particles. The feed to froth flotation is produced by comminution, which includes: Blasting ore fragments from the mine walls (∼0.1 m diameter); crushing these fragments in eccentric and roll crushers (∼0.01 m diameter); grinding the crushed ore in rotating tumbling mills (<100 mm diameter). The resulting finely ground particles are then sent continuously to froth flotation. A recent development is the formation of finer more uniform fragments during blasting by means of larger explosive loadings in blast holes. This increases crushing rate and lowers crushing electricity requirements. It has been aided by: Automatic ore toughness measurements during blast hole drilling and continuous measurement of fragment sizes by electronic imaging of blasted ore during delivery to crushing.The grade of copper ores is typically too low (0.5–2% Cu) for economic direct smelting. Heating and melting the huge quantity of largely worthless rock would require too much energy and too much furnace capacity. For this reason, all ores destined for pyrometallurgical processing are physically concentrated before smelting. The product of this step is Ores destined for hydrometallurgical processing are rarely concentrated. Cu is usually extracted from these ores by direct leaching of crushed or milled ore ( This chapter and Concentration of Cu ores consists of isolating the copper-containing minerals from the rest of the ore. It entails: Blasting, crushing, and grinding the ore to a size where the Cu mineral grains are liberated from the non-Cu mineral grains, known as Physically separating the liberated Cu minerals from non-Cu minerals by  Copper concentrators typically treat 10,000–150,000 tonnes of ore per day, depending on the production rate of their mines ( To liberate the copper-containing minerals from the gangue materials in the ore ( Comminution is performed in three stages:   Wet The final fineness of grind is mainly determined by the number of times an ore particle passes through the grinding mills. Separate crushing and grinding steps are necessary because it is not possible to break massive run-of-mine ore pieces while at the same time controlling the fineness of grind that is necessary for the flotation step. Blasting entails drilling holes in a mine bench with automatic equipment, filling the holes with explosive granules, and then electronically igniting the explosive. This explosively Many Cu open-pit mines use closer drill holes and larger explosive charges to produce smaller ore fragments ( Improved fragmentation has been aided by two recent technologies: automated real-time ore-size determinations and automated real-time ore-toughness determinations. Automated ore-size determination technology consists of (a) digitally photographing ore particle assemblages at various points in the comminution flowsheet and (b) calculating particle-size distributions from these digital photographs ( Modern blast hole drilling machines are equipped to measure the amount of energy (from torque and drilling time) required to drill a blast hole ( Crushing is mostly done in the mine, mostly using To isolate the copper-containing minerals into a concentrate, the ore should be ground finely enough to liberate the Cu mineral grains from the non-Cu mineral grains. The extent of grinding required to do this is determined by the size of mineral grains in the ore. Laboratory-scale flotation tests on materials of different particle sizes are usually required to ascertain the grind size that is required to  Liberation of mineral grains from each other generally requires grinding to ~100 μm diameter particle size. Flotation begins to be adversely affected when particles less than ~10 μm are produced. Grinding requires considerable electrical energy ( Grinding produces ore particles of sufficient fineness for Cu mineral recovery by flotation. The most common grinding mills are The crusher product is ground in a SAG or AG mill. Autogenous mills crush the ore without the need for iron or steel grinding media. They are used when the ore is hard enough for the tumbling ore to grind itself. In SAG milling, ~0.15 m The mill product is usually passed over a large vibrating screen to separate oversize The ball mill accepts the SAG or AG mill product. Ball mills give a controlled final grind and produce flotation feed of a uniform size. Ball mills tumble iron or steel balls with the ore. The balls are initially 5–10 cm diameter but gradually wear away as grinding of the ore proceeds. The feed to ball mills (dry basis) is typically 75 vol.-% ore and 25% steel. The ball mill is operated in closed circuit with a particle-size measurement device and size-control cyclones. The cyclones send correct-size material on to flotation and direct oversize material back to the ball mill for further grinding. A critical step in grinding is ensuring that its product particles are fine enough for efficient flotation. Coarser particles must be isolated and returned for further grinding. Size control is universally done by This principle is put into practice by pumping the grinding mill discharge into a hydrocyclone at high speed, 5–10 m/s. The slurry enters tangentially ( The principal control parameter for the hydrocyclone is the water content of the incoming slurry. An increase in the water content of the slurry gives less hindered movement of particles, and allows a greater fraction of the input particles to reach the wall and pass through the apex. This increases the fraction of particles being recycled for re-grinding, and ultimately leads to a more finely ground final product. A decrease in water content has the opposite effect. Grinding circuits are extensively instrumented and closely controlled ( Produce particles of appropriate size for efficient flotation recovery of Cu minerals; Produce these particles at a rapid rate; Produce these particles with a minimum consumption of energy. The most common control strategy is to ensure that the sizes of particles in the final grinding product are within predetermined limits, as sensed by an on-stream particle-size analyzer ( The particle-size control loop in Conversely, too fine a flotation feed automatically cuts back on the rate of water addition to the hydrocyclone feed sump. This decreases ore recycle to the grinding mills, thereby increasing the particle size of the flotation feed. It also permits a more rapid initial feed to the ball mills, and minimizes grinding energy consumption. The second control loop in The simplest mass-flow control scheme is to use the hydrocyclone sump slurry level to adjust the ore feed rate to the grinding plant. If, for example, slurry level sensor (L) detects that the slurry level is rising (due to tougher ore and more hydrocyclone recycle), it automatically slows the input ore feed conveyor. This decreases flow rates throughout the plant, and stabilizes ball mill loading and sump level. Detection of a falling sump level, on the other hand, automatically increases ore feed rate to the grinding plant, to a prescribed rate or to the maximum capacity of another part of the concentrator, such as the flotation circuit. There is, of course, a time delay (5–10 min) before the change in ore feed rate is felt in the hydrocyclone feed sump. The size of the sump must be large enough to accommodate further build-up (or draw-down) of slurry during this delay. Major recent developments in comminution include: Improved fragmentation during blasting ( Incorporation of high-pressure roll crushing in the comminution flowsheet; Use of scanning electron microscopy to optimize the grind size.  Its perceived advantages are 15–25% lower electrical energy consumption per tonne of ore, and its ability to fracture ore at the mineral grain boundaries (although this is probably more advantageous for leaching than for froth flotation). Its major disadvantage appears to be its difficulty in handling wet, sticky, and high clay ores, and a 10–25% higher initial capital cost ( An important modern tool for optimizing concentrate production is quantitative scanning electron microscopy (SEM) which, for any assemblage of ore particles (a) indicates the mineral grain makeup of every particle in the assemblage, showing Automated mineralogical analysis can also be useful in the initial design of a new concentrator by indicating the minerals and mineral grain associations of ore samples from around the entire mineral deposit. Copper ores typically contain 0.5–2% Cu. They must be concentrated to ~30% Cu before smelting. The universal concentration technique is froth flotation of finely ground ore particles ( The feed to froth flotation is produced by comminution, which includes: Blasting ore fragments from the mine walls (~0.1 m diameter); Crushing these fragments in eccentric and roll crushers (~0.01 m diameter); Grinding the crushed ore in rotating tumbling mills (<100 μm diameter). The resulting finely ground particles are then sent continuously to froth flotation. A recent development is the formation of finer more uniform fragments during blasting by means of larger explosive loadings in blast holes. This increases crushing rate and lowers crushing electricity requirements. It has been aided by (a) automatic ore-toughness measurements during blast hole drilling and (b) continuous measurement of fragment sizes by electronic imaging of blasted ore during delivery to crushing.