In-pit crushing and conveying (IPCC) systems (whether fixed, mobile, or semi-mobile) are an alternative to the traditional truck/shovel approach to materials handling, offering potential cost savings. However, assessing the viability of one of these systems for an existing or planned open-pit mine from an operational standpoint presents a great deal of challenge given the complexity of the problem as they evolve non-linearly in many regards. This research applied the discrete event simulation to compare and model the materials handling systems of a mine to assess the applicability and weaknesses of the techniques for such use. Varying configurations of a mine's geometry were fed into the simulation then run and optimized for cost using the discrete event simulation tool, Arena®. The development of the model and simulation highlighted the potential for discrete event simulation to serve as a rapid tool to compare IPCC and truck/shovel systems by assessing those parameters and associated costs inherent with the operating realities of each system.With the trend of open pits becoming broader and more profound in scale continuing, the potential of In-Pit Crusher and Conveyor (IPCC) systems to save costs deserves new tools to make the study of its practical comparison against more traditional truck/shovel systems more accessible and feasible. In recent years, the interest in and research on the analysis of IPCC and truck/shovel systems has increased rapidly. Londoño et al. In a typical open pit, ore and waste are loaded into haul trucks via shovel. These trucks then travel up and out of the pit to either the waste dump or to the mill, depending on the mineral content of the rock (whether it is designated as waste or ore, respectively). The mining industry requires to find more environmentally friendly methods due to the carbon tax and growing emphasis on the circular economy, forcing a transition from diesel to electric powered systems. IPCC systems emerge as an alternative to truck-shovel systems because IPCC systems need less fuel. Furthermore, the maintenance costs associated with IPPC systems are usually less than the maintenance cost of truck-shovel systems. Finally, IPCC systems facilitate more effective waste management as the particle size of crushed material is more uniform, thus improving the conveyor performance. As the scale of mines has grown dramatically in the last century, the increasing costs of moving this material solely by trucking has motivated some mines to install IPCC systems. Implementing an IPCC system involves constructing a crusher away from the mill as opposed to adjacent in a traditional truck/shovel system. This implementation allows loaded trucks (typically ore-laden trucks) to travel a reduced distance to unload. That crusher reduces the maximum particle size, allowing for the material to be transported by a conveyor to the mill. The promise for IPCC systems is that this reduction in operation times for trucks and the often-lower operational costs of conveyors together outweigh the higher initial and sustaining capital costs associated with resulting in an overall higher net present value (NPV) for the pit. While the existing research has value, it has not significantly eased the practical challenges and difficulty experienced by the industry in evaluating the economics and operational requirements of adopting such systems. The traditional setup begins to suffer at larger scales as distances grow. The truck operational time per tonne increases as more distance results in a lower cycle rate (i.e., cycles/hour). To keep production steady, additional costs are required to acquire and operate more trucks with more operators and more overall fuel consumption. With an IPCC system, the crusher may be fixed closer to the pit or may be moved closer to the production area, either continuously or at intervals. There are already several different varieties of configurations available. Further benefits include the potential conveying poses to result in lower costs as it may be more energy-efficient and less labor-intensive than trucks. Other benefits of IPCC system implementation such as reduced greenhouse gas emissions IPCC systems have been implemented in many mines successfully. Rio Tinto's prolific Bingham Canyon Kennecott Copper mine in Utah successfully adopted an IPCC system in the late 1980s, replacing a significant and complex rail network The type of mine for which IPCC and truck/shovel systems are typically considered tends to be massive in scale, either in terms of depth, lateral extent, or both. Moreover, the high capital costs associated with IPCC systems are not compatible with mines that do not operate long enough to break even with payback. Thus, this study will focus on large-scale mines, notably those of open-pit copper porphyry deposit geometry, scale, and cost equivalents. With the potential for a convincing economic impact, environmental impact reduction, and reduced personnel requirements, IPCC systems deserve study and evaluation for all medium to large scale open-pit mines. However, barriers remain in effectively studying the varying configurations in an efficient manner during either the design phase or in an operational mine. Many variables are impacted by such system changes, and measuring their combined impact is difficult. Principally, understanding how the NPV is affected by differences in time for material recovery, the impact of downtime, the capital and operating cost differences, and potential future costs such as carbon taxes all need to be evaluated in tandem. A promising combination of existing tools to address this need is evaluated. A methodology of applying the Discrete Event Simulation (DES) tool using Arena® (together with its process analyzer software) and analyzing the output with Excel spreadsheets offers the potential to rapidly develop, adjust, and optimize varying IPCC and mine configurations. More complexities may be added through further tools and software integrations for less idealized scenarios. DES is a dynamic and stochastic simulation technique and widely used in the practice of the mining engineering Demonstrated applications of Arena® in mining include Rio Tinto's Oyu Tolgoi joint venture, which successfully used the software for long-term planning decisions, calling it an “integral part” of the project's feasibility study With a proven track record of the application for the specific type of simulation desired, DES using Arena® is a natural starting point for developing a methodology. However, adjustments are necessary for adapting its use for comparing traditional truck/shovel and IPCC system configurations, as there is yet a research gap in the application of DES in system setups, including IPCC systems. This methodology poses the potential to reduce barriers to the study of the applicability of IPCC systems for planned or operating mines given both its simplicity and potential for quick simulation. In this paper, DES is tested as a methodology for quickly and accurately simulating the materials handling systems of open pit mines for the purpose of comparing in-pit-crushing and truck/shovel systems. A mine is designed and entered in a model using the program Arena®. The mine permutations are simulated bench by bench across their entire life. That data is fed into an Excel sheet and used to analyze the time-discounted cost impacts of the choice of one material handling system over the other. For the purposes of this experiment, the results of DES are integrated into a simple cost model built in Excel. The two are integrated, encapsulating the entire design process for a simple mine model. Although much research has been conducted in recent years detailing the intricacies and sensitive parameters concerning IPCC systems, little has been done to develop methods of quickly and easily comparing the novel systems to traditional materials handling configurations. The use of DES is theorized to allow for rapid and simple comparisons of mine configurations while considering the sensitive design parameters described in previous research. The originality of this study rests on the application of DES to mine design focused on truck/shovel and IPCC materials handling configurations, while allowing for inclusion of past research (changing the sensitive parameters of IPCC design and being able to quickly test new setups as needed against already-proven systems). This research intends to evaluate the applicability of comparing IPCC and truck/shovel methods using Arena®. In doing so, a model mine is created with many variations developed to demonstrate the potential for trends to emerge. The mine geometries are all variations of a simple, idealized, concentric cylinder pit configuration with equal bench heights and bench widths, as illustrated in Once the mine geometry is created, the various configurations can be applied to determine which variables are entered into the DES model (in Arena®). To be able to compare different materials handling systems in Arena®, the systems and/or mining process must be mapped entirely, including activity durations, logic gates (does the truck go to the shovel or to maintenance, does the truck go to shovel one or two, does the truck go to the waste stockpile or the ore hopper, etc.), and equipment utilization. The final piece to the simulation is the introduction of uncertainty into each event or activity in the system chain. This is achieved by applying a triangular probability distribution to each variable considered (a list of which can be found in The sort of copper porphyry deposits this research bases itself upon are of low grade. As such, the resulting mines are high tonnage with massive lateral and vertical extents making them among the largest type of open-pit mine in the world. The mine model was developed using the dimensions of several real-world examples of this mine type as a basis. To this effect, the model dimensions were modified in multiple permutations. First, the number of benches was fixed, and bench heights were varied for each pit diameter possibility. Then, a variable bench model was created where multiple bench numbers were simulated for each bench height (with pit diameter scaling accordingly). A full simulation was run for each configuration, with a sample configuration for each case shown in Different mine configurations should present benefits and/or challenges to Truck-Shovel and IPCC materials handling systems. In order to determine trends in resulting data and to highlight which configurations benefit each system, three model inputs were varied. The first variable was pit diameter, which represents a change in lateral distance between the dig face and the dump locations. Next, bench height was varied, which represents changes in both vertical and lateral distance (a fixed pit slope requires that taller benches are also wider). Finally, bench count was varied, which represents changes in vertical and lateral distances traveled as well as the total material produced. To keep the model simple for the purposes of developing the methodology, fixed proportions of each rock designation were configured for each bench's mass of rock. Given the capacities of the chosen haul truck model, outlined below, the density and tonnages are important. The material grades were assumed to be uniform in the ore, with a strip ratio of 2:1, and ore and waste densities fixed at the same 2.65 tonnes/m Per mines of this scale, the mine was designed to have three shovels operating at all times. In accordance with the fixed proportions of ore, one shovel was set only to handle ore and the other two, waste. While not a requirement of the methodology to configure the shovels as such, it did simplify model construction. These three were chosen to be Cat 6060 hydraulic shovels, which fed varying numbers of Cat 793F surface haul trucks. Industry-standard variables were applied for parameters such as spotting time, loading time, turnaround time, pit dump time, and crusher dump time. Also, truck loads were varied between 87 and 97% of rated capacity to mimic real-life imperfect truck loading. Similarly, truck travel times were varied between 105 and 115% of the optimal theoretical travel time of each route (to mimic typical inefficiencies). A summary of the variables used to create the triangular distribution for each activity (see Given the multitude of system configurations to choose from between IPCC and the classic truck/shovel systems, the number studied was reduced to two for practicality's sake. The first of the two configurations modeled is a fixed IPCC system. The fixed system's function is not very dissimilar to that of a traditional truck/shovel system, only that the crusher is fixed for the length of mine near the pit crest, which ferries crushed ore via conveyor to the mill. The other studied case is a semi-mobile crusher. This crusher requires infrastructure and is large and difficult to move. The movement is an expensive and time-consuming process that typically takes place every few years, moving the machine closer to the production area. In this case, the crusher is moved every three benches to keep distances within a fixed range. These two options were chosen as they are both applicable for this type of mine and were likely to contrast well. The model is then set up such that for the fixed IPCC case, the crusher is located at roughly 100 meters from the end of the ramp to the surface and remains in the same position for the full length of mine life. For the semi-mobile IPCC system, the crusher and conveyor are moved, as mentioned, every three benches lower into the mine, to within 100 meters of the ramp of any given placement. Trucks with loads designated as waste are programmed to travel to the dump, located roughly 500 meters from the top of the ramp to the surface, irrespective of fixed or semi-mobile system choice. While there are indications that waste crushing may be economically feasible The principal inputs for the model are the ore and waste quantities, the time it takes to travel from one destination to another, and the number of trucks (which will be discussed later in For any determined route, the time taken to travel from one area to the next is dependent on the distance as well as the properties of the haul truck. Distances are determined automatically for a bench using rules, including a 10 percent grade for ramps, turning radius allowance, and strict lateral distances between areas. Together with these values, the trucks’ rimpull characteristics, acceleration, and max travel speed given the haul mass can be used to incorporate accurately the smaller effects of accelerating, turning, and climbing ramps. Together, these can be combined for ideal travel time, with triangular distribution giving a range of multiples (105 to 115 percent) of the ideal time to account for inefficiency and delay. In assembling the model, the travel times are only one of several factors. Other integral time consumers for haul trucks include queueing, loading, dumping, and time in maintenance. How these work together most optimally is a question of decision making, monitoring of truck capacities and incorporating maintenance, which are all programmed into the model at its inception (the model includes a decision process for how to dispatch each available truck which can be examined in An Arena® model was created using the workflow shown in The model does not take varying inputs as it is run to account for the moving mining face. Instead, the model is run only for a single bench with distances computed to be an average across the bench's life. This run allows for a more straightforward setup, but requires that for a single mine configuration, each bench needs to be simulated individually. Travel times to and from the 11th bench (counting down from the surface) would be significantly higher than those to and from the 1st bench, and so on. Thus, the required inputs for each individual bench simulation are the total amount of mined material, the average travel time to and from the mining face, and the number of trucks utilized. All other variables (truck capacity, material density, etc.) are not dependent on the bench in question and therefore can remain fixed for every simulation. With the model complete and functional in Arena®, simulations could proceed. Given the inherent limitation of running simulations in Arena®, notably the slow processing time and the tediousness of changing a significant number of variables manually, a better solution for running these models was required. An extension of the Arena® software, Process Analyzer, addressed this issue. Process Analyzer allows the Arena® model to be loaded into it and run without the animation and wasted computation it entails of Arena®, drastically reducing computation time. Additionally, multiple copies of the model can be created to run successively, reducing human monitoring and attention. By loading the mine model multiple times and modifying the inputs to reflect that of each bench in the mine, the entire mine of a certain configuration can be simulated in one go. Process Analyzer's relationship with Arena® is defined by two large sets of variables, those of controls and responses. Controls are inputs for the Process Analyzer, which set the values of individual variables for the specific instance of the Arena® model. The inputs, in this case, are the tonnages of ore and waste for a bench, the base values for travel times, and the number of trucks, named appropriately in The other large set of variables Process Analyzer uses is that of responses. Responses may be a wide variety of values, including variables’ values at the end of a simulation, average values of variables during utilization, average queue quantities, the number of times a certain decision was made (and many others). As mentioned, multiple realizations of a stochastic simulation give more valuable data, as the important values are averaged across the realizations to give a more representative value. While an immense amount of useful statistics may be developed automatically by Process Analyzer, the responses important for this research are simple. Most important is the simulated time to complete a bench. Also of value are statistics determined throughout the course of simulations. Utilization (of shovels, the crusher) and average number in a queue (of trucks queued for a shovel, the crusher) are useful indicators to guide optimization of the number of trucks and the time at which additional trucks are bought. They are not the only guide to optimize the model; the cost model is an incredibly important aspect. The cost model allows the derivation of net present value (NPV), as it uses the chronological results of the simulation to properly discount costs (effect of costs of the NPV of the project are dependent on the time the cost is incurred which is an output of the simulation).This NPV can be monitored as the changes guided by statistics over multiple simulation iterations change the shape the model takes to ensure they positively benefit the mine design. The cost model for this research incorporated output from the simulations and served as input for optimizations. The responses from a set of bench simulations for a mine are output in a table format, which was simply copied and pasted into an Excel spreadsheet configured to interpret the results for a given IPCC configuration. All values for cost and revenue incorporate the time taken for each bench to complete as time discounting is applied and are given in US Dollars. Simulated time to complete a bench is such a critical result as the time discounting of the simulation means that ore mined earlier has greater value and the timing of capital expenditures has an impact. For this simulation, a simple discount rate of 5% is applied on an annual basis. From there, costs and revenues are summed for the provided NPV. Costs include several items. Again, the simulated time is involved as the operational expenses of trucks, including wages, diesel, and maintenance, are tied to it (truck and shovel costs are conducted on a per-hour basis using typical hourly cost values from mining equipment estimator guidebooks). The capital costs for purchasing trucks, the crusher, and moving the crusher and conveyor are all included as well as the operating costs of such equipment. The approximated combined costs of mining, treating, and storing waste are handled the same way. Finally, revenue from ore is modelled as a fixed dollar per ton figure; for the sake of simplicity, the model assumes all ore is of uniform grade and density. Note that if this method were applied to a more complex model with accurate geological data, variable revenue could easily be applied. All costs are recorded on a per bench basis, discounted according to the time the bench begins and ends, and then summed across the life of mine to complete the mine life finance picture. Note that any purchase of additional equipment required to uphold production rates (if mining rate is fixed for the life of mine) at increased mining depth (e.g. increased truck fleet size) must also be discounted according to the implied purchase date. It should also be noted that although the cost model of this method is rather simplistic (does not include engineering costs, administration or mine overhead costs, nor does it include various activity costs such as grading or bench drilling), the addition of other costs to give a more realistic view of the mining process is easily conducted if deemed necessary. A strength of the proposed method is the flexibility of inputs to provide more context to the systems being compared. For the purposes of this study, costs that are shared in all configurations (such as bench drilling) are not necessary to include, as the goal is to determine which configuration is superior to the others in question (since unchanged costs shared between methods such as Truck-Shovel and IPCC contribute nothing to the comparison of the methods’ effectiveness). This combination of tools allowed for rapid prototyping of mine designs while considering the variability in key mine performance parameters (travel time, maintenance, load factor, etc.). As shown by the scenarios in With regards to the overall process the ability to rapidly adjust a model's parameters based on the results of a previous simulation to optimize it was effective. The following figures (see With a target daily mill feed tonnage of 30,000 tonnes of ore arbitrarily chosen from within the range of data of similar mines, the simulation was optimized over five iterations to achieve maximum NPV. The optimization required re-evaluating how many trucks were necessary for a bench to achieve target production and choosing when to introduce them. Following the completion of the first iteration, the results were fed into the cost model, the tonnes per day and NPV were output. By paying attention to the trends that arose regarding the disparity between the target and realized produced tonnes per day of ore, the timing of trucks being introduced was modified. The simulations yielded quick results, showing optimization of this type could be achieved relatively quickly. More remarkably, the iteration time was quite short, considering the immense amount of interactions and calculations in each simulation. Every individual interaction between truck, machinery, and route is computed across the life of mine, with no extrapolation or interpolation used to reduce the processing load. The lifetime of mine and the time to compute it considered together are impressive. The life of mine ranged between 30 to 45 years in these simulations with three realizations per bench, giving a simulation iteration time of roughly 15 minutes. This efficiency allowed for very rapid prototyping of the mine design. Optimizing for a single value, in this case, target ore production, yielded promising results, as illustrated in This research simulated and compared the materials handling systems of two types of IPCC systems across several different mine geometries using the DES software Arena®. The initial designs were optimized iteratively on one of many possible bases for both the fixed and semi-mobile in-pit crushing and conveying systems. The optimization involved changing the number of haul trucks required and the times at which they were added to the fleet, yielding improved NPV for each configuration. The varying pit design permutations of this particular mine configuration yielded trends in agreement with conventional knowledge, namely of increasing benefits from the semi-mobile IPCC over the fixed IPCC as pit volume increases. Given that the process, assuming accurate estimates for input, has been concluded as having the potential to produce accurate results for truck/shovel systems, it is a natural choice for this sort of comparison. Indeed, the configuration changes required to switch between the system types for this scale were minimal, and the derivation of statistics and costs required for iterative optimization and distillable conclusions are efficient. While further work is necessary to capture complexities omitted from this study, the richness of Arena®’s tools and external application hooks and APIs should enable even the most complex scenarios to be modeled and simulated. As shown from the iterative optimization of the proposed materials handling systems through the use of DES and Process Analyzer, the method does allow for quick and simple comparison of proposed and implemented materials handling systems. The proposed method of systems analysis has the potential for repetitive use to highlight pros and cons of various mine designs, with the ability to test multiple designs with a very small time and resource cost. Thus, the goal of creating a method to improve accessibility and feasibility of testing IPCC systems in large-scale mining operations has been satisfied. As per the results of the research, the prototyping rate of simulating varying materials handling in open pits may be quite rapid. The real promise of this technology for this purpose lies with the ability to incorporate the results of previous simulation realizations into the decision-making process for determining future model inputs. The potential to extend this to develop a more automated and precise system for optimization via more complex result interpretation and API calling is an exciting venue to explore. One challenge clearly necessary to address in advance is the impact scaling this sort of prototyping effort to real-world scale mine models will have on simulation time. Real-world models necessarily include a higher degree of complexity and interconnectedness to model processes missing in this research and as such the ratio of time spent computing the simulation vs. the simulated time increases. While DES experts may provide valuable insight regarding the impact of model changes, as of yet the impact of those changes particular to scaling up needs to be assessed from a mining perspective. The advantage of the proposed model is that as the parameters of a specific mine are entered, the results tailored to this mine is obtained. Further work is encouraged to determine whether this lab-scale demonstration of the technology does integrate fluidly with the established mine design or operational processes in place in the industry today. A full-scale model of an operating or planned mine with a higher amount of input accuracy, complexity inclusion, and result scrutiny should be performed. Such further work would enable the results and simulated values of this method to be compared and reconciled with real-life scenarios, increasing effectiveness and accuracy. As well, it will simply assess whether or not the design of a mine with far greater a degree of complexity than included in this research may be too challenging or intensive to incorporate with this methodology. Should that work be undertaken, this methodology does hold the potential to assess IPCC system implementation for most any given mine in terms of operational requirements and differences as compared to traditional systems as well as the operational and capital costs and revenues associated with such a conversion. The authors gratefully thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) (ID: 236482) for supporting this research.