This special issue on Ionic Liquids in Separation and Purification Technology represents a selection of papers presented at the first ILSEPT Conference which was held September 4–7, 2011 at Melia Hotel in Sitges, Spain. The Conference featured technical programs in 4 parallel sessions where cutting edge results that were obtained over the last few years in establishing innovative separation and purification technologies that exploit the unique solvent properties of ionic liquids were presented. The topics of the Conference were (1) Ionic Liquids as advanced fluids in Analytical separations, Adsorption/Chromatography, Absorption, Crystallization, Distillation, Extraction/Leaching, Membrane separations, Electrodyalisis/Electrophoresis, (2) Applications of Ionic Liquids in Biorefining, Biotechnology, Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Surface cleaning, CO A total of 174 delegates from academia and industry attended the Conference. These delegates arrived from 4 continents (N. America, S. America, Asia, Africa, Europe) and 39 countries (Algeria, Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Czek Republic, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, India, Ireland, Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan, Latvia, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Taiwan, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States). The Conference attracted a good number of young scholars in the field of ionic liquids. The following companies exhibited their products and services, BASF, COSMOlogic, IOLITEC and PROIONIC. Clearly the Conference was very well attended by a diverse group of ILs professionals that shared and discussed the cutting edge results in the rapidly developing field of ILs in Separation and Purification Technology. The following companies, CYTEC, EVONIK, KOEI and MERCK gave generous financial assistance to the Conference. The guest editor wish to thank the Executive Publisher Chemical Engineering, Minerals & Separations, Mr. Dean Eastbury, the Publishing Content Coordinator, Mrs. Tracy Chen, and Professor André de Haan, Editor of Separation and Purification Technology, for great support. Last but not least, I wish to thank all of anonymous reviewers for their timely and professional review of the manuscripts.