In this study, the mechanism of enhancing Fe removal from metallurgical grade silicon (MG–Si) by the novel metal-assisted chemical leaching (MACL) purification methods have been investigated. The typical impurity phase Si2Fe was selected to study interface reactions between the impurity phase and lixiviant. Based on density functional theory (DFT), the interactions of HF leaching, CuACL and AgACL on Si2Fe were revealed through studying the evolution behaviors of atom geometric structure, density of states and bond population, which showed that the stability of Si2Fe structure weakened with the orders of AgACL > CuACL > HF leaching. It was found that the lengths of Si–Fe bonds and metallicity of Si2Fe were successively increased when Si2Fe interacted with HF leaching, CuACL and AgACL, respectively. Compared with HF leaching, MACL weakened Si–Fe bond populations and increased HFe bond populations, further destroyed the stability of Si2Fe structure. The experimental results showed that the impurity Fe removal rates were 94.30% for HF leaching, 95.75% for CuACL, and 97.27% for AgACL, respectively, which was highly consistent with the theoretical simulation results. The study provides a theoretical basis for enhancing Fe removal from silicon through MACL produces, indicating that MACL methods have a potential application in deep removal of impurity Fe from silicon in the future.Solar energy, as one of the most important clean and renewable energy, is expected largely to replace the traditional fossil energy in the future. The solar energy can be converted into electrical energy by solar cells In order to remove impurities from silicon more ecologically and economically, metallurgical technologies as the promising methods are proposed to achieve SoG–Si from upgrading metallurgical grade silicon (MG–Si, purity 98%–99%) The simulations were performed using the CASTEP (cambridge serial total energy package) module of Materials Studio based on the density functional theory (DFT) The raw material used in this study was MG–Si with a purity of ∼99%. The concentration of Fe and other major impurities is shown in The leaching process were carried out in a self-assembly and closed experimental installation, 5 g MG–Si powders are added into 100 mL leaching solutions stirring for 2 h at room temperature. For comparison purposes, the HF concentration of each leaching solutions are selected as 3.45 M. Different from HF leaching process, the CuACL and AgACL process requires a certain concentration of Cu The concentration of impurities before and after leaching under different methods were measured by using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES, Optima 8000, Perkin Elmer, US). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM; QUANTA200, FEI, USA) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS, INCA, Thermo, US) was used to detect the morphologies and microstructures characteristics of silicon powders and the impurity precipitates. The measured main impurities concentrations are listed in In order to know more details of Si The atom geometric structures of Si  In order to further reveal the effect of interactions on the electronic structure and properties of Si As shown in  The TDOS is similar to that of the CuACL interaction results, which also cannot find the bandwidth of Si Bond populations can be regarded as another useful method in evaluating the nature of bonds in compound It is known that the removal of Fe from MG–Si with hydrometallurgical processes are closely related to the activity of H In order to verify the feasibility and accuracy of the calculations, the leaching experiments are carried out.  The reaction mechanism of removal impurity Fe from MG–Si with and without MACL processes was investigated in this study. The typical of impurity phase of Si The authors declares no conflicts of interest. Financial support of this work from the