The width of metastable zone of unseeded potassium nitrate, potassium sulphate and ammonium sulphate solutions, saturated at 30°C, was determined by means of an ultrasonic measuring technique at three different cooling rates. The change of ultrasonic velocity and temperature in solutions during a cooling and heating cycle was controlled by using a protected sensor. The results were compared with those of the unprotected sensor taken from the literature for the chosen substances. The change of ultrasonic velocity of supersaturated ammonium sulphate solutions in the presence of crystals was measured at constant temperature by means of a protected sensor. It was found that the protected sensor was reliable and sensitive enough to determine the change of ultrasonic velocity and temperature in both solution and slurry.The operation of industrial crystallizers, whether batch or continuos, must satisfy the customer's requirements concerning product purity and crystal size distribution (CSD) and the manufacturer's requirements economically. The generated CSD also affects other customer acceptance criteria such as dust content, ability to flow and dissolution rate. In order to meet these diverse production objectives, all the variables affecting the crystallization process must be controlled. One of the principal variable that must be controlled in crystallization is the supersaturation in the solution which is defined as the difference between actual and equilibrium concentrations of a solution. The supersaturation profile in a crystallizer has a profound effect on nucleation and growth processes, and resulting in CSD. The optimum supersaturation level for a crystallization process is approximately half of the metastable zone width (MZW) which defines the operating zone of the industrial crystallizer. Operation above the metastable limit results in the production of a large number of nuclei competing with seed growth and reducing the rate of subsequent solid–liquid separation. On the other hand, operations near the saturation limit lead to a very low growth rate which is not of interest for economical and operational reasons. Therefore, significant improvement in CSD and operation can be achieved by controlling the supersaturation levels during the crystallization process. It is prerequisite to determine the limits of the metastable zone to control the crystallizer to be operated away from the edge of the effective metastable zone. The ultrasonic measuring technique is one of the methods, which enables to determine supersaturation and metastable range. According to this technique proposed by Omar and Ulrich Measurements of MZW were performed in a 0.5 l jacketed glass crystallizer. Temperature control of the solution in reactor was maintained by a programmable thermostatic bath. Stirring was accomplished by a magnetic stirrer and the stirring rate at each experiment was kept constant to avoid the effect of stirring rate on MZW. The solutions of different experiments were prepared at desired saturation temperature by adding analytical grade potassium nitrate, potassium chloride and ammonium sulphate to deionized water according to the solubility data In order to indicate the applicability of the ultrasonic measuring technique to determine MZW and to be used in the presence of crystals in industrial crystallizers in case of using the protected sensor, a series of experiments were carried out. The measurements achieved by means of a protected sensor were compared with those obtained by using an unprotected sensor. The values of MZW obtained using an unprotected sensor were taken from the literature for chosen substances As can be seen from In order to indicate whether or not the protected sensor can be applied for in situ measurements of supersaturation in the slurries, the change of ultrasound velocity of supersaturated ammonium sulphate solution corresponding to time was measured at a constant temperature by means of the protected sensor after adding seed crystals of a known amount (5 wt.%). For this purpose, ammonium sulphate solution saturated at 30 The protected ultrasound sensor was found quite sensitive to measure the change of ultrasonic velocity and temperature in solution. Using the protected sensor, we can eliminate the effect of particle size and/or suspension density on ultrasound velocity. Thus, the ultrasound velocity technique can be used for online measuring of concentration for control purposes in industrial crystallizers precisely. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support for parts of the works which led to the results by the EU and by the Volkswagen Foundation.