Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) results are typically reported as individual scores, or as a breakdown of the most direct inputs; either as absolute values or relative scores. It is proposed to report not only the direct or primary LCIA scores, but also the impacts from secondary and tertiary processes. A graphical technique to report LCIA results is described where a combination of pie and donut charts, with the inner most layer representing direct impacts and subsequent outer layers representing preceding indirect impacts, is presented. An MS-EXCEL spread sheet is presented where the methods and outcomes are shown. This can then be used to display LCIA results. It is possible to present both primary and indirect impacts in a single figure. Significant indirect impacts contributing to the total score of an LCA are clearly visible.To date, Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) methods have been investigated in great detail. For example, Irrespective of the robustness of each individual method, there is no shortage of LCIA discussion regarding the methods needed to fully calculate Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) results. However, the way in which this data is presented is not always clear. This paper aims to show some of the current methods of presenting LCIA results and give a new way to graphically represent the data. In so doing, the paper aims to answer the research question: Is it possible to present LCIA results in a more user friendly way for non-practitioners? LCIA data can either be presented graphically or using tabulated data. While some papers present only tabulated data (for example Bar charts are typically shown as a single bar for each of the impact categories used, divided into different colours for the direct contributions to that category ( A slight modification of the bar chart is the use of a footprint diagram. A simple footprint is drawn, and in the same way as in a bar chart, the impacts contributing to the category in question are given different colours to represent their contributions. These are often used in carbon-, water- and ecological footprinting represent the footprint idea. In a similar technique to bar charts, line graphs and scatter plots have been used by A tree diagram is a linear representation of all the contributing factors towards a single impact category ( One of the problems with tree diagrams is that no process can be represented as a simple linear flowchart. In reality, Life Cycle Assessments involve complex looped systems. As such there are many units of a tree diagram which will be repeated, e.g. electricity. Instead of repeating these units, thereby maintaining a linear representation, network diagrams merge these processes (for example An additional feature of both is that depending on the size of the flow, the arrows connecting units are represented as proportional sizes. This is a similar technique as used in Sankey diagrams. These however are usually limited to mass or energy flows in a system as demonstrated by LCIA results have also been depicted through the use of spider diagrams as used by This paper will encourage the use of pie and donut charts to combine the use of first, second and higher level impacts (see below). The use of pie diagrams to show LCIA impacts is not a new concept with single level inputs being used by (amongst others), All of these representations are useful but it is suggested that they can be improved to show LCIA data to non-LCA practitioners; particularly the decision makers within a company. Bar charts, while simple to understand, only give the most direct impacts of each impact category and do not show the breakdown of the individual parts that make up the whole. However, networks and trees clearly show the exact breakdown of each impact. However, even with a few impacts, both trees and networks can become complicated means of reporting results. This paper proposes a method of a combination of pie and donut charts to represent the LCIA impacts in a simple concise manner, reporting all of the direct, secondary and, if needed, tertiary processes which contribute to total LCIA scores. An inside out layered approach is proposed, with a single circular graphic for each impact category. The inner most layer of the chart represents the direct impacts, with successive outward layers representing the impacts of preceding processes. Level 1 is the innermost layer of the graphic. These are the direct, or primary, impacts to the total score. Typically these may be 4 or 5 values which will form a pie diagram at the centre of the final representation. As is seen in Level 2 represents the secondary impacts of the process and is shown as a layer outside of the pie chart which represented Level 1. For each of the direct impacts in Level 1, a donut chart is drawn for the impacts contributing to each of these impacts. Expanding the example of The third level in the diagram is an optional layer to represent tertiary impacts. This could be used to expand on a large contributor e.g. a primary contribution of electricity greater than 75% may yield 50% of the total impact due to electricity from coal in the secondary impacts. It may be decided to break this down further in reporting. If we again expand the diagram above ( While the proposed technique allows for the reader to quickly see the secondary and tertiary impacts of a process there are some limitations. These include: The method does not allow for comparison of results across impact categories in the same way a bar chart might; and It is not possible to represent uncertainty. An additional consideration is that data may be presented as relative results, although absolute values can be shown on pie charts. Given this and the above limitations, it is suggested that the diagrams proposed here are used as additional graphical features to complement what might already be given. It is not always possible to implement changes to a process which might lead to primary impacts being reduced. However, secondary impacts could be changed e.g. it may not be possible to reduce energy usage, but changing from coal to solar energy may be possible. Presenting the technique above, particularly to management, will allow a better understanding of where all impacts originate. This may not need to take the form of all impact categories, but could be a combination of most important impacts or a single impact (e.g. global warming) which acts as a proxy for all scores. LCIA results are the final showpiece of a LCA. As such it should be important to ensure all the effort of the LCA process is clearly portrayed to the desired audience. While bar charts, tree or network diagrams and others are useful tools in graphically portraying these results, a combined pie and donut chart approach has been proposed here as an additional reporting tool. The pie and donut chart approach allows for the primary, secondary, and (if needed) tertiary impacts of a product/process/service to be shown. This approach also allows for a clear distinction between primary and secondary impacts which may be the same impact (e.g. electricity) without adding them, but still allowing for a sense of the total impact of this one impact. Included in this paper is an MS-EXCEL file which allows the reader to develop the Level 1 and 2 pie/donut charts as described herein and use them as required. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: