Shape characteristics of fine aggregates, namely angularity and form 2D are greatly associated with the types of rocks, mineralogical compositions, and allied crushing mechanism. Thus, for a given source and aggregate, the type of crusher may play a critical role in producing aggregates having different shape parameters. The present study was undertaken to compare shape parameters of fine aggregates produced from three different crushers, i.e. vertical shaft impactor (VSI), cone crusher (CC) and horizontal shaft impactor (HSI). Basaltic fine aggregates collected from three different crushers was divided into five sizes, namely FA1 (P4.75-R2.36: aggregate passing 4.75mm and retaining on 2.36mm), FA2 (P2.36-R1.18), FA3 (P1.18-R0.600), FA4 (P0.600-R0.300) and FA5 (P0.300-R0.150). The angularity and form 2D values of different sizes and types of fine aggregates were measured using Aggregate Image Measurement System (AIMS) in accordance with AASHTO TP 81. Further, conventional technique namely fine aggregate angularity (FAA) test was used to measure angularity of fine aggregates. Furthermore, Angle of Repose (AoR) test was conducted to identify influence of shape characteristics on particle packing behaviour. The study showed that both the techniques (i.e., AIMS and FAA) could differentiate among the quality of fine aggregates produced from different crushers. However, both techniques resulted in opposite trend in angularity of aggregates. The AIMS measurement showed that angularity and form 2D was highest for aggregates produced from HSI crusher followed by CC and VSI. On the other hand, FAA showed that aggregates produced from CC crusher had maximum angularity followed by VSI and HSI. Conclusively, the AIMS showed that HSI crusher could produce aggregates with highest angularity, while FAA showed that this type of crusher might produce aggregates with least angularity. Curiously, the AoR values showed no significant difference for the fine aggregates produced from different crushers. The interrelation between angularity and form 2D is also discussed in the paper.Aggregates of different sizes are used in significant proportion for production of asphalt mixes. In asphalt mixes, coarse aggregates provide major load distribution network, while fine aggregates fill the voids among coarse aggregates skeleton, and asphalt binder provides glue action for aggregates to form a monolithic asphalt mix. For dense asphalt mixes, approximately 50% of total volume is comprised of fine aggregates. Shape characteristics of fine aggregates have appreciable effects on performance of dense-asphalt mixes So far to the author’s understanding, no studies have been conducted to compare shape parameters of fine aggregates produced from different types of crushers. Further, comparison between angularity measured using conventional test method (FAA) and digital techniques have not been reported. In the present study, fine aggregates of five different sizes: FA1 (passing a sieve of 4.75 The objectives of the present study are to: Compare angularity and form 2D of fine aggregates produced from three different crushing operations (i.e., VSI, CC and HSI), measured using AIMS. Correlate packing and stability behaviour of fine aggregates measured using conventional laboratory tests (i.e., FAA and AoR) with angularity and form 2D of fine aggregates obtained from AIMS. In the current study, basaltic fine aggregates produced from three different types of crushers, namely vertical shaft impactor (VSI), cone crusher (CC) and horizontal shaft impactor (HSI) were collected. The VSI works on aggregate to aggregate impact mechanism. The aggregate was allowed to fall through spacing on centre and circumference. Centre fall aggregates were provided high centrifuge velocity against a cascade of circumferential aggregates. The crushing in the CC is a combination of abrasion and cleavage phenomena, which is generated due to trapping of aggregates between rotating cylinder and fixed hard wall surface. The HSI works on aggregate to anvil impact mechanism. The impact is generated by the collision of aggregates with high-speed blades and fixed anvils ( First angularity and form 2D of different types and sizes of fine aggregates were measured using AIMS. Thereafter, FAA and Angle of Repose (AoR) of fine aggregates were measured to understand particle packing behaviour. Different size of aggregates (FA1, FA2, FA3, FA4, and FA5) were washed and oven dried at 110 Angularity is defined as the sharpness of corners of a 2-dimensional image of the aggregate particles. Angularity is measured using gradient method. The change of gradient is measured over particle boundary using binary particle image (silhouette) of aggregate particles (Equation Form 2D quantifies the relative form from the two-dimensional images of fine aggregate particles. Form 2D is calculated using Eq. The FAA was measured in accordance with AASHTO T304 The Angle of Repose (AoR) is an indirect measure of particle packing or particle stability behaviour. The higher value of AoR indicates better particle packing. In this test, a flat horizontal surface was used as a test area (  Mean value of angularity for different sizes of aggregates is shown in The analysis of variance (ANOVA) test was conducted to compare angularity of each size aggregates produced from VSI, CC, and HSI crushers. The summary of ANOVA test with one-way and multiple comparisons (post-hoc analysis) is reported in  ANOVA test was conducted to compare form 2D values of each size of aggregates produced from VSI, CC and HSI crushers. The FAA test was conducted in lab in accordance to AASHTO T304 AoR test is an indirect measurement of particle packing behaviour. It is expected that the aggregate with higher angularity will show the better aggregate interlock and hence results in higher AoR value. The significant number of statistical comparison were drawn to further understand the strength of linear relationship between different shape parameters.  The present study focused on comparison of shape parameters (angularity and form 2D), and associated laboratory performance tests (FAA and AoR) of different sizes of fine aggregates (FA1, FA2, FA3, FA4 and FA5) produced from VSI, CC and HSI crushers. The selected crushers (VSI, CC, and HSI) have different production mechanism and thus expected to have aggregates with varying shape characteristics. The outcomes of the present study are expected to be useful for industry in selection of crushers and quality of aggregates. The following conclusions can be drawn based on the results and discussion presented above. AIMS test results showed that fine aggregates produced from HSI crusher had the highest angularity and form 2D, followed by CC and VSI crushers. The order of angularity can be ranked as HSI Conventional FAA test also differentiated aggregates produced from three crushers; however, angularity ranking was different compared to AIMS. The FAA test showed that aggregates from CC crusher were highly angular followed by VSI and HSI, and ranking of angularity was CC Both FAA and AIMS test methods showed opposite trend of angularity for HSI crusher. Considering digital image based technique is more reliable, and FAA involves more subjective based measurements, it is suggested that validity of FAA test results be further verified based on large database or performance tests. The AoR values showed no particular trend over different type (i.e. size and crusher) of fine aggregates, therefore, this test was unable to differentiate among different crushing mechanisms. The opposite trend was seen for angularity measured from FAA test and AIMS. The present study is based on a limited number of crushers and one type of aggregate, thus it is recommended that a future study can be conducted to consider larger database and varying types of aggregates. Further, performance tests on asphalt mixes for different types of aggregates can be conducted to validate the results obtained from AIMS and FAA techniques.