A system for the biological production and accumulation of cyanide was developed, which was used to recover platinum-group metals (PGMs) from spent automotive catalysts. This two-stage process was proposed to overcome drawbacks of biological cyanidation such as low cyanide production, unsuitable pH for bacterial growth and cyanidation, and difficult access of cyanide lixiviant to the surface of target resources. The batch- and continuous-type cyanide production systems achieved maximum cyanide concentrations of 954.8 and 6594.5mg/L, respectively. The leaching of Pt, Pd, and Rh from ground spent automotive catalysts by the biogenic cyanide was compared with leaching by a chemical NaCN solution. A 1000mg/L biogenic cyanide solution leached Pt, Pd, and Rh at efficiencies of 92.1%, 99.5%, and 96.5%, respectively, at 150°C. The chemical NaCN solution leached these PGMs at efficiencies of 100%, 99.9%, and 100%, respectively, under the same condition. These differences might be due to the effect of dissociated anions and oxygen in the biogenic cyanide. Although the leaching efficiencies by the biogenic cyanide were a little less than those by the chemical cyanide, the feasibility of the biological cyanide production and accumulation system for PGMs leaching was demonstrated.Platinum-group metals (PGMs; platinum, palladium, rhodium) are used as catalysts in automobile catalytic converters owing to their activity, stability, and selectivity ( Hydrometallurgical processes are also studied to leach PGMs directly from catalyst materials using suitable lixiviants such as aqua regia ( The advantages of this method over acid leaching include low corrosion, selective PGM extraction, and lower base metal dissolution. However, excessive use of cyanide for the dissolution of PGMs has associated environmental risks, and thus more environmental friendly biological cyanidation for PGM leaching is being investigated. It is believed that the biological method has been one of the most promising environmentally sound technologies in metallurgical processing because bacteria produce cyanide and can subsequently detoxify in a biological cyanidation system. Biological cyanidation also has the advantage of producing cyanide without requiring the transport of the chemicals to a processing site. Cyanide-producing bacteria, such as In this work, a two-stage process is proposed. Cyanide is first biologically produced, and then used to recover PGMs in a separate vessel. The initial stage used an air-purged A cyanide-producing bacterium, A batch-type cyanide production and accumulation system employed a 2 A continuous-type cyanide production and accumulation system employed a reactor and trap system similar to that of the batch-type system, but the system was equipped with feed and drainage vessels and pumps to enable feed flow and drainage ( Samples were collected from the reactor and traps once a day during operation to measure the cyanide concentration and bacterial viability. After sample collection, the same volume (5 The spent monolith automotive catalysts of honeycomb-structure used in this study were obtained from a Korean recycling company. The elemental composition ( The cyanide species distribution in the NaOH traps was calculated using a computer program Visual MINTEQ (version 3.0) ( A cyanide production and accumulation system was developed and operated to biologically produce cyanide by using  To decide the optimal concentration of glycine to produce cyanide, the batch-type system was operated with different glycine concentrations in the YP medium for 5  In the case of the system with 1 To optimize the concentration of NaOH solution in the traps, the batch-type system was operated using 1, 5, or 10 To solve the problem of short cyanide production period (2 Three PGMs (Pt, Pd, and Rh) were leached from ground spent automotive catalyst by the biogenic cyanide solution. A chemical cyanide (NaCN) solution at the same concentration was used for comparison. Leaching efficiencies were assessed after 1 The dependence of PGM on temperature has been thoroughly investigated ( Moreover, above 160 In this study, using 1000 In addition, HCN has a relatively high vapor pressure (100 The biogenic cyanide leached PGMs slightly less efficiently than the chemical cyanide, possibly owing to the effect of sulfate anions or oxygen. Before leaching, the pH of the biogenic cyanide solution was adjusted with sulfuric acid from 14 to 11 (optimal pH for cyanidation). The acid, which contains anions such as SO The biogenic cyanide appeared feasible for PGM extraction: a 1000 A new cyanide production and accumulation system was evaluated, and the resulting biogenic cyanide was assessed on the leaching of PGMs from spent catalysts. The biologically produced cyanide (1000 This research was supported by the Basic Research Project (  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at