The distribution (profile) of air to a bank of cells has been shown to influence metallurgy. To facilitate setting a profile a sensor giving a continuous airflow rate signal is introduced. The principle of operation is collection of bubbles in a tube and measurement of pressure drop across a calibrated orifice as the air expels under steady state conditions. Experience with the unit is illustrated, from identifying a malfunctioning airflow meter, to revealing interaction between cells, and demonstrating the ease in establishing a profile down a bank of 16 cells with a multi-sensor unit.Airflow rate to a cell is one of the main operating variables in flotation. In many plants, if measurements are available at all, they are typically made on a line common to several cells with valves to distribute as determined by the operator. A recent trend has been to monitor air rate to individual units, especially tank cells. At best, therefore, we have knowledge of the air into a cell but with no easy way to check the reading or to determine how the air is distributed throughout the cell. Measurement in the cell requires collection of bubbles. Several groups have been developing such methods (  While we cannot conclude an increasing The sensor comprises a tube, valves, a pressure transducer and an orifice ( In continuous mode, the bubbles enter and the air expels through the orifice. The liquid level in the tube depresses till steady state is reached (air in as bubbles equals air out through orifice) and from the pressure drop across the orifice The pressure transducer is the Wika S-10 (range 0–50 in. water). The data are collected using JTACQ V28 acquisition software connected to a Dutec BIO4 (4 channels), BIO8 (8 channels) or BIO16 (16 channels) data acquisition systems. The software is run in a PIII Toshiba Satellite Pro. The multi-channel capability means up to 16 sensors can be monitored at the same time. There have been opportunities to evaluate the new sensor at a number of installations. Some of the experiences are illustrated starting with troubleshooting, followed by revealing cell interactions and their manipulation, to finally demonstrating the ease of setting an air rate profile to a bank of 16 cells with a multi-sensor unit. North American Palladium Ltd. is Canada's only primary producer of palladium. The Company's Lac des Iles open pit mine, located 85 km northwest of Thunder Bay, ON, also produces platinum, gold, copper and nickel as by-products. The circuit includes a row of OK-130 cells each with a froth crowder and individual mass airflow meters (  Northparkes is a gold, copper mine located 27 km NW of Parkes, New South Wales, Australia, owned by Rio Tinto, Sumitomo Metal Mining Co. Ltd., and Sumitomo Corporation. A rougher bank of four DO-100 cells was monitored over extended periods. Cells 1 and 2 are connected to a common airline, as are cells 3 and 4. The sensors (2 m by 10 cm) were held ≈50 cm below the froth-pulp interface and 1 m away from the impeller.   Clarabelle mill is part of INCO Ltd's metallurgical complex centred on Sudbury, some 400 km north of Toronto, ON, Canada. Besides nickel and copper, significant quantities of cobalt, platinum group metals, gold and silver are also recovered (  An objective set was to manipulate the air valve on cell 2 to yield the same The experience indicated the sensor should simplify setting a profile. A chance to test was an invitation to contribute to a campaign at Matagami Mines, a gold, copper, zinc producer located 180 km due north of Val d'Or, QC, Canada. Setting a profile to a rougher bank of 16 Galigher–Agitair (≈4 ft The approach was to insert the sensors in the odd numbered cells, set the air rate, transfer to the even numbered cells, tune those, then return to the odd cells to check. For the 8 cells this took about 20 min. The whole process, including cleaning the sensors when transferring, took about 80 min, a great improvement over using the on/off  Froth buildup inside the sensor is a natural consequence of collecting bubbles in a flotation system. In the Northparkes case this led to fouling of the orifice for sensors in the first cells of the rougher bank where froth is stabilized by high bubble solids loading. While it was possible to find cells where this was not a problem, ways to overcome were considered in order that surveys were not compromised. Simply extending the tube proved impractical in the one case where it was tried when after 6 m there was no sign that the problem was close to being solved. One attempt was to try to promote collapse of the froth by acceleration through a small diameter pipe inserted in the line before the orifice with a reservoir (to collect the froth). This bought some time. In that regard, it was no more successful than the addition of WD 40, spayed into the orifice and on the tube walls, which delayed the froth buildup. The simplest solution was to institute regular cleaning. After 15–30 min data acquisition the sensor was taken off-line and the orifice washed out. For survey work this will probably suffice much of the time. It does suggest the possibility of automation. The cleaning could be by compressed air activated by a solenoid valve on a timer to eject the froth-slurry from the sensor. Compressed air at suitable pressures (10 KPa or 100 cm of water) is available at plant sites. Cleaning should take less than a minute. For long-term surveys (and we have run them for days in cells giving no froth buildup problem) this would provide an obvious benefit and it opens the way for on-line monitoring and control. Flotation circuit performance can expect to benefit from managing gas distribution (as with any reagent). An example is setting an airflow rate ( Funding was initiated under the Industry Chair in Mineral Processing sponsored by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Inco, Falconbridge, Teck Cominco, Noranda, and now Corem and SGS-Lakefield Research, and since January 2001 through an NSERC Collaborative Research and Development grant sponsored by the Australian Mineral Industry Research Association (AMIRA) representing Noranda, Inco, Teck Cominco, Cleveland Cliffs and Phelps Dodge. One of the authors (JT) also recognizes the financial contribution from the Programa de Perfeccionamiento Acadmico de la Universidad de Santiago de Chile (USACH). The enthusiastic assistance of operators and engineers at the various sites was much appreciated and is gratefully acknowledged.