Wash water is widely used in flotation to increase the gravity-driven drainage rate of water within the froth phase and the efficiency of removing entrained (hydrophilic) particles. At a high rate, it can disturb the froth. Here, we investigate the drainage instability caused by wash water using the forced drainage experiments. We quantitatively confirm that foam suffers from convective instability when a sufficiently high flow rate of wash water is employed. A comparison between the theoretical onset predictions of convective instability and experimental results shows that some available drainage experiments might have suffered from convective instability. Our new experimental results show three drainage regimes and structures associated with increased flow rate of wash water: (1) stable foam structure, (2) relative motion of bubbles and (3) convective roll. Our study presents both theoretical analysis and experimental results for quantifying convective instability, which can be eliminated to improve flotation.In froth flotation, floatable and non-floatable particles have different mechanisms for transportation from the pulp to the froth phase. Floatable particles are recovered by true flotation, i.e., by the attachment to air bubbles, whereas non-floatable particles are recovered by entrainment ( Wash water systems have been studied for both coal and mineral flotation ( In this paper, we investigate the regimes of drainage instability caused by wash water using the forced drainage experiments. We compare the reported data of the drainage experiments with the theories. The comparison shows that the traveling waves of the wetted foam front caused by wash water may have suffered from instability. We also provide new experimental data to elucidate three regimes of foam instability during the drainage experiments. The convective instability occurs when the gravitational and capillary effects overcome the yield stress of the foam. Depending on where on the Plateau border the stress is assumed to exceed the critical stress, three onset criteria for convective instability are described as follows (    Deionized (DI) water with a resistivity of 18.2 MΩ cm was produced from a Milli-Q system (Millipore, USA). Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Australia) with purity higher than 99% and was further purified by recrystallization. The foam for the drainage experiments was generated by using a foam column (600 mm long with an inner diameter of 33 mm). SDS concentration in foaming solutions was 2.0 CMC (CMC A foam volume within 300 mm depth from the top was chosen to study liquid front motion, bubble motion, and bubble size distribution during forced drainage experiments. The wet foam at the bottom was disregarded because (1) the drainage theory only applies in the dry foam limit, and generalizations are needed if the foam is wetter towards the bottom (   In this study, we have investigated regimes of drainage instability caused by wash water. We compared theoretical predictions of the onset of convective instability to experimental results of drainage experiments. Some reported drainage experiments in the literature might have suffered convective instability and, therefore, do not agree with the theoretical predictions. The new drainage experiments show three different regimes of drainage instability as the superficial velocity of imposed liquid increases, i.e., (1) stable foam structure, (2) relative motion of bubbles, and (3) convective roll. The current study is significant for wash water applications to flotation cells to increase the cleaning action of the froth phase by the gravity drainage.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the China Scholarship Council (CSC) of the Chinese Government for the CSC joint training scholarship for the first author (JT). S1 – Theoretical background of forced drainage, S2 – Model development, and Figure S1 - Histogram of bubble size for all drainage experiments. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: