This work illustrates the reduction roasting and magnetic separation studies of a complex Indian iron ore with 57% Fe that could not be upgraded to >61% Fe using a flow sheet comprising of the conventional unit operations like scrubbing, jigging, magnetic separation or flotation. The sole reason of the poor response to physical beneficiation was mainly attributed to the inadequate liberation of iron as visualized under the reflected light microscope, which revealed the fine dispersion of silica particles within the hematite grains and vice versa. In order to overcome this problem, the ore was subjected to reduction roasting using conventional as well as microwave heating followed by magnetic separation. The effects of different process variables such as reductant concentration, time, and temperature during the process of roasting were studied and subsequently optimized using the Taguchi statistical design. Optical microscopy and X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies of the roasted mass confirmed the formation of magnetite with simultaneous disappearance of the hematite and goethite phases. In the microwave roasting process, the reduction could be achieved in a considerably shorter time as compared to the conventional roasting, and the formation of undesired non-magnetic iron minerals like fayalite was limited as well. In both the processes, it was possible to achieve an iron ore concentrate having 63–65% Fe accompanied by ~85–90% weight recovery.The processing and utilization of iron ores are intimately linked to their mineralogical characteristics, liberation pattern, and the nature of inclusion of the impurities such as SiO There are a few alternate methods of recovering mineral values from complex and difficult to treat ores. Reduction roasting, ultrasonic radiation and microwave heat treatments are some of the techniques that have been attempted to recover mineral values from the associated gangue particles Microwave heating is a new area of research in iron ore processing. It is unique and different from conventional heating. Microwave energy is a non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation with frequencies in the range of 0.3–300 The present work encompasses reduction roasting studies of a difficult to treat iron ore using conventional as well as microwave heating. The roasted mass has been subjected to grinding and magnetic separation for obtaining a good iron concentrate. Different parameters and process levels are studied using the Taguchi statistical design. The low-grade iron ore samples were procured from the iron ore mines of Karnataka, India. The sample was received in lumpy form and for roasting studies; it was reduced to the desired size by jaw crushing followed by roll crushing. The complete chemical analysis of the representative sample was carried out after grinding the sample to a very fine size. The chemical analysis of the sample pertaining to Fe, SiO The iron ore sample was initially subjected to classification, jigging, magnetic separation, and flotation techniques for the recovery of the iron values. Magnetic separation studies were conducted by a laboratory model wet high-intensity magnetic separator (WHIMS) supplied by Box Mag Rapid, England. The magnetic intensity of 7500–16,000 All the reduction roasting experiments were carried out in a laboratory muffle furnace using high-quality refractory crucibles. Activated charcoal containing 3.0% moisture, 2.5% ash, 1.0% volatile matter and 93.5% fixed carbon was used as the reductant. 500 Microwave assisted reduction roasting experiments were carried out using a 2650 The roasting experiments were carried out as per the Taguchi experimental design in order to optimize the roasting variables for obtaining the maximum iron grade and recovery. L Initially, experiments were carried out by scrubbing, screening, jigging, and magnetic separation techniques to enrich the iron content of the ore containing ~ The sample was subjected to reflected light microscopic studies, which showed the intricate presence of extremely fine silicate phases within the hematite phase ( All the roasting experiments were carried out as per the Taguchi statistical design. The complete results of the muffle furnace roasting experiments at different conditions are shown in In order to delineate the effect of temperature on phase transformation, four additional experiments were performed at different temperatures (750, 850, 950 and 1050 The overall results show that wustite and fayalite are more predominant phases at a higher temperature. According to the corresponding ternary phase diagrams of the FeO-SiO The entire microwave roasting experiments were carried out as per the Taguchi statistical design. Three particle sizes of − The phase changes during microwave roasting were studied by reflected light microscope and XRD analysis. The X-ray diffraction studies in the case of some selected reduction process are shown in The formation of fayalite takes place only in experiments having higher residence time (> An iron ore with 57% Fe was found to be unresponsive to conventional beneficiation techniques because of the inherent complex mineralogy pertaining to fine-grained silica particles that are locked within hematite grains. A different approach based on reduction roasting and microwave heating followed by magnetic separation was considered to reduce and recover the iron values. The effects of different process parameters in both cases were analyzed using the Taguchi statistical design. The furnace roasting route yielded an iron concentrate of ~