Continuous high-throughput microwave treatment followed by infrared thermal imaging (MW-IR) has previously been shown to provide attractive separations for a number of porphyry copper ores, leading to rejection of a large proportion of barren fragments from ore-grade material or concentration of copper values from waste-grade material. However, the efficacy of the sorting process is reduced by the presence of hydrated clays and pyrite. Literature measurements have shown differences in the conductivity of pyrite and copper sulphides such as chalcopyrite at radio frequencies. In this work the potential of using radio frequency (RF) heating to exploit these differences and achieve improved selectivity between copper and iron sulphides, is investigated. For the first time a novel bulk materials handling and presentation method that facilitates even heating of angular ore fragments in parallel plate RF systems is discussed. The fragment-by-fragment thermal response of five ore samples under equivalent pilot MW-IR and RF-IR processing conditions is evaluated, showing that there is an increase in selectivity in the heating of hydrated clay minerals in RF compared to microwave. It is suggested, again for the first time, that selectivity in the microwave processing of ores containing semi-conducting minerals is due predominantly to magnetic absorption (induction heating) caused by eddy currents associated with the magnetic field component of electromagnetic energy. In radio frequency processing, where electric field is the dominant component, heating of semi-conducting minerals is limited by the electric field screening effect. This effect is demonstrated using synthetic fragments. Thermal response profiles of synthetic fragments show that approximately 2.5 times the mass of sulphide minerals to hydrated clay minerals would result in an equal temperature increase for microwave heated fragments in which the microwave-heating minerals are evenly disseminated throughout the matrix. This understanding provides the foundations for development of models incorporating different thermal responses for individual heated phases, alongside other textural and treatment variables, that can be used to predict how close to intrinsic sortability ores will perform in MW-IR and RF-IR without the need for extensive processing trials.In recent years sorting of ores has seen renewed interest, as a means of reducing comminution energy, with many studies demonstrating the potential benefits of applying sensor based sorting to mineral processing operations ( Microwave heating followed by infra-red thermal imaging (MW-IR) has been investigated as a potential excitation-discrimination technique for sorting of ores ( The pilot scale sorting performance of 16 porphyry copper ores has been investigated using a high throughput 100 Radio frequency electromagnetic energy is longer in wavelength than microwave energy; for the relevant industrial, scientific and medical (ISM) bands this difference equates to 11 The objective of this paper is to determine for the first time the potential of using RF-IR excitation-discrimination to sort porphyry copper ores on a fragment by fragment basis and investigate whether improved selectivity of copper sulphide minerals can be achieved compared to MW-IR. A novel method for materials handling during bulk RF excitation is developed that allows the fragment-by-fragment thermal response following microwave and RF treatment to be evaluated. Using this method the difference in the thermal response of fragments during microwave and RF processing is determined and evaluated with respect to the mineralogy of the ore fragments. Using synthetic fragments, the electric and magnetic field contributions to the overall heating of sulphide and clay minerals at microwave and radio frequencies are evaluated, and the implications these findings have for optimising selectivity in industrial scale ore sorting based on MW or RF-IR excitation and discrimination are discussed. Five porphyry copper ore samples were processed in this investigation, all originating from the same host site. The five samples were two ore and two waste grade feeds with varying lithologies, plus a recycled pebbles sample. Bulk ore samples (~ Continuous microwave treatment of samples was carried out using the pilot scale 100 Radio frequency testing of ores and synthetic fragments was carried out in a 20 It was observed during initial scoping tests of ore fragment monolayers in the RF parallel plate system that hot points were occurring on the edges and tips of fragments located closest to the upper electrode. A method for rotating a packed bed of material within the RF cavity was devised that was found to largely mitigate the effect of fragment geometry. The test fragments were placed in a cylindrical plastic tube and surrounded by crushed fill of the same ore type to cover the full length of the electrodes. The sample tube was plugged to prevent any spillage or movement of the packed bed during treatment. An empty length of the sample tube extended out of the RF tunnel so the tube could be manually rotated during treatment. By surrounding the test fragments with crushed fill material of the same ore type, electric field concentrations on tips and edges are minimised as power is absorbed into the surrounding material as well as the test fragments. By also rotating the bed of material (at approximately 15 The thermal response of ore and synthetic fragments following microwave or RF treatment was captured using an NEC H2640 thermal imaging camera. For each recorded test run with any excitation method, a thermal image was taken immediately prior to treatment. After treatment, thermal images were captured for 2 The sorting performance of each ore sample was determined by plotting ore sortability curves. These are analogous to the grade/mass recovery curves, used to assess the performance of flotation circuits. Metallurgical efficiency of a concentration process can be expressed by a curve showing the recovery attainable at any value of concentrate grade ( Previous work ( The variation in fragment thermal response profiles for the five different ore samples tested is illustrated in To further elucidate the difference between the behaviour of test fragments in microwave and RF processing, the comparative individual thermal responses for each fragment in each ore sample are illustrated in To determine whether radio frequency heating can provide a benefit over microwave heating for discrimination between valuable and uneconomic fragments, the sortability of the same fragments under equivalent conditions is compared. The metallurgical efficiency of any sorting process can be expressed as a curve showing the (copper) recovery attainable at any value of mass recovery. The intrinsic sortability of an ore sample is determined by ordering fragments from highest to lowest copper grade; cumulative recovery is then determined on a fragment by fragment basis ( S2 in the Supplementary Information illustrates the cumulative microwave and RF mass-copper sortability curves alongside the intrinsic mass-copper curves for each ore sample tested. Sortability performance can be readily determined from these curves by examining the copper recovery at different mass recoveries. The differences in MW and RF sorting performance under equivalent conditions are most readily attributed to a change in the selectivity of heating different mineral phases within the ores. To determine the influence of the three principle heated phases (chalcopyrite, pyrite and moisture) in the ores on the temperature rise of the fragments following microwave and RF treatment, multiple linear regressions were run for each of the five ores. The fragment heating results for microwave treatments in orientation 1 and orientation 2 were included as a single series to eliminate the effect of fragment orientation from the regression analysis. For all the samples with the exception of Ore 3, either chalcopyrite or pyrite content was found to have a significant influence on individual fragment temperature rise in MW-IR sorting. It is noteworthy that the chalcopyrite influence was generally less statistically significant than the pyrite content in MW heating. Interestingly, moisture content was highly significant in the microwave treatment of all ores except Ore 1; in this case the large pyrite content was dominant. This potential threshold for MW-IR sorting based on the content of different heating minerals is elucidated later in A major observation from these The A full set of charts illustrating the relationship between temperature rise, sulphide content and moisture content for all five ores can be found in the Supplementary Information (S3–S7). Overall, these trends and To test the hypothesis that there is no significant interaction between sulphide minerals and electric fields in microwave and RF processing, synthetic fragments containing a single heated phase were produced. The synthetic particle transparent (non-heating) matrix was fabricated from polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) and pulverised quartz using an adaptation of a method developed by Microwave treatment of synthetic fragments was conducted in a 2450 For microwave testing, 8 fragments were placed around the edge of the plastic disc and placed under the thermal camera for cold imaging. The disc was then placed on the microwave turntable and heated the fragments treated for 5 Multiple linear regression analysis was run to determine the significance of microwave-heating phase content on the average surface temperature rise of synthetic fragments following batch monolayer microwave and RF treatment. As expected, both pyrite and moisture content have a statistically highly significant influence on the average temperature rise from microwave heating. However, there was no influence of pyrite content on temperature rise in RF heating. Applying the linear models in The electromagnetic effects behind this type of behaviour in other conducting materials have been recently demonstrated by Literature values for the conductivities of natural sulphide minerals such as pyrite and chalcopyrite have been reported between 1.0 and 1 As well as elucidating how semi-conducting sulphide minerals may interact with electromagnetic fields during microwave processing applications, these results also highlight the threshold ratio of sulphides and clays required to provide even heating due to each mineral group at 2.45 Radio frequency heating followed by infra-red thermal imaging has been investigated as an excitation-discrimination technique for sorting of ores. By developing a novel presentation and bulk handling method to allow even heating of fragments within a pilot scale parallel plate RF system, the fragment-by-fragment thermal response of a number of ore samples and synthetic fragments has been evaluated and compared to microwave treatment at pilot and batch scales. It has been shown that there is an increase in the selectivity of the heating of hydrated clay minerals at RF compared to microwave frequencies. Significantly, it has been shown that heating of semi-conducting sulphide minerals at radio frequencies is limited by electric field screening. It is suggested that the interaction of these minerals at microwave frequencies is likely to be due to induction heating via eddy currents associated with the magnetic field component. Whilst RF-IR is not a viable technique for sorting of the porphyry copper ores tested here, it could find applications where sorting or grading of material based on moisture content is required. Thermal response profiles of synthetic fragments have shown that hydrated clay minerals heat approximately 2.5 times as much as sulphides at microwave frequencies for the minerals tested. Conductivity is suggested to be key to determining the relative absorption of electric and magnetic fields and ultimately the heating response of semi-conducting minerals. The amenability of different ores and mine sites to both microwave and radio frequency IR sorting will be best determined in future through thorough characterisation of mineral electrical and magnetic properties, and via the development of statistical models that incorporate thermal response weighting of heated phase content, together with textural, geometric and process variables. We greatly acknowledge Rio Tinto Technology and Innovation along with their research and industry partners for engagement and collaboration throughout the Copper NuWave™ project. The authors would also like to thank the technical staff of the Microwave Process Engineering Group at the University of Nottingham: Richard Meehan, Joe Meehan, Rachael Baines, Matt Rus, Matt Nicholls, and Richard Thompson, and the JKMRC at the University of Queensland for preparing ore samples for testing.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at