Purpose
                  Proximal fibula avulsion fractures, or “arcuate fractures”, are an often discussed but poorly defined injury pattern which represent a destabilizing injury to the posterolateral corner of the knee. Historical and recent literature discussing reconstruction and repair techniques exist, but there has been little biomechanical evaluation of repair techniques. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the strength of three type of fixation techniques for arcuate fractures: bone tunnels, a screw and washer, and a novel suture anchor technique.
               
                  Methods
                  A laboratory model of the arcuate fracture pattern was developed. This was used to create an arcuate fracture in 24 cadaveric specimens. Knees were randomized into fixation with either suture tunnel (ST), screw and washer (SW), or suture anchor (SA) repair. A previously published model for inducing varus stress was applied and a MTS testing system was used to assess fixation ultimate and yield strength.
               
                  Results
                  Fibular fracture occurred during the fixation of one specimen from the ST group and one from the SA group. Analysis of the remaining 22 specimens revealed a mean ultimate strength of 2422.48 N for the ST group, 2271.78 for SW, and 3041.66 for SA (p = 0.390). Yield strengths were 2065.28 for ST, 1882.43 for SW, and 2871.92 for SA (p = 0.224). Analyses of stiffness and total energy applied were not statistically different (p = 0.111 and 0.601, respectively).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Biomechanical analysis of three types of arcuate fragment fixation revealed robust fixation among all methods, supporting surgeon preference for fixation. Fixation may depend on the size of bony fragment and whether or not the injury is a bony or soft tissue injury.Proximal fibula avulsion fractures, or “arcuate fractures”, was originally described by Shindell in 1984 who originally defined it as an avulsed fibular styloid fragment related to the insertion site of the arcuate complex At the onset of the study a model for proximal fibular avulsion fracture was developed in order to recreate the most common fracture pattern descried by Cohen et al. Twenty-four fresh-frozen cadaveric knees were obtained for testing of repair methods. The knees were randomized into three groups of 8, including screw and washer fixation (SW), a novel suture anchor fixation (SA), and fixation with suture through bone tunnels (BT). For each knee the aformentioned method was used to produce a proximal fibular avulsion fracture. For each knee a running-locking Krackow suture was placed into the FCL and BFT, leaving two tails free distally at the level of the fibular head. For screw and washer fixation a 6.4 × 40 mm fully threaded cancellous screw and 14 mm washer was used. The fibular fracture was held reduced with a pointed reduction clamp under direct visualization and a drill hole made. The screw was then inserted without final tightening. Suture strands from the BFT were tied around the screw to the strands from the FCL to back up the repair, and the screw and washer were tightened to a final position. ( For suture anchor fixation, a pilot hole for suture anchor was predrilled approximately 15 mm distal to the fracture site on the anterolateral aspect of the fibula. The free suture strands were pre-loaded into 3.5 mm biocomposite anchor (Swivelock®, Arthrex, Naples, FL), suture strands were appropriately tensioned, and the anchor was inserted according to the devices recommended surgical technique. No additional bony fixation was implemented ( For bone tunnel fixation, a tunnel was drilled with a 2.7 mm drill, originating approximately 15 mm distal to the fracture site and starting on the anterolateral aspect of the fibula. Both cortexes were drilled, and a Hewson suture passer used to pass suture strands. The sutures were then tied to each other over the lateral fibula, using the intact cortex as a bone bridge. No additional bony fixation was implemented ( Femoral and tibial transfixion pins were then inserted in an anterior-to-posterior fashion, such that the pins were parallel with the knee joint in approximately 15° of flexion. The knees were then placed into a custom jig used previously in similar testing Force and displacement obtained from biomechanical testing was plotted for each specimen using LoggerPro v. 3.7 (Vernier Software & Technology, Beaverton, OR). Ultimate strength was defined as the maximum force (in Newtons) withstood by the specimen during its plastic deformation phase. A line of best fit was plotted within the elastic deformation phase and the slope of this line was defined as the stiffness (N/m) of the specimen. If there was a well-defined transition point from elastic to plastic deformation of the specimen on the force-displacement curve, this was marked as the yield point for the specimen. Otherwise, a 0.1% offset rule was applied to determine the yield point. Using a built-in software function the area under the curve from initiation of testing to failure was calculated and used to represent the energy expended (mJ) during testing until failure. To ensure data normality, a Shapiro-Wilk test was conducted with non-significant results ( A total of 24 specimens were prepared, experimentally fractured, and repaired for this study, with eight each in the Suture Tunnel (ST), Screw and Washer (SW), and Suture Anchor (SA) groups. Specimens were from male donors in 15 of 24 knees, 16 of 24 were right sided, and the ages ranged from 31 to 65 (Mean 55). Fracture comminution occurred during repair for two specimens, one each from the ST and SA groups. Testing was therefore completed on a total of 22 knees. The ultimate strength averaged 2422.48 N for the suture tunnel group, 2271.78 N for the screw and washer group, and 3041.66 N for the suture anchor group. ANOVA testing for differences between groups revealed a p-value of 0.3904. Yield strength, stiffness, and energy applied were all similarly were not statistically different between groups ( The primary mechanism of failure in the suture tunnel group was suture cut-through at the site of the fibular tunnel, with five such failures and three failures due to a propagating fracture at the site of the fibular tunnel. In the screw and washer group five specimens failed due to screw pull-out, one due to fibular fracture propagation, and one due to femoral fracture. In the suture anchor group, there were four anchor failures and three intrasubstance failures of the lateral collateral ligament. The literature has not definitively established the management of arcuate injuries once identified. While indications and techniques for soft tissue repair and reconstruction of the posterolateral corner of the knee have been well described, the role of bony fixation of the fibular styloid and its associated structures are less defined. Our biomechanical study shows that when treating proximal fibular head (arcuate) fractures there is no statistical difference in load to failure for three repair techniques: suture fixation with bone tunnels (ST), suture fixation with anchors (SA), and a screw and washer construct (SW). For this reason, when fixation for knee instability is indicated, the surgeon should choose the method fixation that best addresses the fracture pattern, as strength of fixation if similar for these tested techniques. Prior work investigating proximal fibular head fractures has shown that different fracture patterns likley represent injury to different structures inserting on the posterolateral corner of the knee. Cohen et al. retrospectively reviewed radiographic imaging for 48 patients with fibular head fractures over a two year period and identified 3 discrete fracture patterns Prior anatomic studies have shown there exists a correlation amongst these fracture patterns and the soft tissue structures involved. Lee et al. performed an anatomic study combining MRI and gross dissection of cadeveric knees, as well as retrospective review of patient MRIs with posterolateral corner injury With regards to fixation, smaller avulsion injuries (pattern 1 and pattern 2) can likely be managed non-operatively if the knee exam is stable, while more significant injuries involving the posterolateral corner structures with instability on exam should undergo fixation/repair or reconstruction. While it is generally accepted that these fractures should undergo surgical intervention if there is knee instability or combined ligamentous injury, there is no widely agreed upon technique. Surgical management should be indicated for patients with clinical exam significant for posterolateral instability as indicated by positive dial test or posterolateral drawer exam The least expensive option is suture repair with bone tunnels, although this construct was the weakest upon biomechanical testing. The suture anchor technique, which would likely be the most expensive option, was indeed the strongest, although not statistically different. This may be clinically significant in patients who are larger or who may place a greater amount of force across their repair. Screw repair was intermediate in strength, and may involve less soft tissues dissection of the fibular head to the diaphyseal-metaphyseal junction in the event that reduction can be achieved in an indirect manner, as opposed to the other techniques, which require distal fixation and would require more dissection in an already traumatized area. However, the screw and washer may be more prominent and bother patients given the subcutaneous nature of the lateral knee. Compared to Vojandi, et al. we used a shorter screw (40 mm vs. 70 mm) and non-spiked lower profile washer as we found it difficult to place a longer screw within the small medullary canal of the fibula This study is not without limitation. First since this was performed as a cadaveric study we may have been limited by the sample size of 8 specimens per fixation technique. It is possible that with more data points that our results would have reached statistical significance. Additionally, while we took measures to reproducibly create the same fracture pattern in all specimens, there was still some inherent variability based on cadaveric bone quality, fibular size, and tendon quality. All fractures in our testing were “pattern 3″ fractures involving the FCL and biceps femoris, which limits our ability to make recommendation on smaller fractures, pattern 1 and 2. These patterns represent a soft tissue injury and if the knee is unstable, may benefit from suture and bone tunnel or suture anchor fixation as screw fixation is not indicated. Finally, these results have not been correlated to clinical outcomes in actual patients, making it difficult to determine the clinical significance in the differences in strength of the three constructs. Further work is required in the evaluation of these various surgical treatment modalities with regards to ease of surgical fixation, knee stability, and long term outcomes. The aim of our study was to compare 3 techniques: suture repair with bone tunnels tied over a bone bridge, screw and washer fixation and novel suture repair with anchor fixation. The results showed that no single technique was biomechanically superior, and that any one of the fixation methods is a viable technique based on surgeon preference, comfort, and fracture pattern. To the best of our knowledge, no conflict of interest, financial or other exists, related to this work Funding for this study was provided by the