In coal flotation, the hydrophobicity of fine coal is a crucial factor that affects coal flotation recovery and performance. How to accurately characterize the surface hydrophobicity of coal becomes a research hot spot in coal science. This paper used a novel characterization technology, namely inverse gas chromatography (IGC) to characterize the wettability and hydrophobicity of fine coal particles by analyzing their surface energy. Five coals with different coal ranks were used as coal samples in this investigation, and the flotation results of five coal samples were obtained under the same flotation conditions. Throughout this paper, a good correlation between flotation recovery and surface energy was found and the hydrophilicity index of coal was calculated using the ratio of the specific component of surface energy to the total surface energy. A higher hydrophilicity index of coal leads to a lower flotation recovery. The flotation recovery is not governed by the coal rank but is determined by the surface energy of coal particles, i.e. the hydrophilicity index and the work of adhesion. The IGC is demonstrated to be a potential method for predicting the flotation recovery of fine coal in the coal preparation industry.Coal flotation is a sort of separation technology involving a three-phase interface reaction between gas, liquid and solid The surface energy of a certain material is defined as the extra amount of energy on the surface relative to the inside. The surface structure and chemical composition are different from its internal counterparts It has been reported that the surface energy is usually calculated using the contact angle method. However, the test accuracy of the contact angle method is usually limited because of the solid surface heterogenous. The contact angle method requires pellet or block samples. Sometimes the direct compression process is necessary to ensure that the power material into the pellet one, which can lead to the heterogeneity. The heterogeneity here includes the roughness, the various pores structures and permeation caused by the crack. Contrary to the contact angle method, the inverse gas chromatography (IGC) is a dynamic method for the analysis of surface energy. It is a particularly suitable technique that allows a fast and accurate determination of the surface energy, the dispersive component and the interaction with a polar probe Mohammadi-Jam et al. The use of surface energy in pure minerals such as quartz or medicine particles has been occasionally reported. And there are a few researches focused on the IGC technology and measurement of surface energy for mineral wettability. However, until now, there is no publication regarding the application of IGC in coal flotation recovery. Because the coal is not a pure mineral, so its surface is complex and extremely homogeneous In order to investigate the potential regulation between the flotation recovery and the surface energy, five coals with different coal ranks were used as coal samples. The coal rank ranges from sub-bituminous coal to anthracite coal. The ash and moisture contents of five coal samples based on air-dry basis were presented in For coal flotation, low ash coal particle usually has a better floatability than high ash coal. In this paper, five coal samples have similar ash contents and the effects of ash content on coal floatability can be ignored. If these coal samples have different floatabilities, it should be caused by the difference in the surface energy between different coal samples. The purpose of this paper can be well reached using these five coal samples because they have similar ash content. The IGC instrument is a powerful technology which provides the information about a wide range of important physicochemical properties such as the thermodynamic interaction parameters, the BET surface area, the work of adhesion, the acid-base properties and the surface energy IGC technology is based on a pulse method which can acquire the absorption information about the probe molecules on the sample surface, and the fundamental measurement for all pulse methods is depended on the net retention volume, The dispersive part ( Therefore, the free energy changes of adsorption ( The Schultz approach employs a series of n-alkanes to determine the dispersive surface energy. It would result in the only existence of dispersive forces between the non-polar solvents, such as n-alkanes and the solid surface, under the condition of non-polar probes injection. Due to the absence of polar probes, the measured specific part of the free surface energy equals to zero ( The free energy changes of adsorption( Combining the previous Eqs. An alternative method to calculate the dispersive part called Dorris-Gray is based on the adsorption free energy of one methylene group, which is obtained from the slope of the straight line achieved by plotting the adsorption free energy of the n-alkanes versus the carbon number The specific surface energy distribution Gutmann and Van Oss method is used to work out the specific energy part of the total surface energy. This approach on account of the specific free energy of two monopolar probes (one acidic and one basic probe, for instance, toluene and dichloromethane in this paper) With the two key parameters, the specific surface energy can be calculated by following Eq. During the wetting process of the solid by a certain liquid, the work which can cause the change of free energy on the surface of the system is defined as the work of adhesion. In general, the larger work of adhesion, the more stable system there will be, and the solid surface tends to be more hydrophilic. The work of adhesion requires to reversibly separate an interface between two bulk phases. The total work of adhesion ( The Eq. Coal samples with proper particle size were packed into the column, where the glass wool was placed on both sides of the sample power to maintain a stable state. Mass of the coal sample was worthy of notice. Since the absorption between the solvent and the coal surface was strong, so the dosage should be reduced to around 50 mg. At the same time, the temperature of the sample column needs to be conditioned at 90 °C or higher, which can help restrain the violent reactivity. The Relative Humidity ( A series of surface coverage with alkanes and polar probe molecules were to determine the dispersive surface energy distribution as well as the specific (acid-base) surface energy distribution. Since the coal was easier to attract the solvent molecules than other minerals, thus not all provided solvent were suitable for use in the coal surface energy measurements. After many times tests, hexane, octane and heptane were chosen as the alkanes, meanwhile dichloromethane and toluene acted as the polar solvent. To analyze, the Schultz method was employed for dispersive surface energy component, and specific contribution was determined by first measuring the free energy of desorption of a pair of monofunctional acidic and basic probe molecules, based on the DnG, pol approach and Della Volpe scale. The parameter was peak max. The inert methane gas was used for dead volume corrections. All flotation experiments were conducted in a typical 1.5 L XFD flotation cell under the same controlled condition, where the impeller speed was 1900 r/min with the aeration of 0.25 m   Regarding CJT coal and SBL coal, they present completely opposite hydrophobicity as others. According to the surface energy distribution profiles from The surface energy profile can only help to judge whether the experiment material is hydrophilic or hydrophobic from a very general aspect, but still quite hard to make a precise comparison when the two or more samples belonging to the same wettability category. For instance, the surface energy distribution of SHM coal and AY coal resembles, and it could merely draw such a conclusion that both samples are hydrophobic, however, more detail information about which one behaves better in actual flotation is unclear. To settle the problem, the quantitative index needs to be introduced. The hydrophilicity index can meet that requirement, and calculated by Eq. The hydrophilicity indexes and flotation results of five coals are illustrated in The work of adhesion results are also shown in In this study, the surface energy and flotation results of coal samples were obtained. The IGC acted as an effective and accurate method to identify the surface energy distribution for coals. The hydrophilicity index can be calculated using the ratio of the specific component of the surface energy to the total surface energy. And there is a good correlation between flotation recovery and surface energy profile. The hydrophilicity index can be used as a promote parameter to predict the flotation recovery of fine coal. The flotation recovery of fine coal is not governed by the coal rank but determined by the surface energy of coal particles, i.e. the hydrophilicity index and the work of adhesion. This work was supported by the