Leach solutions of vanadium (V) slag was generated from (NH4)2SO4 (AS) roasting and water leaching process. After separating titanium (Ti) from the solutions, the remaining liquor contains a large amount of V and iron (Fe). In this study, a system composed of trioctyl tertiary amine (N235) and sulfonated kerosene was used to separate V; moreover, the feasibility, mechanism, and energy evaluation of this system were also investigated. The results indicated that the single-stage V extraction rate was 86.35% using 40% N235 (v/v) and 60% sulfonated kerosene, an initial pH of 1.23, an organic/aqueous phase ratio (O/A) of 1.5:1, a temperature of 298.15 K, and an extraction time of 1 min. Based on McCabe-Thiele analysis, over 99% of the V was extracted by three-stage countercurrent extraction. Using the slope method and Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy, the V extracted by N235 was proposed to exist as [(R3NH)4·H2
                     V
                     10O28]. Using 1.4 mol/L ammonia water, over 90% of the V could be stripped. The effects of the impurities Si, Ca, Al, Mg, and Mn on V recovery were negligible. A preliminary material and energy calculation (MEC) indicated that 113.64 kg V
                     2O5 could be recovered from 1000 kg raw V slag using 5.57 × 106 kJ of heat and 974.45 kWh of electricity.As a secondary source of vanadium ( Solvent extraction is a promising method for recovering In a previous study, The The effect of the amount of H Then, N235, the anionic extractant, would combine H All the liquid-liquid experiments were carried out in 100 mL three-necked flasks and using a PHS-3C pH meter to detect the pH of the solution. The contents of V, Fe, and impurities in the aqueous phase were detected using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES, 7400, Thermo-Fisher, USA), and their contents in the organic phase were calculated from the mass balance. Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy (Nicolet iS10, Thermo-Fisher, USA) was used to detect the characteristic peaks of the organic matter in the range 400–4000 cm      To verify the theoretical results, 15 experiments were conducted following a three-stage simulated countercurrent The effects of four solutions, namely, AS, Na Because N235 is an alkaline extractant, an alkaline stripping agent would be expected to show a good stripping effect. Ammonia water could be obtained from the NH The effects of Mg, Si, Mn, Ca, and Al impurities on the extraction, washing, and stripping processes were investigated under the optimal conditions. The results are shown in The pH and potential of the leach solutions were 1.23 and 375 m The reaction for the extraction of V by N235 involves bonding between anions and cations, and can be expressed as shown in Eq. The equilibrium constant For a given V concentration, more V would be extracted as the concentration of N235 was increased. For a sufficiently high concentration of N235, its concentration could be considered to remain constant. To confirm the structure of the Using the materials and energy consumption (MEC) for AS roasting and water leaching reported by The preliminary material balance includes the entire process including roasting, leaching, oxidation, extraction, washing, stripping, precipitation, and calcination. Irrelevant and minimal reactions were not considered. The main chemical reactions that occur in these processes are shown in  Assuming that the extractant could be recycled four times, 48.33 kg N235 and 72.49 kg sulfonated kerosene would be used in the solvent extraction process, and 194.75 kg AS would be used in washing. The ammonia used in stripping could be obtained from the recycling process. 113.64 kg of the final product V  The recovery of V from leach solutions of Zhifeng Qin: Experimental operation; Guoquan Zhang: Writing- Reviewing and Editing; Yingjie Xiong: Theoretical calculation; Dongmei Luo: Supervision; Chun Li: Supervision; Siyang Tang: Supervision; Hairong Yue: Supervision; Bin Liang: Supervision. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was funded by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at