In this study, a waste pickling liquor from a steel mill, which is rich in iron and acid, was used as the main raw material to prepare a composite coagulant: polymeric ferric aluminum sulfate chloride (PFASC). The as-prepared PFASC was used, together with PAM, for the tertiary treatment of papermaking wastewater to decrease its COD and Chroma. The Results from FT-IR and XRD of PFASC, supported the conclusion that polymeric ferric aluminum hydroxide hydrates compounds/ complexes are formed in the synthesized PFASC. When applied to a waste water sample from a paper mill, PFASC, together PAM, leads to decreases in COD and Chroma by 65.3% and 71.2%, respectively (initial pH 7.5, 1 ml/L PFASC, 1.0 ppm PAM). The technology has been implemented at a paper mill, and the obtained results are consistent with those from the laboratory.In the steel processing industry, the pickling step is indispensable to obtain a high-quality steel surface for further processing Due to the rich iron present in the waste pickling liquor, it could be potentially utilized for the preparation of Fe based inorganic coagulant, which can be used in wastewater treatment. In general, the use of coagulant not only removes suspended solids and colloidal particles from water but also reduces Chroma With the rapid growth of the paper industry in China, the pressure on waste water treatment from various processes of the pulp and papermaking manufacturing has also increased In China, there are about 3,000 papermaking mills and 8,500 metal (iron) processing mills, and they both are examples of manufacturing industries that have environmentally related challenges. If the waste pickling liquor from the iron processing mills can be used to treat the wastewater from the papermaking mills, the economic and environmental benefits would be rather obvious. In this study, a waste pickling liquor from a steel mill was utilized as the main raw material and reaction medium to prepare a composite coagulant of PFASC, which was subsequently used for the tertiary treatment of papermaking wastewater. The as-prepared PFASC was further characterized using Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscope (SEM). The dynamic formation of flocs from using the PFASC composite coagulant, was studied based on the focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) technique. Its performance was evaluated in terms of the COD and Chroma decrease of a papermaking wastewater, and the gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) was used to follow the disappearance of the organics after the treatment. The industrial application of this process was also discussed. The waste pickling liquor was provided by a steel plant in Shandong province, China, which contains 2.8 mol/L H Ferrous sulfate (technical grade), aluminum sulfate (technical grade), sulfuric acid (technical grade), and sodium chlorate (technical grade) were provided by a chemical company in Tianjin, China. Polyferric sulfate (PFS), polyaluminium chloride (PAC) and anion polyacrylamide (APAM, 12,000,000 of molecular weight, 20% of ionic degrees) were provided by Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. The wastewater samples were collected from the secondary settling tank in a recycled fiber paper mill in Hebei Province, China. The wastewater characteristics were: pH 7.5, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 30 mg·L The preparation of PFASC is shown in Fig. S1. 100 ml waste pickling liquor was added to a three-necked flask, which was placed in a thermostat water bath. 0.072 mol FeSO Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The preparation of PFASC is shown in The PFASC sample was dried at 50 °C for 20 h in a vacuum oven. It was analyzed using an FTIR spectrophotometer scanning from 4000 to 400 cm Coagulation experiments were evaluated by jar test using a ZR4-6 six-unit stirred system (ZR4-6, Zhongrun Water Industry Technology Development Co., Ltd., China) at room temperature. The coagulants (a 35% concentration of PAFSC, PAC, and PFS) were added into wastewater in beakers. The mixture was stirred at 200 r/min for 3 min. 1 ppm PAM (based on the liquid volume of the waste water sample, added as a 1% PAM solution) was added at 80 r/min for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was measured. The COD was measured by the potassium dichromate oxidation method The flocs size and counts were measured using an LS13320 Focused Beam Reflectance Measurement (FBRM) (Beckman Coulter, United States). FBRM measures the distance between two points on the edge of a particle structure in terms of chord length. In this case, the chord length is related to the true size of the particle 100 ml raw wastewater (pH = 7.5) was extracted using 40 ml methylene chloride three times. Then, the wastewater was adjusted to pH 2.0 by HCl (1.0 N) and extracted with 40 ml methylene chloride three times. After that, the wastewater was adjusted to pH 12.0 by NaOH (1.0 N) and extracted with 40 ml methylene chloride three times. Subsequently, the extracts were mixed, and the residual water was removed using anhydrous sodium sulfate. Finally, the mixture was concentrated to 1 ml in a rotavapor. The GC/MS analyses were performed using a Bruker GC456Scion gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (Bruker, Germany). The analytical column connecting to the system was a DB-1 column (50 m × 0.25 mm internal diameter, 0.11 µm film thickness). Helium gas was used as carrier gas at a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min. The column temperature program was 60 °C (3 min); 60–270 °C (5 °C /min, hold time: 5 min). The sample injections were done in the 1:20 split ratio mode and 1 µl of the sample was used. The mass spectrometer was operated in the electron impact ionization mode with an ionizing energy of 70 eV. The results of full scan were obtained by scanning from The concept of preparing PFASC from the waste pickling liquor of steel mills is illustrated in First, ferrous sulfate, aluminum sulfate, and sulfuric acid are mixed with the waste pickling liquor. Ferrous sulfate is added as make-up iron source so that a desired iron content in the final PFASC composite coagulant product can be reached. In the present study, the iron present in the waste pickling liquor represents about 81.6% of the total iron in the final PFASC composite coagulant, while the make-up ferrous sulfate accounts for 18.4% of the total iron in the final PFASC composite coagulant. Aluminum sulfate is added to introduce Al (III) to the system to copolymerize with iron salts, and the Fe/Al molar ratio is 11:1. Sulfuric acid is used to adjust the system acidity, preventing the in-situ formed coagulant from sedimentation. Subsequently, sodium chlorate (as an oxidant) is used to oxidize Fe (II) into Fe (III). The copolymerization between Al (III) and Fe (III) will occur in the mixture, and the polymeric ferric aluminum hydroxide hydrate compounds/complexes are finally formed (as supported in the next section), which will be the composite coagulant used for treating waste water samples from pulp mills. Again, the idea here is to utilize the waste pickling liquor from the steel mills to produce the PFASC composite coagulant product to be used in a paper mill for tertiary treatment purpose. Coagulants include the inorganic coagulants (metal salts) and organic coagulants (polymers), and they are used widely in the water treatment. The dual coagulant system is effective, hence, the as-prepared PFASC and PAM are combined to treat the wastewater from a pulp mill (in Shown in In the spectra of PFASC, the peak at 1026 cm The XRD spectra of PFASC are shown in Included in Shown in In The initial pH has a great influence on the coagulation performance, and the results are shown in Included in As shown in Shown in The GC-MS analyses were applied to the wastewater sample before and after the dual polymer treatment process, and the results are shown in The GC-MS analyses were applied to the wastewater sample before and after the dual polymer treatment process, and the results are shown in Shown in Table S2 are the changes of organics with the different carbon number in the original and treated samples according to the GC-MS analyses. The removal degree of organics with the different carbon number is: 19.1% for C Shown in The PFASC composite coagulant synthesized using waste pickling liquor of steel mills can be applied to a paper mill in the tertiary stage of its wastewater process. One option of the concept is shown in The technology has been used in a recycled fiber paper mill in China, and the results are shown in The cost of PFASC composite coagulant per ton is estimated at 422 RMB ($67.4 US), which is compared to 1000 ∼ 1300 RMB ($160–210 US)/ton for the conventional coagulants, such as PFS, PAC. Hence the PFASC composite coagulant made from the waste pickling liquor from steel mills shows an economical advantage over the conventional coagulants. The features of this technology include: It is based on the concept of using a waste from one industry to treat the waste from another industry. The implementation is simple and straightforward. It is a cost-effective process. An inorganic PFASC composite coagulant was prepared from a waste pickling liquor from steel mills and subsequently applied in a dual coagulants system to treat wastewater from a paper mill. Such a strategy allows the use of a waste from one sector (waste pickling liquor from steel mills), to treat a waste stream from another sector (wastewater in a paper mill). The FT-IR and XRD results have shown that polymeric ferric aluminum hydroxide hydrates compounds/complexes are formed in the synthesized PFASC. The use of PFASC increases the floc size, and improves the floc stability and settling, in comparison with conventional coagulants (e. g., PFS and PAC). The GC-MS results show that most of organics matter is decreased and 12 organics disappear after the treatment. In addition, PFASC is more effective in removing high- carbon number organics. Under the conditions of the initial pH 7.5, 1 ml/L PFASC, 1 ppm PAM, the process decreases the COD and Chroma by 65.3% and 71.2%, respectively, which are much better than those of either PFS or PAC, yet at a lower dosage. The technology has been commercialized in a recycled fiber paper mill and the results are consistent with those obtained in the laboratory scale.