In consideration of the lack of systematic investigations on solvent extraction process and equipments for extracting 233U from irradiated thorium, an extraction process using TBP (Tri-n-butyl phosphate) as extractant was proposed, optimized and verified. First, the process parameters, including concentration of TBP and HNO3, phase ratio, are preliminary selected. Then, a multistage countercurrent extraction using batch simulation is used to further optimize the parameters. Finally, the extraction process is verified through the continuous multistage countercurrent extraction using both mixer settler and centrifugal extractor, and the process operation efficiency is estimated by equilibration time and concentration profiles of Th and U after equilibrium.Thorium-uranium nuclear fuel cycle, using With the consumption of uranium resources, thorium, as a potential nuclear resource, has being paid more and more attention. There are reasons to believe that the reprocessing of thorium-based spent fuel would become an important issue in the near future. In this paper, the procedure of solvent extraction process development for recovering only uranium from irradiated thorium using TBP was discussed in detail, including parameters selection by single-stage extraction experiments, parameters optimization by batch extraction simulation, process test using mixer-settler and centrifugal extractors. TBP, In single-stage extraction and batch simulation experiments, the feed solution was obtained by adding Th(NO The macro Th was analyzed by EDTA complexometric titration. Macro U, micro U, Th and FPs were determined by ICP-AES/MS. In order to avoid the interference of bulk element, pretreatment of samples was used before analysis. For samples with bulk Th, TEVA resin column was used to adsorb Th, eluted U and FPs were analyzed subsequently. For samples with bulk U, TBP extraction chromatography resin column was used to adsorb bulk U, eluted Th and FPs were analyzed subsequently. The concentration of HNO The single-stage extraction of Th and U was operated in an extraction tube with equilibrating a certain volume of organic and aqueous phase by using a mechanical shaker for 2 In the scrub experiments, the Th and U loaded organic phase was agitated with the HNO The process flowsheet for recovering only uranium from irradiated thorium is shown in On the basis of batch simulation experiment, a continuous multistage countercurrent extraction using mixer settler and centrifugal extractor was operated to further test and verify the process as shown in The realizability of separation in extraction process is dependent on the distribution difference of compounds in extractant. So, the influencing factors, such as concentration of TBP, HNO The effect of phase ratio on the extraction percentage of Th and U is shown in The purpose of scrub stages in 1A cycle is to scrub Th from the loaded TBP/ As mentioned above, the process parameters in 1A cycle were preliminary selected by extraction and scrub experiments. The multistage countercurrent batch simulation extraction with 4-stage extraction and 3-stage scrub was used to test and optimize the process. The recovery of U (1A cycle) and separation factor of U/Th (1A cycle) were used as the process evaluation index. As shown in The 1C cycle is used to strip U into aqueous phase from loaded TBP/ Actually, the extraction process should be operated on definite extraction equipments. In our research, the uranium extraction process was further tested by using mixer settler and centrifugal extractor on the basis of parameter optimization by batch simulation experiments. In order to ensure the process efficiency under parameter fluctuation, the stage numbers were increased to 9 stages extraction, 7 stages scrub and 8 stages stripping, respectively. The concentration of Th and U in 1AW, 1AU and 1CU at different run time is shown in The concentration profiles of Th and U in 1A cycle after equilibrium is shown in The concentration profiles of U in 1C cycle after equilibrium is shown in A solvent extraction process using 5%TBP as extractant to separate U from irradiated thorium was detailedly studied in this paper. On the basis of parameter optimization by extraction and batch simulation experiments, the extraction process was tested on mixer settler and centrifugal extractor. The results show that an aqueous uranium product free from thorium and FPs can be obtained and centrifugal extractor is more efficient for countercurrent extraction operation. A further “tracer” or “hot” process experiments are necessary to its practical application. This work was supported by the “Strategic Priority Research Program” of the Chinese Academy of Sciences [grant number XDA02030400] and National Natural Science Foundation [grant number 11305244].