Material characterization plays a crucial role by means of equipments efficiency and overall circuit performance. Material properties such as grindability, breakage, crushability, mineralogy can easily be determined by laboratory studies. These parameters are required for modeling and simulation works.
                  Breakage behaviour of material is important for size reduction equipments and it is defined by breakage distribution function. Commonly, single particle breakage method is used to determine breakage behaviour of materials which assumes that breakage is not size dependent. As new surfaces formed material behaviour changes so particle size effect should also be introduced into the grinding model structure. Determination of fine particle breakage becomes important. This will make models more reliable. With this aim a bed breakage method was developed for determination of fine particle breakage. In this study new breakage model is presented and effects of different breakage distribution functions on breakage rate and discharge function is investigated. The bed breakage test results are compared with single size drop-weight test results in the aspect of modeling. It was observed that, the breakage rate and discharge function variation by size indicates a characteristic change at fine size ranges compared to regular curve.Breakage behaviour of materials is important for mathematical modeling of size reduction equipments because every material has different breakage characteristics. Different laboratory tests are carried out for the determination of the breakage characterization of materials. Single particle double impact tests have been widely used for many years for this purpose. Drop-weight test methods have found wide application among researchers compared to other single particle impact tests ( Particle size and ore type are effective on breakage characteristics of most materials. Particle size effect should be defined in the breakage models make the grinding models more reliable. Some researchers such as For modeling particle size effect on breakage, determination of breakage behaviour of fine particles becomes important. It is a time consuming and effortful operation to determine breakage behaviour of fine particles by single particle impact test. A method for fine particle breakage behaviour should be developed and breakage behaviour should be modeled to reflect the effects results from material characteristics to the grinding models. In this study, bed breakage test method for determination of fine particle breakage and modeling results are presented. Effects of fine particle breakage on grinding model were investigated. Bed breakage test is a method for analyzing breakage characteristics of samples finer than 3.35 A simplified schematic view of the drop-weight tester is given in Samples are dry sieved to seven narrow size intervals between 3.35 Bed breakage test conditions are summarized in Broken products are dry sieved on a √2 sieve series from top size to 38 Product particle size distribution data obtained from bed breakage tests are used for determination of Variation of  Effects of particle size on breakage at constant impact energy are shown in Fineness of the breakage product is directly proportional with specific comminution energy and particle size (    Particle size distributions of each particle size fraction finer than 3.35 An example of calculated breakage distribution curves by using bed breakage test method for different size fractions are shown in In addition to bed breakage tests and single particle impact tests were carried on two clinker samples to make a comparison between fine and coarse particle breakage. In this experiment two different clinker samples which are named as Clinker A and Clinker B were dry sieved and taken representative samples from −9.5 Broken particles were dry sieved from top size to 150 Bed breakage test procedure were applied to Clinker A and Clinker B. Particle size distributions of 19 size fractions of each clinker sample were determined and size dependent breakage distribution matrixes were created to use in ball mill modeling. Calculated breakage distribution curves of Clinker A are given in Data used for the modeling studies were obtained from four sampling studies of two cement mills (Mill 1 and Mill 2). Test 1 and Test 2 were carried on Mill 1; Test 3 and Test 4 were carried on Mill 2. Design parameters of cement mills and test conditions are summarized in As part of modeling studies, second chambers of the two ball mill were modeled based on For the correction of variations in residence time In the study, particle size distributions of first point of the second chambers were used as a feed size distribution. Feed and product size distributions of tests are given in Two different breakage distribution functions obtained from single particle impact and bed breakage tests were used for each test. The ratio of breakage rate to discharge rate function (  Effect of breakage distribution function on breakage rate to discharge rate model parameter can be seen from graphs. In case of bed breakage conditions, particle size– Breakage distribution function obtained from single particle test did not indicate a significant effect at coarse size ranges. Breakage rate decreases with the decreasing particle size. On the other hand when size dependent breakage distribution function is used, breakage rate does not decrease like single impact test results. Similar breakage rate function trend was observed at finer particle sizes. A breakage test procedure has been proposed which is an easy method for determination of breakage behaviours of fine particles. Particle size effect on breakage model has been defined with two parameter equation with good correlation coefficient. Test results showed that breakage distribution is a function of particle size at finer sizes like coarser sizes. 