This study was done to improve the productivity of an inclined solar still through some modifications include installing angle bars on the basin to increase the water residence time, fabricating the basin with adjustable inclination angle to achieve the highest amount of solar radiation in each season, installing top and bottom flat-plate external reflectors and a cooling system on the glass cover. The effect of the basin inclination angle, feeding water flow rate, cooling water flow on the glass cover, installing top and bottom reflectors at their optimum inclination angles on the productivity of the still were experimentally investigated under the climatic conditions of Tehran (35°N Latitude and 51°E Longitude) during summer, winter and spring. The results showed that in the case of applying only one modification, passing the cooling water on the glass cover has the most effect on productivity enhancement in spring while applying top reflector at its optimum inclination angle gave the best results in winter. Also, the maximum productivity of 4.2 kg/m2 was obtained for a basin inclined at 25° with top and bottom reflectors inclined at 10° and 45°, respectively. In this case, the feed water and cooling water flow rates were equal to 90 and 720 ml/min, respectively in solar radiation of 800 W/m2, air temperature of 22.5 °C, and wind velocity of 2.4 m/s. Moreover, the efficiency of the still was obtained as 36.7%, which was 14.2% higher than that of the still at an optimum inclination angle of 25° without reflectors and cooling water under the same weather conditions.surface area of the basin (m concentration ratio of solar radiation intensity latent heat of vaporization (J/kg) intensity of solar radiation (W/m total solar radiation incoming on the basin surface (W/m net incoming solar radiation on the basin surface (W/m freshwater productivity of the solar still (kg/s) absolute error of Desalination with a long history is an appropriate option for treating water in arid, semiarid and remote zones. The desalination process can be integrated by using solar energy as a renewable energy source. Among various solar desalination technologies, solar distillation has become critical in supplying drinking water due to the use of free solar energy for operation, low maintenance costs, secure transport, easy setup, being relatively light and inexpensive. Despite these advantageous, solar stills have low productivity ( Since the amount of solar radiation absorbed by the basin directly affects the productivity and efficiency of the still, adjusting the angle of basin inclination to absorb the most radiation has been considered by some researchers ( Water depth is considered as another critical design parameter of the solar still. Therefore, several attempts have been made to examine it ( The use of internal and external condensers, applying vacuum inside the solar still to improve the evaporation-condensation process, cooling the glass cover to increase the temperature difference between the glass and water in the basin cause to improve the performance of the solar still. These modifications have been studied by some researchers ( Using reflectors, either external or internal is one of the applicable and most affordable approaches to increase the efficiency of solar stills which has been investigated by some researchers ( The present study aims to investigate the effect of still inclination angle, saline water flow rate, glass cover cooling water, and the inclination angle of the top and bottom reflectors on the productivity of the modified inclined solar still. Some angle bars were used in the tilted basin structure to control the water flow rate. The proposed solar still structure also permits adjusting tilted basin inclination as well as glass cover inclination (since both are connected in parallel to each other) at various angles between 5° and 45° with 2.5° intervals. An exploded view and a photo of the solar still are shown in The proposed solar still was modified over a simple basin-type solar still as follows: A minimum air gap between the glass cover and the basin was provided; The basin was made inclined; Some barriers to increase the water residence time in the basin were installed; The basin inclination angle was made adjustable for different seasons; A simple cooling system on the outer surface of the glass cover was installed; The inclination angle of both top and bottom reflectors were made adjustable. The effect of the basin material on the total productivity of the solar still was investigated by In addition, a simple cooling system including some steel wires and a water accumulator (in the form of the peripheral edges which have been shown in The top and bottom reflectors with the same area of the basin surface were installed at specified angles by their holders. The holder of the bottom reflector provides an inclination angle at any desired position, and the holder of the top reflector allows an inclination angle between 0° and 30° with a 10° interval. The thermal efficiency of the system can be calculated as ( Moreover, the value of concentration ratio (C) of solar radiation intensity based on the measurement results for The solar still was assembled in the During the experiments, the temperature of the different components, air temperature, distillate output, salinity and the TDS (total dissolved solids) values of the feeding water, freshwater and rejected brine were recorded between 8:00 am and 5:00 pm at time intervals of 30 min. Moreover, the climatic parameters such as solar radiation intensity and wind velocity were recorded every 15 min during the experiments.  The model, accuracy, range, and resolution of the measuring instruments used in the experiments have been shown in The uncertainty analysis of the experimental data is outlined in this section. It should be noted that in order to reduce these errors all necessary precautions were taken during the experimental setup preparation. For instance, a thermal interference material was used as a layer between the thermocouple and the glass cover surface which increased the heat transfer rate between them. As a result, more accurate measured outer glass cover surface temperature was recorded. The experiment errors of independent parameters such as solar radiation, air temperature, wind velocity, and distillate output were considered based on the accuracy of the measuring equipment provided in The average value of the environmental parameters include wind speed, ambient temperature, and solar intensity on a typical day of the summer (2016-07-2), winter (2017-01-12), and spring (2017-05-20) between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. have been reported in The still should be adjusted at an appropriate inclination angle so that the basin can absorb the maximum solar radiation. Such an angle controls the water flow in the basin and leads the formed water droplets on the inner surface of the glass cover down. Also, due to the geometry of the basin, the effective area in the evaporation process is higher at lower inclination angles. Therefore, the inclination angle of the basin needs to be optimized. In this regard, some experiments were carried out to obtain the best inclination angle of the still in three different seasons of summer (June 2016), winter (Dec. 2016-Jan. 2017) and spring (April 2017). Since the altitude angle of the sun is at its highest in the summer compared to spring and winter, the optimum still inclination angle is the lowest in summer and increases during spring and winter, respectively ( As can be seen in Also, as has been shown in Since the experiments have been carried out in the summer (June-July 2016), the inclination angle of the still was set at 20° (optimum still inclination angle in summer in Tehran). The hourly freshwater productivity for different feedwater flow rates has been shown in Similar results have been reported by It should be noted that the maximum water temperature of 63.4 °C was recorded at a feed water flow rate of 90 ml/min which is higher than the maximum basin water temperature of 54 °C at a feed water flow rate of 180 ml/min by 9.4 °C. The variations of the freshwater productivity versus different cooling water flow rates passing on the glass cover have been shown in By increasing the cooling water flow rate, a larger area of glass is soaked. Therefore, the glass temperature decreases further and the cooling process enhances. This means that the higher the cooling water flow rates, the more fresh water production. The results showed that productivity at a cooling water flow rate of 720 ml/min is 1.73 kg/m It should be noted that, based on the measured temperature, the average values of the basin salt water and glass cover temperature at a cooling water flow rate of 180 ml/min are higher than those of 720 ml/min by 9.6 °C and 11.8 °C, respectively. However, based on the data reported in Since the altitude angle of the sun in the winter is lower than spring and summer, to effectively absorb the reflected sunrays by the basin, the top reflector should be inclined forward in winter and backward in summer and spring relative to the vertical angle ( As has been shown in The results also showed that productivity of the still with the top reflector at inclination angles of 10°, 20°, and 30° has been increased by 3%, 50%, and 19%, respectively compared to the still with no reflector. It means that using the top reflector at the inclination angle of 10° has no significant effect on the productivity in winter. In the case of still with the bottom reflector, the inclination angle of 40° leads to the highest productivity in winter. Unlike the top reflector, installing the bottom reflector at any inclination angle has been improved the performance of the system compared to the case with no reflector. Based on the results, the freshwater productivity for the bottom reflector inclination angles of 20°, 30°, 40°, and 50° has been increased by 16%, 23%, 41%, and 34% respectively compared to the still without reflectors. It can also be observed that using the top reflector positioned at its optimum inclination angle in winter is more effective than the bottom reflector positioned at its optimum inclination angle which is similar to the results reported by Finally, the installation of two reflectors together at their optimum inclination angles in winter showed an improvement in the performance of the still compared to the case with only one reflector. The results showed that productivity of the still with two top and bottom reflectors has been increased as 7%, 12%, and 60% compared to the still with the top reflector, with the bottom reflector at their optimum inclination angles and with no reflector respectively. In the case of the basin optimum inclination angle of 25° in the spring, the top reflector inclination angle of 10° relative to the vertical positioned backward was obtained as the optimum angle of the top reflector in this season. Also, it was found that installing the top reflector at its backward inclination angle of 30° resulted in a decrease of 8% in productivity, compared to the still without reflectors. This is because the top reflector with an inclination angle of 30° forms a shadow on the basin, while at the other angles, the productivity of the still has been improved. Therefore, the productivity of the still at top reflector inclination angles of 0°, 10°, and 20° compared to the case with no reflector has been increased to 9%, 20%, and 2%, respectively. This means that using a top reflector at an inclination angle of 20° has no significant effect on the productivity in this season. In the case of using the bottom reflector in the spring, the inclination angle of 45° provided the highest productivity for the system. It was also observed that installation of the bottom reflector regardless of the inclination angles improved the performance of the system compared to the still without the reflectors. Thus, the productivity of the still at bottom reflector inclination angles of 20°, 30°, 40°, 45°, and 50° increased by 4%, 16%, 26%, 36%, and 32%, respectively compared to the productivity of the still without the reflectors. It can also be concluded that, unlike the winter, installing the bottom reflector at its optimum inclination angle in the spring is more effective than installing the top reflector at its optimum inclination angle. Similar results have been reported by In addition, the results of the experiments showed that the increase in the freshwater productivity of the still with top and bottom reflectors compared to the cases of existence only top reflector, bottom reflector, and the still without the reflectors were recorded as 24%, 8%, and 48%, respectively. Some experiments were also carried out when the basin inclination angle was 20° in the spring. The results showed the average productivity decrease of 9% compared to the basin inclination angle of 25° under the same conditions. The optimum inclination angle of the top and bottom reflectors were also obtained as 10° and 45° respectively, at the basin inclination angle of 20° in the spring. Therefore, it can be concluded that the basin inclination angle decrease from 25° to 20° in the spring has no significant effect on the optimum inclination angles of the top and bottom reflectors. Moreover, since the altitude angle of the sun is higher in the spring relative to the winter, the optimum inclination angle of the bottom reflector is higher in the spring than that in the winter while the top reflector optimum inclination angle in the spring is lower than that in the winter. Similar results were reported by The average values of the concentration ratio of solar radiation intensity calculated from the Eq. The ratio of the system productivity under the conditions of using top and bottom reflectors individually, to the system productivity in the case of adjusting the still at optimum inclination angles without using reflectors can be defined as “increase ratio”, which has been shown against different reflector inclination angles in As has been shown in Also, applying bottom reflector at its optimum inclination angle has a more significant effect on the productivity in spring compared to the still with the top reflector positioned at its optimum inclination angle. The opposite results have been obtained for the experiments carried out in winter. It is worth noting that, based on the measured data, the average percentage increase of the received solar radiation on the basin of the still with the top reflector in the winter (at its optimum inclination angle) is 4% higher than that of the still with the bottom reflector (at its optimum inclination angle) in the spring. In this section, some experiments were carried out in winter and spring to evaluate the effect of the cooling water flow on the performance of the still with and without two reflectors, positioned at their optimum inclination angles. The results have been shown in The results of the experiments for the still with two top and bottom external reflectors with cooling water flow in winter showed that productivity has been increased by 12% and 37% compare to the still with two external reflectors without cooling water flow and the still with cooling water flow and no external reflector respectively. Similarly, the results of the experiments conducted in spring for the still with two top and bottom external reflectors with cooling water flow showed an increase of 13% and 17% in productivity compared to the still with two reflectors and no cooling water flow on the glass cover and the still with cooling water flow and no reflectors.  Saline and freshwater samples were tested for chemical characteristics. This study aims to develop an eco-friendly technology for saline water treatment in remote areas. The modified inclined solar still integrated with the cooling system on the outer surface of the glass cover and two external flat plate top and bottom reflectors were designed, fabricated and evaluated under weather conditions of Tehran city in summer, winter and spring seasons. The effect of still inclination angle, feeding water flow rate, cooling water passing on the glass cover, and the inclination angle of the top and bottom reflectors on the productivity of the distillation system were investigated as follows: Since the altitude angle of the sun is at its highest in the summer compared to spring and winter, the optimum still inclination angle is at its lowest value in summer and should be increased during spring and winter, respectively. Increasing the cooling water flow rate on the glass cover leads to an increase in productivity since the productivity at a cooling water flow rate of 720 ml/min has been recorded 14% higher than that of 180 ml/min. The most productivity of the proposed inclined solar still in the spring was recorded for the basin, top reflector, and bottom reflector inclination angles of 25°, 10° and 45° with cooling water and feed water flow rates of 720 ml/min and 90 ml/min, respectively. The obtained productivity was around 1.68 times more than the still at an optimum inclination angle of 25° without reflectors and cooling water. The recorded efficiency of the still was obtained as 36.7%, which was 14.2% higher than that of the still at the basin optimum inclination angle of 25°, without reflectors and cooling water. Installing both top and bottom reflectors, one top reflector, and one bottom reflector separately at their optimum inclination angles in winter increased the productivity of the still by 60%, 50%, and 41%, respectively compared to the still without reflectors. Therefore, it can be concluded that using both top and bottom reflectors, and even one of them alone, has a more significant effect on the productivity of the still in winter. This is while that the still with cooling water flow on the glass cover without any reflectors in winter, shows 30% increase in productivity compared to the still without reflectors and cooling water. Using cooling water flow on the glass cover without installing any reflector in the spring could increase the productivity of the still by 19% and 5% respectively compared to the condition when the top and bottom reflector has been separately installed. Applying bottom reflector at its optimum inclination angle has a more significant effect compared to applying top reflector at its optimum inclination angle in the spring. The reverse results were obtained in winter. The authors would like to express their thanks to “Fluid mechanics, Heat transfer, and Thermodynamics Laboratory” of the “Amirkabir University of Technology” for providing access to measuring instruments as well as their close cooperation. Special thanks are extended to Ali Saberi Ghomi, laboratory instructor, who assisted with field and laboratory work.