A numerical dynamic-mechanical model of a planetary ball-mill is developed to study the dependence of process efficiency on milling parameters like ball size and number, jar geometry and velocity of the revolving parts. Simulations provide evidence of the correlation between milling parameters and the resulting microstructure of the ground material. In particular, maximum efficiency of the grinding process is observed with the most disordered ball motion, which is obtained within a well-defined range of jar to plate velocity ratios. As a significant case study in ceramic powder technology, the model is presented and validated for calcium fluoride (CaF2), ground under different conditions in a planetary mill, and then characterized by X-ray powder diffraction and scanning electron microscopy.High-energy ball milling is commonly used for particle size reduction (comminution) down to the nanometer scale Among high-energy ball mills, the planetary is a mechanically simple and versatile device for efficient grinding. It is usually made of two or more jars, rotating at an angular velocity This work introduces a model belonging to the latter category, implemented within the framework of a multibody dynamics software. The validity of the model has been experimentally verified considering the case study of a typical ceramic material, calcium fluoride. Following, the model of the Fritsch Pulverisette 4 (P4 The Hilber–Hughes–Taylor (HHT The angular velocities The most critical ingredient in the model of a ball mill is the contact law. Contact models belong either to the (i) discrete or (ii) continuous approach The contact force is defined by the hard-coded While calculations provide a reasonable first-order guess, experiments can account for simplifying assumptions in theories. The most straightforward approach is comparing a simulation of a drop test (ball impinging on a plane) against experimental results Even if more refined contact models exist, it is worth noting that physical insights can be captured also from simpler (but more robust) schemes. Dealing with more complicated descriptions of phenomena is conditioned to a rigorous and extended procedure of parameters fitting. Among the possible schemes to account for friction at the contact location, the Coulomb model (hardcoded in MSC.Adams) was implemented. In this case, parameters are the static ( Calcium fluoride (CaF Interestingly, Computer simulations provide the complete set of dynamical variables for each milling body as well as quantities associated to each contact event, therefore allowing an outright understanding of the time evolution of the investigated system. Naturally, visual inspection of trajectories provides information on (i) motion regimes and (ii) regions characterized by high impact frequency and/or intensity, therefore potentially prone to significant wear. Moreover, each computed quantity can be broken down with respect to the local impact reference frame, therefore allowing to design the preferential direction for stress exchange. For example, exfoliation of graphite can be enhanced if shear load is preferentially transferred To quantitatively characterize each simulation, two parameters have been used. First one, the total relative impact energy of the system, computed in the impact reference frame The second parameter provides a geometrical view of the simulation. Inspired by statistical mechanics, given the number of milling media Within the wide set of parameters characterizing the process, in this work the effect of jar (  The specific impact energy (Eq. ( As anticipated, the specific impact energy can be separated into a normal and tangential component with respect to the local impact reference frame. The geometrical parameter, quantifying the randomness of motion of the milling media inside the jar and, in turn, the mean free path, is reported in So far, only the steel–steel interaction (no powder charge) has been considered. To validate the model, a comparison of simulations and experimental results, The same figure also reports some interesting experimental results for fluorite powder ball-milled in a P4 mill under the same nominal conditions as in the simulations. Experimental data, as provided by LPA of the XRPD patterns, are proposed in terms of average crystallite dimensions (sphere diameter) 〈 In this work a computer model for the P4 planetary ball mill has been presented and the effect of plate and jar velocity investigated. Two extreme conditions have been simulated, namely (i) steel–steel interaction (no mill charge) and (ii) steel–fluorite, by changing friction coefficients. Both cases have been analyzed from energetic and geometrical points of view. Results show that these, described by the specific kinetic impact energy and motion randomness parameters, are strictly related. In particular, the maximum value of the two parameters has been found to correspond to the same speed ratio, Simulation output were also indirectly compared with experimental data from XRPD-LPA of ground fluorite. Particularly, average crystallite size and dislocation density have been characterized and related to mechanical properties through Hall–Petch law (yield stress) and Taylor equation (work hardening). In spite of the simplicity of the model used to simulate contacts, a good agreement has been found within the two extreme conditions. The choice of a straightforward contact scheme is due to the not trivial calculation and tuning of model coefficients, which are the key ingredient for meaningful and reliable simulations: schemes depending on few parameters, easily estimable through simple experiments, support quick predictions of efficient milling conditions for a given material, thus reducing and steering the experimental effort in fine-tuning the ball milling process. As a further development, images of the milling process are going to be recorded through an high-speed camera directly mounted on the jar, therefore allowing more precise coefficients (and complicated contact models) to be retrieved The present work was partly supported by Fondazione Caritro, under project No 2013-0247 “Mechanical activation to improve bioavailability and reduce adverse effects of drugs in the therapy of chronic diseases” The authors are especially grateful to Ing. D. Catelani (MSC Software) and Prof. S. Siboni for precious collaboration and support to the research work. N.M.P. is supported by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: