Portland cement grouts are widely used in the mining industry to bond cable bolts with the surrounding rockmass. Numerous laboratory and field tests showed that bond failure of the cable/grout interface is the dominant failure mode. Previous research has found that shear behaviour of the grout along a pre-defined plane plays a significant role in determining the nature of the bond failure in a cable bolt reinforcement system. In this study, the shear behaviour of a Portland cement grout was investigated based on a direct shear test. Two different boundary conditions were considered being a constant normal load (CNL) and constant normal stiffness (CNS). Under CNL condition, five different normal pressures between 0.1 MPa and 6.0 MPa were examined. While under CNS condition, the initial normal pressure was set to value within the same range. Also, a CNS of 10kN/m was added. The cohesion, internal friction angle and shear strength of the grout were acquired. The results showed that there is a linear relationship between the shear strength of the grout and resultant normal pressure. However, under the CNS condition, the shear strength of the grout was found to be generally higher comparing to the CNL condition, most likely because sample dilation resulted in an increase in the normal pressure. Consequently, shear strength of the grout also increased.Portland cement is a product of clay and limestone, which are heated together and then pulverised to form a powder rich in calcium silicates While there are various types of cement-based grouts, Portland cement grouts are the dominant primary grouting materials widely used in the mining industry. Specifically, this type of grout is commonly used in rock reinforcement systems in mining to ensure the safety of mine personnel. In cable bolt installations, Portland cement is mixed and poured into boreholes to bond cable bolts to the surrounding rockmass Bond failure at the cable/grout interface is due to low bond strength between the cable bolt and grout column Although Portland cement has long been used in the industry, most research only focused on its axial loading performance. Feldman and Beaudoin Li, Xiao On the other hand, less work has concentrated on the shear behaviour of the Portland cement grout. For example, Reichert Nevertheless, Moosavi and Bawden Until now, no research has been conducted on the shear behaviour of the Portland cement grout under CNS condition using a direct shear test. It should be noted that in the case of cable bolt reinforcement, the boundary of CNS does occur In this paper, the experimental direct shear test process is firstly illustrated. Then, the results from shear behaviour of the cement grout under CNL condition are presented. After that, the shear behaviour of the grout under CNS condition was provided. Finally, the shear behaviour of the grout under CNL and CNS conditions are compared and analysed. A Stratabinder HS cement was selected and tested in this study because it is widely used in the mining industry Cubic samples of grout material were cast and prepared in the laboratory. It should be mentioned that in cement shear testing, there is no test standard and few references have been reported. However, in concrete shear testing, cubic samples were always used After the grout had set in the mould for 24 Direct shear box RDS-300 manufactured by the Geotechnical Consulting and Testing Systems was used in this study. The direct shear box is a servo control machine, composed of two main elements: the shear loading section and the normal loading section. The shear loading actuator can provide a maximum shear capacity of 300 The first series of tests was conducted under CNL condition. Specifically, the bottom shear box was pulled out before testing. Then the assembled sample and sample holder were installed in the bottom of the shear box, as shown in To acquire the shear strength envelope of the grout, a number of different normal pressures should be applied In the first series of test, a low normal pressure of 0.1 MPa was applied on the sample to check whether the direct shear test can be conducted successfully. Then, the normal pressure was increased with a small internal to make sure that the shear load is within the capacity of the apparatus. As a result, the normal pressures of 0.5 MPa, 1.5 MPa and 3.0 MPa were used. When the normal pressure was higher than 6 MPa, the shear load was close to the capacity of the apparatus. Consequently, it was determined that in this study, the maximum normal pressure was 6 MPa. Specifically, when a low normal pressure of 0.1 MPa was applied to the sample, the feedback of the normal actuator was set to stress control. After the normal load cell was able to record a stable stress of 0.1 MPa, the normal actuator was set up as well. Then, the connector between the shear load cell and the bottom shear box was tightened, as shown in In the direct shear test, a constant shear speed of 0.5 mm/min was applied to the sample. During the test, the shear stress, shear displacement and normal displacement (or dilation) were recorded. And the maximum normal displacement that the sample reached is named the dilation limit. After the test, the connector was released and the top shear box was lifted up. Then, the sample holders were removed and the failure status of the sample was examined. Following the same process, when different normal pressures were applied, the shear behaviour of the grout could be studied. Each test was replicated three times. The best two sets of test results were selected and averaged as the final results. Theoretically, CNS condition was realised by adding a spring with a constant stiffness on the sample boundary. And the normal pressure generated by the spring in the shear process can be calculated with Eq. As for the experiment, the test process under CNS condition was basically consistent with the test under CNL condition. However, the difference is that under CNS condition, an initial normal pressure e.g., 0.1 MPa, was applied to the sample and then a normal stiffness of 10 By using this method, the shear behaviour of the grout under CNS condition was studied. Again each test was replicated three times and the best two were averaged as the final results. When a CNL of 0.1 MPa was applied on the sample, the shear stress versus shear displacement relationship of the sample was determined as shown in After each test was completed, the shear box was lifted up to check the failure status of the sample, as shown in Each test condition was repeated three times. Then the normal pressure increased to 0.5 MPa, 1.5 MPa, 3 MPa and 6 MPa respectively, and the shear tests were conducted. The test results under the CNL condition were tabulated in After the test, it was found that: when a CNL of 0.1 MPa was used, the average shear strength is 11.8 MPa and the dilation limit is 0.6 mm. when a CNL of 0.5 MPa was used, the average shear strength is 13.4 MPa and the dilation limit is 0.7 mm. when the CNL increased to 1.5 MPa, the average shear strength increases to 14.1 MPa and the dilation limit is 0.5 mm. when the CNL increased to 3 MPa, the average shear strength is 15.1 MPa and the dilation limit is 0.6 mm. when the CNL was 6 MPa, the average shear strength is 17.7 MPa and the dilation limit is 0.6 mm. The shear performance of the grout under CNL condition is shown in The influence of normal pressure on grout dilation is shown in The shear strength versus normal pressure relationship of the grout is shown in Under CNS condition, a normal stiffness of 10 After the test, the failure surface of the sample was inspected, as shown in Replication tests were conducted and the results are tabulated in The shear performance of the grout under CNS condition is shown in The shear strength versus normal pressure relationship of the grout is shown in A comparison between the shear behaviour of the grout under CNL and CNS conditions is shown in The shear strength of the grout under CNS condition is generally higher than that under CNL condition. This is because during the shear process, the sample did not fail along a horizontal plane. In fact, an inclined shear failure plane apparently occurred, resulting in the sample dilating. Under CNL condition, dilation has no effect on normal pressure since the hydraulic system kept the normal pressure constant and stable in the whole shear process. While under the CNS condition, after dilation occurred, because of the normal stiffness, there was a gradual increase in normal pressure. The extra normal pressure generated by the normal spring had a positive effect on the shear strength, resulting in an increase in grout shear strength. Nevertheless, since the normal stiffness used in this study was quite small, it appeared that grout shear behaviour was less sensitive to normal stiffness. The shear behaviour of a Portland cement grout was studied in a direct shear test. Two different boundary conditions were considered: CNL and CNS. Under the CNL condition, five different normal pressures were examined: 0.1 MPa, 0.5 MPa, 1.5 MPa, 3.0 MPa and 6.0 MPa. As for the CNS condition, the initial normal pressure was set between 0.1 MPa and 6.0 MPa. Also, a CNS of 10 Test results showed that there is a general linear relationship between the shear strength of a grout and the normal pressure in both the CNL and CNS conditions. During the shearing process, inclined shear failure plane occurred in the sample, resulting in the sample dilating. Under the CNL condition, the cohesion of the grout was determined to be 12.4 MPa and the internal friction angle 42.3. While, under CNS condition, the cohesion of the grout was 13.1 MPa and the internal friction angle was 47.5. The shear strength of the grout under CNS condition is generally higher than that under CNL condition. This is because under CNS condition, the sample dilation resulted in the normal spring generates extra normal pressure. Consequently, the extra normal pressure leads to an increase in the grout shear strength. However, since the normal stiffness used in this study was quite small, the effect of an increase in grout shear strength was less obvious. The authors would like to thank Minova Australia for providing the Stratabinder HP grout. Also, the authors especially thank the Australian Coal Association Research Program (ACARP C22010). This paper was also supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant No. 2018QZ06).