Mercaptobenzoheterocyclic compounds: 2-mercaptobenzothiazole (MBT), 2-mercaptobenzoxazole (MBO) and 2-mercaptobenzimidazole (MBI) are widely used as corrosion inhibitors and flotation collectors, but the true nature of the adsorption selectivity and activity to solid surfaces is still unclear. Using density functional theory (DFT) calculations, this study investigates the structure–reactivity relation of MBO, MBI and MBT as flotation collectors with sulfide minerals. The results demonstrate that the O, N and S heteratoms in MBO, MBI and MBT molecules can attend the chemical bond formation with metal atoms on mineral surfaces and significantly impact the chemical reactivity of these mercaptobenzoheterocyclic compounds, and the reactive power of the three compounds to metal and mineral surfaces is predicted to be MBT>MBI≥MBO. In addition, the chemical reactivity of the thione, thiol and ionized thiol species of these mercaptobenzoheterocyclic compounds in both vacuum and aqueous phases is also studied. The results show that the thione tautomers of MBO, MBI and MBT is more stable and reactive than their thiol tautomers, and in aqueous solutions, the ionized thiol exhibits the strongest reactivity. The theoretical results of structure–reactivity relations provide an atomic level understanding of the activity and selectivity observed by the experimental investigation of the adsorption of MBO, MBI and MBT on metal and sulfide surfaces. The further pyrite flotation tests indicate that MBT has the highest collecting power to pyrite, followed by MBI and then MBO, which is consistent with the theoretical prediction.Mercaptobenzoheterocyclic compounds 2-mercaptobenzothiazole (MBT), 2-mercaptobenzoxazole (MBO), 2-mercaptobenzimidazole (MBI) are known to form metal complexes with various metal ions, including Cu, Cd, Bi, Pb, Ag, Hg, Pd, Pt, Zn and Co As widely considered, computational methods are valuable tools for understanding the chemical reactivity systems. Recently, density functional theory (DFT) has become a reliable and inexpensive method for obtaining chemical information about the energetics, structure, and properties of (atoms and) molecules The chemical reactivity of a reagent with solid surfaces depends on a set of quantum-chemical parameters such as composition and energy of the frontier molecular orbitals (FMO) Yekeler and Yekeler have used DFT to predict some chemical information of MBT, MBO and their derivatives as flotation collectors in vacuum In the present study, DFT was used to determine the optimal molecular structure and calculate relative energy (Δ In this study all computational analysis was performed using Gaussian03 The mineral pyrite used in this study was provided by Xinqiao pyrite mine, China. Coarse pieces of high grade pyrite (46.1% Fe and 51.6% S) was selected, ground in an agate mortar, and screened to obtain −400 mesh fraction of the mineral. This fraction was washed 5 times in deionized water by an ultrasonic bath, filtrated and dried under nitrogen gas, and used in flotation test. Analytical grade MBT, MBI and MBO from Sigma–Aldrich Co. LLC were used as received. The pH of the suspension was adjusted with concentrated HCl and KOH solutions. Flotation test was carried out in a 100-mL Hallimond tube. In each test, 2-g pyrite particles in a given volume of distilled water were place in the Hallimond tube. After adding a desired amount of reagents, additional distilled water was added to a total volume of 100 MBT, MBO and MBI may exist as thione and thiol tautomers, and thiol can be further ionized in aqueous solution as shown in The optimized geometric parameters of MBT, MBO and MBI are given in The presence of solvent (water) is shown to have a significant effect on bond distances (   The calculated total energy MBT, MBO and MBI as sulfydryl collectors react with a sulfide mineral by a frontier-controlled reaction  The presence of solvent (water) shows a different effect on HOMO energy of thione and thiol tautomers of MBT, MBO and MBI. Compared with the value in vacuum, placing thione tautomers in water decreases the HOMO energy, while placing thiol tautomers in water increases the HOMO energy. It is evident that surrounding water weakens electron-donating ability of thione tautomers and enhances electron donating ability of thiol tautomers. As a result, the electron-donating ability of thiol tautomers and corresponding thione tautomers of MBT, MBO or MBI in aqueous solutions becomes less distinguishable. Another remarkable trend shown in The results in The results of theoretical analysis in The presence of solvent (water) increases the LUMO energy of both thione and thiol back-donating covalent bond of MBT, MBO and MBI, decreasing their ability of accepting electrons. The LUMO energy of ionized thiols of MBT, MBO and MBI is the highest among the three forms of collectors, suggesting the lowest ability of back-donating covalent bond with metals on sulfide mineral surfaces. It should be noted that calculating other quantum parameters such as total energy, electronic energy, ionization energy, softness, hydration energy, etc. would provide complementary information on reactivity of a molecular species, which is in progress. The composition of HOMO and LUMO obtained by GaussView3.0 is shown in The 2P  The LUMO of MBT, MBO or MBI is mainly composed of 2P In aqueous solutions, the ionized thiols of MBT, MBO or MBI exhibit the strongest electron-donating power among the three forms of collectors. The 3P The calculated Mulliken and Natural atomic charge values are given in The Natural atomic charge values of S3 in MBT, O3 in MBO and N3 in MBI are positive, negative and negative, respectively. The Natural atomic charge value of C2 in the thione, thiol or ionized thiols is negative for MBT, but positive for MBO or MBI. The magnitude of Natural group charges of the  The results in It is evident that the theoretical analysis in this study provides an insight into the chemical reactivity of MBO, MBI and MBT collectors on various sulfide mineral surfaces, and offers an atomic level understanding of the experimental data available in literature. In this work, the molecular structure and parameters of thione, thiol and ionized thiols of MBT, MBO and MBI were computed by DFT at the B3LYP/6-31 The exocyclic sulfur atom of MBO, MBI or MBT is the electron-donating center, i.e., the chemical reactive center of these three collectors. The presence of solvent (water) slightly lowers the electron-donating ability of the thione tautomers of MBO, MBI and MBT, but increases the electron-donating ability of the corresponding thiol tautomers, which enhances the electrostatic interaction between MBO, MBI or MBT and sulfide mineral surfaces. The thione tautomers of MBO, MBI and MBT are more stable and show higher reactivity than their thiol tautomers in both the vacuum and aqueous phases. Among the thiones, thiols and ionized thiols of MBO, MBI and MBT, the ionized thiols exhibit the strongest reactivity. The O, N and S heteratoms in the respective ring structures can attend the chemical bond formation with metal atoms on mineral surfaces and significantly impact the chemical reactivity of the three collectors. Based on the atomic charge values of exocyclic sulfur atom along with the composition and energy of HOMO and LUMO, the collecting power of the three collectors for sulfide flotation is predicted to be MBT The authors would like to thank the