The effect of adsorption of two carboxymethyl celluloses and sodium lignosulfonate on the zeta potential distributions and the aggregation/dispersion behavior of hematite (isoelectric point at pH 6.7) was investigated at pH 5.5 and 10.5. At pH 5.5, all three polymers caused hematite aggregation at lower dosages followed by steric re-dispersion at higher concentrations. It was found that the width of the zeta potential distribution at pH 5.5 gradually increased with polymer adsorption and reached a maximum value at polymer concentrations that led to strongest aggregation of hematite. The results indicated that the main role of the polymers in hematite aggregation at pH 5.5 was to generate large variations in the zeta potential characteristics between individual hematite particles, producing populations of oppositely charged particles that readily underwent aggregation. In the absence of such polymer-induced variations (e.g., at pH 10.5), adsorption of the polymers resulted in strong dispersion of hematite. The width of the zeta potential distribution, rather than the adsorption density of the polymers, was found to be a common factor determining the onset of steric re-dispersion by the tested polymers regardless of the polymer type. Using the width of the zeta potential distribution as a measure of zeta potential variations among the particles, it was shown that steric dispersion at pH 5.5 started to occur when the hematite particles acquired very similar zeta potential characteristics as a result of polymer adsorption. The onset of steric dispersion coincided with a well-defined transition from broad to narrow zeta potential distributions. It was also shown that zeta potential distributions offered additional insights into the mechanism of the aggregating/dispersing action of the tested polymers, compared to the average zeta potential value alone.The zeta potential is a fundamental parameter characterizing the surface charge characteristics of an interface. A review of the theory of electrokinetic phenomena, the zeta potential, the electrical double layer, and associated terms and definitions will not be attempted here since the literature on the topic is vast and dates back over one hundred years to the original works of The bulk of the available literature on the zeta potential of mineral particles approaches the zeta potential as a single average value despite the fact that all the electrokinetic effects, and electrophoresis in particular, rely on taking measurements for many charged particles. This aspect is rarely discussed in mineral processing applications even though several studies showed advantages of the concept of the zeta potential distribution, over a single average value, in analyzing surface-chemical phenomena in mixtures of particles of different types ( A work most relevant to our study was presented by The present study focuses on probing the effect of polymer adsorption on zeta potential distributions of fine hematite particles. The resulting dispersion, coagulation, and flocculation phenomena are also studied. Hematite is used as a model mineral, along with two types of carboxymethyl cellulose and sodium lignosulfonate. Hematite is one of the most important minerals of iron, while the selected polymers are expected to produce different adsorption affinities and mechanisms of aggregation/dispersion. The selected polymers are also commonly used in various mineral processing applications. A hematite sample was obtained from Alfa Aesar as pure fine iron (III) oxide, containing 99.9% Fe Two samples of sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), with a degree of substitution of 0.7 but different average molecular weights, 80,000 Da and 250,000 Da (designated as CMC80 and CMC250, respectively), were obtained from Polysciences. A stock solution of CMC (1 g/L) was prepared by mixing the polymer with a 0.01 M sodium chloride solution in a Pyrex glass beaker, and leaving the solution to gently mix overnight on a magnetic stirrer while covered with a sheet of parafilm. The content of water-insoluble matter in the samples was negligible since the total organic carbon assays (Shimadzu TOC-Vcph analyzer) on centrifuged and raw solutions returned the same value. Desired concentrations were obtained from the centrifuged solutions by dilution with the background electrolyte. Sodium lignosulfonate with the code name D750 was obtained from Borregaard-Lignotech USA. The sample had an average molecular weight of 6000 Da. As provided by the manufacturer, the sample was characterized by a sodium content of 8.0%, a sulfonate sulfur content of 2.7%, and a carboxylic group content of 7.4%. A stock solution of lignosulfonate (1 g/L) was prepared in dilute sodium chloride (0.01 mol/L). Analytical grade sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid were used for pH adjustment while the ionic strength (0.01 mol/L) was maintained using sodium chloride. These reagents were all ACS certified chemicals from Fisher Scientific. Five grams of hematite were initially mixed with 50 ml of a 0.01 mol/L NaCl electrolyte solution in a 125 ml Erlenmeyer flask, and the suspension was mixed with a magnetic stirrer until a steady-state pH value was reached (5.5 ± 0.2 or 10.5 ± 0.2). The sample was further conditioned for ten minutes in a temperature-controlled orbital auto shaker (IKA KS 4000 ic Control) at a temperature of 25 °C and 210 rpm. Then, 50 ml of a polymer solution at pre-adjusted pH was added to obtain a 5% (wt) suspension (0.95%vol), and the whole mixture was shaken again at the same settings for 30 min to allow adsorption equilibrium to be attained. At the end of the adsorption test, a 30 ml aliquot of the sample was immediately drawn with a pipette for the measurement of turbidity and subsequently zeta potential distributions, while the rest of the suspension was used for determining the residual polymer concentration from the total organic carbon (TOC) content in solution. In this way, direct correlations could be obtained from the same experiment between polymer adsorption, zeta potential distributions, and the resulting stability towards aggregation (turbidity). The suspension sample for TOC analysis was centrifuged at a centrifugal force of 10,000g for 20 min using a Heraeus Biofuge Primo centrifuge. The supernatant was transferred to a glass vial for TOC analysis with the use of a Shimadzu TOC-Vcph total organic carbon analyzer. The sample was acidified to pH 2–3 and gently heated on a hot plate at about 35 °C to remove inorganic carbon (carbon dioxide) before analysis. The TOC content in solution was converted to the polymer concentration using a calibration curve, made separately for each polymer. The adsorption density was calculated using the depletion method based on the difference between the initial (known) and residual (measured) polymer concentrations. The stability of hematite suspensions was characterized through turbidity measurements with the use of a Hach 2100 AN turbidimeter. A 30-mL aliquot of the sample suspension from the adsorption experiment was placed in a glass vial and allowed to settle for 30 min. Turbidity measurements were performed on two sets of samples. The first group of samples comprised more concentrated supernatant samples from the adsorption experiments with an initial volume fraction of hematite of 0.95%. Since the samples were allowed to settle for 30 min, the actual solids content during the turbidity measurement was lower than 0.95%, and varied between the samples depending on the degree of dispersion or aggregation of hematite. The second round of turbidity measurements was performed at an initial hematite content of 0.004% (vol). The main intention of these tests was to limit interactions between particles. In such a dilute suspension, particles are less likely to collide, aggregate, and settle out, thus changing the composition of the suspension. As a result, the effects of the interparticle phenomena on the subsequent zeta potential measurement could be minimized, and the effect of polymer adsorption alone could be more clearly illustrated. Zeta potential measurements were performed with a ZetaView PMX100 micro-electrophoretic instrument (Particle Metrix GmbH, Meerbusch, Germany). A glass syringe was used to inject 10 ml of the sample suspension into the rectangular quartz cell of the instrument, which had been flushed several times with the background electrolyte and with the sample. The sample used for zeta potential measurements was the same sample that had been used for turbidity measurements. The sample was settled for an additional one hour to allow the solids content in the supernatant to decrease to a value suitable for zeta potential measurements using the microelectrophoretic technique. This condition was assessed by measuring the electrophoretic mobility as a function of settling time, until the measured values did not significantly change. The final content of suspended solids after settling was not measured. Another set of zeta potential tests was also performed at an initial solids content of 0.004%. The ZetaView uses a video camera to automatically track fine particles moving along the stationary level. The number of particles tracked ranged from several hundred in strongly aggregated samples to several thousand in well dispersed ones. The Smoluchowski equation, The width of the zeta potential distribution was calculated from the cumulative zeta potential distribution curve, as shown in The width of the distribution was defined as the difference between the zeta potential value at a cumulative frequency of 95% and the zeta potential value at a cumulative frequency of 5%. For the example in  The isoelectric point (iep) of the hematite sample was found to be at pH 6.7. The width of the corresponding zeta potential distributions initially increased with pH, reached a maximum near pH 7.5, then decreased to almost the same level as that at low pH. The maximum width on the curve roughly coincides with the iep of the sample. Such a strong effect of pH on the width of zeta potential distributions of hematite is in contrast to the results of Actual zeta potential distributions for a 0.004% (vol.) hematite suspension at pH values near and far from the iep are shown in As the figure suggests, the hematite particles at the iep can be characterized by a broad distribution of both positive and negative zeta potential values. This observation is contrary to the physical meaning of the iep, which is a pH value at which particles possess a zeta potential of zero. In fact, only a small fraction of particles at pH 6.8 appears to carry a zeta potential of zero. The apparent presence of such differently charged populations of particles deserves some discussion. The fact that the net force acting on the particles is zero does not exclude the possibility that the particles may move with a steady-state velocity. Under these conditions, Brownian (random) motion may contribute to the observed results. However, a contribution from Brownian motion is usually insignificant in electrophoresis ( The turbidity of hematite suspensions decreased with pH, reaching a minimum value around the iep, where maximum aggregation occurred in both dilute and concentrated suspensions. The turbidity values, however, level off from the iep through pH 11, indicating that the hematite particles remain aggregated. Hematite should become dispersed at high pH by electrostatic repulsion between the negatively charged hematite particles ( The turbidity data demonstrate the intention to limit interparticle interactions at the lower solids content: the turbidity of supernatant suspensions prepared at an initial hematite content of 0.004% are actually higher than the turbidity values obtained at an initial hematite content of 0.95%. In the former case, aggregation and settling were less likely to occur, while in the latter case, particles aggregated and settled out of suspension, thus decreasing the concentration of the solids remaining in the tested supernatant. This effect is clearly visible at pH values higher than the iep. However, at pH values lower than the iep, the two sets of data do not differ much in the tested pH range when the hematite particles appear to be well dispersed. Overall, changes in turbidity as a function of pH are much less pronounced at a solids content of 0.004% compared to a solids content of 0.95%. It could be argued that the aggregation and settling of hematite particles from concentrated suspensions could leave only the most dispersed particles in suspension, and that the measured zeta potential distributions would characterize only those most dispersed fractions. However, the average zeta potential of dilute suspensions is very similar to the zeta potential of hematite particles remaining in the supernatants of concentrated suspensions. The widths of the zeta potential distributions from dilute and concentrated suspensions are also very similar. These observations suggest that the two populations of hematite particles remaining in suspension are representative, in terms of electrokinetic and aggregation characteristics, of the initial population of hematite particles used in the experiment. The observed changes in the baseline zeta potential distributions can be attributed to changes in the surface properties of individual particles, and the data are not significantly affected by variations in the composition of the suspensions after settling.  The adsorption density of carboxymethyl celluloses approaches a plateau value at both high and low pH, and the polysaccharides exhibit high affinity-type adsorption isotherms – adsorption of CMC is complete at initial concentrations lower than 100 mg/L and 50 mg/L at pH 5.5 and 10.5, respectively. The adsorption of lignosulfonate increases without reaching a plateau at both pH values in the studied concentration range. Although the adsorption curves for D750 could be classified as a low affinity-type, it should be observed that at any initial concentration of D750 at pH 5.5, over 90% of the polymer adsorbs on the hematite particles. As a result, the adsorption densities of all three polymers at pH 5.5 are similar below an initial concentration of 150 mg/L, or in the concentration range where the most important changes take place in adsorption, zeta potential, and turbidity results. Although all three polymers induce strongest aggregation (lowest turbidity) at the same concentration (100 mg/L), aggregation of hematite by lignosulfonate is less extensive than aggregation of hematite by CMC, as seen in At concentrations higher than 100 mg/L, the turbidity values increase sharply in the case of CMC, while higher doses of lignosulfonate cause a more gradual change. The lack of a significant effect of the molecular weight of CMC on both the adsorption density and turbidity is noteworthy. At pH 10.5, turbidity quickly increases with polymer concentration and reaches very high values, exceeding the measuring limit of the instrument (10,000 NTU) at high polymer concentrations. The addition of the anionic polymers to hematite suspensions at high pH leads to dispersion without an initial aggregation stage observed at pH 5.5. Generally, all the tested polymers act as strong dispersants for hematite at pH 10.5. The corresponding changes in the average zeta potential are presented in The average zeta potential of hematite changes from positive to negative with increasing concentrations of the polymers at pH 5.5. Lignosulfonate causes a reversal in the sign of the zeta potential more gradually, and an iep appears in the lignosulfonate data at a higher concentration than the iep concentrations for both CMC samples. At high polymer concentrations, the zeta potential results approach similar values. At high pH, the average zeta potential was not significantly affected by the polymers since the negatively charged hematite surface reduced polymer adsorption. It is however noteworthy that despite these small changes in the average zeta potential at pH 10.5, the dispersion of the hematite particles by the polymers is quite dramatic. Changes in the width of the zeta potential distributions of the hematite particles with polymer addition are shown in It is noteworthy that the widths of zeta potential distributions at pH 5.5 and 10.5 in the absence of polymers were very similar. The width of the zeta potential distributions obtained at pH 5.5 increased at low concentrations, and the broadest widths were observed in the initial polymer concentration range from 25 mg/L to 50 mg/L. At polymer concentrations higher than 100 mg/L, the zeta potential distributions became narrow and did not change further. All the polymers generally had a very similar effect on the width of the zeta potential distributions in the studied concentration range. These large variations in the width at pH 5.5 result from the adsorption of anionic polymers on the oppositely charged hematite surface. At pH 10.5, the distributions were relatively narrow, and only a small reduction in the width was obtained at higher polymer concentrations. At pH 5.5 and at high polymer concentrations, the zeta potential distributions become as narrow as the distributions at pH 10.5. The greatest changes in the width of zeta potential distributions at pH 5.5 take place in the CMC concentration range in which the adsorption of the polymer is complete, as marked by the vertical dashed line. The maximum in the width at concentrations of 25–50 mg/L corresponds quite closely to a transition concentration through an iep for the lignosulfonate, but that range appears to be substantially higher than the transition concentration for both CMC samples, which produce an iep below 10 mg/L (  The data in The average zeta potential values as a function of polymer concentration for dilute hematite suspensions are shown in  As the examples of zeta potential distributions show, CMC concentrations of 0.01 mg/L and 0.02 mg/L, near the iep, generate zeta potential distributions containing both positively charged and negatively charged particles. This result is very similar to the effect of lignosulfonate on the width of zeta potential distributions around the iep, but quite different from the earlier observations in relation to the CMC data at the iep in The widths of zeta potential distributions for dilute suspensions at pH 5.5 reach a maximum value near the same polymer concentration that produces an iep for all three tested polymers. For concentrated suspensions, the polymer concentration at the iep and the polymer concentration at maximum width do not overlap. This discrepancy is much more pronounced for CMC, while for lignosulfonate those two concentrations are close in dilute and in concentrated suspensions. In other words, the population of hematite particles remaining in the supernatant of concentrated suspensions after CMC adsorption represents only the non-settling, most dispersed fractions of hematite. This observation is further supported by the fact that the average zeta potential of the hematite particles remaining in the supernatant is nearly −40 mV at a CMC concentration of 100 mg/L ( The extent of changes in the composition of supernatant suspensions at pH 5.5 can also be noted by comparing the widths of zeta potential distributions from dilute and concentrated suspensions. The much broader zeta potential distributions from dilute suspensions ( In the case of small ions and molecules, their impact on the zeta potential distribution should be more uniform across a large population of particles since the number of ions (molar concentration) available for adsorption is high, and the width of the distribution should not dramatically change even though the average zeta potential value may be affected. Along these lines, pH adjustment generally results in narrower distributions than those induced by polymer adsorption. These observations probably explain why It is noteworthy that in both dilute and concentrated hematite suspensions, the initial polymer concentration at the iep is about 3–5 times lower for CMC than for lignosulfonate. The sharp transition through an iep for both CMC samples may appear inconsistent with the low adsorption density of the polymers at those concentrations. At an initial CMC concentration of 10 mg/L, CMC adsorption is complete, and the resulting adsorption density (~0.02 mg/m The zeta potential is measured at the shear plane, which is located at a distance away from the charged surface, roughly equal to the thickness of the compact layer of the electrical double layer. The thickness of the compact layer is in turn defined by the size of ions and molecules adsorbed on the mineral surface as the adsorbed species move together with the charged particle during the microelectrophoretic effect. As a result, the data suggest that the relatively large anionic CMC macromolecules at low adsorption densities are capable of pushing the shear plane farther away from the hematite surface and establishing a negative electrokinetic potential at a new location of the shear plane defined by the size of the adsorbing chain. The lack of a pronounced effect of the molecular weight of CMC on the adsorption density, zeta potential, and turbidity indicates that the adsorbed CMC chains assume very similar conformations on the hematite surface in terms of surface densities of trains, loops, and tails. The low adsorption density of CMC leaves positively charged sites on the hematite surfaces allowing additional macromolecules to continue adsorbing well beyond the apparent iep concentration, even though the average zeta potential of the particles is negative. It appears that the main effect of CMC is to produce negatively charged sites/patches on the positively charged hematite surface at pH 5.5, which is generally consistent with the patch neutralization model of aggregation proposed by The D750 lignosulfonate brings about gradual changes in the average zeta potential at pH 5.5 even though the adsorption densities and changes in the width of zeta potential distributions generated by lignosulfonate are similar to those produced by CMC. The low molecular weight lignosulfonate macromolecule does not shift the position of the shear plane to the same degree as CMC does. Lignosulfonate produces wide zeta potential distributions, characterized by the presence of oppositely charged fractions at concentrations of strongest aggregation. Under these conditions, coagulation between the oppositely charged particles can be expected to dominate the aggregation process at pH 5.5. Considering that very few particles actually carry zeta potentials of zero at the apparent iep concentration for lignosulfonate, coagulation of net-zero charged particles appears to be less important. Because of the low molecular weight of lignosulfonate and the compact, spheroidal shape of the lignosulfonate molecule ( An interesting comparison can be made between the data at pH 10.5 and at pH 5.5. The average zeta potential values of hematite at 50 mg/L of CMC at pH 5.5 and pH 10.5 are similar. At the same time, the adsorption densities of the polymer are also comparable (~0.1 mg/m Finally, hematite particles aggregate as long as adsorption of CMC is complete at pH 5.5. As soon as a small residual amount of CMC appears in solution at initial concentrations higher than 100 mg/L, the hematite particles become strongly dispersed, most likely by steric forces, which is a typical consequence of overdosing a flocculant. A sudden transition between aggregation and dispersion occurs over a narrow range of initial CMC concentrations between 100 mg/L and 125 mg/L, which produce adsorption densities equivalent to 66% and 77% of maximum surface coverage, respectively. Simultaneously, transition from aggregation to dispersion is accompanied by a shift from broad to narrow zeta potential distributions. An increasing number of hematite particles become more uniformly negatively charged as a result of increasing polymer adsorption, but any charge heterogeneities remaining on individual particles no longer lead to aggregation. In the case of lignosulfonate, it is not so straightforward to relate changes in the adsorption density to transition from aggregation to dispersion since the lignosulfonate adsorption data did not reach a plateau. However, it can clearly be seen that the width of zeta potential distributions in the presence of lignosulfonate also changes from broad to narrow at the same lignosulfonate concentration at which hematite redispersion starts taking place. Despite the very different properties of CMC and lignosulfonate, the steric redispersion of hematite by the polymers is observed under very similar circumstances, when differences in the zeta potential characteristics between hematite particles gradually disappear, as judged by the narrowing of zeta potential distributions to a low and constant width. The width of the zeta potential distribution, rather than the adsorption density or surface coverage, seems to be a common criterion for the onset of steric redispersion of hematite at pH 5.5 by the tested anionic polymers. The width of the zeta potential distribution is a parameter obtained from measurements for a number of individual particles, while the adsorption density is averaged over the total population of particles, and the adsorption density on individual particles is not readily available. From this point of view, steric dispersion starts taking place when a critical number of particles acquire similar surface charge characteristics. Although the average zeta potential value is commonly used in analysis of polymer adsorption on mineral surfaces, zeta potential distributions provide additional insights into the mechanisms of polymer-mineral interactions. At low concentrations, adsorption of the polymers at pH 5.5 resulted in large differences in the surface charge characteristics between individual hematite particles, often leading to the appearance of oppositely charged populations. Aggregation under these conditions was generally caused by electrostatic attraction of the oppositely charged particles. It was found that only a small fraction of hematite particles carried zeta potentials of zero at isoelectric points determined from the average zeta potential data. As a result, the role of van der Waals attraction between net-zero charged particles in the polymer-induced aggregation processes appeared to be very limited. For an anionic polymer with a sufficiently high molecular weight, such as CMC, bridging flocculation of several positively charged particles contributes to the aggregation process. Otherwise, a common mode of aggregating action of the tested polymers, regardless of their molecular weights and degrees of anionicity, was to induce variations in the surface charge properties of the hematite particles. The width of the zeta potential distribution is a measure of such variations in a population of particles. In the studied polymer-hematite systems, aggregation proceeded as long as large differences existed in the zeta potential characteristics of individual particles. Broad distributions (40–70 mV) were associated with pronounced aggregation, while narrow distributions (10–20 mV) were typical of well dispersed suspensions. Steric re-dispersion can be expected to occur when the width of the zeta potential distribution decreases to low and constant values as a result of polymer adsorption. At the onset of steric dispersion, all the particles in a tested population acquire very similar surface charge characteristics, and aggregation due to electrostatic attractive interactions (polymer-particle, particle–particle) no longer takes place. Adsorption of the anionic polymers on the negatively charged hematite surfaces (pH 10) produced only minor variations in the surface charge characteristics of hematite particles. For such a uniformly charged population of hematite particles, aggregation was not observed, and the polymer adsorption process led to strong dispersion of hematite over the tested polymer concentration range.  The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. Financial support for this work was provided by