In the current world, the large consumption of fossil fuel leads to some global environmental problems, using biomass energy is one of the good solutions. However, due to the more strict emission policy, the sulphur releasing during biomass combustion cannot be ignored. In order to study the self-sulphur retention characteristics, the briquetting process of biomass is carried out. In this study, a batch of biomass briquettes combustion experiments are conducted to investigate self-sulphur retention characteristics. Five kinds of biomass powder, biomass briquettes, and briquettes with additive samples are used to carry out the combustion experiments, which are performed in a lab-scale tube furnace system. The influence of the briquetting process, reaction temperature, added coal and additives are studied comprehensively. The briquetting process gives remarkable enhancements on sulphur retention characteristics compare to the raw biomass powder, which is mainly due to the effect of the structural transformation. The enhancement are 35.00%, 76.68%, 36.15%, 27.34% and 31.36% compared to the original biomass samples. The reaction temperature behaves severely on the release of sulphur, that when the reaction temperature reaches 
                        
                           
                              
                                 900
                              
                              
                                 ∘
                              
                           
                           C
                        
                     , the sulphur release ratio starts to sharply increase. Adding coal into the biomass samples can increase the sulphur retention ability and the caloric value. The effects of different additives on sulphur retention ratios are also studied, exhibiting opposite trends as temperature increased. The organic Ca-based additives show better performance to enhance the self-sulphur retention ability. What's more, the potassium-based additives have a higher improvement than the calcium-based ones. The mechanism on sulphur retention of biomass briquettes with or without additives is also discussed. This study develops insightful understand on biomass self-sulphur retention ability, and its behaviours under the effect of the briquetting process, reaction temperature, added coal or additives, which could use as a guild for biomass briquetting combustion.Cotton straw Cotton straw briquette Fugu coal Maize straw Maize straw briquette Proportional integral derivative Pine sawdust Pine sawdust briquette Poplar wood Poplar wood briquette Rice straw Rice straw briquette X-Ray diffraction X-Ray fluorescence The concentration of Total release quantity, μg Sulphur content of the sample, % The flux of the gas, The mass of the sample, μg The mass of the additive, μg Sulphur release ratio, % In the current world, the large amount of consumption of fossil energy leads to global warming, energy crisis, ocean pollution, and many other environmental problems, which have been concerned by international community [ Direct combustion is one of the main ways for large-scale biomass energy utilisation [ Although the sulphur content of biomass is much lower, and the nitrogen content is close to that of coal, the emission standards of flue gas pollutants of biomass-fired boilers still become stricter. In China, the emission standards of flue gas pollutants of biomass fired boilers in demonstration projects (i.e. the thermal capacity of single boiler is above 7 MW), were issued in July 2014 by National Energy Administration and Ministry of Environmental Protection of PRC, limiting dust emission concentration of 30 It has been widely accepted that the sulphur (S) is categorised into organic sulphur and inorganic sulphate in biomass. The proportion of the two forms greatly affected by farming methods, growing time, and the type of fertiliser [ Although the high alkali mental (K, Na) content leads to a destructive problem as mentioned before, it does play a significant role in sulphur retention. The thermodynamic equilibrium calculations [ However, the investigations on the additives enhancement are based on the clean use of low-quality coal, biomass added only as an auxiliary ingredient with a proportion up to 30%. And the previous studies on the transformation of sulphur in biomass raw material are relatively sufficient, but for sulphur release characteristics of biomass briquettes during combustion still need to be further researched. Thus this study aims to the clean and extensive utilisation of biomass briquettes with a higher calorific value which is more easily to be transported, stored than biomass raw material. In this paper, a batch of biomass briquettes (details are shown in Five typical biomass samples and the Fugu coal are used in this work. The biomass samples include herbaceous plant cotton straw (CS), rice straw (RS), maize straw (MS) and woody plant pine sawdust (PS), poplar wood (PW). These biomass are widely used in cooking, heating and power generation, and collected from rural areas in Dezhou, Shandong Province, China. The Fugu coal (FG), a typical low-sulphur content high-volatile bituminous coal, was collected from Fugu, Shaanxi Province, China, used as a reference sample and an additive. All received biomass samples and coal were pulverised and dried for 12 h at The additives (Kemiou Chemical Reagent Co., Tianjin) used in this study were analytically pure and mechanically blended with these raw materials with corresponding Ca or K to S molar ratio. In order to mix additives with raw materials adequately every stirring process lasted 1 h, the corresponding mixed ratio is shown in The following process was conducted to fabricate the biomass briquettes with a laboratory compaction apparatus. For each sample, raw materials of 100.0(5) mg were put into a cylindrical mould. The main components of the agricultural residual are cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin  [ The experiments about sulphur release were conducted in a lab-scale tube furnace shown in In each batch, the alundum crucible containing powders sample for (100.(5) mg) or one briquette sample (weighted 100.0(5) mg). Then the alundum crucible was quickly pushed into the constant temperature zone of the reactor. The reactor is preheated to a given reaction temperature. Then the plug was tightened immediately while the air supplied by the cylinder was introduced into the tube at a constant flow rate of The formed ash samples in the alundum crucible after each batch were ground, homogenised and collected for further analyses. XRD (powder X-ray diffraction, Bruker Instrument Co., Ltd Advanced D8) analysis method was introduced to qualitatively analyse the chemical compositions of the formed ashes in order to identify the typical crystalline phase. The XRD analysis used Cu as the radiation source with electricity at 100 mA and voltage at 40 kV. The final graphics model was  However, as shown in  After the briquetting process, the compact structure greatly reduces the oxygen diffusing into the interior of biomass briquettes, which makes internal combustion remaining hypoxic conditions, inhibiting part of the organic sulphur converting to The low calorific value of biomass fuels has always been a great drawback that prevents the large scale utilisation. To improve the calorific value and to promote the fuel quality of biomass briquettes, a good way is to mix the biomass with coal. In this section, the five kinds of biomass powders are mixed with low-sulphur FG coal at a fixed mass ratio of 90:10. Then the mixtures are used to make briquettes, under the same conditions and pressure as mentioned above. The self-Sulphur retention characteristics are studied and discussed.  However, when the temperature reaches It is also necessary to study the sulphur retention from the chemical compositions of the formed ashes. Through the understanding of chemical compositions of the formed ashes, the typical sulphur retention products can be identified. The XRD analysis was conducted to analyse the chemical compositions of the formed ashes. The formed ashes of MS powder mixed with FG coal and MS briquette mixed FG coal burned at both It is shown that the That's due to the silicon is normally presented in the straw plant at a high concentration, as a fundamental element. The domination role for the silicon element is confirmed by XRF results shown in Basically same crystalline compositions are identified in the ashes of powder and briquette at When the reaction temperature reaches As reported, the main reason that results in low sulphur retention ratio in combustion is the thermal decomposition of the conventional sulphur retention product Another compound needs to be focused on is calcium aluminate sulphate It is demonstrated from XRD patterns that there are more sulphates generated mainly because of the briquette compact physical structure. Meanwhile, the addition of FG coal not only promotes the briquette calorific value but also increase the self-sulphur retention abilities. Hence, the discussion in this section unveil the directions to enhance the self-sulphur retention ability, that to enhance the yield of sulphur retention products during combustion. In this section, the influence of reaction temperature on sulphur release ratio of biomass briquettes are studied. MS briquettes (MSB), RS briquettes (RSB) and MS mixed with FG coal briquettes (MS-FGB), RS mixed with FG coal briquettes (RS-FGB) are used as research samples. It can be seen from It is consistent with the previous investigation [ However, when the reaction temperatures are above It should be noticed from Although sulphur could be fixed in the ash as sulphates of alkali metal and alkaline earth metal, and It comes to a conclusion that there is a negative correlation between the molar ratio of Si/K and sulphur retention ratio. As The discussion of previous experimental results revealed that only rely on biomass briquette internal components can hardly reach the goal of ultra-low emission of From previous XRD patterns, it is found that the sulphur retention mainly achieved by alkali metal and alkaline metal especially K and Ca. Five different additives, including potassium-based and calcium-based additives, are performed in this part. The additives are consist of inorganic ones ( In general, as shown in At It should be noticed that the molar ratio for additives 1, 2 and 3 is Ca/S  As can be seen from The XRD pattern in The silicon possessed the priority to react with potassium. Hence, for additive 6 ( In this paper, a batch of biomass briquettes combustion experiments is conducted in the lab-scale tube furnace to investigate the self-sulphur retention characteristics. The results are listed as following: Firstly, the comparison of the self-sulphur retention ratio between five kinds of biomass (cotton straw, CS, rice straw, RS, maize straw, MS, pine sawdust, PS and poplar wood, PW) powders and briquettes at different reaction temperatures are performed. When the reaction temperature is Second, the comparison of the self-sulphur retention ratio between pure biomass briquettes and biomass mixed with Fugu coal (FG) briquettes are carried out. The results shows that adding FG will further increase the sulphur retention ability and promotes the briquette calorific value. Thirdly, the temperature effects on sulphur release ratio of biomass briquettes are studied. Experimental results shows that between Finally, the influence of additives on the sulphur retention ratios for the MS mixed with FG briquette samples are studied. The results unveils that the organic additives showing better sulphur retention abilities. Another obvious phenomena is that the potassium-based additive shows a higher improvement on sulphur retention ability than the calcium-based additive for the greater affinity of sulphur for alkalis than for calcium. It is possible to meet the ultra-low emission of Hence, this study develops insightful understand on biomass self-sulphur retention ability, and its behaviours under the effect of the briquetting process, reaction temperature, added coal or additives, which could use as a guild for biomass briquetting combustion. ☒ The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. ☐The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: This study was supported by the