To help clarify the nature of the iron arsenate–sulphate compounds produced during the autoclave treatment of refractory gold ores and concentrates, systematic synthesis studies were undertaken; in addition to scorodite and Fe(SO4)(OH), two other compounds, designated as Phase 3 and Phase 4, were identified. Whereas Fe(SO4)(OH) is predominantly an orthorhombic compound, Phase 3 can have the same composition but is predominantly the monoclinic polytype, the formation of which is promoted by the solid-solution uptake of As; substitution of As results in a corresponding decrease in the OH required to maintain the charge balance; e.g., Fe[(SO4)0.60(AsO4)0.40]∑1.00[(OH)0.6(H2O)0.4]∑1.00. Phase 4 corresponds to Fe(AsO4)·¾H2O. In 0.4 M Fe(SO4)1.5 (22.3 g/L Fe), 0.41 M (40 g/L) H2SO4, 0.09 M (7 g/L) As(V) solutions, sulphate-containing scorodite was formed at 150–175 °C. Phase 3 precipitated at 175–210 °C, but mixtures of Phase 3 and Fe(SO4)(OH) formed above 210–220 °C. The Fe content of Phase 3 is about 30 mass %, whereas the AsO4 and SO4 contents vary widely and in an inversely proportional manner, reflecting the extensive mutual structural substitution of these anions. At 205 or 215 °C, Fe(SO4)(OH) was precipitated from 0.4 M Fe(SO4)1.5 (22.3 g/L Fe), 0.41 M (40 g/L) H2SO4 solutions containing <0.03 M (2 g/L) As(V). Increasing As(V) concentrations enhance the precipitation of Phase 3, but only Phase 4 was precipitated from solutions containing >0.33 M (25 g/L) As(V). The composition of Phase 4 is nearly constant and it contains <1 mass % SO4. Acid concentrations >0.2 M H2SO4 had little effect on the composition of the precipitates. At 205 °C in 0.41 M (40 g/L) H2SO4, 0.09 M (7 g/L) As(V) media, mixtures of scorodite and Phase 4 precipitated from 0.0–0.1 M Fe(SO4)1.5 (0.0–5.6 g/L Fe) solutions; for Fe(SO4)1.5 concentrations >0.1 M, only Phase 3 formed. To provide a preliminary indication of the solubility of Phase 3 and Phase 4 in tailings impoundments, the various precipitates were leached at room temperature for 40 h in water. The As concentrations dissolved from Phase 3 were consistently <0.1 mg/L, which suggests that Phase 3 might be an acceptable medium for arsenic disposal. In contrast, the soluble As concentrations from Phase 4 were 1–3 mg/L.Refractory gold ores, or the concentrates made from the ores, commonly contain “invisible” gold intimately associated with sulphide or sulpharsenide minerals ( For autoclave systems, the deportment of arsenic and its resistance to solubilization from the autoclave residues are relevant metallurgical and environmental issues that have not been completely resolved. At some, if not most, processing facilities the cyanide-treated autoclave residues are co-disposed with flotation tailings or other residues to a storage facility, such as a tailings impoundment. Thus, the characterization of the different species formed and their solubilities are relevant issues in hydrometallurgical processing. The stability of the As-bearing residues under the conditions that prevail in a particular impoundment is an important environmental issue, and a prerequisite is that the nature of the solid phases be identified. In an initial part of this study, the post-depositional behaviour of arsenic in the autoclave residues from a Canadian gold mine was characterized ( Although the electron-microprobe results in Reagent grade Fe(SO The precipitates from all the experiments were dissolved in HCl using microwave digestion in sealed containers. The resulting solutions were diluted and then analyzed for Fe, As and total S using inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectroscopy with the appropriate reference standards. The precipitates were also subjected to X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) analysis using a Rigaku rotating-anode diffractometer with Cu A preliminary series of experiments was carried out in the 150–225 °C temperature range, using solutions containing 0.3 M Fe(SO Subsequently, a more detailed series of experiments was carried out over the range from 180 to 250 °C, where the minimum of 180 °C was selected to avoid the precipitation of scorodite (  The experiments summarized in Because of the differences in the compositions of some of the corresponding precipitates made in the 1-h and 4-h experiments, a systematic series of experiments was carried out at 205 °C and for various retention times. The synthesis solutions initially contained 0.4 M Fe(SO The effect of the As(V) concentration on the precipitation of the iron arsenate–sulphate compounds was investigated using solutions initially containing 0.4 M Fe(SO The bulk composition of the precipitates also varies as the As(V) concentration of the solution varies ( Similar experiments were also carried out at 215 C, using 4-h retention times for solutions containing 0.4 M Fe(SO The effect of the H Similar experiments were carried out at 205 °C using 0.4 M Fe(SO The effect of the Fe(SO The bulk compositions of the precipitates presented in In the above experiments, increasing the concentration of ferric ions also increased the concentration of total sulphate, because the Fe was added as Fe(SO Other than scorodite, none of the several ferric arsenate compounds known as minerals (e.g., ferrisymplesite, kankite, kaatialaite, tooeleite, bukovskyite, zykaite, etc.) were obtained in the study. For most of the approximately 200 tests that were done, the products consisted of one or more of Fe(SO Fe(SO The Fe(SO Although the thermal decomposition of AsO For the arsenical Fe(SO Although the crystal structure of Fe(SO The thermal decomposition of Phase 3 occurs in three steps ( The average composition of 17 samples of Phase 4 is 26.7 mass % Fe, 68.4 mass % AsO The thermal decomposition of Phase 4 takes place in two well-defined steps, as shown in The stability of As-bearing compounds in storage facilities, such as tailings impoundments, is in the forefront of geochemical concerns about the deportment of As, both in near-term and in long-term scenarios. These concerns are related to immediate or potential environmental issues, and to the consequential need to meet regulatory requirements. Therefore, to provide an initial indication of the solubility of Phase 3 and Phase 4 in impoundment systems, 5-g samples of the various precipitates were stirred for 40 h at room temperature in 150 mL of water. At the end of the leaching period, the slurries were filtered using a 0.2 micron filter membrane and the filtrates were brought to 250 mL prior to ICP analysis. The results of the preliminary dissolution studies are summarized in To help clarify the nature of the iron arsenate–sulphate compounds produced during the autoclave treatment of refractory gold ores and concentrates, systematic studies in the ferric sulphate–sulphuric acid–arsenic pentoxide system were undertaken and two new synthesized compounds, designated as Phase 3 and Phase 4, were characterized. Increasing temperatures resulted in a general increase in the amount of precipitate formed in 0.4 M Fe(SO To provide an initial indication of the solubility of Phase 3 and Phase 4 in tailings impoundments, samples of the various precipitates were leached at room temperature for 40 h in water. Low concentrations of Fe (1–11 mg/L) and SO