This work presents a study on the dissolution of spent commercial Pt/Al2O3 and PtSn/Al2O3 catalysts in aqueous solutions containing fluoride ions and other species, under mild experimental conditions. Despite fluoride being a strong complexing agent, solubilization of samples in the presence of fluoride only was negligible. Addition of a strong inorganic acid led to support solubilization after 2–4 h (60 °C, 400 rpm). This time was reduced to less than 1 h when hydrogen peroxide was added to the solution, irrespective of the presence of the strong mineral acid. The previous oxidation step of the spent catalyst reduced platinum dioxide to metal in high yield by the coke present in the samples. Processing of other catalyst components was possible with the HF+H2O2 binary mixture. Platinum was recovered as a black powder, with minimal generation of a final residue.Materials containing precious metals (gold, silver and platinum) are largely employed in manufacturing of electronic devices, in electrodeposition procedures, for synthesis of fine chemicals and for preparation of catalysts. This wide range of applications is a result of the physical and chemical properties of these metals and their compounds. To prevent any environmental impact, it is necessary to develop proper technologies of recycling used materials containing noble metals It was estimated that about 500.000 troy-ounce of platinum-group metals (PGM) can be recovered from spent exhaust vehicle catalysts in North America Obviously, recycling of precious metal-containing materials is easily justified by economic reasons: (i) worldwide reserves are concentrated in two regions—Siberia and South Africa, and (ii) the market value of these metals and their compounds is very high. Although metal content is normally very low (0.5–1.0 wt.% range), the high cost of a precious metal-containing catalyst is due to the metal cost The literature shows a drastic change in the overall profile of papers published in the field of recycling spent catalysts Despite the great variety in proposed methods, recycling processes found in the literature show a clear evolution with time. At first, spent catalysts were considered an “ore” of the elements present; therefore, pyro- or hydrometallurgical processes were adapted to these samples. These methods are highly energy-consuming. Recycling of catalysts may not be as easy as first imagined, even when the chemical composition of the catalyst (including additives) and the possible contaminants in the industrial process may be determined. Therefore, it is necessary to search for an adequate recycling process to optimize metals recovery and save energy as much as possible At present, research is mainly conducted under mild experimental conditions. In many cases, a preparation step is performed, namely, a reduction procedure or coke burning Other processes are based on a direct solubilization of the catalyst or a selective dissolution of the noble metal. An acid medium (sulfuric acid; The use of new supports requires the development of new processes for these materials. For example, for a Pd/zeolite catalyst, the pH of the basic medium must be always above 9 (NaOH) in order to avoid evolution of HCN due to an ionic Na–H(zeolite) exchange. If the catalyst is supported on carbon, this support (together with coke) may be eliminated after a careful oxidation procedure, after which the ash can be dissolved in a proper medium. This has been done with the Pd/C system Some changes in traditional processes have been proposed to reduce corrosivity of the medium. For example, an AlCl However, the use of fluoride for processing of noble-metal spent catalysts is scarcely mentioned, in contrast to the other halide ions. Fluoride is a very hard base (more than the other halide ions) and forms very stable complexes with cations with noble gas-like configuration (the so-called hard acids). This is generally found in cations with a high charge and a small ionic radius, like Al This work studied the use of fluoride ions for processing of spent noble metal-containing catalysts, taking advantage of its complexing properties. The investigations were conducted under mild experimental conditions, whenever possible, according to recent literature data. Two commercial spent catalysts were employed in this study: a monometallic Pt/Al All samples were oxidized in a furnace under air (400 °C, 1 atm, 5 h) to eliminate coke and water. Loss of mass arising from coke and water elimination was 6–8 wt.% in all samples. Carbon elimination was quantitative, iron was eliminated as Fe The following fluoride chemicals were used: hydrofluoric acid (40 wt.%≈20 M), NaF, KF, NH Al, Fe, In and Pt were determined by atomic absorption spectrophotometry  The data in Another set of experiments with binary mixtures (with and without fluoride ions) was performed: an inorganic acid+hydrogen peroxide. Data in However, dissolution in the HF+H The goal of these experiments was to combine the synergystic effect of the inorganic acid and hydrogen peroxide on solubilization of the catalysts in the presence of fluoride ions. Data are presented in Platinum solubility remained very low, and it was concluded that the remaining platinum was in the final insoluble residue. After isolating this residue it was washed with water at room temperature (2–3×5 mL). The washed solid was treated with excess boiling water (100 °C) and centrifuged. It readily dissolved in aqua regia at room temperature. In fact, it consisted of dark platinum. From temperature-programmed experiments Pt(0) is not soluble in the binary and ternary systems used in this work. Solubilization of residual PtO The aqueous solution from the treatment of the impure platinum with boiling water was evaporated, yielding a white solid in the case of the multimetallic catalyst. This solid was LiF (lithium fluoride), which is not very soluble in water or in HF As shown in Although the ternary mixture (inorganic acid+hydrogen peroxide+fluoride compound) is suitable to recover platinum directly from the spent catalysts, it is clear that the HF+H After an induction time of 5 min there was vigorous effervescence together with a rapid increase in temperature (from room temperature to about 75 °C) in the following 10 min. This result is of great importance since it clearly shows that hydrogen peroxide has a physical effect on the solubilization step: its vigorous decomposition (catalyzed by platinum metal) seems to help grinding of the catalyst. In other words, catalyst grinding, heating and agitation are not necessary to solubilize spent reduced platinum catalysts in the presence of hydrogen peroxide. The time necessary to dissolve the catalyst support was determined by searching for aluminium in the insoluble solid residue after treatment with the binary mixture. The best HF/H After solubilizing aluminium, the solution was left to stand in order to verify the occurrence of precipitation (deposition of a white solid of indefinite composition containing this element). The best HF/H The following discussion is presented for the multicomponent PtSnIn/Al The volume of the solution must be doubled with water to: (i) avoid co-precipitation of NaF together with cryolite (Na Crude cryolite was washed with water (room temperature, 4 mL g The residual solution contains tin and sodium fluoride (only NaF for the monometallic catalyst). Its general properties are: (i) pH: 7.3–7.8, (ii) colorless, (iii) cations present: only sodium and (iv) residue after evaporation: a white crystalline solid. Tin can be separated from NaF by using warm ethanol (40 °C) in which SnF The preliminary coke oxidation step, under the experimental conditions employed in this work, seemed to play a role in the reduction of platinum (Pt(IV)—elemental platinum), which agrees with literature results Dissolution of spent precious metal catalysts in mixtures containing fluoride ions was only feasible when other co-reagents were employed: an acid (which helps support solubility and stability of the solution after dissolution) and a hydrogen peroxide solution. The effect of the latter seems to be of a physical nature: its decomposition is catalyzed by reduced platinum, leading to a vigorous effervescence (O The dissolution process presented in this paper is different from any other in the literature and may be an alternative to ordinary chemical procedures for processing spent catalysts. Besides platinum, other precious metals can likely be recovered in this way. It is also possible to obtain valuable fluoride-containing products, resulting in a low residue generation, which is of great environmental interest. Ana Acácia de Sá Pinheiro, Tatiana Siqueira de Lima, and Paula Constante Campos acknowledge PBIC CNPq/SR-2-UFRJ for a fellowship. We are grateful to CNPq, CAPES, CENPES, FAPERJ and FUJB for financial support.