Response surface methodology was used to investigate the main effects and interactions of sodium chloride (0–2%), microbial transglutaminase preparate (MTG, 0–0.6%) and heating temperature (HT, 70–100°C) on water binding, textural and colour characteristics of pork batter gels cooked to an internal temperature of 70 °C. Lower salt gels showed decreases in hardness, chewiness and elastic properties, as well as significant reduction in the cooking yield and increase of expressible moisture. Salt levels also affected gel colour parameters, with Hunterlab a* and b* values being inversely correlated with salt concentration. MTG addition favourably reduced the cooking loss and increased hardness and chewiness of gels, but was not able to improve these parameters in low-salt products to the same levels as the high-salt products. Heating temperature was found to have relatively minor effect, primarily through its interaction with salt level and in a quadratic term affecting the elasticity and springiness of the gels.Comminuted meat products are complex systems in which muscle salt soluble proteins form heat-induced gels that bind fat and water while providing texture to the product. Formulation of a gel with desirable texture is dependent on many factors including protein concentration, ionic strength, pH, heating temperature and rate, post-mortem history of the muscle and its type ( The processing of comminuted meat products involves chopping meat in the presence of salts and/or phosphates to extract the myofibrillar proteins, which are mainly responsible for the heat-induced development of a functional protein matrix ( In recent years, concern about dietary sodium intake and the development of hypertension has led to reduced salt content in processed meat products. Lowering salt levels in comminuted meat products to reduce dietary sodium intake necessitates stringent process control to avoid failure of the meat batter. In products with higher levels of added water or reduced sodium, the functionality of the traditional myosin heat-set matrix may be limited due to low ionic strength. Reducing salt content decreases protein extraction, water binding and strength of meat gels, in addition to altering palatability attributes. Excessive loss of water resulting in a mushy texture may result from failure to form a gel or from formation of an excessive number of intermolecular protein bonds that decrease the water binding ability ( A variety of approaches to reduce sodium content of meat products has been reported. These include reducing the level of NaCl, substituting of NaCl with other chloride salts or other binding agents, or alteration of processing techniques ( The objective of the study was to determine the effects of salt and MTG levels in conjunction with different heating temperatures, as well as potential interactions between these factors, on the binding, textural and colour characteristics of cooked pork batter gels. Post-rigor pork loins were purchased from a local market. The pork was trimmed of visible fat and connective tissue, then ground in a laboratory grinder through a plate with 3 mm diameter orifices. The ground meat was portioned, vacuum-packaged and frozen at−22 °C until product formulation. The protein concentration of the ground pork was determined by a nitrogen analyser (Leco Corporation, St Joseph, MI). Nitrogen values were converted to protein using a conversion factor of 6.25. The protein content of the meat was 22.39%. The ingredients used in the homogenate formulations included salt (sodium chloride—BDH Inc., Toronto, Canada), sodium tripolyphosphate (Fisher Scientific Company, New Jersey, USA), sodium nitrite and sodium ascorbate (BDH Inc., Toronto, Canada). Microbial transglutaminase MTG (ACTIVA series) was supplied by Ajinomoto (Barentz, Poland) as a mixture containing 99% maltodextrin and 1% microbial transglutaminase, with transglutaminase activity of approx. 100 units/g. MTG concentration is reported in the present study as the concentration of the maltodextrin–MTG mixture. Before processing, the meat was tempered at 4 °C for 24 h prior to use. Meat protein content was adjusted to a constant level of 10% in all formulations. Water and ice (50:50 ratio) were added to the batters to ensure the same protein level. Treatments (300 g each) were prepared by mixing ground meat and non-meat ingredients for 60 s on speed 8 using a Galaxie VIII homogenizer (Osterizer, Canada). The levels of sodium chloride and MTG preparate to be added were determined using a central composite rotatable design as shown in Immediately after homogenate preparation, the batters were stuffed into three cylindrical plastic tubes (30×115 mm). The tubes were closed and allowed to stand overnight in a cold room at 5 °C. The homogenate samples were then heated isothermally to a final internal temperature of 70 °C in a water bath at the various heating temperatures shown in Total moisture was determined in quadruplicate by AOAC method 950.46 B ( Following overnight storage, each chilled gel was removed from the plastic tube, blotted dry with a paper towel and weighed for a cook yield. Overall cook loss was calculated as a percentage based on the raw stuffed weight. Expressible moisture (EM) of gels was determined 24 h after thermal processing following the method of Five 25×15 mm gel cores were vacuum-packed and placed in a single layer in an air-cooler at 4 °C. Purge was determined by reweighing blotted slices following 1 week of storage and expressed as a percentage of the initial gel sample weight. Colour of the meat gels was measured using a Hunter Lab Labscan II spectrocolorimeter (Hunter Associates Laboratory Inc., Reston) and expressed as Hunter Textural characteristics of gels were analyzed according to the texture profile analysis (TPA) method ( Five center cores (25 mm in diameter, 15 mm height) of gel samples were compressed twice to 30% of their original height at a constant cross-head speed of 60 mm/min. The TPA parameters, namely hardness [HD; peak force on first compression (N)], cohesiveness [ratio of the active work done under the second force-displacement curve to that done under the first compression curve (dimensionless)], springiness [SPR; distance the sample recovered after the first compression (mm)], and chewiness [CHW; hardness×cohesiveness×springiness (N*mm)] were computed. In addition to the TPA parameters, the degree of elasticity (DE) and mechanical hysteresis loss (MHL) were also calculated ( Response surface methodology (RSM) was used to study the simultaneous effect of the three experimental variables or factors. Experimental design and statistical analysis were performed using Minitab 12.5 for Windows (Minitab Inc., State College, PA). Five levels of each factor were chosen based on the central composite design principle ( The following second-order polynomial equation of function The pH values of the meat gels ranged from 6.08 to 6.14 (average pH of 6.12). In general, none of the experimental factors had any effect on pH of the cooked products. A small linear increase occurred in pH with increasing salt content but the magnitude of the change (0.05–0.08 units) was not of significant importance. Moisture levels varied from 81.06 to 87.88%. The moisture content in the gels was directly proportional to the salt content. In all formulations, the meat protein content was held constant, indicating that the increase in overall moisture content as a function of added salt was the result of higher water binding capacity of the meat homogenates under higher salt conditions. Higher ionic strength has been reported to enhance electrostatic repulsions and to cause a loosening of the myofibrillar structure so that there is more space for water to be trapped ( Analysis of variance indicated that among the regression models for the binding properties of gels processed with varying levels of salt and MTG addition at different heating temperature, only the model for cooking loss was highly significant ( Varying salt levels had an appreciable inverse effect on the cooking loss, the linear component of the regression being highly significant ( The significant effect of salt concentration on binding characteristics in this study supports the findings of a number of authors that binding properties are strongly influenced by sodium chloride content in processed muscle foods. An increase in ionic strength, and hence in quantity of extracted proteins, causes an increase in the potential interactions of polypeptide chains during heating. As a result, a much more stable gel matrix is formed which leads to a smaller release of water and fat, thus improving binding properties of meat emulsions (  However, inverse relationship between fat and water binding properties and the percentage of added salt found in the present study has not been detected in all cases ( The presence of increasing levels of MTG significantly ( Heating temperature did not produce any significant effect on binding properties. Furthermore, the absence of any interaction effects on cooking loss indicates that the influence exerted by each variable was not affected by the others. Disparate results are reported in the literature with respect to the effect of heating conditions on batter stability and water holding capacity. It has been suggested that a slow heating rate may allow more favourable protein–protein interactions to occur, thus producing a stronger, better-ordered three-dimensional gel ( The colour attributes of cooked meat products arise mainly from the pigmentation of the meat and from the variations of pigment conversion rates occurring on cooking. However, when the myoglobin content is kept constant, the colour of meat products is mostly influenced by fat content, added water and processing conditions. Analysis of variance indicated that in our study, the regression model for yellowness was highly significant ( Salt content was the only factor that produced a highly significant effect ( Salt content was shown to be a significant factor in the regression model for MTG addition had no significant influence on colour parameters of experimental gels. Previous reports on the effect of transglutaminase addition on colour have been contradictory. Addition of pig plasma TG in the 0–1% range did not produce significant differences in colour of low-salt chicken meat balls ( As with binding parameters, heating temperature had no significant effect on Analysis of variance indicated that the regression models developed for hardness, springiness, DE, MHL and chewiness were all significant ( Significant linear and quadratic effects were observed for salt and MTG concentration on hardness ( Springiness and both parameters describing the elastic properties of the gels (DE and MHL) showed generally similar trends of dependence on the variables studied ( Conflicting reports are found in the literature on the effects of salt concentration on texture of comminuted meat products. A number of authors have found higher-salt comminuted products to be tougher than lower-salt ones. On the other hand, The effect of transglutaminase on the texture is well documented for raw (not cooked), restructured meats ( As indicated earlier, texture depends on structure and integrity of the protein matrix formed during cooking. Salt performs an important function in the production of comminuted meat products by solubilizing muscle proteins. The dissolved proteins assist in binding meat, moisture and fat in the formation of desirable gel texture. Thus, salt contributes to the formation of a stable emulsion which upon heating results in a product with acceptable quality characteristics. In our study, salt reduction adversely affected textural characteristics and this effect was not altered by the presence of increased levels of MTG addition. Of the variables analyzed, heating temperature was the one that least affected the TPA parameters of meat gels. Heating temperature contributed to the regression model for chewiness through its interaction with salt concentration, and exhibited an influence on elastic characteristics of gels through positive quadratic terms for springiness ( Many researchers have analysed the effects of heating regimes on textural properties both of gels made from individual salt-soluble proteins and of complex muscle foods such as frankfurters and bologna. As noted with respect to batter stability, the effect of heating rate on texture of comminuted meat systems may be related to the fact that a slower heating rate allows more time for proteins to unfold, providing more favourable conditions for protein interactions and thus making the gel network firmer than gels formed at higher heating rates ( The results of this research indicate that salt is critical in ensuring good binding and textural characteristics of cooked pork batter gels. Low-salt batters produced gels that were less hard and chewy and had poorer binding properties than gels produced with higher salt. Although addition of microbial transglutaminase had beneficial effects on reducing cook loss and increasing hardness and chewiness, the detrimental effects of salt reduction on these properties were not overcome by the addition of microbial transglutaminase at the levels studied. Heating temperature had little effect on binding and textural properties although it was found that heating at higher temperature diminished effects of salt level on springiness and elastic properties of meat gels.