In this study, two fabrics namely cotton/cotton woven fabric having cotton yarn in both warp and weft direction; and cotton/bamboo woven fabric with cotton yarn (warp direction) and bamboo yarn (weft direction) were selected. Compression moulding method has been used to fabricate cotton/cotton and cotton/bamboo woven fabric reinforced composites with epoxy resin as a matrix material. The mechanical properties of cotton/cotton and cotton/bamboo reinforced composites had been compared under five different fiber loading conditions (30, 35, 40, 45 and 50wt.%) and the fractured morphology was analyzed using scanning electron microscope. It was noted that cotton/bamboo reinforced composite with 45wt.% fiber loading exhibited the best mechanical properties namely tensile, flexural, impact, compression, and inter laminar shear stress (ILSS), due to its weft direction of bamboo yarn.Polymer composite material (PMC) is broadly used in various industrial applications as a result of its advanced properties and has occupied every functional area namely household items, construction, automotive industries and aerospace The chopped or random oriented fabrics exhibited lower mechanical properties owing to discontinuous and randomly oriented in nature Cotton/cotton and corresponding hybrid reinforced composite laminate were selected in this study. Bamboo is woven in weft direction along with cotton in warp direction inside cotton/bamboo fabric in order to minimize the cost because of higher yarn density. This study deals with the investigation effect of different wt.% on the mechanical properties namely flexural, tensile, impact and compressive strength on both cotton/cotton and cotton/bamboo reinforced laminates. LY556 (Bisphenol A) epoxy and HY951 (Triethylenetetramine) hardener with a mixing ratio of 10:1 were used as a matrix material. It is a two component system with low viscosity for curing at room temperature, which was supplied by Covai Seenu & Company, Coimbatore District, India. The composite was fabricated using compression moulding process and in this process, a steel mould of dimensions 270 The tensile properties of cotton/cotton and cotton/bamboo composites were tested according to ASTM D3039 standard Computer controlled KALPAK universal testing machine tested all the flexural properties of test specimens using ASTM D 790-03 standard The Izod impact testing machine has been used to test the impact properties of all specimens in accordance with ASTM D256-05 standard ILSS estimated the interfacial adhesion strength of the composite and it was determined by using short beam shear testing machine according to ASTM D2344-16 standard The test was performed in accordance with ASTM D 695-02 standard The micro-structural failures of the tensile, impact and flexural fracture like fiber matrix debonding, fiber pullout and some other interfacial properties such as voids, cracks and fiber break of cotton/cotton and cotton/bamboo composites had been analyzed using VEGA BTE SCAN (SEM). The surface images were captured at an accelerating voltage range of 10−20 The development of textile material mainly depends upon the physical and mechanical properties of yarn and fabric. The warp, weft linear density of the woven fabric and types of weave pattern depend on fiber and spinning yarn properties. The effect of weaving conditions relies on weft up force, weaving speed, warp insertion rate, way of shed opening, tension in warp and weft and number of threads used in reed The type of wave is the major factor that influences warp strength. Addition of bamboo along weft direction enhances the strength of fabrics along weft direction The tensile strength of plain woven fabric reinforced composites mainly relies on various factors namely fiber orientation, length of fiber, strength, fiber content, fillers, bonding between fiber and matrix and weave style Tensile strength of cotton/cotton composite records increase with further increase in wt.% of fiber loading and reaches a maximum of 76.92 SEM micrograph is used to analyze the fracture surface of cotton/cotton and cotton/bamboo tensile tested specimen. A bonding between fiber/matrix has vital role in identifying properties of composite laminates and high strength is achieved by maximum usage of fiber and adequate stress transfer between fiber and matrix. SEM image of tensile fracture surface of cotton/cotton and cotton/bamboo is shown in The three-point flexural test analyses the bending nature of the composite. The bending strength of composite laminate is mainly due to sequence of compression and shear strength. In plain weaving pattern, the effect of cotton yarn (warp direction) and bamboo yarn (weft direction) constitutes an interlocking structure. The result indicates that yarns in warp and weft direction are noted with higher bending load capacity ( The capability of material to resist fracture under the sudden applied load at same velocity (or) speed is called impact strength. The impact properties of laminated composites are based on the factors like fracture toughness, fiber pull out on friction force, inter laminar and interfacial strength between fiber and matrix The strength and structure of individual fiber plays a key role in the strength of laminates and bamboo yarn has high strength compared to cotton yarn. Hence, it is observed that impact strength is owing to properties of the individual fiber used during hybridization in the polymer matrix system rather than using other parameter. The surface voids, crack fiber pullout and poor bonding that exist between fiber and matrix are the main causes of low impact strength of composite material. The SEM fracture surface of impact specimen is shown in ILSS is the essential property of the material which is used in large number of engineering applications. The short beam shear test was used to determine the ILSS of cotton/cotton and cotton/ bamboo composite with various fiber loading conduction.  In this present study, cotton/cotton and cotton/bamboo composite laminates were fabricated successfully with increase in fabric loading content (wt.%). The effect of mechanical properties on different fiber loading was investigated. The following conclusions are arrived: Cotton/cotton fabric has 24 % difference in tensile strength along warp and weft direction but cotton/bamboo fabric has much lower difference of about 15 % only. Effect of weaving pattern and selection of yarn in proper direct ion enhances the mechanical properties of composite material. Cotton/bamboo composite exhibits enhanced mechanical properties at 45 Inter laminar shear stress of cotton/cotton and cotton/bamboo composites enhances with increases in fiber loading upto the critical point of 45 The author (s) declares no conflict of interest for publishing this manuscript. The authors are very much grateful to acknowledge the support provided by DST-FIST, Government of India (SR/FST/College -235/2014) for carrying out this research work.