Gang saw is widely used in the dimension stone industry and stone cutting factories. One of the important factors in evaluating the efficiency of a machine is the electrical current consumed by the gang saw. Therefore, the evaluation of the electrical current consumed by the gang saw and study of the effective parameters are necessary in the rock cutting process. In the present research, considering the physical and mechanical properties of rock, including the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), Mohs hardness (Mh), Schimazek’s F-abrasiveness factors (SF-a) and Young’s modulus (YM), it was attempted to study and evaluate the electrical current consumed by the gang saw using soft computing techniques. Thus, the Differential Evolution (DE) algorithm and Self-Organizing Map (SOM) algorithm were used as two intelligent techniques in this study. Results obtained from these studies showed that the DE algorithm could accurately classify 12 carbonate rocks under study into three groups, including travertine rocks sample with the average electrical current of 83.25 (A), crystal rocks sample with the average electrical current of 90 (A) and marble rocks sample with the average electrical current of 94 (A). Due to more details of output and results of the DE algorithm, it can be concluded that this algorithm has superiority over the SOM technique because it provides higher performance capacity in evaluating and classifying carbonate dimension stone samples in terms of the electrical current consumed by the machine and its physical and mechanical properties.Nowadays, rock cutting tools are significantly used in the dimension stone quarries and dimension stone processing factories. The complete knowledge of the cutting process and the performance of gang saw can enhance the efficiency and quality of the manufactured product. The comprehensive understanding of the cutting machines’ performance can boost the productivity and quality of dimension stones. The final cost and product quality are important factors in this arena. Overall, the cost of a dimension stone plaque in stone cutting industries is highly influenced by factors such as tools wear and energy consumption Despite the important the classical and experimental methods, the soft computing techniques serve a key role to solve complex and uncertain problems, which have received attention recently in the field of rock mechanics. The wear rate of diamond wire saw wasv evaluated by Mikaeil et al. based upon the some major dimension stone properties. They obtained a logical relationship between rock characteristics and wire rate using the harmony search algorithm As mentioned, in the past research works, researchers often had been trying to establish reasonable relationships between some parameters and production rate based on the classical and experimental methods. On the other hand, cutting processes are traditionally classified as one of the issues dealing with uncertainty in quarries and laboratory studies, especially in the preparation of cylindrical specimens from stone samples and determination of physical and mechanical properties and the cutting phase. The literature shows that the hard (conventional) computing approaches are suitable for dealing with systems with a precise and certainty value, while the soft computing techniques are able to tackle unpredicted and uncertain conditions in different kinds of industrial, economic and technological problems compared to the mathematical and deterministic methods. In fact, the soft computing approaches have been providing a more widely frame compared to the conventional computing, contributing to very promising results. It is worth noting that an additional advantage of the soft computing approaches is striking results in modeling non-linear functions in comparison to the hard computing techniques. Accordingly and given the unreliability of laboratory tests, two stochastic techniques, namely differential evolution (DE) and self-organizing map (SOM) algorithms are used for the clustering in order to improve the analysis of the laboratory results. Although in previous research works, there are some studies based on soft computing techniques, this kind of analysis was not used in previous studies for gang saws performance evaluation in carbonate rock cutting process based on conditions of this study such as the kind of cutting machine and rock properties. In fact, in this study by contribution of two algorithms as novel approaches and the some physical and mechanical properties of the rock are considered to evaluate to study and evaluate the electrical current in the carbonate rocks’ cutting process. Field studies were conducted in one of the dimension stone processing factories in Mahalat city, Iran. For this reason, the blocks extracted from 12 quarries were transferred to a factory to be used for conducting studies. Each rock sample under study was cut using the saw cutting machine with diamond blades under the same operational conditions. According to the fracture theory of brittle materials indentation, The locations and names of the studied quarries and electrical current during cutting process are given in For laboratory tests, sample blocks were collected from the studied quarries. A sample of blocks prepared for conducting experimental studies is shown in Standard tests were done to measure four major physical and mechanical properties of rock such as the Schmiazek abrasivity factor (SF-a), Uniaxial Compressive Strength (UCS), Mohs Hardness (MH) and Young’s Modulus (YM). Abrasiveness influences the wear of sawing tools. Abrasiveness is mainly affected by various factors such as mineral composition, the hardness of mineral constituents and grain size, grain shape and grain angularity Thin microscopic sections were studied to determine the grains’ sizes and amount of quartz in the rock samples under study. A sample of thin microscopic section for Qorveh crystal (A11) is shown in The results of laboratory studies to determine this index are given in Uniaxial compressive strength is considered as a significant mechanical element present in the engineering property of rock. Rock material strength is a very important parameter used in numerous systems of rock mass classification Hardness means the rock’s resistance to fracture or plastic deformation because of scratching and cracking from circular diamond saw. The factors influencing the rock hardness include the cohesion forces, the hardness of the constitutive minerals, homogeneity, and the water content of rock. Hardness is a good index of all the above mentioned elements of the rock material. One of the most common and useful indices for evaluating the hardness of a rock is the Mohs hardness scale. This index was chosen as a hardness index in the clustering system. The mean hardness per dimension stone is computed on the basis of the contained minerals’ hardness using the following Eq. Considering to the rock behavior during the fracture process, especially in sawing, how rocks reach the failure point has a great effect on the sawability. Young’s modulus is the best scale for the rock elasticity is based on ISRM suggested methods One of the most dynamic computing branches is the soft computing. Soft computing includes a wide spectrum of methodologies based on biological sciences, neural systems structures, motions, and collective and social behaviors of the biological species. In fact, soft computing analyzes scientific and complex problems in the engineering world using natural systems 1: Initialization of Population 2: Mutation 3: Crossover 4: Selection 5: This loop repeats until the stop conditions are achieved such as the desired precision level and maximum iteration. In the first step, DE is started from an initial set of solutions called the initial population produced by Eq. In the mutation section, the search space is expanded and a mutant solution vector In the next step, the creation of the trial vector (U In the selection step, the next generation is selected between the trail vector and the corresponding target vector. Finally, it continues to reach the most optimized response. DE algorithm is used in many engineering and industrial designs due to its high compatibility and flexibility in different complex problems. For the optimal design of water distribution networks, meta-heuristic algorithms were used by Suribabu. He studied and investigated DE algorithm in comparison with other algorithms and the obtained results showed higher superiority in terms of optimal design of water distribution networks Engineers like neurophysiologists have a significant contribution in developing neural networks. Due to the complex biological structure of brain in the data and concept analysis and process, brain is used as a pattern for creating a complete system and different neural computing techniques. Artificial neural networks have been significantly developed in recent years both in theoretical and practical researches, including image processing, signal processing, and pattern recognition in control systems In the algorithm optimization process, the winner neuron is selected based on the similarity criterion which is usually the Euclidean distance, then the weight of the winner neuron is adjusted based on Kohonen rule, i.e. the input data of each node in the input layer is attached to the competition layer from every x This process is repeated until it reaches a special criterion. For example, certain numbers of iterations could be one stop criterion. The weight vector of the excited neuron is updated. Updating process of the algorithm is shown in the Eq. If t as the number of times of learning is equal to the learning number T, the learning process stops and completes the independent survey, otherwise this loop repeats and returns to Eq. One of the most influential applications of DE algorithm is in the area of data mining for optimizing the objective function’s performance process As mentioned, k-means algorithm is considered as an objective function for DE optimization algorithm. In fact, although the Lloyd algorithm may be highly used in simple data sets, there are some drawbacks, including the determining of the precise and accurate Euclidean distance in large or complex data sets. Hence, DE algorithm as a meta-heuristic algorithm can be a reliable technique for the training and optimization k-means algorithm. Therefore, considering the nature of complex problems and big datasets and also its full compliance with DE algorithm concepts, after the analysis, a precise and accurate clustering is obtained. The accurate determination of the algorithm’s control parameters has a significant role in the convergence process and increases the precision level of optimization responses. Thus, control parameters for DE algorithm were adjusted and considered based on the previous studies using the certified experts’ opinions, as seen in After the adjustment of control parameters, data were evaluated and analyzed in 2, 3, 4 and 5 classes and the most appropriate and exact optimization process was obtained for the triplet class. The distance of each criterion from the center of clusters is shown according to According to the results obtained from the Euclidean distance of each criterion under evaluation in this analysis from the center of clusters in It is worth mentioning that the best cost is the fitness value of objective function and it is a non-dimensional term. As mentioned before, control parameters have a key role in the algorithms’ convergence process leading to the determination of more precise and proper responses. In fact, the selection and adjustment of these parameters have an experimental process and depend on some issues i.e. the number of studied samples, the complexity of the problem and the suggestions of experienced experts, and previous studies. Considering the opinions of experts and previous studies After adjusting control parameters and inserting data under study to perform clustering in MATLAB software, data are analyzed for doublet, triplet and quartet classes which in this optimization process based on the clustering by the SOM algorithm, the most appropriate clustering belongs to the triplet class. In Two soft computing techniques including the DE and SOM algorithms were used to investigate the performance of the gang saw and effective parameters on cutting. In addition, the models with the four physical and mechanical properties of 12 carbonate rocks, including the UCS, Mh, SF-a and YM were studied. The results obtained by using two clustering techniques are shown in In this section, for validating the results of modellings, a comparison is made among the DE clustering, SOM clustering and the measured average electrical current of the gang saw. The result of comparison is shown in Furthermore, the following remarks can be evaluated and concluded: With respect to In Marble and Travertine classes with the average electrical current of 94 and 83.25 (A), respectively. SF-a is the most effective factor, which contributes greatly to the values of electrical current in gang saws. Also, YM plays a key role in the values of electrical current in Crystal class. It's worth mentioning that the exact amount of these results demonstrated in DE algorithm is a reliable system modeling technique for evaluating electrical current with highly acceptable degrees of accuracy and robustness (with the accuracy rate of 100%). While, the results of the SOM algorithm describes its low capability in the evaluation of electrical current (with the accuracy rate of 83.33%). The results of this study can be very useful and effective for owners of rock industry and designers for a more reliable planning and design based upon the electrical current. Finally, it can be concluded that due to the multiplicity of factors affecting the cutting process and the performance of gang saw, these two soft computing techniques can be applied for the evaluation of gang saw performance. The electrical current of gang saws is one of the important costly factors in the rock cutting industries. One of effective strategies for reducing costs and increasing the income obtained from sales is to increase the efficiency and reduce the amount of electrical current by the rock cutting machines. The first step in this arena is to identify the factors influencing the amount of electrical current by the cutting machine and measure this amount during the process of different dimension stones. The studies conducted in this research attempted to address the clustering of dimensional stones from the perspective of the amount of electrical current consumed by the gang saw using the soft computing and considering the physical and mechanical properties, including the UCS, Mh, SF-a and YM. Results obtained from studies after adjusting control parameters and inserting data relating to 12 carbonate rock samples in MATLAB software showed that samples were accurately classified into three classes with the low, average and high electrical current amounts. Consequently, it is concluded that the DE algorithm can accurately evaluate and classify carbonate rock samples from the electrical current perspective due to having physical and mechanical properties. Considering the full compliance of clustering results with the measured electrical current, this study demonstrates that the DE and SOM algorithms are applicable for evaluation of electrical current; however, DE algorithm can be better applied based on higher performance capacity. Future studies must focus on comparing the DE and SOM clustering processes to other meta-heuristic algorithms within the framework of this application, including the Genetic algorithm (GA), Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) algorithm and machine-learning approaches such as support vector machines (SVM). We would like to express our deepest thanks to Professor Mahdi Ghaem for his excellent advice. We are also grateful to anonymous reviewers for their advices and contributions to this paper.