Refractory, sulfidic tailings from gold mining operations may be biooxidized to increase the amount of gold recoverable by cyanide extraction. Tailings containing thiocyanate must be pretreated to remove thiocyanate prior to biooxidation due to its toxicity to microorganisms that oxidize sulfide minerals. Thiocyanate in tailings at Minacalpa, Peru, was only partially extractable with water or with dilute sulfuric acid. The thiocyanate also was not completely biodegradable at neutral pH. Consequently, tailings remained inhibitory toward biooxidation after these treatments, releasing thiocyanate into bioleach solutions. The non-extractable form of thiocyanate in Minacalpa tailings was probably copper thiocyanate. A novel approach was developed to remove this thiocyanate using ferric sulfate solution. Tailings were detoxified by washing with either reagent ferric sulfate or solutions derived from biooxidation of pyrite. Detoxified tailings, i.e., those thoroughly washed with ferric sulfate solution, were biooxidized, exhibiting a fairly linear relationship between sulfide-S oxidation and cyanide gold recovery. A process for biooxidation of Minacalpa tailings would involve an initial washing step with biooxidation solutions followed by stirred tank biooxidation or agglomeration of detoxified tailings onto support rock and biooxidation in heaps.Biooxidation of refractory gold ores and concentrates is practiced commercially in stirred tank reactors and in constructed heaps ( Minera Aurifera Calpa S.A. (Minacalpa) operates an underground gold mine and treatment plant in the Department of Arequipa in southern Peru. The ore contains sulfides or mixed oxides and sulfides. Processing comprises crushing, ball milling, flotation, discard of flotation tailings, regrinding of concentrates, and cyanide leaching of the reground concentrates for gold recovery. The plant is currently (June, 2005) operating at 30% capacity treating 250 to 300 t/d of ore grading 4.80 to 5.25 g/t gold, giving a concentrate treatment rate of 80 to 90 t/d at a grade of 18.25 to 33 g/t gold. Tailings from the Minacalpa gold plant contain appreciable concentrations of refractory gold. These tailings have been deposited in dams over several years and now form a resource that may be economically exploited. Included at this site are 1.2 million tons of old flotation tails assaying 3.2 g/t of gold and 380,000 t of concentrate leach tails assaying 7.3 g/t of gold. This amounts to 205,000 ounces of contained gold. Gold in the tailings is intimately associated with pyrite and is highly refractory to cyanidation. Gold extraction from unoxidized material is only about 40%. Biooxidation is a potential treatment option for these tailings for oxidizing pyrite and making the gold available for subsequent extraction with cyanide. Because the material has been previously cyanided, significant thiocyanate contamination is present and must be removed prior to biooxidation. Thiocyanate is formed by the reaction of reduced sulfur compounds with cyanide and is a primary mechanism of cyanide consumption during cyanidation of sulfidic gold ores ( This paper describes the occurrence of thiocyanate in Minacalpa tailings in a form not fully removed by washing with water or with dilute sulfuric acid or by biodegradation. This laboratory study was done to determine how thiocyanate may be removed from Minacalpa tailings and the amenability of the “detoxified” tailings to biooxidation. Preliminary engineering work was undertaken to develop a conceptual process design. Minacalpa provided two samples of dry tailings. Concentrate leach tails, referred to as “A” tailings, were gray-colored and contained 21.9% sulfide-S and 4.95 ppm gold. Most of the work was done with a blend of concentrate leach tails and flotation leach tails, referred to as “B” tailings ( Ten g of tailings were added to 50 mL plastic centrifuge tubes along with various amounts of deionized water, 1 N sulfuric acid, or 0.2 M ferric sulfate in 1 N sulfuric acid. Tubes were gently shaken at room temperature (20 to 25 °C) for periods of time ranging from 1 min to 3 h. After shaking the tubes were centrifuged at 2000 r.p.m. for 5 min. Thiocyanate in the supernatant solution was analyzed colorimetrically with ferric nitrate reagent ( A bacterial isolate tentatively identified as Biooxidation of detoxified tailings was done in 15 wt.% slurries in MKM culture medium in Erlenmeyer flasks. MKM medium contained 0.4 g (NH Column tests were done with “B” tailings (400 g) agglomerated with 1) 100 mL of 5 N sulfuric acid and 2000 g coarse Minacalpa ore (6.35 Gold extraction from recovered tailings was carried out for 24 h at 40% solids in agitated Erlenmeyer flasks at room temperature. NaCN concentrations were maintained at 1 to 2 g/L and the pH was maintained at 10.5 to 11.0 with lime. The measured thiocyanate concentration of the tailings depended on the method of extraction ( These results indicate washing with water or dilute acid would be inadequate to detoxify these tailings; biooxidation solution, essentially acidic ferric sulfate solution, would dissolve additional thiocyanate and poison the microorganisms. This was confirmed by extraction tests showing that tailings could be detoxified after extensive washing with 0.2 M ferric sulfate in 0.1 N sulfuric acid. The washed tailings were added to MKM medium (5% w/v), inoculated with pyrite-oxidizing bacteria, and supported subsequent microbial growth and pyrite oxidation. Tailings washed less extensively or with only water or sulfuric acid did not support biooxidation. In these latter cases, thiocyanate was detected in solution at concentrations (3.6 to 13.5 mg/L) sufficient to inhibit biooxidation. The water-insoluble form of thiocyanate in Minacalpa tailings was not conclusively identified but is probably copper thiocyanate (CuSCN). This assumption is supported by several observations. Firstly, reagent CuSCN was virtually insoluble in 0.1% w/v suspensions prepared in deionized water or in 0.02 N sulfuric acid. Conversely, CuSCN was completely soluble in ferric sulfate solution. These results, together with the thiocyanate solubility characteristics of the tailings ( Thiocyanate was biodegraded in slurries of “A” tailings at pH 6.5 in shake flasks inoculated with a culture of neutral pH thiocyanate-degrading bacteria ( However, the solids recovered from these tests after all measurable thiocyanate in solution had disappeared still contained 385 mg/kg (“B”) to 838 mg/kg (“A”) thiocyanate as determined by ferric sulfate extraction. These tailings were not able to be biooxidized in a 20% slurry at pH 2.0 inoculated with pyrite-oxidizing microorganisms. In summary, water soluble thiocyanate leached from the tailings was biodegradable at neutral pH but the water-insoluble form of thiocyanate in the tailings was not biodegraded and subsequently prevented biooxidation of sulfides in the tailings. Tests also were performed with wet tailings in trays to determine if in-place biodegradation of thiocyanate in tailings heaps may be feasible. After 33 days there was no evidence of biodegradation; thiocyanate concentrations in the tailings determined by ferric sulfate extraction remained unchanged. It is possible that poor oxygen transfer into the wet, paste-like tailings retarded aerobic thiocyanate biodegradation. Results of the biodegradation tests indicate neither slurry nor in-place biodegradation processes are feasible for completely removing thiocyanate from Minacalpa tailings. The water insoluble form of thiocyanate was not biodegraded at neutral pH and was subsequently mobilized when the tailings were placed under conditions for the growth of pyrite-oxidizing microorganisms. “B” tailings (600 g) were washed twice with reagent ferric sulfate solution (0.2 M ferric sulfate in 0.1 N sulfuric acid) to reduce the thiocyanate concentration in the tailings from 641 to 5.3 mg/kg. Recovery of tailings was 563 g representing 6.2% weight loss. The washed tailings contained significantly less copper than the starting material ( These tests were done to establish the relationship between sulfide biooxidation and cyanide gold extraction in Minacalpa tailings. There was a lag of about 20 days before significant microbial growth and iron oxidation began in shake flasks containing the detoxified tailings. This lag is attributed to the small amount of residual thiocyanate present in the tailings. Thereafter, sulfide-S biooxidation proceeded at about 1.1%/d ( Gold extraction was about 40% from unoxidized tailings and increased to a maximum of 87% after 85% sulfide-S biooxidation ( The slow rate of biooxidation was due to the comparatively coarse particle size of the tailings (24.2% A limited number of shake flask biooxidation tests also were done with detoxified “A” tailings. The results were similar to “B” tailings, showing a fairly linear relationship between sulfide-S biooxidation and cyanide gold extraction ( The results of the shake flask tests indicate that detoxified Minacalpa tailings can be nearly completely biooxidized resulting in nearly complete liberation of gold. Biooxidation time could be shortened by regrinding the tailings and by operation at higher temperature. Additional tests with continuous stirred tank reactors (CSTRs) are required in order to more accurately predict biooxidation kinetics by such a process. Minacalpa tailings also might be biooxidized in a heap configuration following agglomeration of tailings onto coarse ore or support rock ( Thiocyanate was extracted from the agglomerates by circulation of 125 mL of biooxidation solution through the column for 20 h. The biooxidation solution was produced by a culture of iron- and sulfur-oxidizing microorganisms grown on pyrite. The solution had a pH 1.2, an Eh of 770 mV (SHE), and contained 60 g/L dissolved Fe. This treatment extracted 91% of thiocyanate in the tailings based on the removal of 595 mg/kg being 100% ( Thiocyanate extraction from the tailings was not quite complete; a concentration of 24 mg/L thiocyanate was present in the initial recirculating leach solution. This concentration was inhibitory to sulfide biooxidation. However, the concentration of thiocyanate declined slowly over the following weeks ( The initial solution redox potential slowly declined from 770 to about 635 mV where it stabilized for several days. After solution thiocyanate concentrations declined to near zero, the redox potential increased, reflecting microbial iron oxidation in the column ( The slow decline in thiocyanate concentrations is attributed to chemical oxidation of thiocyanate via an autoreduction reaction that occurs in solutions containing ferric ions ( Two additional column tests were set up with a lower ratio of tailings to ore (1 These column tests showed biooxidation solution could be used to remove thiocyanate from tailings agglomerated onto coarse ore. Additional test work is required to optimize the thiocyanate removal process in this configuration. Although coarse ore is a potential support material for agglomeration with tailings, biooxidation of sulfides in the ore would generate considerable additional acid and dissolved iron that must be treated prior to disposal. Agglomeration of tailings with inexpensive and abundant river rock located near the mine would reduce neutralization costs. Thiocyanate was removed from the agglomerates by recirculating aliquots of acidic ferric sulfate solution totaling 1.15 L through the columns over a time period of several days. The leachate was passed through 2.0 g activated carbon particles in small plastic columns (1.5 About 11% of gold was lost from the tailings during thiocyanate extraction, similar to the results with tailings that were detoxified prior to shake flask tests. This gold, based on fire assay of the activated carbon, amounted to a loss of 0.52 to 0.54 ppm from the original 4.66 ppm. Following thiocyanate extraction, columns were inoculated with 100 mL of biooxidation solution along with 200 mL of MKM medium. Initially, leachates contained 8 to 10 mg/L thiocyanate. A lag period of about 10 days ensued before leachate redox potentials and dissolved iron concentrations began to increase indicating biooxidation of the sulfides. The solution Eh increased to 850 mV after 30 days and remained between 850 and 900 mV for the duration of the tests. Dissolved iron increased to about 40 g/L after 70 days and remained fairly stable for the remainder of the tests. Agglomerates in the columns were allowed to biooxidize at room temperature for 84 days (column 1) to 127 days (column 2). Following biooxidation, the entire content of the columns was shaken in water to separate the oxidized tailings from support rock. Tailings were 53% to 62% biooxidized and cyanide gold extraction was 66.5% to 76% ( Steps in a process for treatment of Minacalpa tailings for gold recovery may first involve feed reclamation from existing tailings dams using high pressure water sprays consisting of biooxidation solution. The tailings slurry would be sent to an attrition tank and would be agitated with the biooxidation solution to remove thiocyanate. Dewatering would be used to separate the solution phase and the washed tailings. Because some gold would be dissolved during this process, the solution phase would be sent through carbon adsorption, followed by neutralization and either disposal or water recycle to the process. Biooxidation of detoxified tailings could be done in stirred tank reactors or in heaps. The latter would be performed by agglomeration of tailings onto support rock. In either case, regrinding of the tailings may be desirable to improve biooxidation kinetics. Following biooxidation, fines would be separated from biooxidation solution or support rock, neutralized with lime slurry, and transferred to the existing gold plant for leaching in cyanide. Biooxidation solution would be used to reclaim additional tailings. Minacalpa tailings are amenable to biooxidation if first treated to remove thiocyanate. Thiocyanate cannot be completely extracted with water or acid; ferric sulfate is required for near complete extraction and detoxification. Reagent ferric sulfate or biooxidation solutions both were effective in detoxifying tailings. Once detoxified, tailings were biooxidized, and exhibited a roughly 1 This approach may be useful in treating thiocyanate-contaminated refractory gold tailings at other mines as a detoxification step prior to biooxidation. However not all tailings behave as those at Minacalpa. Tailings samples from two other gold mines showed water extracted as much thiocyanate as ferric sulfate solution. It is believed the difference is due to the presence of copper, producing a water insoluble copper thiocyanate. Nonetheless, if a biooxidation process is contemplated for tailings containing thiocyanate, it is important to determine if a simple water or acid wash will remove all the thiocyanate or if additional thiocyanate is mobilized by biooxidation solutions. We thank Doug Halbe for his valuable discussions and encouragement. This work was presented at the 6th International Gold Symposium in Lima, Peru in May, 2004 and is dedicated to the memory of Ernesto Calmet.