Many hydrometallurgical processes produce large amounts of acid waste. For example, copper SX/EW process plants typically bleed a concentrated sulphuric acid stream (electrolyte) from their tank house in order to limit the build up of impurities in the electrowinning stage. A process based on solvent extraction, to selectively recover up to 90% of the sulphuric acid from electrolyte bleed streams, has been developed. This is recovered as a pure aqueous acid stream at a concentration of up to 130 g/L that can be recycled back into the tank house circuit thus reducing both neutralisation and acid make up costs. The acid concentration of the electrolyte is reduced from 180 g/L to as low as 18 g/L. The extraction system involves the use of a branched long chain aliphatic tertiary amine tris(2-ethylhexyl)amine (TEHA) as the extractant, Shellsol 2046 as the diluent and octanol as a modifier. The equilibrium data and simulation results were also compared with an alternative extractant, CYANEX 923.In the solvent extraction and electrowinning process for the production of copper, a 175–180 g/L sulphuric acid solution (electrolyte) is used to strip the copper from the loaded organic. It is then sent to the electrowinning cells where copper is electrolytically deposited onto stainless steel cathodes. The spent electrolyte from the electrowinning tank house is returned to the SX process and used to strip the organic again. Thus the electrolyte is continuously regenerated. During normal operation, impurities such as iron build up in the electrolyte, mainly from aqueous entrainment in the organic. Impurities such as iron affect the current efficiency of the electrowinning process as well as the purity of the deposited copper. In order to control the concentration of impurities in the electrolyte, a bleed stream is often required. This bleed has to be neutralised before it can be released to tails. An equivalent quantity of fresh acid is added to the circuit as make up to ensure that an acid concentration of 175–180 g/L is maintained. If the bleed electrolyte could be purified and reused in the electrolyte circuit, this would reduce the costs associated with neutralisation and make up acid. The proposed recovery process is based on solvent extraction, which has the advantage of being a well established technology in the mining industry. The process also does not increase the environmental impact of the copper recovery plant as all additional chemicals can be completely recycled. A simplified diagram of the process is shown in The reaction between the tertiary amine extractant, tris (2-ethylhexyl) amine (TEHA) and sulphuric acid can be described by two equations. The first, represented by The second equation, represented by The loaded organic solvent is then contacted with pure water at an elevated temperature to strip the solvent of acid and produce a pure sulphuric acid stream that can be recycled back into the copper process. The stripping reaction is simply the reverse of The solvent is made up of two other constituents in addition to the TEHA, a diluent and a modifier. The diluent used in the experiments was Shellsol 2046, which is necessary to reduce the high viscosity of the loaded solvent. A modifier is required to avoid the formation of a third phase. The third phase is formed at a high solvent loading. Octanol was used as modifier in the initial investigation and it was found that the minimum concentration required to prevent the third phase formation was 20%. Later, tridecanol was used as it has a higher flash point and therefore more cost effective in any industrial application. Tridecanol and octanol demonstrated similar properties as modifiers. The conditions, such as extraction and stripping temperature, modifier concentration and solvent to aqueous phase ratio, have been optimised for the conditions described in An alternative to basic extractants, such as amines, is neutral or solvating extractants such as liquid phosphine oxides. Two alternative phosphine oxides have been proposed for the extraction of sulphuric acid. The first being tri- The second is CYANEX 923 which is a mixture of four trialkylphosphine oxides More recently, Alguacil and Lopez The extraction of mineral acids by CYANEX 923 under the conditions used in this investigation can be represented by the general reaction described by The equilibrium experiments were performed with two types of technical grade extractants: TEHA (greater than 95% TEHA, Fluka) and CYANEX® 923 (93% trialkylphosphine oxide). For TEHA extraction system, solvents were prepared by making 1 M (43%) solutions of TEHA in varying amounts of octanol and Shellsol 2046 (Shell Aust). The concentrations of octanol varied from 14.25% to 57%. For the CYANEX 923 system, neither a diluent nor modifier was used. All experiments were done at an A/O ratio of 10:1 to ensure that the aqueous acid concentration did not change significantly. Aqueous solutions were made from analytical grade sulphuric acid in distilled water. All organic chemicals were used without further purification. Organic and aqueous phases were contacted in either separating funnels (at ambient temperature) or in sealed jars placed in a water bath (at elevated temperatures) and agitated for approximately 3 min to allow equilibrium to be reached. The mixture was then allowed to settle after which the two phases were separated. The organic phase was allowed to stand overnight and was then placed in a centrifuge at 140× The process of acid recovery requires a compromise between extraction and stripping. Under certain operating conditions, the equilibrium isotherm is such that the loaded solvent cannot be stripped with water. For this reason, it was necessary to obtain equilibrium isotherms over a wide range of conditions. This would enable optimum operating conditions to be identified. It was found that both temperature and octanol concentration had a significant effect on the equilibrium. Previous equilibrium experiments performed by Eyal et al. A similar effect is also observed with temperature change. The three temperatures used at each octanol concentration were 20°C, 35°C and 60°C. These temperatures were chosen for the following reasons: 20°C — Ambient laboratory temperature. 35°C — Typical ambient temperature at many copper mine sites around Australia 60°C — Elevated temperature chosen to give larger range.  The aim of this work was to confirm the results obtained by Rickelton The TEHA equilibrium data consisting of 127 points over a range of octanol concentration, temperature and aqueous acid concentration, was fitted to the following equation: This form of equation was chosen because it has an asymptote at higher aqueous acid concentrations (i.e above 2 M). This meant that any extrapolation of the data would not result in significant error. It was found that parameters The final model is shown below  Octanol concentration Temperature of extracting stages Temperature of stripping stages Extraction and strip O/A ratio Solvent to strip water ratio Number of extraction and stripping stages  The number of extraction and strip stages have an effect on the amount of H The organic to aqueous ratio (O/A) in the extraction and strip stages can be optimised to maximize amount of acid recovered and product concentration. Thus, the optimum operating conditions for the conditions considered are summarized in Using this approach, it is also possible compare 1 M TEHA in 25% w/w isotridecanol to CYANEX 923 using industrial acid solutions. The extraction and stripping equilibrium isotherms for both solvents at 20°C were used. The optimum recovery and product acid concentration at an operating temperature of 20°C are shown in The results show both CYANEX 923 and TEHA could be used for an acid recovery process. Both extractants have the ability to produce a product acid concentration of well over 120 g/L and a percent extraction close to 80% with no iron or copper detectable in the product. It is further encouraging that these results were obtained without using an elevated stripping temperature which if used could provide even greater product concentrations and percent recoveries. Both TEHA and CYANEX 923 require further pilot plant experiments to fully assess their viability. The following conclusions result from this work: The modifier concentration has a significant effect on the equilibrium for TEHA extraction system. The temperature can significantly affect the equilibrium and so alter the optimum recovery conditions for both TEHA and CYANEX 923. The recovery of the acid is significantly improved if stripping is performed at an elevated temperature. Both TEHA and CYANEX 923 extraction systems could be used for an acid recovery process. Support from the Australian Research Council and Zeneca Specialties (UK) for their funding of this project is gratefully acknowledged. The authors would also like to thank the Advanced Mineral Products Special Research Centre (AMPC) for their support and use of equipment and Gunpowder Copper Co for supply of industrial solutions, Shell Chemicals Australia for supply of the Shellsol 2046 and Cytec for the CYANEX 923.