The influence of nickel carriers minerals, contained in three different laterite ore samples, on their extraction by a sulfation-roasting-leaching process, is investigated in this paper. X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy coupled to energy dispersive spectroscopy and chemical analyses by atomic absorption spectrometry were the techniques employed to characterize ore samples and leaching solid residues. Phase quantification was carried out by the Rietveld method. Nickel recovery showed to be strongly dependent on the minerals to which it was associated. Unlike expected, almost all the nickel contained in silicate minerals was extracted; however, some silicates, especially serpentine, interfere in nickel extraction when it is predominantly associated with the octahedral sites of goethite. The highest nickel recovery (93.0%) was achieved with the sample in which goethite was the main nickel carrier and its serpentine content was the lowest. The worst nickel recovery (76.1%) was obtained with the sample in which its association was predominantly with silicate minerals and the amorphous phase. Cobalt recoveries were higher than 81.0% for the three processed samples.Nickel presents a wide range of applications in the industry, especially in the production of stainless steel, which accounts for two-thirds of its consumption ( More than 70% of nickel resources occur as laterites ( Among hydroxides, goethite is the main nickel carrier ( Sheet silicates are another group of nickel carriers’ minerals in laterite ores. In general, nickel occupies the octahedral sites replacing magnesium, or it is found between the octahedral and tetrahedral layers of these minerals. In serpentine, for example, nickel (and Co)-rich mineral may appear in solid solution with Mg, Fe and Al-rich end members of the phyllosilicate group that can be arranged in monoclinic or orthorhombic structures with the lattice parameters varying according to the composition. This composition, in turn, is made of layers of tetrahedral-octahedral type (t-o). Nickel and cobalt may appear in the sites of octahedral sheets instead of magnesium ( There are several hydrometallurgical, pyrometallurgical and hybrid routes that can be applied to nickel extraction from laterite ores. Among them, atmospheric leaching (AL), high pressure acid leaching (HPAL), enhanced pressure acid leaching (EPAL), heap leaching (LP), ammonia-ammonium carbonate leaching and nickel pig iron (NPI) ( Sulfation-roasting-leaching basically consists of sulfating the ore sample with concentrated sulfuric acid at room temperature. The sulfated sample is subjected to heat treatments at temperatures ranging from 200 to 700 °C in one or more stages ( The key to the success of this route, therefore, depends on the decomposition of the trivalent sulfates, formed during sulfation step, at a temperature suitable for the formation of the nickel and cobalt sulfates. This can be obtained when nickel is incorporated in the octahedral sheets of goethite. When Mg This way, the objective of this paper is to investigate the influence of the different nickel and cobalt minerals carriers on their extraction efficiency using sulfation-roasting-leaching process through the quantification of the phases present in both ore samples, from different regions of Brazil. Solid leach residues will also be evaluated in order to find out which nickel cobalt carriers did not well respond to the process. A schematic of the study is presented in Three samples of nickel laterite ores from different regions of Brazil: red limonite (X), limonite rich in chalcedony (Y) and limonite (Z) were processed. Nickel, cobalt, iron, magnesium and silicon contents, as well as nickel distribution in the main minerals, can be observed in Sulfation was performed on a laboratory scale (10 g) with the addition of 10% (wt.%) double-distilled water and sulfuric acid 50% (wt.%). Acid was slowly added and further mixed for homogenization. The Mixture was then pre-roasted in a muffle furnace for 1 h, at 265 °C. After cooling and weighing out, samples were submitted to roasting at a temperature of 780 °C for 20 min using the same muffle furnace of the previous step. The choice of roasting temperatures was made based on previews test analyses results. Subsequently, samples were submitted to aqueous leaching in pulp with a solid to liquid ratio of 12.5 (wt.%) for 30 min and temperature of 80 ± 1 °C, with a mechanical stirring speed of 300 rpm. The slurry was then vacuum filtered and metals contents in the solution and in the solid residue was determined by atomic absorption spectrometry. The recovery of each metal was calculated by Eq. Five grams of each sample was ground with agate grinding media, during 10 min in 12 mL of ethanol in a McCrone micronizing mill, to reduce particle size to below 10 µm. Samples were discharged into a PTFE Petri dished and dried at 70 °C, under air flow. After drying, samples were gently ground in agate mortar and pestle and backloaded into sample holders for X-ray diffraction analysis. X-ray diffraction analyses were performed with a Bruker-AXS D4 Endeavor diffractometer, with Co k The Rietveld method-based mineral quantification with a fundamental parameters approach ( The image analyses were performed with a FEI Quanta 400 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) - coupled to a Bruker Quantax 800 Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (EDS) system and an XFlash 5010 detector. The SEM analyses were performed under high vacuum, 20 kV accelerating voltage and spot size 5. Spectra were processed for standardless analyses using fundamental parameters and φ (ρZ) corrections. Samples were previously prepared by setting the materials in an epoxy resin which were polished with successively finer diamond pastes, decreasing to a final cutting size of 1 μm. Samples were coated with a thin carbon film before analyses. Nickel, cobalt, iron, and magnesium recoveries, for three different laterite ore samples, after the processing indicated in The worst nickel and cobalt extractions were obtained from the Z sample, which presents a considerable amount of nickel associated to serpentine, a phyllosilicate. Nickel and cobalt can substitute magnesium in the octahedral sites of lizardite, which is the main serpentine mineral in the ore sample. Magnesium sulfate is stable at working temperatures, and therefore, if formed during sulfation, it will not decompose to release sulfur trioxide gas to react with nickel in the mineral sites. Furthermore, due to its higher concentration in the mineral, it competes favorably with nickel for the SO Cobalt presents a behavior very similar to nickel, with a 91.9% recovery for the Y sample and 81.1% for the Z sample, as shown in Phases identification by X-ray diffraction, in the solid leaching residues, are presented in The quantification of phases present in the residues by the Rietveld method is shown in Quartz content corresponds to only 36.4% of the amount of silicon oxide present in the solid leaching residue, and the grade of silicon oxide associated with other crystalline phases is lower in the Z sample. Therefore, it can be concluded that the amorphous phase found contains a large amount of silicon oxide. The existence of this phase helps to explain the difference in the nickel extraction between X and Z samples. The Z sample has around 65.8% (wt.%) of the nickel in the particle size smaller than 20 µm, or in the slime fraction, which contains a large amount of amorphous phases. This phase should contain nickel physically adsorbed and can also adsorb more of this element during leaching, due to silica activation as it presents a negative surface charge in a slightly acidic solution, enhancing the attraction of positive ions, such as Ni The Y sample contains only residual quantities of goethite and minerals from the serpentine group. This may be the reason it presented the highest nickel recovery. Furthermore, as it contained a small amount of magnesium it leads to less magnesium sulfate formation, contributing to the increase of the amount of nickel sulfate in the roasting product and the ease of nickel extraction. SEM micrographs are presented in The relationship among the four main phase’s components found in the ores samples and in their processing residues is presented in The Gibbs free energy from 25 to 1200 °C under standard state conditions for the main reactions of sulfuric acid with lizardite (Mg The mineralogy of the solid leaching residues of laterite ore samples determined by X-ray diffraction, includes hematite, quartz, goethite, chromite, ilmenite, lizardite, vermiculite, tridymite and spinel. Amorphous phase was also detected in the Z sample. The quantitative mineralogy determined by the Rietveld refinement of XRD data, for the solid leaching residues of the ore samples, showed that quartz and hematite are the main phases in all samples. The Z sample showed a large amount of amorphous phase (38.4%), which contains a high grade of amorphous silica. A mechanism has been proposed for the nickel extraction. Contrary to what was expected, the sulfuric acid used for the sulfation of the sample reacts primarily with the serpentines (which main mineral in the analyzed samples was the lizardite) and the oxides. The energy released by the exothermic reaction of the phyllosilicates and of the oxides with the acid contributes to the reaction of goethite and formation of sulfates. However, contribution of exothermic reactions might be insufficient if they consume too much of the free acid and form stable magnesium sulfates within the tested temperature range. As the success of the route depends on the decomposition of iron, aluminum and magnesium sulfates during roasting, the essence of the process might be compromised, and goethite remains intact in the solid residue. This way nickel and cobalt extraction decrease considerably once they are still locked in the octahedral sites of the goethite phase. The congruence of this study was accomplished after the recovery analysis of nickel and cobalt. The sample which presented the highest nickel recovery was the one containing the lowest content of magnesium, the Z sample. In this sample, nickel and cobalt recoveries around of 93% and 91.9% were achieved. For samples with higher content of magnesium, but with similar phyllosilicates content, X and Z samples, it was verified that the Z sample showed the lowest nickel and cobalt recovery, 76.1% and 81.1%. In addition to the influence of the large amount of magnesium, the low recovery of this sample is associated with the existence of amorphous silicate in which there is a large content of nickel associated. The X sample presented intermediate recovery between Y and Z, 82.5% and 83.5% for Ni and Co, respectively. The authors wish to thank Instituto Tecnológico Vale/Vale S.A, the Brazilian research agency CNPq, Laboratory of Mineral Technology (LTM, UFRJ) and Prof. Dilson Silva dos Santos (COPPE/UFRJ). This study was financed in part by the