Sintered dicalcium pyrophosphate (SDCP) is a synthetic pyrophosphate analog that could be utilized in the treatment for osteoporosis. In this study, an ovariectomized (OVX) Wistar rat model is applied to evaluate the effects of SDCP on biochemical bone turnover markers relative to its effects on bone mass. OVX rats were treated with SDCP in the dose of 0.75mg/kg daily for continued 13weeks. Rats were sacrificed after predetermined periods; serum levels of bone turnover markers were evaluated. Parallel histological evaluation and bone ashes of the long bones of four limbs were performed. Results showed that the serum level of bone resorption marker (type I collagen fragments) for rats treated with SDCP decreased, and the levels of bone formation markers (alkaline phosphatase [ALP], osteocalcin and osteopontin) also decreased significantly. These findings reveal the bone turnover rate decreased. Histological examinations of distal femoral metaphysis revealed the OVX rats ingested with SDCP restored the architectures of trabecular bone and decreased the porosity. This finding was consistent with the increase in serum tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 5b level, an indicator that represents the number of osteoclast, which indicates an increase of bony tissues. The analyses of limbs bone ashes showed a significant increase in bone mineral contents. This study indicates that the SDCP inhibits the bone resorption rate to restore the bone mass in the OVX rats that could be applied in clinic in the future.Osteoporosis is a common disorder of skeletal system characterized by low bone mass, deteriorated bone architecture and alterations in bone quality, which usually occurs in postmenopausal women and elders Bisphosphonates, characterized as the structure of “P-C-P”, are synthetic pyrophosphate analogs with high affinity for hydroxyapatite and are demonstrated physicochemical effects similar to those of pyrophosphates Beta-dicalcium phosphate, formula for Ca In this study, the effects of SDCP on bone were further demonstrated. The OVX rats, an animal model of postmenopausal osteoporosis, were used to evaluate the effects of SDCP to reverse the osteoporosis based on the biochemical bone turnover markers. The adult OVX rat is a convenient and reliable experimental animal model for osteoporosis Wistar rats (National Taiwan University Hospital Laboratory Animal Center), aged 10–11 Forty female rats were randomly divided into four groups. The rats of sham group were normal rats subjected to a sham operation without ovariectomy. The rats in other three groups subjected ovariectomies via a lateral retroperitoneal approach. The sintered b-dicalcium pyrophosphate (SDCP) with Na Blood samples were obtained with plastic syringes via intracardiac puncture immediately following sacrifice on the day after the observation period. Sera were separated from whole bloods and stored in a −80 After sacrifice, the long bones of four limbs (including femur, tibia, humerus, and forearm) were harvested. The long bones were trimmed of soft tissues, cleared, and stored for further analysis. The length and width of femur (lateral dimension) were measured using calipers. Bone volume was determined by a method based on Archimedes’ principle. The harvested long bones were fixed in neutral buffered 10% formalin solution (533998, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), decalcified by decalcification agents for another two days, and dehydrated using a graded ethanol series. Then the samples were embedded in paraffin, sectioned into 5 Histological sections of distal femur metaphysis were used to evaluate the bony porosity; the thickness and interconnections between the trabeculation were evaluated. To evaluate the bony trabeculae area precisely, the image was observed by light microscopy at 40X magnification. The outline of each bony trabecula was traced and was measured by image software (Adobe The other long bones of rats were dried in an oven set at 60 The data obtained from ten replicate measurements of each group were expressed as mean The change of body weight is shown in In the OVX group, there was no significant difference in bone volume, length, width, and dry weight when compared with those of the sham group ( The marker of bone metabolism, ALP, has statistically significant changes ( The serum levels for other bone turnover markers also have statistically significant changes. The serum OC level increased from 330 For the OPN, it increased from 13.4 The serum TRACP-5b level decreased from 4.9 For the CTX-1, the level in the serum increased from 22.2 The serum level of intact PTH increased from 37.7 For the statistic analyses, the levels of ALP, OC, OPN and CTX-1 for the OVX For the TRACP-5b, rats of OVX The PTH levels for rats OVX In the histological study of the femur for the sham group, the cancellous bone showed intervening trabecular bone with connectivity of the trabeculae elements ( The porosity of bony trabeculae also increased significantly in the OVX group (68.6 After ovariectomy (OVX group), the ratio of bone ashes to dry weight of long bones for the limbs decreased significantly ( Concerning the affect of ingestion of SDCP on OVX rats, the weight gain of OVX group was significant greater than that of sham group, this shall attribute to the estrogen deficiency postovariectomy SDCP may either influence the bone resorption by osteoclast or the bone formation by osteoblast. For this reason, bone turnover markers are applied to demonstrate the biological mechanism of SDCP on bone In spite of the increasing levels of ALP, OC and OPN in OVX rats, the bone resorption markers, CTX-1, also increased significantly ( On the contrary, the ALP, OPN, OC, and CTX-1 levels in OVX Regarding the finding of PTH, rats ingested with ALN had an increase in serum PTH level; this observation is consistent with the finding of Greenspan et al. that reported ALN increased endogenous nocturnal PTH secretion, suggesting that its efficacy was similar to that of intermittent administration of low-dose PTH ALN produces no mineralization impairment at large multiples of the pharmacologically effective dose and has been shown to increase bone mass in animal models of osteoporosis and in postmenopausal women The ingestion of SDCP decreased the bone turnover markers which was demonstrated by a significant decrease in the serum ALP, OC and OPN levels. SDCP also inhibits the bone resorption that proved by serum TRACP-5b and CTX-1 levels. The ingestion of SDCP restored the architectures of trabecular bone, decreased the porosity, and increased the bone mineral contents in the long bones. This study indicates that the SDCP inhibits the bone resorption to increase bone mass in the OVX rats. Further studies, such as the pharmacokinetics of SDCP shall be demonstrated carefully to ensure its application in clinics in the future. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.