Thirteen patients with isolated distal femoral fractures were treated by external fixation. There were seven males and six females with an average age of 45 years. Four were Type A3 fractures, one Type C1, five Type C2 and three Type C3 fractures. Seven of these were open. In seven cases the articular surface was first reduced and fixed. The fixation was extended across the knee to supplement the distal fixation in six severe cases. The average follow up was 30 months.
                  There was one non-union in the study with the average time to union in the other patients being six months. Using the Mize criteria for assessing clinical results we found that nine patients obtained a good to excellent score and four were classed as failures. The average range of movement of the knee in the study was 100°. Apart from the single non-union all the fractures healed and there were no other serious complications.
                  Considering the severity of the fractures we did not find any evidence to suggest that temporary fixation of the lateral soft tissues by fixator pins was detrimental. The results suggest that external fixation may be used to treat these difficult fractures without the risk of serious complications.Distal femoral fractures pose a difficult treatment problem for the surgeon with significant complication rates and unsatisfactory results Prior to the 1970's, non-operative management was the treatment of choice Success of the treatment depends very largely on the effectiveness of the distal femoral fragment fixation and this in turn depends on the amount and quality of available bone stock. Using external fixation the support may be taken across the knee thus neutralising the effect of the lower limb lever arm and augmenting the distal femoral fixation. There has been very little published on the management of these fractures using an external fixator. This is the first report describing the use of limited internal fixation to reconstruct the articular surface combined with external fixation. Current opinion is that the use of external fixation is limited mainly in the initial management of severe open fractures prior to more definitive management The results of a retrospective study on the use of external fixation in the treatment of isolated distal femoral fractures is presented. The advantages and limitations of this method of treatment are then discussed. For the purpose of this study a distal femoral fracture was defined as a fracture involving the distal 9 cm of the femur on X-ray. From 1988 to1997, thirteen isolated distal femoral fractures were treated by external fixation in the Limb Reconstruction Service at the Northern General Hospital in Sheffield. All fractures with severe comminution or intra-articular extension were included in the study. Simpler or non-articular fractures were treated by other methods and as such were not included. Those with associated injuries to the same limb (e.g. a floating knee) were excluded from the study. There were seven male and six female patients. The average age was 45 years with a range of 19 to 74 years. Eight fractures resulted from road traffic accidents, four from a fall and one patient was kicked by a horse. Most of the data were extracted from the case notes. However, patient satisfaction was determined by interview either in the clinic or over the telephone. The average follow up time was 30 months with a range of 15 to 52 months. The AO/ASIF classification described by Muller was used in the study to classify the fractures based on radiographic appearance Clinical results were assessed using the criteria of Schatzker and Lambert and modified by Mize et al. ( A detailed pre-operative plan is made since there is very little room to insert both cancellous screws and external fixator pins. Via a limited incision the fracture is reduced under direct vision and imaging. The fracture is held with a tenaculum forceps and guide wires are inserted in the optimum position for the cannulated screw fixation. The skin is temporarily closed. Stab wounds are made and under radiological control 3.2 mm drill bits are inserted in the position of the external fixator screws. The drill bits are then removed and the skin flaps reopened. 6 mm cannulated cancellous screws are then inserted over the guide wires. The skin is closed and the external fixator pins are placed through the previously made stab incisions and attached to a metaphyseal clamp. Two or three cortical screws with long screw shafts are inserted into the proximal femoral diaphysis and connected to the distal screws by a short or standard bodied fixator ( In twelve out of thirteen patients the fracture united ( The average range of movement of the knee was 100° of flexion with a range of 30–135° (full range of movement, ROM).The average range of movement when the knee was crossed was 85° compared to 110° when we did not cross the knee with the fixation. There was no difference in the range of movement between the open and closed group. Four patients achieved a full ROM. Evaluation of the results using the criteria of Mize et al. revealed nine good to excellent results and four failures. Two of those classed as failures were simply due to a ROM of less than 90°. The other two were due to pain, deformity and a decreased ROM. Only one of the failures were in the open group. The principle complication noted was non-union in one patient. Five patients had minor pin tract infections which settled with regular cleaning and antibiotics. One patient had loosening of the pins and had the fixator removed at six weeks (case 2). Subsequent management in a cast brace led to a good result. Four patients required an MUA to improve the range of movement. Two of these subsequently required a quadricepsplasty. Patients were interviewed by one author (FA) either in the clinic or by telephone. Ten patients said that overall they were satisfied with their final result but three said they were unhappy, the main reason being persistent pain. The management of supracondylar fractures of the femur remains controversial. Most studies over the past thirty years have attempted to compare the results of surgical versus non-surgical methods. Open reduction and internal fixation using a variety of devices remains the most frequently reported surgical method. However, no internal fixation method has repeatedly achieved satisfactory results in the management of the more complex fractures. In a review of all the published articles on this subject we found that most centres have used external fixation only as a temporary device for the initial management of fractures and soft tissues in open wounds The largest series published was that by Noer and Christensen who treated 17 supracondylar fractures with the Orthofix Fixator. Good results were obtained with all fractures uniting and patients mobilized after 16 days. The study only involved Type A2 and A3 fractures. There were no fractures treated that had intercondylar extensions and the knee was not crossed with the fixator On review of the clinical results we found that 69% of our patients had a good to excellent result using the Mize criteria. This compares to 71% by Sanders et al. using a DCS and side plate and 52% by Merchan et al. using a condylar blade plate The average range of movement in this study was 100° of flexion. This was comparable to the range of movement obtained in other studies using various devices There was one non-union in our study. The average time to union in the other patients was 6 months. These results were slightly higher than most other published results but again it must be remembered that these patients treated had much more complex injuries than the other studies The use of an external fixator has many theoretical advantages for helping to promote union. In the distal femur the cortex is thin and there is a widened medullary cavity with cancellous bone. In addition the distal fragment is usually short. All these features make stable fixation difficult to achieve. Also, because the fracture site is so close to the knee joint movement of the knee allows movement at the fracture site. By using an external fixator and especially by crossing the knee joint we are able to achieve a more stable fracture fixation. The concept of cross joint fixation is not new. Kuntcher described a technique of driving a K Nail across the knee joint in supracondylar fractures in order to achieve a good fixation Compared to open methods of treatment negligible soft tissue dissection or periosteal stripping is performed The threat of infection has been one of the major problems in the management of these fractures because of the high energy nature of some of these injuries with soft tissue damage and open fractures. Also the extensive periosteal stripping, soft tissue dissection and prolonged operative time may all add to the incidence of infection seen in internal fixation methods. In recent reports this has ranged from 0 to 5.9% We had 7 cases of open fractures in our study. There was no incidence of osteomyelitis. Siliski reported 2 cases of osteomyelitis out of 20 open fractures when using the blade plate External fixators have the ability to maintain length and alignment whilst spanning a zone of comminution or bone loss. In addition they can allow for lengthening in the limb with little additional intervention. Frequently there is shortening due to either bone loss from a compound injury or intentional shortening at the fracture site in order to promote union. Proximal lengthening can be performed during the course of treatment using the external fixation system. The limitation of this study is that it is a retrospective analysis of an uncontrolled population. More than one surgeon was involved although all the patients were under the care of the same consultant (M.S.). The small number of patients in the series precludes a statistical analysis of the differences. However, these results can be used to compare with other reports. While comparing results among various studies can be difficult because of a lack of standardized reporting criteria and small numbers, the result of the study suggest that although there may not be significant differences in the clinical results and the union rates obtained, the use of external fixation does have a place in the management of the more complex distal femoral fractures especially those associated with open wounds, soft tissue injury, bone loss and comminution. The absence of deep infection and other serious complications so far is encouraging.