An equimolar mixture of weakly basic and chelating reagent was used for extracting zinc(II) from acid chloride solutions at various concentrations of chloride and hydrogen ions. N,N-dihexylpyridine-3-carboxamide was used as a weak base and 1-phenyldecane-1,3-dione (β-diketone) as a chelating extractant. In a three-step extraction–scrubbing–stripping process, zinc ions were transferred from the chloride into the sulfate solutions. In the first step, Zn(II) was extracted by N,N-dihexylpyridine-3-carboxamide. The composition of the extracted complexes (solvate or ion pairs) depends on HCl concentration. After zinc(II) extraction from acid chloride solutions, Cl− ions were scrubbed out from the organic phases with ammonia solutions. In this step, the extractants transfer zinc ions according to one of two possible mechanisms: from the solvate into the chelate, or from the ion pair into the chelate. The stripping of zinc ions from the chelate complex with β-diketone was carried out with sulfuric acid solutions. For both systems under investigation (weakly and strongly acidic solutions), the use of the reagent mixture enables the effective extraction of zinc(II) and removal of chloride ions from the organic phase. Owing to the possibility of using the extractant mixture for the recovery of Zn(II) from the chloride solutions of varied acidity, a partial protonation of the weakly basic extractant in the stripping step has no significant effect on the efficiency of a subsequent extraction–scrubbing–stripping process.The hydrometallurgical processes in chloride media are particularly useful for zinc recovery from low-grade ores, complex sulfide ores, and also secondary zinc materials. In a number of processes, the extraction–stripping step is used for the purification and the concentration of zinc(II) chloride solutions. However, metal recovery from chloride solutions by electrowinning, which is the last step of a hydrometallurgical process, presents many difficulties. Metal formation in powder form instead of sheets and the recycling of chlorine gas are major problems, but they do not occur in sulfate electrowinning. To avoid electrowinning from chloride media, the extraction–stripping process can be replaced by an extraction–scrubbing–stripping process in which the metal ions are transferred from chloride media to sulfate media. The process involves essentially three steps: 1) extraction of metal ions from chloride solution, 2) scrubbing of chloride ions from the organic phase, and 3) stripping of metal ions from the scrubbed organic phase with sulfuric acid solution. The purified and concentrated sulfate solutions obtained as a result of the process above are suitable for the classical electrowinning of the metal. In the three-step solvent process, mixed extractants (one basic or solvating reagent and one chelating reagent) or bi-functional extractants can be used. Some mixtures of extractants are proposed, first of all, for copper(II) recovery from chloride solutions, e.g., an amine and a β-diketone ( The recovery of zinc(II) from chloride media is one of the most commonly used hydrometallurgical processes. In chloride media, basic, acidic and solvating reagents were used as zinc(II) extractants ( Hydrophobic esters and amides of pyridinecarboxylic acids for the extraction of copper ions from chloride solutions are proposed by Hydrophobic β-diketones, e.g., commercial extractant LIX 54, are important extractants of copper(II) from ammonia solutions ( It is the objective of this work to present fundamental studies on the transfer of zinc(II) both from weakly acidic and strongly acidic chloride media into sulfate solutions by the mixture of two hydrophobic extractants, N,N-dihexylpyridine-3-carboxamide and 1-phenyldecane-1,3-dione. Two model extractants were used. The structures of the studied compounds are as follows: N,N-dihexylpyridine-3-carboxamide (DH3) was used as a solvating reagent in weakly acidic chloride media or as a basic extractant which transfers zinc(II) from strongly acidic chloride solutions as ion pairs. The synthesis of the amide was described in an earlier paper ( 1-Phenyldecane-1,3-dione (BDK) was used as a chelating reagent. The β-diketone was obtained by the condensation of acetophenone with an excess of ethyl octanoate in the presence of sodium ethylate ( The purity of the synthesized compounds in the range 97–99% was determined by GC–MS (Hewlett Packard 5890 Series II with detector MSD HP 5970B). The 1H NMR and 13C NMR spectra prove the structure of the compounds. The spectra were measured on a Varian UNITY 300 spectrometer (500 and 125 MHZ, respectively) in CDCl Zinc chloride, hydrochloric acid (36%), sulfuric acid (98%), ammonia (25%), sodium chloride, sodium nitrate (POCH) and lithium nitrate (MERCK) of analytical grade were used to prepare aqueous solutions. Deionized water and toluene of analytical grade (POCH) were used as diluents. Decan-1-ol of analytical grade (Fluka) was used as a modifier. The zinc(II) extraction, the chloride scrubbing and the zinc(II) stripping were carried out at 20–25 the metal concentration in the aqueous phase before extraction, the metal concentration in the organic and aqueous phase after extraction, respectively, the metal concentration in the aqueous phase after stripping (re-extraction). The confidence interval for [Zn(II)] was estimated for six parallel extraction, scrubbing, and stripping processes, at level of confidence (1 The chloride concentration in the aqueous phase was determined by potentiometric titration with silver nitrate (0.005 Extraction from weakly acidic chloride solutions was carried out at a constant water activity ( The ammonia concentration in the aqueous solution used for the scrubbing of chloride ions was varied between 0.005 and 0.03 Extraction from strongly acidic chloride solutions was carried out at constant zinc(II) concentration (0.01 The ammonia concentration in the aqueous solution used for the scrubbing of chloride ions was varied between 0.15 and 0.3 The zinc ions extraction from chloride solutions depends upon the acid and chloride concentrations in the aqueous phase. Zinc(II) easily forms chloro-complexes ZnCl N,N-dihexylpyridine-3-carboxamide (DH3) is an effective extractant for zinc recovery from weakly and strongly acidic chloride solutions. DH3 is a weak organic base (p Owing to the low acidity of β-diketones, 1-phenyldecane-1,3-dione (BDK) can be used for extracting zinc ions only at pH above 5. The extraction of zinc(II) from weakly acidic chloride media with DH3 can be described by the solvation mechanism: The extraction of zinc(II) with the chelating reagent BDK can be described by the following equation: The extraction of zinc(II) from weakly acidic chloride media (pH  Due to the fact that the studies were carried out at constant water activity using chloride/nitrate solutions, Zn(II) can form complexes with chloride ions and weaker complexes with nitrate ions at low Cl In order to remove chloride ions from the organic phase and to carry the metal ions from the solvate into the chelate, the step of extraction was followed by washing the organic phase with ammonia solution. The reaction of removing chloride ions from the organic phase with ammonia solution can be described by the following equation: The scrubbing of chloride ions with 0.03 The ammonia concentration in the scrubbing step should be adjusted to a concentration of the zinc ions in the organic phase after extraction. The data presented in After the extraction and scrubbing steps, the stripping of zinc ions from the organic phase (in which the Zn(II) is bound in the chelate with the β-diketone) was performed with a sulfuric acid solution. The extraction can be described by the following equation: The data after stripping show that the total re-extraction of zinc ions from the organic phase occurs with the aqueous sulfuric acid solution at an approximately equimolar concentration of H In the process of stripping of Zn(II) by 0.02 As shown in our previous work ( The data showing the influence of the total HCl concentration on the transfer of zinc(II) from the aqueous into the organic phase at chloride concentrations 2–4 In strongly acidic media (2–4 The results of zinc(II) extraction with an equimolar (1:1 After the extraction step, the organic phase was washed with an ammonia solution to remove chloride ions from the organic phase and transfer the metal ion into the chelate. As shown in a previous work by The results presented in In a previous study (  The mass balance of zinc and chloride ions for the scrubbing step with 0.2 For each ion pair, which may be formed during the extraction from the feed for a given concentration of acid, a theoretical concentration of the chloride ions in the aqueous solution after decomposition of the ion pair by washing with 0.2 The results presented in After the extraction and scrubbing steps, the stripping of zinc ions from the organic toluene/decan-1-ol phase was performed with sulfuric acid solution, in agreement with Eq. After stripping zinc(II), part of DH3 can be protonated. However, when the 0.05 If the concentration of the sulfuric acid that was used for stripping was much higher than 0.05 The use of an equimolar mixture of the weak base (N,N-dihexylpyridine-3-carboxamide — DH3) and the chelating reagent (1-phenyldecane-1,3-dione — BDK) in the three-step process involving extraction–scrubbing–stripping enables zinc(II) recovery both from weakly and strongly acidic chloride solutions. The zinc ions are transferred from acidic chloride solutions into sulfate solutions from which the separation of high-purity zinc by electrolysis is a well known and widely used process. In weakly acidic systems (4 After the extraction step, Cl The stripping of zinc ions from the chelate complex with β-diketone can be carried out with sulfuric acid solutions. The concentration of H Owing to the possibility of using the DH3-BDK mixture for the recovery of Zn(II) from both weakly and strongly acidic chloride solutions, partial protonation of the weakly basic extractant in the stripping step has no significant effect on the efficiency of the next extraction–scrubbing–stripping process. However, the conditioning of the organic phase before recycling for the extraction step can be carried out using ammonia or hydrochloric acid solutions for weakly or strongly acidic systems, respectively. The work was supported by the