Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) is a promising additive in medium-temperature pressure oxidation leaching of high sulfide copper ores. In this article, we present a systematic study on the performance of pressure oxidation leaching of an enargite concentrate in the presence of PTFE beads. The effects of various leaching conditions, including leaching solution composition, temperature, oxygen overpressure, initial pulp density, and an addition of varying amounts of PTFE beads, on copper leaching kinetics have been systematically investigated. Our results show that, with the use of PTFE beads, the rate of leaching and ultimate extraction of copper can be significantly enhanced, over the temperature range of 150–210°C and an oxygen overpressure range of 50–120psi, compared to otherwise similar conditions without the addition of PTFE beads. Results of analysis of the surface adsorbates on the PTFE beads suggest that, during the initial stages of leaching, PTFE beads capture hydrophobic sulfide minerals on their surface. Leaching of the minerals then progresses on the surface of the beads, producing elemental sulfur. The molten sulfur is partially drawn away from the mineral/electrolyte interface to the PTFE surface, mitigating the agglomeration of the mineral particles and facilitating their further oxidation. In addition, the PTFE beads have been found to be highly reusable with identical performance maintained for at least 6cycles of leaching experiments without the need of any special surface regeneration treatment. Arsenic deportment was tracked by XRD and ICP-MS analysis of both the resulting leaching solution and residue. The majority of arsenic (about 96%) was converted to a stable solid scorodite product, thus facilitating its safe disposal.Due to the gradual depletion of conventional high-grade copper ores, there is growing interest in the processing of complex metallurgically challenging lower-grade ores and minerals, such as those rich in enargite (Cu Despite the potential advantages, the technology for hydrometallurgical treatment of arsenic-rich enargite ores is still evolving and is not without challenges ( Previous investigations showed that the dissolution rate of enargite is very slow in sulfate media under atmospheric conditions when using either oxygen or ferric ions as an oxidant ( Pressure oxidation leaching of enargite in acidic sulfate and chloride media has been studied by a number of investigators to improve copper extraction. Ruiz In recent years, researchers have focused on developing effective sorbents for molten sulfur in medium-temperature pressure oxidation processes. In the previous studies ( In this current work, the effects of PTFE addition on copper extraction in pressure oxidation of an enargite concentrate were studied, with the aim of achieving high copper extraction along with fixation of arsenic in a form that is safe for disposal. The effects of various leaching parameters on copper extraction kinetics from the enargite concentrate have been systematically investigated, including: leaching solution, temperature (130–210 The enargite concentrate used in this work was the + Solution samples collected during the pressure oxidation experiments were filtered with a 0.45 The pressure oxidation leaching experiments were conducted in a 1.8 Flotation experiments were performed at room temperature with a Denver Laboratory D1 model flotation machine to separate elemental sulfur and/or sulfide from oxides in selected leaching residues. The leaching residue used for the flotation was repulped to about 20 Leaching experiments of the enargite concentrate were first carried out at 150 The significant enhancement in copper leaching in the presence of PTFE beads is believed to begin with the adsorption of sulfide minerals onto the surface of the PTFE beads, similar to how bubbles become coated by hydrophobic minerals during flotation. Oxidation of the minerals then progresses on the surface of the beads producing molten elemental sulfur. The molten sulfur is partially drawn away from the mineral/electrolyte interface to the PTFE surface. This reduces the agglomeration of the mineral particles and their passivation by sulfur, facilitating their further oxidation. Leaching experiments were subsequently carried out at different temperatures ranging from 130 to 210 In fact, the complete oxidation of sulfide to sulfate likely occurs At each temperature, the addition of PTFE beads significantly improves copper leaching performance. At 130 The surfaces of PTFE beads were examined after leaching experiments at different temperature. While the PTFE beads appeared relatively clean after the leaching at 130 The acid concentration in the resulting leaching solutions after 4 The solid leaching residues obtained after 4 The residues following leaching in the presence of PTFE beads were further characterized with XRD to identify their composition. We have further characterized the composition of the leaching residues produced in both the presence and absence of PTFE beads through elemental analysis (sulfur analysis and ICP-MS for Cu, Fe, and As). Elemental sulfur and pyrite are known to be hydrophobic and are expected to have excellent floatability at near neutral pH, suggesting that they can be separated from scorodite in the residues through flotation. To explore this possibility, we undertook flotation experiments on the residues produced in the presence of PTFE beads at 150–210 Another important metric of leaching performance is deportment of arsenic, whose residual dissolved concentration and solid form are important for safe disposal given its toxicity. Previous reports have shown that arsenic precipitates out with iron as scorodite in autoclaves operated above 150 Further leaching experiments were conducted at 170 The effect of the loading amount of PTFE beads on leaching performance has also been investigated by carrying out a series of leaching experiments at 170 The effect of initial pulp density on copper leaching kinetics was investigated by undertaking the leaching experiments at different pulp densities (5, 10, or 20  All the above results confirm the effectiveness of the use of the PTFE beads to enhance the performance of pressure oxidation of the enargite concentrate. With the inherent high chemical and thermal stability of PTFE, these beads are expected to have good reusability, which makes them highly promising for commercial use. We have subsequently investigated the reusability of these beads by carrying out 6 PTFE beads have been demonstrated to be effective sulfur/sulfide mineral sorbents for pressure oxidation of an enargite concentrate. The addition of PTFE beads greatly enhances copper leaching in terms of both the rate and final copper extraction. The condition with the leaching temperature of 170 The financial support for this work from Barrick Gold Corporation, Ontario Centers of Excellence, Centre for Excellence in Mining Innovation, and Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada is greatly appreciated. The authors also thank Mr. Troy Maki at Laurentian University for performing ICP-MS analysis.