High-performance Ti-based nanocomposites reinforced with TiB nanowires with a network-woven structure were fabricated, and the growth of the TiB nanowires was investigated through comparative sintering and annealing experiments. TiB nanowires nucleated from the surfaces of the Ti powder particles and then grew into the particles. They remained stable in the Ti matrix when isothermally annealed at 1000 °C for 24 h, but coarsened noticeably during rapid heating to 1200 °C. The coarsening of the TiB nanowires was found to occur through stacking of thinner TiB nanowires, which can be regarded as a detachment-attachment controlled Ostwald ripening process and is affected by the surface free energy of the faceted TiB. Tensile property tests revealed that TiB nanowires are distinctly advantageous over TiB microwhiskers in strengthening the Ti matrix. The as-sintered Ti-based nanocomposites achieved both high tensile strengths (>800 MPa) and excellent tensile ductility (>20%).As key engineering materials, Ti alloys have found many important applications in a variety of industries including aerospace, energy generation, and biomedical areas because of their high specific strength and excellent corrosion resistance On the one hand, nanofibers of strong ceramics (including nanowires The mechanism for the formation and coarsening of TiB nanowires in the titanium matrix remains unclear. However, it is critical both for the fabrication of metal matrix nanocomposites and for enriching the scientific knowledge related to the growth of ceramic nanowires in a metal matrix. In this study, we used commercially pure Ti powder and B Gas-atomized Ti powder (≤45 μm) and B  The Ti-B The results discussed above show that when sintered at temperatures higher than 1100 °C, TiB nanowires and TiC particles can become coarsened easily. To delineate their coarsening process, we designed two comparative experiments, i.e., to sinter and/or anneal the microstructure at a lower temperature (1000 °C) for a long duration (up to 24 h), and to rapidly heat it to a higher temperature (up to 1200 °C) without isothermal holding followed by immediate cooling. These conditions are summarized in Firstly, the low temperature-long duration conditions (A1 and A2) were applied. TMCs prepared under the A1 and A2 conditions exhibited similar microstructures. Secondly, the high temperature-zero isothermal holding conditions (B1 and B2) were applied. The B1 sample had a significant presence of TiB nanowires and their morphology was similar to that of the TiB nanowires shown in These observations suggest that the coarsening processes of TiB nanowires and TiC particles are distinctly different. For example, increasing either the sintering temperature (comparing Next, we investigated morphological and structural characteristics of TiB whiskers in the microstructure that was sintered at 1200 °C for 0 min (e.g., Ostwald ripening is a process where large particles coarsen at the expense of fine particles through the Kelvin effect  In this study, we fabricated high-tensile-strength and high-tensile-ductility Ti matrix nanocomposites reinforced with TiB nanowires and systematically investigated the growth processes of the TiB nanowires in the Ti matrix. The following conclusions can be drawn: TiB nanowires formed a 3D network-woven structure in the Ti matrix with the size of each cell in the network being consistent with that of the feedstock Ti powder particles. TiB nanowires nucleated from the surfaces of the Ti powder particles and then grew into the nearby Ti matrix. TiC particles nucleated at the similar sites but they were distributed along the cell boundaries in the network. The sintering temperature was a dictating factor for the coarsening of TiB nanowires, and the threshold temperature was between 1100 and 1200 °C. The rapid coarsening process of TiB nanowires was found to occur through growth by stacking of thinner faceted TiB whiskers along their (100) planes. Their coarsening can be regarded as a result of the reduction in the total surface energy of the facets of TiB whiskers. Increasing the sintering temperature from 1000 °C to 1200 °C led to noticeable coarsening of both the TiB nanowires and the Ti matrix grains. As a result, the yield strength of the Ti matrix composites decreased from 658 MPa to 543 MPa. The coarsening of the Ti matrix grains reduced the yield strength by 34 MPa, while the coarsening of TiB nanowires caused a loss of 81 MPa. The results confirmed that TiB nanowires possessed much higher strengthening effect than TiB microwhiskers. The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests. This work was jointly supported by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at