Crystallization of sodium perrhenate (NaReO4) from aqueous solution was studied by means of laboratory scale experiments at 298K. NaReO4 has a very high solubility in aqueous solution (>1130g/L at 298K) so crystallization was induced by the addition of ethanol (drowning-out crystallization process). This resulted in well crystalline NaReO4 particles which required less energy and water than the conventional evaporative crystallization industrial process. The crystallization of NaReO4 took 5–10min and could be achieved in 1 or 2 stages by controlling the solution super-saturation by the addition of ethanol in the 25–75vol.% range. The ethanol in solution could be recovered by distillation and recycled.Rhenium (Re) is a rare transition metal present in nature in very low concentration (0.4 Rhenium is industrially produced after a series of concentration and refining operations. The main compound produced is ammonium perrhenate (NH Sodium perrhenate (NaReO Crystallization of inorganic compounds dissolved in aqueous solution induced by the addition of alcohols and other organic compounds has been studied for a long time ( The NaReO The solubility of NaReO Further crystallization experiments were carried out in a stirred small glass reactor in a thermostated bath (PolyScience). After 10 The solubility of NaReO  Ethanol acts as co-solvent in NaReO  The sodium perrhenate crystals were analyzed and were of higher purity than the starting NH  From stoichiometric calculations based on the mass balances for Na and Re it was inferred that sodium perrhenate crystallized as different phases, such as: the hydrated phase NaReO  Experimental results obtained in this study help to define a conceptual process for producing sodium perrhenate by crystallization with ethanol (drowning-out crystallization process). The final ethanol aqueous solution could be distilled for recovering the ethanol and aqueous solution.  The crystallization process with ethanol at 298 Solubility of sodium perrhenate decreased markedly as the ethanol concentration of an ethanol–water mixture increased. The measured solubilities at 298 Microscopy showed that crystal sizes of sodium perrhenate decreased as ethanol concentration increased. Mass balancing the system indicated that the waters of crystallization of the NaReO Finally, the proposed process for NaReO This work was funded by the