Acid mine drainage and mining wastewaters contain, depending on the source, elevated concentrations of metals, e.g. nickel (Ni2+), and oxyanions, e.g. selenate (SeO4
                     2−) and sulfate (SO4
                     2−). This study compared the performance of two reactor configurations, a biotrickling filter (BTF) and an upflow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) reactor, for the treatment of model mining wastewater contaminated with SeO4
                     2−, SO4
                     2− and Ni2+. The Se removal efficiency of the BTF biofilm was improved by >70% in the presence of SO4
                     2−. In contrast, the Se removal performance of the UASB reactor was not affected by the presence of SO4
                     2−. The addition of Ni2+ decreased the oxyanion (SO4
                     2− and SeO4
                     2−) removal efficiency of both the BTF and UASB reactor by >30%. However, the UASB reactor recovered more quickly (∼10 days after Ni2+ addition) from Ni2+ toxicity as compared to the BTF (∼22 days after Ni2+ addition). A Ni2+ removal efficiency of more than 80% was achieved for both the BTF and UASB reactor. Ni2+ was mainly removed via sulfidic (HS−) precipitation by forming nickel sulfide (Ni3S4). Scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDX) and powder X-ray energy diffraction (P-XRD) revealed entrapped Se and selenium monosulfide (SeS) in the biofilm and granules of both reactor configurations, which could be potentially recovered for further reuse applications. This study demonstrated that the feed wastewater characteristics and the reactor configuration are key factors in achieving an efficient treatment of Se-laden mine drainage wastewater.Selenium (Se) is a vital trace metalloid for all living organisms, but also a toxic element to natural ecosystems due to its high bioaccumulation potential The application of biological processes for the removal of the mobile and toxic Se species, i.e. selenate (SeO Se shares a close chemical similarity with sulfur (S) and is often associated as a by-product of metal sulfide ore mineral processing The studies exploring the effect of SO To the best of our knowledge, there are no studies on the simultaneous removal of oxyanions, e.g. SeO Nickel was chosen because it is one of the most commonly used heavy metals in the mining industry present in oxide ores and one of the main heavy metal co-contaminants found in Se-laden wastewaters Anaerobic granular sludge taken from a full-scale UASB reactor treating a paper-mill wastewater (Industriewater Eerbeek B.V., Eerbeek, The Netherlands) was used as the inoculum for both the BTF and UASB reactor. A detailed description of the inoculum can be found in Roest et al. The UASB reactor was inoculated with 10% ( The reactors were fed with a synthetic acid mine drainage wastewater containing a mineral medium, organic carbon source and the different contaminants of interest, i.e. SeO The BTF ( The UASB reactor ( The chemical oxygen demand (COD), oxyanion and Ni The reactor conditions were separated into two main operational phases, RC1 and RC2. During phase RC1, the reactors were operated only with SeO Total dissolved sulfide (HS SO Biomass samples consisting of biofilm carriers and granules from both reactors were taken to analyze total solids (TS) and volatile solids (VS) according to the standard methods Lyophilized biomass samples were examined for morphology and elemental semi-quantitative analysis using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Vega 3, TESCAN, Czech Republic) with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDX, QUANTAX, Bruker, USA) analyzer Specific removal rates (SRR) and removal efficiencies were calculated according to Eqs. Colloidal Se Average and standard deviations were calculated for SRR, removal efficiency and residual concentration of contaminants in the effluent. Statistical differences in SRR, removal efficiency and effluent concentrations between the two reactors and among the reactor conditions were evaluated using analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the Tukey tests (Minitab 17 statistical software, Minitab Inc.). Two comparing data sets were considered statistically different when a   Upon addition of Ni The Se   During period RC2b, the COD/SO A COD/SO During period RC2b, the SO Ni The total COD removal efficiency was stable at <30% during phases RC1 and RC2 in both reactors (  Se and Ni were detected in the air dried biomass samples collected at the end of each reactor phase/period ( The mineral precipitates detected in the biofilm and granules were different during each reactor condition, but similar in both reactors. As such, only the SEM-EDX ( During phase RC1, a light reddish coloration was observed both on the BTF biofilm and in the UASB reactor liquid suspension ( When SO Upon addition of Ni This study showed that the addition of SO During phase RC1, high signals of Se, likely Se In contrast to the BTF, a gradual increase of the Se removal performance was observed in the UASB reactor ( Although biogenic Se An increase of the COD/SO The higher feed COD concentration resulted in a COD/SeO The main impact of Ni High Ni Upon removal of SO A simulation by the Visual MINTEQ software (data not shown) confirmed that precipitation of Ni-Se minerals at the applied initial conditions was unlikely, but that Ni was more likely to precipitate with phosphate in the absence of HS The BTF biofilm and UASB granules had similar mineral complexation, identified by P-XRD as Se-S and Ni-S precipitates ( Other characterization studies on Se-S indicated that cyclic Se-S eight rings can have similar spectra For metal sulfide, Villa-Gomez et al. This study demonstrated that two reactor configurations employing different biomass retention systems (biofilm in BTF and granules in UASB) result in a diverse removal performance when treating a synthetic mine drainage wastewater containing SeO The authors thank Dr. Ludovico Pontoni (University of Napoli Federico II, Napoli, Italy) for his assistance in analytical instrumentation operation, Giorgio Trojsi (University of Suor Orsola Benincasa, Napoli, Italy) for carrying out the P-XRD analysis and Dr. Neeraj Maheshwari (University de Technologie Compiegne, Compiegne, France) for assistance in P-XRD data analysis. This work was funded by the Erasmus Mundus Join Doctorate program ETeCoS Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 