The Iberian Pyrite Belt (IPB) is one of the largest (if not the largest) of the world’s massive sulphide provinces. Since the Chalcolithic era, gossans formed from the massive sulphide mineralisations have been worked for copper, silver and gold, and consequently many historic mine sites have abandoned dumps of gossanous material. The aims of this study are to determine the mineralogical hosts of precious metals (Au, Ag) and environmentally significant elements (As, Ba, Bi, Cu, Hg, Mo, Sb, Se, Pb, Zn) in gossanous waste rocks from historic dumps, using geochemical, optical, SEM–MLA and laser ablation techniques. Results demonstrate that the precious metals are contained as inclusions of electrum, Au and Ag–Hg halides commonly within iron oxides and hydroxides. At least part of the inclusion surfaces are exposed and thus may be amenable to processing, however, the encapsulated nature of the precious metal inclusions along with their small size could make mineral processing difficult. In addition, the As, Bi and Pb enrichment of iron oxides and the presence of Ag–Hg halides may require suitable and safe storage of processing wastes. The study indicates that a solid knowledge of the mineralogical siting of precious metals and environmentally significant elements in gossanous waste rocks is required to assess processability in the move towards sustainable mineral resource development.The Iberian Pyrite Belt (IPB) is one of the world’s largest massive sulphide provinces and has been continuously explored and mined since prehistoric times resulting in more than 80 mines across Spain and Portugal, including the large Rio Tinto and Neves Corvo deposits (e.g. In our study, gossanous waste rocks were collected from a historic dump to determine whether the waste material contains precious metals and environmentally significant elements and if so in what mineral phase(s) they occur. The samples were examined using geochemical analyses to obtain element concentrations, quantitative X-ray diffraction (XRD) for modal mineralogy of bulk components, optical analysis to identify mineral textures, scanning electron microscope – mineral liberation analysis (SEM–MLA) to determine the deportment of precious metal phases (i.e. liberated or as inclusions in other minerals) and laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICPMS) techniques to determine element deportment (i.e. in inclusions or in the mineral lattice), particularly within sulphide minerals. A thorough knowledge of the siting of these elements in the gossanous waste rocks has implications for the recovery of precious metals from these materials and the ultimate safe disposal of wastes in suitable repositories. The IPB is ∼250 Percolation of meteoritic water within the massive sulphides and associated stockworks induced the formation of gossans with complex mineral textures formed during long-term weathering since late Tertiary times ( Previous authors reported Ag to occur in the gossan as native silver, silver halides (e.g. cerargyrite (also called chlorargyrite)), silver sulphides, sulphates (e.g. jarosite) and mercury and/or silver sulpho-halides (e.g. Fieldwork was conducted at a historic gossan dump where samples were collected for mineralogical and geochemical characterisation. Samples consisted of twelve composite rock chip samples each more than 2 Sample powders (chip samples only) were analysed for 48 elements using a four-acid-digest followed by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) – atomic emission spectrometry (AES) and ICP – mass spectrometry (MS; procedure ME-MS61) at Australian Laboratory Services (ALS), Loughrea, Ireland. The samples were analysed for gold content using fire assay followed by ICP-AES (procedure Au-ICP21). Replicate analyses of a sample and the Certified Reference Material (CRM) NIST 2710a (Montana soil I) were included. Replicate determinations, including those for Au, agreed to within 5% (10% for Ba) for the sample. Replicate determinations agreed to within 5% (10% for Ni) for the CRM. Elemental recoveries for the CRM were in the range 95–105% (90–110% for Cd, Co and V and 85–115% for Ni, no certified value was available for Au). Sawn pieces of the grab samples were mounted in resin to form polished mounts. The mounts were coated with 20 LA-ICPMS analysis was performed on nine polished mounts containing sawn pieces of the grab samples and on four polished mounts containing particulate material from the chip samples to determine Au distribution. Free gold or gold-bearing minerals (e.g. electrum) may occur as micron to sub-micron inclusions (e.g. in hematite). If the gold particles are of sufficient size they can be identified in the ablation line data. The minimum size of gold inclusions that can be detected depends on: (1) the laser spot size, (2) the background low-level amount of gold in the mineral, and (3) the purity (fineness) of gold in the inclusion. For a standard spot size of 22 LA-ICPMS analysis was carried out using a Resonetics Resolution 193 X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses of the composite rock chip samples were obtained from finely milled sample splits with a Panalytical XPert Powder Diffractometer, using Co Kα radiation and a graphite monochromator. Operating conditions were: 40 A summary of elemental analysis results for the composite rock chip samples are shown in XRD analysis of the 12 composite rock chip samples demonstrates that the gossanous waste dump materials are largely composed of goethite (avg. 46 Precious metals largely occur within the iron oxide as inclusions of electrum and as inclusions and bands of Ag–Hg halides (dominantly Ag–Hg–Cl; ∼30–70 average wt.% Ag; Based on the SEM–MLA data collected from polished sections containing sawn pieces of the grab samples, inclusions of electrum range in size from <2 to ∼15 Similar precious metal-bearing oxide material (i.e. goethite–hematite rich gossan) is processed at the Cerro de Maimόn deposit (Dominican Republic) using cyanide leaching and Merrill–Crowe Au–Ag precipitation ( Processing of the gossanous material to extract precious metals may be possible using innovative new techniques. For example, plasma processing is currently under development ( Analysis of gossanous waste rock material demonstrates that precious metals are contained as inclusions of electrum, Au and Ag–Hg halides ((Ag, Hg) Cl) and rarely as Au–Ag–Hg inclusions. The inclusions largely occur within goethite where they may be encapsulated by iron oxide or occur within/next to quartz or barite. Approximately 20% of the overall inclusion surfaces are exposed and they occur at the edges of voids/pore spaces. Size of the electrum inclusions ranges from <2 to ∼15 The current work on gossanous waste rock from the IPB indicates that at least a portion of the precious metal surfaces are exposed, suggesting they may be amenable to extraction. However, the encapsulated nature of the precious metal inclusions along with their small size would likely make mineral processing difficult. In addition, the iron oxide hosting the inclusions contains some As, Bi and Pb. This combined with the Hg in the Ag–Hg halides may lead to difficulties with waste/tailings disposal and safe storage. However, this study is preliminary in nature and much more work could be done to characterise the gossanous waste material in detail and to develop a solid understanding of the content and deportment of precious metal and environmentally significant elements within gossanous ores and waste rocks to, in particular, determine their potential processability. The authors would like to acknowledge the support of CRC ORE, established and supported by the