The depression effect of chitosan on talc as well as the associated mechanisms were investigated at different pH values. The flotation results showed that chitosan is a useful depressant for talc flotation and that its depression effect is independent of pH. The adsorption mechanisms of chitosan were different at pH3 and 9. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis indicated that at pH3 and pH9, the chitosan adsorbed on talc surfaces through physical interactions. At pH3, the adsorption changed the zeta potential of the talc from negative to positive and the adsorption was achieved via hydrogen bonding interaction. At pH9, in addition to adsorption due to hydrogen bonding, the water-insoluble chitosan also deposited on the talc surfaces and shifted the slip surface of the electric double layer outward, thus making the surface potential of the talc gradually approach zero. The adsorbed chitosan could be washed away from the surface. This phenomenon occurred more easily at pH3, because the deposited chitosan dissolved and entered the aqueous phase again. Flotation separation tests on the mineral mixtures indicated that the chitosan could only be used as a selective depressant for chalcopyrite and talc separation at pH3.Talc is a magnesium-rich silicate mineral that typically associated with polymetallic sulfide deposits around the world. Talc is a mineral that floats easily, which therefore will affect the quality of sulfide concentrates. In particular, large amounts of talc in flotation concentrates can cause problems in the smelting process Chitosan is a natural cationic polysaccharide with large numbers of hydroxyl groups and amino groups In this study, the depression effect of chitosan on talc was investigated at different pH values, and the mechanisms were discussed, to determine whether chitosan is a suitable depressant for talc flotation. Pure talc was obtained from Haicheng, Liaoning province, China. According to results from X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectroscopy ( The chitosan (formula weight The single mineral flotation test was conducted in a mechanical agitation flotation machine ( For mixed minerals flotation, potassium butyl xanthate (PBX) was used as the chalcopyrite flotation collector. After flotation, the copper grade of the concentrates or tailings was analyzed by chemical titration method in the chemical analysis laboratory, and the recovery was calculated. 1 For these tests, 1 Zeta potential measurements of the talc were carried out using a ZetaProbe Analyzer manufactured by Colloidal Dynamics, LLC, USA. A stock mineral suspension was prepared by adding 1 For the XPS tests, 1  The influence of changes in the chitosan dosage on the talc recovery was studied for different pH conditions, and the results are shown in As shown in As shown in The desorption of chitosan from the talc surface was investigated at different pH values, and the results are shown in XPS was used to investigate the mechanisms responsible for the interaction of the chitosan with the talc. N 1s, Si 1s and Mg 1s XPS spectra were collected for the talc, before and after treatment with chitosan. As shown in  Flotation separation tests were performed on mixed minerals (chalcopyrite and talc with a 1:1 weight ratio) to verify the selectivity of chitosan, and the results are shown in Chitosan was a useful depressant for talc flotation, and its depression effect was independent of pH. However, the mechanism responsible for the adsorption of the chitosan was different at pH The authors acknowledge the support of the