In this study, the effect of bentonite and kaolinite minerals with low and high crystallinity on pulp rheology and the flotation of copper and gold minerals was investigated. It was found that clay minerals modified the pulp rheology depending on the type of clay minerals present. Bentonite, a 2:1 structured clay mineral increased pulp viscosity more significantly than kaolinite, a 1:1 structured clay mineral, and poorly crystallized kaolinite increased pulp viscosity more than well crystallized kaolinite. It was also found that pulp rheology modified by clay minerals was strongly correlated with copper and gold flotation. The higher pulp viscosity corresponded to the lower copper recovery. While high pulp viscosity was related to the decreased gold flotation, slightly increased pulp viscosity by clay minerals enhanced gold flotation.The mineral processing industry is well aware of the difficulty in treating high clayey ores. Currently, the ways to treat high clayey ores include blending them at a small proportion with normal ores, processing them at low solid concentrations, the use of viscosity modifiers and the removal of clay slimes from the flotation feed ( While the focus has been on slime coating and mechanical entrainment, the effect of clay minerals on pulp rheology and subsequent flotation has received less attention. In fact, the modification of pulp rheology is one of the most important characteristics of clay minerals. Due to their anisotropic structure and charge properties, clay platelets can form three different modes of association, edge-to-face (EF), edge-to-edge (EE) and face-to-face (FF) ( A number of studies have indicated a strong relationship between flotation performance and pulp rheological properties. It has been found that changes in rheology of mineral slurries influence the hydrodynamics within flotation cells and therefore various flotation sub-processes including gas dispersion and particle–bubble attachment as well as the mobility of particles and mineralised bubbles in the pulp phase ( Kaolinite and smectite are the most common clay minerals which are often associated with copper, gold and other valuable minerals. They have different structures and affect pulp rheology differently. Kaolinite, a non-swelling clay mineral with a 1:1 alumina to silica layered structure, has low chemical reactivity ( Montmorillonite belongs to the smectite group with a 2:1 alumina to silica layered structure. It is a swelling clay which can takes up to 10 times its weight and increases its volume by 20 times and the main component of bentonite ( In this study Snobrite and Q38 were chosen to represent well and poorly crystallized non-swelling kaolinite clay and bentonite was chosen to represent a more complicated swelling clay. The effect of Snobrite, Q38 and bentonite on pulp rheology in flotation and the subsequent flotation behaviour of copper and gold minerals were studied. A copper–gold ore with low clay content was crushed to a size of −2.36 Particle size distributions of these three clay mineral samples were measured by a Laser Diffraction Malvern Mastersizer (Malvern Instrument Ltd., U.K.) using a very dilute suspension (about 0.1% solids) conditioned with dispersants followed by ultrasonic dispersion for 20 Sodium isopropyl xanthate (SIPX) and Cytec Aero 3894A (a thionocarbamate) were used in this study as collectors. Huntsman polyfroth W22 was used as the frother. Brisbane tap water was used throughout the study. 1 In order to study the effect of various amounts of clay minerals on copper and gold flotation, a series of artificial mixtures of the clean ore and clay minerals were prepared. For each test a calculated amount of clean ore slurry (0–15% of the total solid by weight in each case) was taken out from the agitating flotation cell and replaced by the same amount of a well-mixed clay mineral suspension so that the concentration of clay minerals in the mixture varied from 0% to 15% while the solid density for all tests was kept constant. The mixed slurry was then conditioned with SIPX collector (6 Rheology measurements were conducted with an Ares rheometer (TA Instruments Ltd., U.S.) which employs a computation program so that measurement parameters such as shear stress, viscosity, and torque are directly calculated. A couette geometry with a stationary inner cylinder and a rotating outer cylinder was utilized. The gap between the inner bob (Diameter Each measurement required a sample of 15 The effect of Snobrite, Q38 and bentonite on the pulp rheology of the clean ore in flotation was investigated. The rheograms of the clean ore suspensions indicating the shear stress as a function of shear rate with and without the addition of Snobrite, Q38 and bentonite are shown in 15% clean ore was also ground to the same size of clay minerals and mixed with the ground clean ore slurry (P80 The variation of rheological characteristic of clean ore suspensions in the presence of kaolinite and bentonite at different concentrations is best explained in terms of the formation of aggregate structures. In a dilute kaolinite suspension at high pH values (pH To further examine the effect of clay minerals on the pulp rheology of the clean ore suspension, apparent viscosity at a shear rate of 100  Flotation tests on the clean ore were conducted in the absence and presence of Q38, Snobrite and bentonite to correlate pulp rheology with the flotation behaviour of valuable minerals. In the next two sections, the true flotation of copper and gold minerals were presented with entrainment excluded. To determine the true flotation, the degree of entrainment Since more than 80% Cu in the clean ore is associated with chalcopyrite, it is therefore assumed that the overall mass pull excluding copper mineral in the form of chalcopyrite is the recovery of gangue minerals by entrainment as the amount of other valuable minerals in the remaining concentrate is very small. Once the degree of entrainment is known, the recovery of copper or gold particles by entrainment The recovery of copper or gold minerals by true flotation is the difference between the overall recovery and the recovery by entrainment.    The enhancement in gold recovery in the presence of clay minerals in In this study, the replacements of clean ore by clay minerals increase the fineness of the solids in flotation slurries and turbulence damping can therefore be expected. In addition, It should be pointed out that the reporting of very fine clay minerals to froth zone is likely to enhance the froth stability and therefore improve the mineral flotation ( The current study found that clay mineral particle interactions in the flotation system dominated the pulp rheology. In particular, bentonite affected the pulp viscosity the most with the concentration investigated ranging from 5 to 15 Meanwhile, the pulp rheology of the clean ore suspension modified by clay minerals was strongly correlated with copper and gold flotation. The presence of Q38, Snobrite or bentonite had a deleterious effect on copper flotation, the extent of which depended on the pulp viscosity resulted. The higher the pulp viscosity, the lower was the copper recovery. Gold flotation followed copper flotation in response to the high pulp viscosity. However, the slightly increased pulp viscosity by Snobrite, Q38 or bentonite might favour gold flotation. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of this study from the Australian Research Council, Newmont Mining Corporation and Newcrest Mining Limited as well as the discussion and suggestion from Dr. Ronel Kappes at Newmont Mining Corporation and Dr. David Seaman at Newcrest Mining Limited. The first author also thanks the scholarship provided by China Scholarship Council (CSC) and the University of Queensland.