The influence of antimony, germanium and nickel ions, and of the organic additives hydroxyethylated-butyne-2-diol-1,4 (EAA) and triethyl-benzylammonium chloride (TEBA), on the process of zinc electrowinning from sulphuric acid electrolytes is studied. It is established that metal impurities decrease the current efficiency of zinc (CEZ) and, at higher concentrations, cause total redissolution of the deposited metal. The organic additives stop the process of zinc redissolution, increase current efficiency and improve the quality of the deposited metal. The results obtained were confirmed by pilot plant and industrial trials.A contemporary method for zinc production is its extraction from acid zinc sulphate electrolytes by electrolysis with aluminium cathodes and anodes made of lead–silver (1%) alloy. Zinc electrowinning is complicated by the presence of more electropositive ions than zinc, such as Ni, Co, Sb, Ge, etc. Most of the impurities are removed during electrolyte purification, but a certain amount that is sufficient to initiate a process known as “zinc redissolution” remains. By the addition of organic compounds to the electrolyte, it is possible to inhibit this process and to produce zinc with high current efficiency and good quality (Rashkov et al., 1989, A physical model explaining the nature of the induction period in the course of zinc redissolution in the presence of nickel ions has been proposed. This model is based on the action of the hydrogen bubbles arising on the areas of co-deposited zinc and nickel. Protection ceases on these spots and the action of Zn–Ni galvanic microelements initiates. The organic additives reduces the time of attachment of bubbles on the cathodic surface so that their local screening effect is eliminated. Cathodic protection is maintained during the electrolysis and the local galvanic microelements do not begin their work. As a result, the process of the reverse dissolution of the deposited zinc does not start and the metal deposits with a high current efficiency and good quality This paper present results of laboratory experiments and pilot plant and industrial trials on the above subject. The influence of metal ions and organic substances on current percentage efficiency of Zn (CEZ) was studied by measuring the volume of hydrogen evolved during Zn deposition and current efficiency of hydrogen (CEH) was determined by employing Faraday's laws. Thus, CEZ would be equal to 100-CEH. With the decrease in the current efficiency of hydrogen, the current efficiency of zinc increases and vice versa. The quantity of hydrogen evolved was measured with a burette and a glass bell, both placed over the cathode. The electrolyte filling the burette was displàced by the gas evolved and, thus, allowed measurement of the gas volume. The cathode was made of aluminium with 4-cm When there are no impurity ions at concentrations above the allowed critical limits, the cathodic Zn obtained is thick and smooth, and has a light grey colour without dendrites on the edges. Increasing the impurity concentration leads to rapid increase in CEH, and the process of Zn redissolution starts at the beginning of electrolysis. The coating formed is perforated and corrosion ulcers are formed on the cathodic side and dendrites on the edges. At the highest concentration studied by us, practically no Zn deposits. Of all organic substances studied, the best results were obtained with hydroxyethylated-butyne-2-diol-1,4 (EAA) added to the electrolyte containing Sb    A pilot plant installation for Zn electrowinning was constructed for the performance of the trials. It included two analogous technological lines consisting of upper and lower reservoirs of volume 1000 L and electrolysis bath of volume 21 L, equipped with three Al cathodes and four anodes made of Pb–Ag (1%) alloy. The electrolysis conditions were as follows: current density 5 A dm To the electrolyte supplied from the electrolysis department of Plovdiv Non-Ferrous Metal Enterprise, a solution containing the respective impurity ions were added in order to increase their content to the necessary concentration. Samples of the electrolyte were taken every 6 h and, if necessary, the concentration of each impurity was adjusted so that it was kept constant during the 24-h electrolysis cycle. After the necessary quantity of inhibitor IT-85 was initially introduced in the second reservoir, no corrections of its concentration were made during the whole cycle. In the bath containing only impurity metal ions, deposition and redissolution cycles began about the ninth hour after electrolysis initiation and were repeated several times. The zinc obtained was strongly perforated, oxidized and powdered at its detachment from the cathode. Pieces of the coatings were separated from the cathode during electrowinning and reached the bottom of the bath and dissolved Industrial trials were performed on a cascade in Plovdiv Non-Ferrous Metal Enterprise. The working conditions (current density, temperature, acidity and electrolyte composition, animal glue and foaming agent concentrations) were the same as in the rest of the cascades in the series. During the experiments, the electrolyte did not contain impurities at concentrations above the critical values. Solution of the inhibition additive was added for a period 960 h so that its concentration was kept 0.05 mL L The zinc current efficiency of the experimental cascade was 84.6%, while for the same period of time, the average zinc current efficiency obtained for the rest of the cascades was 82.0%. Therefore, the average increase in CEZ for the experimental cascade was 2.6% and its day to day variation was from 0.5% to 4.5%. The studies carried out indicated that the quantity of block Zn was 14% higher when electrowinning was run with inhibitor addition in the electrolyte. This was due to the decrease in the amount of oxide products.  Samples of the cathodic zinc obtained were subjected to emission spectral analysis. The results obtained indicated that addition of inhibitor in the electrolyte lowered the content of the metal impurities in the zinc coating. Results were as follows: Fe 1.2 times, Pb 3 times, Cu 7.5 times, Cd 13.5 times, Ni up to 2 times, Sb 6 times and Ge from 4 to 10 times, i.e. with regard to the metal impurity content, the quality of cathodic metal was significantly improved.  The addition of inhibitor EAA stops the reverse dissolution of zinc in the presence of antimony and germanium ions and reduces hydrogen evolution. When the impurity ions and the inhibitor EAA or IT-85 are added to the electrolyte at the early stage of the electrodeposition process, the fraction of hydrogen produced is decreased to 11–13%. The addition of the inhibitor TEBA or IT-85 to the electrolyte containing antimony, germanium and nickel ions does suppress the redissolution process. If the inhibitors are added before the addition of these metal ions, reverse dissolution does not occur and a smooth deposit at high current efficiency is obtained. Redissolution does not occur also in cases when these metal ions and TEBA or IT-85 are simultaneously added to the solution. The zinc obtained in the bath containing only impurity metal ions is strongly perforated, oxidized and powdered at its detachment from the cathode. The zinc obtained in the presence of inhibitor additives is light grey in colour and is thick, smooth, without pitting and dendrites on the surface or the edges. The current efficiency of zinc in the bath containing inhibitor is much higher than that of zinc produced in the bath containing only metal impurities. The current efficiency of zinc obtained in the experimental cascade containing inhibitor is about 2% higher than the average current efficiency of zinc obtained in the rest of cascades without inhibitor. The addition of inhibitor in the electrolyte lowers the content of the impurities in the zinc coating and improves the quality of cathodic metal.