The discharge capacities of pellet- and paste-type AB5 alloy electrodes were investigated. The LmNi3.6Al0.4Co0.7Mn0.3 alloy was chosen and the alloy powder was coated with various amounts of copper by the electroless plating method. The pellet-type electrodes were fabricated by cold pressing the copper-coated alloy powder into disks of 10 mm diameter without any binding material and the paste-type electrodes were prepared by pasting the bare or the copper-coated alloy powders onto the foamed nickel with some organic binders. The discharge capacities of the electrodes were measured through half cell tests. The experimental results showed that for the pellet-type electrodes, as the amount of copper coat increased the discharge capacity per weight of electrode decreased whereas that per weight of alloy increased. For the paste-type electrodes the copper coated alloy powder showed a much higher discharge capacity than the bare alloy powder. However, the increase of the copper coat over a certain amount did not increase the discharge capacity per weight of alloy while decreasing that per weight of electrode. Considering the discharge capacity and mechanical endurance, the most promising electrode was the paste-type electrode with 2.5 wt.% Cu-coated alloy powder and no carbon black.The AB LmNi The pressure–composition isotherms for the copper-coated alloy powders are shown in The discharge capacities of the pellet type electrodes per gram electrode and per gram alloy are shown in The discharge capacities of the paste-type electrodes per gram electrode and per gram alloy are shown in The important difference between the commercial paste-type and the laboratory pellet-type electrodes is that the former uses the bare alloy powder and the latter uses the copper-coated alloy powder. But when copper-coated alloy powder was used for both electrodes the discharge capacities per gram alloy for both electrodes were the same. This implies that the difference lies in the copper coating. Copper coating of the alloy powder has two effects: one is to provide a good electrical conductivity to the electrode due to the deposited copper; the other is the removal of the surface oxide film of the alloy powder due to the sulfuric acid etching. Both effects can increase the utilization of the alloy powder and subsequently increase the discharge capacity.  The pellet-type electrode prepared with the Cu-coated alloy powder has a higher discharge capacity than the paste-type electrode with the bare alloy powder. This can be attributed to the improved utilization of the alloy powder by copper coating in the pellet-type electrode. When Cu-coated alloy powders with <10 wt.% Cu are used, the paste-type electrode has the same discharge capacity as the pellet type. The paste-type electrode prepared with 2.5wt.% Cu-coated alloy powder and no carbon black is promising for practical use due to its high discharge capacity and good mechanical endurance. This work was supported by the RRC-HECS, CNU under grant 98-06.