An analytical model is presented for wave mixing of two incident non-collinear plane waves at a plane contact interface characterised by a nonlinear traction law that is representative of rough-surface contact, where the normal response is described by a quadratic nonlinearity whereas the tangential response is linear. The approach relies on a decomposition of the scattered field into contributions exhibiting distinctive symmetries with respect to the interface, combined with a perturbation analysis that treats the nonlinear response as a small correction relative to a linear response. The decomposition is shown to lead to uncoupled governing equations, thereby enabling explicit analytical formulae to be derived for the scattered field amplitudes for a linear interface, which in turn provides the source terms for determining the amplitudes and directions of the nonlinear mixed waves. The characteristics of ultrasound wave mixing at an interface are thus shown to differ in several respects from bulk wave mixing due to material nonlinearity. In particular, interface mixing generates mixed waves at the sum and difference frequencies that propagate in both forward and backward directions (transmitted and reflected), whereas bulk mixing only produces a forward propagating mixed wave at the sum frequency. The directions of propagation for interface mixing are determined from the sum or difference of the components of the incident wave vectors parallel to the interface, coupled with the sum or difference of the frequencies, which constitutes a generalisation of Snell's law. These directions generally differ from the sum of the wave vectors that provides the propagation direction for bulk mixing. A computational model is also presented that confirms these predictions of the analytical model. The implications of both models for the design and interpretation of experimental investigations are briefly discussed.Non-collinear wave mixing provides an attractive approach for detecting various forms of material degradation or structural damage that give rise to a nonlinear ultrasonic response. This approach was first demonstrated by Croxford et al. [ The experimental work of Croxford et al. [ More recently, Alston et al. [ The aim of the present work is to provide an analytical model for wave mixing at a contact interface that is characterised by a general traction law between the normal and shear stresses at the interface and the relative normal and tangential displacements across the interface. This interface model is conceptually equivalent to having nonlinear springs across the interface, which has been shown to be an effective model for rough-surface contact in the presence of a compressive stress that prevents loss of contact [ The presentation is organised as follows. First, the behaviour of rough-surface contact is briefly discussed in Section  Prior to ultrasonic probing, the blocks are assumed to be subjected to a clamping force that gives rise to a contact stress of magnitude The total normal stress at the interface is now given by This restriction implies that the interface always remains in contact, i.e. there is no clapping, unlike the case modelled computationally in Ref. [ In keeping with conventional practice for interface modelling [ As can be seen from The interface response is characterised by a traction law that is assumed to be monotonic and continuously differentiable, so that it can be approximated in the neighbourhood of the reference state From the schematic relation shown in This traction law in Eq. A traction law has also been derived for shear wave incidence, based on a micromechanical model of contacting asperities [ Consequently, the nonlinear response of the interface in the present work is entirely attributable to the quadratic nonlinearity of the tension/compression springs characterised by the first-order coefficient Consider a 2D plane strain configuration where two plane waves, identified by suffixes A and B, are incident on a plane interface located at The angle of incidence will be denoted by For incident SV waves, the direction of polarisation is indicated by an arrow, as shown in Each incident SV wave in isolation will, in general, generate reflected, refracted and transmitted waves as indicated in The fundamental concept in Ref. [ First, for a Consequently, Furthermore, Secondly, for a Furthermore, The associated displacement field for The displacements for It is emphasized that the representations in Eqs. When employing the representations in Eqs. Consider the interaction of two incident plane waves at a contact interface, as indicated in Once the amplitudes For an interface characterised by a general traction law as in Eq. A perturbation analysis then consists in a successive approximation scheme obtained by grouping terms in the traction law according to successive powers of This corresponds to the case of linear springs, for which linear superposition applies, i.e. the relative displacements are simply the sum of the relative displacements produced by each incident wave separately. The second approximation (or first-order correction) is governed by the following equations, Before proceeding to state the results for specific combinations of incident waves, it is pertinent to note two important features of these equations. First, the stress boundary conditions in Eqs. Consider first the case of two incident SV waves, identified as A and B, as indicated in For this incident wave in isolation, the zeroth-order solution for the complex amplitudes of the relative displacements across the interface is given by Ref. [ The incident field for wave B is given as follows, keeping in mind the direction of polarisation as shown in The source terms for the first-order correction in Eq. Equation Thus, Eq. It is clear from Eq. By retaining only the sum-frequency source term in Eq. This equation has the same form as for the zeroth-order problem (cf. Appendix), which leads to the following solution for the complex amplitude The wave pattern for the sum-frequency mixed waves is shown in Consider next the source term involving the difference of the incident frequencies, where it is assumed, without loss of generality, that The amplitudes of the resulting P and SV waves can again be obtained by substituting Eq. The wave pattern is shown in Consider next the case of two incident longitudinal waves A and B as shown in The solution of the zeroth-order problem for the relative displacements is now found to be Following the same approach as for SV/SV incidence (see Appendix for details), the complex amplitude solutions for the Mode I opening is found to be The amplitudes of the mixed-frequency P and SV waves are obtained by substituting Eq. Again, three regimes can be identified for the scattering of the mixed wave at the sum or difference frequency, as shown in Finally, consider the case where wave A is a shear wave given by Eq. The preceding analysis indicates a fundamentally different mechanism for wave mixing due to interface nonlinearity relative to bulk nonlinearity. To discuss the difference in more detail, it is first recalled that bulk mixing relies on an internal resonance that requires a spatial matching of the spacing between the intersecting wave crests of the incident waves and the wavelength of a mixed wave at the sum frequency This resonance condition leads to the following formula for the interaction angle between the incident waves [ This formula only involves the frequency ratio None of these characteristics apply to interface mixing. First, the mixing does not involve an internal resonance. Secondly, the mixing does not give rise to a single wave mode at a single frequency and propagating in a single direction. Instead, both P and SV mixed waves are generated, with the waves propagating in both the forward direction (transmitted waves) and the backward direction (reflected waves), and at both the sum and the difference frequencies, as documented in Section Before considering in more detail the dependence of amplitude on interaction angle, it is worth noting that for both bulk and interface mixing, the analytical approach employs a perturbation analysis, i.e. the nonlinear response is assumed to be a small correction whose amplitude depends on a source term generated by the linear response. However, the response of an interface bridged by linear springs involves one or more characteristic frequencies (unlike the bulk linear response, as noted above). For the case of interest in the present work, where the nonlinearity is restricted to the tension/compression response at the interface (Section To illustrate how the present analysis can guide the design and interpretation of experiments, consider SV/SV incident waves, as shown in Bulk and interface mixing [ The variation of the mixed P wave amplitude with interaction angle for interface mixing is shown in The distinctive features in It is worth noting that the perturbation analysis is restricted to weakly nonlinear traction law and it is thus expected that the amplitude of the mixed waves is accurately predicted for relatively low level of nonlinearity. However, the other characteristics of the interface wave mixing presented in the previous sections also apply for larger nonlinearity, including the case of clapping. In particular, it remains true that (i) the scattered field can be expressed in terms of the relative displacements across the interface, which can be decomposed into Mode I and Mode II contributions; (ii) the wave mixing gives rise to source terms involving both sum and difference frequencies; and (iii) the mixed frequency waves propagate both forwards and backwards (corresponding to transmitted and reflected waves), with the angles of propagation being determined from the sum or difference of the components of the incident wave vectors parallel to the interface, which is a generalisation of Snell's law to interface wave mixing. The computational results presented in the next section will be seen to confirm the predictions of the analytical model presented above. The objective of this section is to present finite element (FE) simulations that provide an independent validation of the interface wave-mixing characteristics discussed in Section A representative FE model (2D plane strain) is shown in The incident waves A and B are generated by imposing normal (P wave) or tangential (SV wave) displacements on a 120 mm face located 100 mm away from the origin and oriented to emit the waves with the desired angle of incidence. The dimension of the input face and the use of spatial apodisation ensure near plane wave conditions, as shown in The output nodal displacements are recorded over 40 mm long segments located 40 mm and 60 mm away from the origin to capture respectively the scattered mixed SV and P waves, as shown in Fig. . These output segments are oriented perpendicularly to the expected directions of propagation from Section The blocks are assumed to be isotropic, with material properties for aluminium alloy, as given above in Section Six different configurations including the three types of incident mode pairs SV/SV, P/P and SV/P are considered here to demonstrate the existence of the mixed P and SV waves at the sum or difference frequency, and to verify that the analytical solution provides the correct direction of propagation and amplitude. An FE model was constructed for each of these 6 cases using the parameters indicated in The compression load at the interface is set at In particular, for SV/SV-1, where two incident shear waves interact to generate a mixed P wave at the sum frequency, the numerical results confirm that the directions of propagation are defined solely by the For the second case SV/SV-2 shown in The third case P/P-1 shown in The results for the interaction between SV and P waves are presented in These numerical results validate the analytical solutions regarding the existence of mixed waves, and their directions of propagation and amplitudes. These results also confirm the differences with bulk mixing noted in Section Returning to the particular case SV/SV-1, consider now the response for different compression loads (and hence different linear stiffness The perturbation approach as an asymptotic approximation which is appropriate in the limit of weak nonlinearity or small perturbation (i.e. small amplitude). However, for stronger nonlinearity, it is still expected that the analytical solutions retain the correct trends for the dependence on input parameters such as wave mode and interaction angle. An analytical model for wave mixing at a contact interface has been presented, based on a perturbation analysis for a nonlinear traction law representative of rough-surface contact. This has been shown to lead to several new fundamental insights into the characteristics of interface mixing, which differ significantly from those of bulk wave mixing due to material nonlinearity. In both cases, the nonlinear response is assumed to be a small correction to the linear response. However, the response for an interface bridged by linear springs involves a characteristic frequency, related to the linear spring coefficient for the interface traction law (which can in turn depend on the contact stress), whereas the bulk linear response involves no characteristic frequency. This means that experimental characterisation of interface mixing due to rough-surface contact should first seek to identify that characteristic frequency, which is most readily achieved by investigating the reflection and/or transmission coefficients for normal wave incidence. A systematic characterisation of interface mixing should be presented in terms of the normalised frequency None. This work was supported by an The objective in this Appendix is to indicate the main steps in deriving the analytical results presented in Section It can be seen that the solution of the zeroth-order equation It was shown in Ref. [ Next, for an incident P wave shown in Recalling that These results for single-wave incidence can now be combined to provide the relative displacements for various combinations of incident waves to obtain the source term in Eq. However, now that the source term has been correctly identified, it is advantageous to exploit the fact that Eq. This equation now has the same form as the zeroth-order equation for which an explicit solution can be derived [ The same approach can be used for the other combinations of incident waves. The approach can also be extended to the case of nonlinearity for the shear response of the interface, as was done in Ref. [