The paper discusses the outcome of a series of test work carried out in a screw type batch vertical stirred mill to evaluate the effect of experimental conditions on the product particle size distribution and generation of fines. A time-based population balance model has been utilized to develop mill selection and breakage function for different operating conditions. A systematic variation in both selection and breakage functions of the population balance model with changes in process conditions are fitted through regression models.Fine grinding is becoming increasingly common in mineral processing plants in order to liberate valuable minerals from fine-grained and low-grade ore bodies. Stirred milling technology are gaining wider acceptance in replacing ball mills for fine grinding (<100      The standard breakage function developed by Broadbent and Callcott, has been successfully used for ball mill modelling and simulation ( The selection function shows the rate at which particles are selected for breakage. Particle selectivity for breakage depends on its size and changes with process conditions of the mill. The general shape of the selection function is shown in A α μ  The grinding test work was carried out in a 2.2 Limestone, with a size distribution as shown in The influence of three significant mill operating variables i.e. grinding media size, mill tip speed and percent solids concentration were tested in this study. Three factorial Box-Behnken experimental design was used to develop the series of experiments. The experimental design allowed a significant reduction in the number of tests while generating sufficient data to develop process model. In total, fifteen experiments were carried out including two repeat experiments. The materials for the grinding test were prepared according to the following criteria. The mass of materials required for the grinding test was calculated to completely fill the voids between grinding media particles. The average porosity value (voids between the grinding media) was considered to be 40% of all media sizes as suggested by The specific energy for each experiment was calculated based on the torque data generated by the torque sensor. The torque transducer was calibrated in order to ensure the reliability of the measurement. For calibrating the torque, a special arrangement was made by fixing the upper portion i.e. the portion on top of torque meter of the mill shaft and the lower portion was connected to a one meter straight metal bar in a perpendicular direction as shown in The torque was converted from torque (N Experimental responses were measured by determining how product particle distribution changes and the amount of fines generated in each experimental run. Ground product particle size distributions were compared for the thirteen different experimental conditions. The effect of media size on particle size distribution is shown in The effect of tip speed on the product fineness was studied by varying through three levels (i.e. 2.0, 2.5 and 3.0 The effect of solids concentration was also tested in the batch mill, which differs from a continuous mill. In the case of the batch mill, the solids concentration has a direct effect on the specific energy for a given power. For a constant mill power draw, the specific energy reduces as the solids concentration increases. This phenomenon was observed due to the increase in the mass of materials in the mill. Based on this argument, the higher solids concentration resulted in coarser particle size distribution for both the samples as shown in A measure of process efficiency can be drawn based on the new fine particle generation. For this work, the −75µm has been chosen as the marker to represent the product fineness. In the experimental test work, generation of fine particles was changing with experimental conditions. The breakage parameters i.e. selection function and breakage function for each experimental run were generated by using the time based population balance model proposed by Different sets of selection and breakage functions were developed for different experimental conditions and then analysed to identify the influence of process variables over mill breakage parameters. The general shape of vertical stirred mill breakage function is shown in It has been found that the breakage function in the batch mill changes with energy input and grinding media size. With increase in screw tip speed, the degree of attrition in the breakage function increases. Higher tip speed incorporates more particles and grinding media interaction in the mill, resulting in greater attrition breakage in the batch mill as shown in Slurry solids concentration also affected the breakage function as shown in The effect of grinding media on the breakage function for the batch mill is shown in The range of values for the breakage function parameters in Eq. Regression models were developed both for Φ (Eq. Before developing individual breakage function for each experimental condition, a single breakage function was utilized to fit the product size. A higher fitting error was found while utilizing a single breakage function for Limestone (ore specific breakage function) developed by A linier selection function was used while fitting the product size of the batch mill using the population balance model. Fitting results showed that the particle selection function changed with process conditions, and certain condition favoured higher selectivity for breakage compared to others. The effect of grinding media size over particle selection function is shown in For limestone the values for “A” ranged from 11.56 to 45.68, whereas a good fit to the data was found for a constant value of 1.58 for α. it is concluded that the A value changes with the process conditions and α remains constant for a specific ore. Application of the time based population balance model for developing selection and breakage function of a batch vertical stirred mill is discussed in this paper. The results reveal that both particle selection and breakage function changes with process conditions within the vertical stirred mill. The developed breakage function indicates that attrition is the predominant mode of breakage in the vertical stirred mill and its model parameters should respond to changes in process conditions. Hence, sub-models relating the breakage function parameters to the process conditions should be developed from laboratory test work for simulating the mill. The selection function in the vertical stirred mill can be described by a linear function for limestone and depends on the process conditions, but remains parallel in log-log space as the gradient function is constant for a given ore. The test result shows that higher mill tip speed, lower solids concentration and smaller grinding media size generates finer particle size distribution in the batch mill. Therefore, higher particle selection function was recorded for the batch vertical stirred mill at higher tip speed, lower solids concentration and lower grinding media sizes. This paper shows the applicability of the population balance model to the vertical stirred mill operation along with presenting the range of parameters for the breakage and selection functions in this batch laboratory-scale operation. The dependency of the product size and fine particle generation in response to changes in the process conditions has been highlighted in the paper. The work would have not been possible without the extensive support and assistance of the pilot plant staff of JKMRC. The work is conducted as part of a collaborative research project in development of stirred milling technology funded by