It has been 10years since the JK size-dependent breakage model was developed (Shi and Kojovic, 2007). Part 2 of the review focuses on the model application to the assessment of material strength and energy requirements for size reduction. In the application for assessment of ore pre-weakening effects, two methods, the A×b based method and the t
                     10 based method, are reviewed. The review also covers a coke strength index, the JKCSI, which unifies various rotating drum indices in different world standards into one single index, and a procedure to predict coal grindability, the HGI. In the application for energy assessment, the JK size-dependent breakage model is used to smooth the energy-size reduction relationship and predict crusher energy requirement, to explain the non-linear response of power station grinding mill capacity with the coal grindability index HGI, to develop a benchmark energy factor to assess energy efficiency for comminution equipment and circuits, and to estimate specific energy reduction resulting from the high voltage pulse pre-weakening effect. Many of these applications were possible only after the JK size-dependent breakage model became available.Since the JK size-dependent breakage model was developed ( Before reviewing the applications of the JK size-dependent breakage model for assessment of material strength and energy requirement in size reduction, this section summarises the principles of these applications. The JKMRC (Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre) has been using a breakage model (Eq. A modified model was introduced by For engineering applications where a feed particle is often presented with a unit of mm and mass specific energy in kWh Parameter It has been found that the parameters Eq. Comparing Eq. Eq. From Eq. In a high energy single impact breakage characterisation test, Eq. Based on the abovementioned principles, the JK size-dependent breakage model has found a number of applications in the past 10 In mineral processing research and operation, sometimes it is required to assess ore hardness changes, such as comparing the ore resistance to grinding between fresh AG/SAG feed and recycled pebbles, the ore strength between HPGR feed and product, or the degree of ore damaged by a mechanical comminution device (e.g. a crusher) or a non-mechanical comminution system (e.g. microwave, high voltage pulses (HVP)). In these comparisons, the strength of the untreated ore is often used as a benchmark. Since For a valid comparison, the The JK size-dependent breakage model has been proved to be a useful tool for ore pre-weakening assessment. In order to evaluate the effect of pre-weakening by HVP, the percentage change of It was noticed that the relationship between the There are a number of limitations in the practical use of the ore availability for a standard DWT or JKRBT tests to generate the the two ore samples being compared are tested with the DWT or JKRBT at different particle size fractions, and thus the the non-linear nature of percentage These limitations have led to the development of a  The following trends were observed from The majority of the HVP-treated The relation of The relationship between A mathematical description of the relationship between It can be seen that parameter To implement the The nine sets of data shown in The error bars presented in The Coke strength affects blast furnace performance. Rotating drum indices are commonly used as the measure of the mechanical strength of cokes. Over the past half century, various drum testing standards with different coke strength indices have been published and used in the market, such as the American Standard (ASTM), British Standard (BS MICUM), Australian Standard (AS MICUM), French Standard (IRSID) and Japanese Standard (JIS). The different standards utilise different coke strength indices. For example, The ASTM uses Stability (% These indices are merely the product sizing results under restricted conditions. Since the standard tumbling drums have different geometries (diameter, length, number of lifter and lifter size) and testing conditions (rotational speed, tumbling revolutions, coke feed size and mass), the indices from various standards are not comparable. For example, the BS Micum and AS Micum both use M A research project was therefore undertaken within ACARP (the Australian Coal Association Research Program) to develop a unified coke strength index from the various drum testing standards. The JK size-dependent breakage model that has been developed and successfully applied for the mineral industry was employed for the coke industry. The drum testing data were fitted to Eq. The challenge in applying the JK size-dependent breakage model for coke strength characterisation is to estimate the mass specific energy level for each tumbling drum. Experiments were undertaken using the JKRBT for incremental breakage of narrowly sized coke samples. The results of the coke incremental breakage were presented in Part 1 of the review. The same cokes in the same size fractions were also tumbled in each drum under the standard drum testing conditions. The JK size-dependent breakage model was then applied to the JKRBT incremental breakage data to generate the characteristic parameters Once the cumulative specific energy levels, Similar to the use of The physical meaning of JKCSI is the rate (kg The Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) is widely used by the coal industry. The original HGI test was developed by Ralph Hardgrove in 1929 to measure empirically the relative difficulty of grinding coal in the then newly developed pulverized coal boiler furnace ( Despite the wide applications of HGI in the coal industry, the literature has reported a number of limitations ( The JK size-dependent breakage model was applied to the JKFBC data reduction, taking both grinding output and input into consideration ( The prediction is effected by the strong correlation between the The major challenge is to predict the specific energy consumed for a given coal in the JKFBC test. As shown in Specific energy The Once A total of 41 sets of HGI data were used to validate the HGI prediction method, covering an HGI range from 38 to 89. The data sets consist of 19 sets of coal samples from the Australian and Chinese power stations, 21 sets of ore samples covering gold, copper and industrial minerals, and one set of clinker collected in a Chinese cement plant.  Application using the JK size-dependent breakage model to predict HGI may have the potential to guide coal blending and washing to allow coal producers to manage product specification. It has also been used in the vertical spindle mill model developed for power station PF grinding to convert the coal breakage characteristic parameters to HGI that the coal industry is familiar with. The vertical spindle mill modelling work will be presented in Part 3 of the review. The JKMRC crusher model ( To produce the energy-size reduction map, the traditional method is to use the three DWT data points at three energy impact tests for each feed size to fit the Since the top size particles tested in the DWT are 53–63 The JK size-dependent breakage model has now been applied to generate the energy-size reduction map. The whole 15 sets of DWT data or 12 sets of JKRBT data are used to fit the model parameters  When the HGI test was developed, it aimed to predict PF (pulverized fuel) grinding capacity. The literature reported a non-linear response of mill capacity with HGI values. Power station operation has found that when coal grindability (HGI) changes from 50 to 40, the grinding mill capacity decreases dramatically, while when HGI changes from 90 to 80 the effect on mill capacity is almost negligible, despite the same 10 The multi-component breakage model based on the JK size-dependent breakage model can explain the reasons for this anomaly. Simulations were conducted to calculate the energy requirement to achieve a nominal PF production, e.g. 20% passing 0.075 These four sets of model parameters were used to calculate the The simulations indicate that in order to achieve the same PF production rate, when the feed HGI changes from 50 to 40, the mill energy has to be increased from 6.0  The core equation used to estimate the minimum practical energy was from the As noted in Part 1 of this review, this model is coincidently the same as the JK size-dependent breakage model when parameter The calibrated model is used to back calculate the specific energy In reviewing the calculation algorithm and the worked example presented in Nevertheless, it has been proved that the size-dependent breakage model can be applied to estimate the energy requirement to produce a desired product from a given feed size, and the model-predicted specific energy used as a benchmark to assess energy efficiency in full scale comminution processes.  Once the material breakage characteristic parameters ( By way of example, the relation between energy reduction by pre-weakening and the target product index   Part 2 of this review has focussed on the applications of the JK size-dependent breakage model ( In energy assessment applications, the JK size-dependent breakage model was used to smooth the energy-size reduction relationship for JKMRC crusher model implemented in the commercial software JKSimMet. The model was applied to explain the well-known observation of the non-linear response of power station grinding mill capacity with the coal grindability index HGI. The model has also been applied by other researchers to develop a benchmark energy factor to assess energy efficiency for comminution equipment and circuits. Finally, the estimation of specific energy reduction resulting from the HVP pre-weakening effect was demonstrated. Many of these applications are possible only after the JK size-dependent breakage model became available. The author appreciates the financial support provided by the following organisations for the JKMRC projects presented in this review article: