Biomaterial-associated infections (BAI) are the major cause of failure of indwelling medical devices. The risk of BAI can end dramatically in the surgical removal of the affected device. Therefore, a major effort must be undertaken to guarantee the permanence of the implant. In this regard, we have developed antimicrobial coatings for tantalum (Ta) implants, using polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) as matrices for carrying an active principle. The dip-coating technique was successfully used for covering solid Ta discs. An original PHA emulsion flow process was developed for the coating of porous Ta structures, specially for the inner surfaces. The complete characterization of the biopolymer coatings, their antibacterial properties, toxicity and biointegration were analyzed. Thus, non-toxic, well-biointegrated homogeneous biopolymer coatings were attained, which showed antibacterial properties. By using biodegradable PHAs, the resulting drug delivery system assured the protection of Ta against bacterial infections for a period of time.Since the number of joint replacements, spinal surgeries, and dental implantations has increased in the past few decades, an urgent need has arisen to prevent implant-associated infections [ Tantalum (Ta) is one of the most chemically stable and biologically inert biometal used in orthopedic implants, and is characterized by its excellent anticorrosion resistance and biocompatibility. However, its significantly high elastic modulus (186 GPa), and density (16.6 g/cm In a previous work [ Solid 10 mm diameter and 1 mm thick Ta discs were supplied by Goodfellow company (Goodfellow Bros., Inc., Washington, USA), while the porous Ta samples for cervical spinal implant (marketed under the name of Trabecular Metal™ Material) were supplied by the Zimmer Biomet company (Indiana, USA). The PHA's used for the study, poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB), poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) (PHBV) and (PHB4HB), were kindly provided by Dr. Martin Koller from the Institute of Biotechnology and Biomedical Engineering of Graz (Austria). The antibiotic used was gentamicin sulfate (Genta, with a molecular mass of 477.596 g/mol, freely soluble in water) purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Missouri, USA). Chemical products such as hydrogen peroxide, Trichloromethane, poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) were also purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, and used without further purification. Biopolymers molecular masses (Mw) and their corresponding polydispersity indices (PDI) were determined with gel performance chromatography (GPC), using a Waters Styragel HT column (Waters Corporation, Massachusetts, USA). Chloroform was used as an eluent at a flow rate of 0.80 ml/min with a stabilization pressure of 35 bars, and a sample concentration of 1.5 mg ml Smooth, mirror-like surfaces were achieved by grinding with SiC papers of decreasing grit size (from P800 to P4000, European grade standard), followed by polishing with diamond crystal suspension (1 μm particle size) on cotton cloths. Samples were then ultrasonically rinsed with distilled water, ethanol and acetone. Finally, they were stored under a vacuum. Sodium hydroxide treatment (NaOH) was carried out after polishing. Ta disks were immersed in 2 and 5 M NaOH freshly prepared solution in closed poly(propylene) flasks. They were then placed into a furnace at 60 °C for 24 h, after which the samples were cleaned and immersed in Milli-Q water for 30 min, and rinsed with water of the same quality and acetone. They were dried with nitrogen, and stored in a vacuum. Based on our previously reported studies [ The viscosity of the emulsions was determined for their characterization. A rotational viscometer Haake Mars (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) was used at 25 °C and with a fixed rotation speed of 0,6 mm/min to determine the viscosity of the biopolymer emulsions. The daily fresh prepared W/O emulsion was used to coat Ta surfaces via dip-coating following a methodology previously reported from studies with Ti [ Preliminary studies for the coating of porous Ta samples were carried out with PHBV emulsified in chloroform. The usual PHBV concentrated solution and a 10% diluted one were used to prepare the emulsion. The samples were initially place into chloroform, and then briefly subjected to ultrasound, so as to eliminate the air entrapped in the sample pores and to improve their wettability with the biopolymer emulsion. Samples were placed inside a syringe. With the syringe capped, a volume of biopolymer emulsion was poured into the syringe body, in an amount sufficient to cover the sample. The plunger was inserted back into the syringe body, and the trapped air was eliminated by tilting the syringe upwards and applying pressure. With the syringe capped, a force of approximately 2.20 kN (7 kPa of pressure) was executed for 5 min. Then, the stopper of the cannula was removed to let the emulsion flow though the sample until the plunger reached the sample. Finally, the sample was collected and left to dry in the air. Contact angles with water were measured for the characterization of the Ta surface hydrophilicity, and with biopolymer concentrate solutions (40 mg/mL in chloroform) to study the wettability (affinity) of the biopolymer to the substrate. Static contact angles were estimated using the sessile drop method (Contact Angle System OCA15 Plus; Dataphysics, Germany). Measurements were acquired in triplicate for three samples at room temperature, with a volume of 3 μL, and a dose of 1 μL/s. A field emission scanning electron microscope JEOL JSM-7001 F (Toyo, Japan) operating at 20 kV was used to study the morphology and topography of the PHAs coatings. Back scattered electron (BSE) images were used to analyze and confirm that the Ta surfaces were completely covered by the dip-coating method. Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) was also used for the elemental analysis of the surfaces. High-resolution images allowed pore diameters to be measured using Photoshop (Adobe Systems, San Jose, CA, USA). White light interferometry (Wyko NT1100 Optical Profiler, Veeco Instruments, USA) was used to evaluate the roughness of the samples. The average height (Ra) of each sample was measured in three randomly chosen points on the disk. The thickness of the coatings was measured with a Dektak 150 profilometer (Veeco Instruments, USA) with a scan length of 6 mm and a measuring range of 524 μm. The methodology used to analyze the toxicity of coated Ta surfaces was an indirect in vitro test carried out with human osteoblast-like SaOS-2 cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA). Although SaOS-2 cells are an osteosarcoma cell line, their suitability as osteoblast cell model has been widely demonstrated [ Human osteoblast-like SaOS-2 cells were seeded at a density of 20,000 cells/disk onto sterilized and coated Ta discs loaded with antibiotic, and incubated in an atmosphere at 37 °C containing 5% (v/v) CO Porous and solid Ta samples were sterilized by washing them three times for 5 min in ethanol (70%, v/v), and they were then kept under UV overnight. A commonly used procedure for studying the antibacterial action of the coated surfaces was followed [ Surface characterization and biological results were expressed as a mean value of standard deviation (SD) for each sample. T-test was used with a 95% confidence interval to evaluate statistical differences. In previously reported studies [ The Mw and the PDI are fundamental parameters for the understanding of the biopolymer properties and their behavior. While PHB and PHBV show very similar Mw, the Mw of PHB4HB is about 5 times higher ( When Ta was treated with 5 M alkali concentration, a more hydrophilic surface and greater roughness (compare Concentrated PHA’s solutions were prepared to study their wettability and affinity to the activated Ta surfaces ( We demonstrated in previously reported studies [ Preliminary tests (data not shown) confirmed that PHAs emulsions have a non-Newtonian behavior, regardless of the emulsifier concentration. In non-Newtonian fluids, the shear stress is not directly proportional to the deformation rate, and their constitutive equation is expressed by the equation: τ = K γ Coatings produced by different immersions in the biopolymer emulsions were analyzed via FESEM ( Regarding the topography, PHBV coatings on Ti showed a highly porous surface, while the PHB coatings were solid and smooth [ For the characterization of the biopolymer coatings, the water contact angles were analyzed. However, they were not possible to measure since the drops of water were immediately absorbed as soon as they touched the biopolymer surfaces, as it previously happened with polymeric coatings on Ti [ The conditions studied were the ones exhibiting the greatest risk of toxicity: coatings with 4DC for PHB and PHBV, and 3DC for PHB4HB, with the highest content of antibiotic (30% w/w Genta). The toxicity of the PHAs, and activated Ta (alkali reaction with 5 M NaOH) was also evaluated. According to UNE-EN ISO 10993-5, the percentage of cell survival should exceed 80% in the first dilutions to ensure the non-toxicity of the coatings. The average cell number exposed to extracts from the different conditions tested exceed this limit in all cases and for all dilutions ( The objective of the cell adhesion test was to verify that the proposed DDS had an appropriate behavior concerning osteoblastic cell adhesion, as well as in the subsequent growth of bone tissue on the device surface. Although the cell number average shows that more osteoblasts adhered to activated Ta than on PHAs surfaces, there are no significant differences between the metal surfaces and most of the biopolymer coatings ( Determination of bacterial growth inhibition was performed with both Gram-positive ( The cervical spinal implant, Trabecular Metal™ Material (TM), is up to 80% porous and has a fully open interconnected pore structure, which offers an osteoconductive scaffold to allow for bone in-growth into the implant. TM’s high coefficient of friction provides initial fixation and modulus of elasticity similar to cancellous bone [ The pore size was estimated between 400 and 600 μm ( The porous Ta samples coated were exposed to Porous Ta with its good biocompatibility and elastic modulus is a biomaterial that was introduced in orthopedics to overcome problems related to implant loosening. Finding a simple way to protect implants from BAI is challenging. By means of the dip-coating technique, we have found a way to optimally coat solid Ta discs with a biopolymer matrix carrying an antibiotic. Porous Ta surfaces were also successfully covered by a biopolymer emulsion flow process. PHAs coatings containing Genta proved to provide Ta surfaces with antimicrobial effect, protecting the implant from Gram-positive and -negative bacteria. The results on cytotoxicity and cell adhesion confirmed the biocompatibility of the designed DDS, and suggest their suitable osteointegration. The fact that the PHAs used for the developed coatings degrade in human bodily fluids assures the release of the antibiotic in the time frame within which the biopolymer will be degraded. Thus, they will provide a protection from microorganisms and BAI for a longer period of time. Once again, we demonstrate that using these natural biodegradable biopolymers, it is possible to adopt different strategies to achieve an antibacterial effect on medical device surfaces. Furthermore, the alkali treatment with NaOH to which Ta surfaces were exposed was shown to increase the contact surface, allowing for more binding points between the substrate and the coating. Thus, a more bioactive material is obtained that favors cell adhesion and proliferation once the coating is degraded. All authors made substantial contributions to conception and design, acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of data; took part in drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content; gave final approval of the version to be published; and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work. Authors acknowledge the Spanish Government for Financial Support through the project MAT2015-67103-C4-3-R