In this study, the effects of one of the most important parameters in coal briquetting process, the briquette size, on the combustion behaviour of coal briquettes were determined from the view of combustion kinetics, i.e. their liability to ignite and combust. Effect of size on the combustion kinetics was treated by two different approaches. The first one consists of combustion kinetics experiments with briquettes of increasing sizes, thus of expanding volumes. In the second phase, briquette dimensions were alternated by keeping the briquette volume fixed. The influences of the concerned parameters were investigated through effluent gas analysis method and interpreted by an Arrhenius kinetic model relying on the changes in the amounts of evolved carbon oxides and consumed O2 gas as a function of temperature and time at three different pressure levels, 25, 50 and 75 psig. At the end of experiments, the activation energy and Arrhenius constant for each run were calculated and the distinct variations in the activation energy values showed that the liability of the coal briquettes to ignite and the efficiency and effectiveness of the combustion reaction were considerably affected both by the size enlargement and dimension variation on a constant volume basis.Determination of the reaction kinetics is one of most useful concepts in the investigation and evaluation of various features related to the combustion of coal. Although the combustion of coal accounts as a very complex reaction consisting of successive sequence of events, reaction kinetics and activation energy concepts make it possible to express these in terms of combustion characteristics. In other words, the liability of coal to ignite and the efficiency and effectiveness of the subsequent combustion reactions can be interpreted in a successful and reliable way by the verification of the combustion kinetics Briquetting process still remains to be a great innovation for the coal industry. Conversion of coal fines with no or negligible economic value into a considerable supplement by the briquetting method proved to be the most effective way for the elimination of a number of severe problems related to the unavoidable production of fine fractions This study aims to investigate the effect of size changes on the combustion kinetics of coal briquettes so as to find out the possible deficiencies or contributions on their liability to ignite and combust, related to the variations in the briquette size. Two discrete series of experiments were performed for the qualitative and quantitative analysis of the parameter of interest. Firstly, the effect of increasing size without any volume constraint was studied. In the second case, the dimensions of the briquettes were changed on a constant volume basis. Hence, it was aimed to determine and compare the effects of size and volume enlargement as well as only dimension variation on the combustion kinetics of coal briquettes. Reaction kinetics runs were carried out by using briquettes made from Çorum-Alpagut Lignite. The particle size analysis of Alpagut Lignite sample is given in The effect of size parameter on the combustion kinetics of coal briquettes was investigated by two approaches. At first, the influences of size enlargement on the combustion kinetics of coal briquettes were determined by using cylindrical briquettes with successively increasing diameters of 2.5, 4.0 and 5.5 cm and lengths of 4.0, 6.0, 8.0 and 10.0 cm. This procedure was followed in such a manner that each diameter represented one individual category where the length of the briquette was extended as the diameter was preserved. Hence, four groups classified by briquette diameters with varying lengths were compared with regard to the parameters of question. The dimensions involved in the study are those used eventually in industry for the production of cylindrical briquettes. Greater amounts of coal fines were employed as the size, thus the volume of the briquettes was enlarged in this series. The second phase of the study comprises another course of combustion experiments in which the size of the coal briquettes was alternated by keeping the volume of the coal briquettes constant. In this manner, briquettes with the same volume but varying dimensions and geometrical areas were produced. For this purpose, the volume of the 2.5×8.0 cm briquette (39.27 cm Combustion kinetics runs were performed by using a complex reaction cell assembly. This unit, which was designed by Bagci For the combustion runs, a variable temperature programme was utilized at constant heating rates. The initial temperature was set around 20 °C and rose to 100 °C at a heating rate of 5 °C/min by supplying nitrogen gas and retained for 30 min at 100 °C to achieve thermal equilibrium within the reactor. After this phase, air injection to the inner combustion cell was started at a constant flow of 1.5 l/min. In addition, the heating regime was changed by reducing the heating rate to 2 °C/min. During each run, the changes in the temperature at the center of the inner combustion cell, variations in the concentrations of the consumed O For the interpretation of the reaction kinetics of the coal briquettes from the effluent gas data, a model involving the typical parameters of Arrhenius kinetics is utilized. Weijdema According to the model, the rate of O  The rate of O Integration of When In this model, the temperature is gradually increased with a constant rate. Based on the amount of O The output of the so-called computer program formed the basis for the calculation of activation energies: The calculated relative reaction rates were plotted against inverse temperature values. After discarding the extensively deviating points, a straight line was obtained with a slope equal to the activation energy, In the first phase of the study, size enlargement on the combustion behavior of coal briquettes was evaluated aiming to find out whether increasing the sizes, and hence volume of the briquettes assisted in providing an easier combustion or the enlargement process brought about an adverse effect resulting in a more difficult reaction. The typical reaction kinetics plot is illustrated in In accordance with the changes in the activation energies with respect to size variations, at first glance, it can be stated that size is one of the most important factors from the view of combustion kinetics for the coal briquettes When the dimensions of the coal briquettes were varied by keeping the briquette volume constant at 39.27 cm In view of the changes in the activation energies with respect to different briquette dimensions, size enlargement happened to result in a deficiency in the combustion of the coal briquettes. The increases in the activation energies indicated that it became harder for the combustion to initiate and proceed as the briquette size was extended from 2.5×4.0 to 5.5×10.0 cm. The efficiency and the effectiveness of the combustion were favored by smaller diameter and length values. The With respect to the changes in the reaction kinetics and activation energies of coal briquettes of varying sizes with and without constant volume, it can be concluded that Size of the briquettes proved to be one of the most critical factors in terms of combustion kinetics. Combustion kinetics of a coal briquette may vary extensively only by the variations in the size, other parameters being the same. The liability of the coal briquettes to initiate and proceed the combustion reaction were adversely affected by the enlargement in the size and volume. It was seen that activation energy had a tendency to increase with regard to size enlargement, expressing that the susceptibility of the coal briquettes to ignite and the effectiveness of the proceeding phases of combustion were severely disturbed by increases in diameter and length of the briquettes. When the dimensions were changed by keeping the volume same, a compact geometry (i.e. Likewise, activation energy of the coal briquettes tended to decrease significantly as the Geometrical area of the briquettes was found to have no distinct influence on briquette combustion kinetics. It can be stated that for a favorable briquette combustion, rather than the largeness of the outermost part naked to initial oxygen contact, the compactness (i.e. diameter–height equivalence) of the briquettes is the determining factor. constant gas flow rate, l/min changing O cross-sectional area of the sample pack, cm length of the sample pack, cm Arrhenius constant partial pressure of oxygen, Pa reaction order with respect to partial pressure of oxygen fuel concentration, 1/s reaction order with respect to fuel concentration activation energy, kJ/mol universal gas constant, J/mol K absolute temperature, K