Ultrafine grain tungsten is a promising candidate for plasma facing component applications in future fusion reactors. The conventional press-and-sinter powder metallurgy method is a preferred route for producing ultrafine grain tungsten from nanosize tungsten powders. However, controlling grain growth, while simultaneously attempting to achieve maximum densification, has been a challenge for making UGF tungsten by sintering. In this study, the effect of processing parameters on the densification and grain growth of nano-W powders was investigated. Near-fully densified tungsten was obtained at sintering temperatures between 1100 and 1300°C, and both Ar and H2 sintering atmospheres were investigated. The Ar sintering atmosphere was determined to more favorably promote densification and minimize grain growth. The nanosized tungsten powder compacts were subjected to reduction in H2 as a part of the sintering cycle. The reduction temperature was found to have significant effects on the sintering of nano-W powder, primarily as a result of grain coarsening, which was seen at temperatures as low as 700°C.Tungsten has a number of unique properties that establish it as a candidate material for fusion reactor applications. These properties include high melting point, high thermal conductivity, excellent mechanical properties at elevated temperatures, low tritium retention The use of nanocrystalline tungsten has been considered one of the approaches that could potentially improve the ductility of tungsten and decrease the ductile-to-brittle-transition-temperature DBTT Similar effects of nanocrystalline structure have also been shown for other metals. Several research groups, that have investigated BCC metals such as Al and Mo, have proven that the high volume of grain boundaries from nanocrystalline structures modify the deformation mechanism, shifting it from intra-granular dislocation activity to grain boundary rotation and sliding, which can significantly improve the ductility There are two main approaches to manufacture ultrafine grain tungsten: the top down approach, and the bottom up approach Others have predicted the difficulties of consolidating nano-tungsten powders to achieve full density and ultrafine grain sizes, and proposed that ultrahigh compaction pressure and low sintering temperature are necessary In this work, a systematic investigation of the sintering of nano-sized ball milled tungsten powders using the low temperature pressureless sintering process was undertaken. The effect of processing parameters, including sintering temperature, atmosphere, and reduction temperatures, on the densification of nano-W powders is discussed. The objective of this research is to determine the best route by which tungsten can be sintered to near-full density with ultrafine grains by a conventional press-sinter method. The pure tungsten powders used as raw materials, with an average grain size about 50 After milling, the tungsten powders were compacted into green parts using a uniaxial press. Powders were pressed into a cylindrical shape with 54 After compaction, the samples were reduced and sintered in an atmosphere controlled tube furnace at different temperatures with either Ar or H The average grain size of milled nano-W powders was calculated based on x-ray diffraction (XRD) using the Williamson-Hall plot   For both types of atmosphere, the density of bulk tungsten increased with sintering temperature, which follows classic sintering theory. As the sintering temperature increases, the diffusion rate of atoms increases, which promotes densification kinetics The sintering of W powders commonly takes place in three stages. The early stage involves neck formation and growth by diffusion with limited densification and an open pore structure. During the intermediate stage, the necks become blunted and the pore channels break up into small segments, essentially a transition from open porosity to closed porosity. The structure shifts to more rapid densification along with noticeable grain growth. In the final stage, pore segments become spherical isolated pores, the rate of densification decreases and grain coarsening becomes pronounced. Compared to H  Oxygen contents of the sintered samples were characterized using a LECO N/O/H determinator, and Based on these results, throughout the entire sintering temperature range, an Ar atmosphere led to improved densification compared to a H Therefore, during the sintering process, a H Due to the high activity of nano-sized powders, the HEPM processed nano-W powders tend to experience a certain level of oxidization during the milling, powder handling, and compaction processes. Sintering of tungsten is very sensitive to oxygen content, as a small amount of oxygen contamination can increase the activation energy for surface diffusion from 300  In order to obtain a better understanding of the effects of reduction temperature, as-reduced tungsten samples were prepared by reducing samples at temperatures from 650 to 850 SEM images were taken on the as-reduced samples and Nano tungsten powders processed by high energy planetary milling had extremely high activity, and can reach near-full density by conventional pressureless sintering processes at temperatures as low as 1100 to 1300 The authors wish to thank the