The kinetic exchange of SO4
                     2− ions with CO3
                     2− ions in natural strontium sulfate (celestite) single crystals under alkaline hydrothermal conditions was investigated. The Experiments were performed at several temperatures ranging from 423 to 523 K for different reaction times between 1 and 96 h with molar ratios of CO3
                     2−/SO4
                     2− 
                     =1, 5 and 10. Structural characterization of partially and completely converted strontianite (SrCO3) crystals was conducted by XRD, FTIR and SEM. X-ray diffraction results showed that under hydrothermal conditions, the exchange of CO3
                     2− ions in celestite was complete at 523 K in a Na2CO3 solution with a molar ratio CO3
                     2−/SO4
                     2−
                     = 10 for 96 h. Based on the experimental observations, a mechanism for the conversion of celestite, under hydrothermal conditions is proposed. As the reaction proceeds, a porous layer of strontium carbonate forms on the celestite surface. The reaction rate is determined by the diffusion of sulfate ions through the porous layer. The apparent activation energy for the conversion from celestite to strontium carbonate is 21.6 kJ mol−1.Strontium carbonate (SrCO The commercial production of strontium carbonate involves the high temperature reduction of strontium sulfate by carbon, followed by a leaching process of the resulting strontium sulfide by sodium carbonate or carbon dioxide. Various studies of the kinetic conversion of strontium sulfate, celestite, are briefly discussed. The conversion of celestite powder (<  Castillejos and Uribe ( On the other hand, the conversion of celestite plates (10 mm and 3 mm thick) to strontium carbonate under hydrothermal conditions was studied from a crystallographic view point by Single crystals of mineral celestite were obtained from typical mineral ores in the mining area of Coahuila, Mexico. Raw mineral single crystals were cut parallel to the cleavage plane (001) direction with a diamond disk, in order to obtain square plates with the dimensions of 10 mm wide and 3 mm thick. These plates were washed with deionized water and cleaned using ultrasonic equipment. X-ray analysis reveal that the celestite single crystals belong to the orthorhombic system with the space group A celestite (SrSO Reaction kinetics of the conversion of Celestite to strontium carbonate was carried out based on measurements of the thickness of the reacted layer, with a scanning electronic microscope (Philips XL30 ESEM). The samples were selected from partially and completely converted crystals, after the crystals were mounted in epoxy resin and polished to a mirror-like surface. The surfaces observed were perpendicular to the cleavage plane (001). The measurement of the thickness of the formed layer of carbonate was carried out in the perpendicular section to the reaction interface celestite–strontium carbonate. Solid–fluid heterogeneous reaction systems have applications in chemical and hydrometallurgical processes. In the solid–fluid system, the reaction rate may be generally controlled by one of the following steps: diffusion through the fluid film, diffusion through the ash or the chemical reaction at the surface of the core of unreacted materials ( In order to determine the kinetic parameters and rate-controlling step about the ion exchange reaction, the experimental data are analyzed on the basis of the shrinking core model. The pseudomorphic process of the reaction has been well established both from microscopic examination of partially and totally reacted celestite plates ( Analytical integration of Eq. The reaction time for the complete transformation of a celestite plate 3 mm thick and 10 mm wide was 96 h. This was carried out to a temperature of 523 K using a fill ratio of 70%. On the other hand,  In Eq. The activation energy for the celestite conversion to strontium carbonate under hydrothermal conditions according to the experimental variables studied during this investigation is 21.6 kJ mol A number of tests were performed to determine the effect of the fill ratio of the autoclave on the conversion with a temperature range from 423 to 523 K using celestite plates of 3 mm thick and 10 mm wide, using for this purpose three different fill ratio: 40, 55 and 70% of a Na There are no variations in the conversion of celestite to strontium carbonate, with a change in the fill ratio at a constant temperature. The maximum variation of the conversion in all the treated samples at several fill ratios is less than 0.1%. This considered that the change in this variable doesn't affect the development of the reaction, because it was not observed increment in the conversion grade due to the increase in the solvent's volume used during the hydrothermal treatments. On the other hand, it was studied the effect of the molar ratio CO The experiments for the conversion of Celestite to Strontium Carbonate under hydrothermal conditions were directed toward evaluation of the effects of the following factors: Temperature, reaction interval, and the molar ratio CO In this work, the experiments were designed to estimate the activation energy associated with the transformation of celestite single crystals to strontium carbonate under hydrothermal conditions, at temperatures between 423 to 523 K.   The formation of the porous layer is clearly shown in The conversion of square plates of celestite single crystals in Na This work was supported by a CONACyT fellowship under project number 34830-U, Many thanks are offered to Ph D. K. Zhu for XRD analyses and Eng. Felipe de Jesus Marquez Torres, from CINVESTAV-Saltillo for the SEM observations. Special thanks to B. S. Frank Addeo V. and M.A. Elizabeth Tobin Haley, from Papaloapan University, for the review of this paper.