In this study, we evaluate and compare the photocatalytic degradation and mineralization of two alkylphosphates, tributylphosphate (TBP) and dibutylphosphate (DBP), in the presence of TiO2 and under ultraviolet A radiation. Tri- and dibutylphosphate are used as extractants in nuclear decontamination processes and thus could be found in reprocessing plant waste water. We have investigated the degradation of TBP by gas chromatography–mass spectrometry, the fate of phosphate species by 31P NMR and by ion chromatography, the mineralization kinetics of TBP and DBP by total organic carbon measurements, and finally, the formation of carboxylic acid by high-performance liquid chromatography with ultraviolet detection. Our results show that DBP is an intermediate product of the degradation of TBP by photocatalysis under ultraviolet A radiation and that the same types of carboxylic acids are formed during the degradation of both compounds. We also show that the kinetics of the mineralization process is well described in both cases by the Langmuir-Hinshelwood model, with identical rate constants.The approach most commonly used to reprocess spent nuclear fuel involves three steps: a mechanical step, a dissolution step, and then liquid/liquid separation using a specific extractant The cycles of extraction and back extraction steps yield purified uranium and plutonium nitrates and after conversion, the resulting plutonium oxide is used to prepare uranium and plutonium MOX (mixed oxide) fuel. The nitric acid, extractant and solvent used in these processes have to be recycled and the liquid and gaseous effluents and solid waste have to be managed. A study has highlighted the importance of combining a detergent with nitric acid in order to remove oily TBP from metallic solid surfaces The decontamination of liquid waste containing TBP and its degradation species is therefore a common industrial problem. Tributylphosphate is a refractory molecule particularly difficult to degrade. The radiolysis of TBP and DBP was studied under α and γ irradiation in the 1950s and the by-products of the degradation were identified as DBP, MBP and butanol The present study investigated the degradation of TBP and DBP by TiO Photocatalytic experiments were performed using commercial (Evonik) Aeroxide P-25 TiO Tri- and dibutylphosphate (99 and 97% purity, respectively) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. All the aqueous solutions used in this study were prepared using ultra-pure water with a resistivity of 18.2 MΩ cm. All experiments were carried out in a 1 L cylindrical glass reactor containing a central 125 W Philips HPK lamp inside a Pyrex tube. A jacket with circulating water was placed around the Pyrex tube to absorb IR radiation and thus prevent any heating of the solutions. The use of Pyrex glass ensured that <290 nm radiation was blocked. The solutions were mixed constantly using a magnetic stirrer placed at the bottom of the reactor. The TiO The overall efficiency of the process was determined by measuring the decrease in the concentration of total organic carbon using a Shimadzu TOC-VCPN analyzer equipped with an auto-sampler. The concentration of TBP was also measured by GC/MS using a DB-5MS capillary GC column (length, 30 m; inner diameter, 0.25 mm × 0.25 µm). The temperature conditions were 250 °C for injection, 280 °C for the detector, and the oven was initially kept at 50 °C for 1 min, raised to 160 °C at 10 °C/min, then raised up to 270 °C and kept at this temperature for 5 min. The helium flow was 1.3 mL/min and the mass spectrometer was operated in electron impact ionization mode at 70 eV. The formation of phosphate ions was followed by ion chromatography using a Dionex DX-120 device and an AS14A (250 mm × 4 mm) column. The flow rate was 1.2 mL/min. The mobile phase consisted of 84 mg of NaHCO The formation of carboxylic acids was monitored by high-performance liquid chromatography with ultraviolet detection using a Waters 600 pump, a Waters 486 UV detector (detection at 210 nm), and a Transgenomic COREGel 87H3 7.8 mm (300 mm × 7.8 mm) column. The flow rate was 0.7 mL/min. The injection volume was 50 µL and the mobile phase was H Liquid-state We first confirmed that the concentration of TBP in the solution did not decrease under direct irradiation at wavelengths above 300 nm without TiO The photonic efficiency, ρ = r/ϕ, is the ratio of the reaction rate, r, the number of reactant molecules converted per second, and the incident flux of efficient photons, ϕ (i.e. the ones absorbable by the TiO   The The DBP peak appears after 1 h of irradiation along with trace peaks from H  The decrease in the TOC concentration as the irradiation time increases shows that the carbon atoms from TBP are transformed into CO  Trace amounts of propionic acid are only detected after 20 h of irradiation. This late arrival suggests that it is a product of the decarboxylation of 2-ketobutyric acid: Since the concentrations of lactic acid, pyruvic acid and acetic acid peak at different times, our interpretation is that lactic acid is progressively degraded by oxidation to form pyruvic acid, which is then decarboxylated to form acetic acid: However, the amount of acetic acid formed during the reaction (  The photocatalytic degradation of alkylphosphate compounds in general was investigated by comparing those of TBP and DBP. This was achieved by comparing the disappearance of organic carbon, the fate of phosphate ions by  This curve is typical of a Langmuir-Hinshelwood process, in which the reaction rate is given by:  The DBP peak is detected at 0.92 ppm and as observed for the TBP solution, peaks from H In summary, this  Acetic acid is the carboxylic acid that reaches the highest concentration during the degradation of both alkylphosphates, because of its low reactivity with hydroxyl radicals Considering that DBP and MBP are detected during the photocatalytic degradation of TBP and DBP, respectively, and the impact of hydroxyl radicals on alkyl phosphate Since in our case, neither butanol or butanoic acid were detected, this suggests that the main reactional pathway is the oxidation of the alkyl chain, which is promoted by the adsorption of alkylhydroxylated phosphate (RO) The proposed chemical reaction pathways for TBP and DBP are summarized in The present study demonstrates for the first time that TBP and DBP can be mineralized using non-damaging radiation (UV-A), with an irradiance similar to that of solar light (4 mW/cm In this process, the alkyl chain is first oxidized before the bond between the phosphate and the alkyl group is broken. This breaking of the bond is confirmed by The authors thank