In this paper, an Al6061–10wt% SiC composite was prepared using the mechanical alloying route. The morphology and the structure of the prepared powder, which change with milling time, were evaluated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) techniques, respectively. Moreover, the relationships among the stages of mechanical alloying (MA), relative density and hardness of both pressed and hot extruded materials were investigated. The morphological evolutions showed that relatively equiaxed powders could be synthesized after 9h of milling. The evolution of relative density and hardness with milling time is due to the morphological and microstructural changes imposed on the composite powder. High-relative densities are typical of the hot extruded samples. The effect of mechanical alloying process on hardness is more significant compared to reinforcement particles. The aging behaviors of the mechanically alloyed, commercially mixed and unreinforced Al6061 were compared. The results showed that MA composites exhibit no aging-hardenability.Aluminum-based metal matrix composites (MMCs) are ideal materials for structural applications in aircraft, automotive and military industries due to their high strength to weight ratio Among various reinforcements, SiC is one of the most widely used dispersoids in Al-based composites. There are some publications focused on the production of this type of composite using the MA method. Hong and Kao The as-atomized Al6061 powder with an average particle size of 50 To obtain the raw material, Al6061 and SiC powders were introduced together into a horizontal rotating cylindrical mixer operating at a rotation speed of 180 The as-received Al6061, the conventionally mixed (CM) and the mechanically alloyed powders were uniaxially cold pressed in a cylindrical die at 300 In order to study the aging behavior of hot extruded, CM and unreinforced Al6061 samples, the standard T6 heat treatment was used. These samples were solution treated at 515 The phase identification of the products was conducted by X-ray diffraction (Seifert3000 PTS) using Cu Kα radiation. The Peak broadening observed in XRD could be due to instrumental factor and physical factors such as crystallite size and lattice micro-strain  A noteworthy phenomenon is the peak broadening which is due to the decrease in crystallite sizes and increase in lattice micro-strain. The crystallite size and the lattice micro-strain were calculated from the Williamson–Hall plots, after making corrections for instrumental broadening. They were plotted versus milling time in The calculated and experimental data for XRD patterns of Al are listed in   In order to determine physical and mechanical properties of the consolidated composite powders, the relative density and hardness were measured.  The relative density for hot extruded samples reduces with increasing milling time ( It should be noted that milling time has much more drastic effect on the pressed and sintered samples compared to the hot extruded samples. It is due to the considerable effect of hot extrusion process on the powder characteristics. During hot extrusion the morphology of the powder particles was changed and hence the morphology evolution during milling had minor effect on densification process. Another significant effect of hot extrusion is the beneficial mechanical disruption of surface oxide layers which provides better interparticle bonding during consolidation process It is clear that mechanical alloying/mechanical milling introduces contamination into the milled powder and this can substantially alter the constitution and stability of the powder product. Fe has been found to be normally present in most of the powders milled with the steel-grinding medium. Since, 0.65 Generally, the hot extrusion process in contrast with cold pressing was able to produce fully dense Al6061–SiC composite materials. The relative densities calculated by the Archimedes principle were not lower than 98% for all hot extruded samples. The hardness of hot extruded samples versus milling time is plotted in The hardness of mechanically alloyed composite powders is affected by two factors: the first factor is the work hardening of matrix alloy due to the milling and second is the role of SiC particles as reinforcement  The age-hardenability of the unreinforced Al6061, CM and MA samples is given in A homogenous distribution of the 10 The evolution of apparent density with milling time is obviously due to the morphological and microstructural changes imposed on the composite powder particles. High-relative densities are typical of the hot extruded samples. On the other hand, cold pressing do not provide good relative density. The change in hardness in hot extruded samples with milling time is in harmony with lattice micro-strain. Hardness of powders may be affected by two factors; addition of reinforcement particles and MA process. The effect of the latter is more significant, according to the results of hardness test. In addition, it was found that specimen processed by MA and consolidated via hot extrusion gave the best mechanical properties. The age-hardenability of the MA composite significantly decreased compared to the CM and unreinforced Al6061 samples. In addition to that, there was an acceleration of aging kinetics in the CM sample compared to the unreinforced Al6061. The authors would like to express their thanks to Mr. M. Pouranvari for useful help and discussions.