The effect of certain trace elements—Cr, Zn, Ba, Ni, Ti, P—on clinker grindability was studied. From the study of commercial and model clinkers, it was concluded that the trace elements studied favorably influence and improve the grindability of clinkers. The effect of trace elements is due to the fact that they favorably influence the clinker formation processes (the quantity and property of the “molten phase”) on the one hand, and on the other hand that during clinker burning they form solid solutions with silicate minerals (alite, belite) and thereby reduce their hardness.The most widely used method of producing disperse systems is dispersion using mechanical energy, the grinding. Grinding is a very energy-intensive process. The cement industry is one of the large energy consumers. The issue of the reduction of energy used for grinding therefore is among the priority tasks in the cement industry. The grindability of clinkers is determined collectively by the chemical–mineral composition and the texture (macro- and microstructure), the pattern of the latter is influenced by several technology parameters. For the development of measures that can be implemented in practice, it is very important to know cement clinker grindability and the material and technological parameters that determine grinding. In earlier research, we studied the effect of the grinding fineness and homogeneity of the raw meal, the intensity of clinker burning and cooling, and the types of fuels on grindability of clinkers ( The test materials were commercial clinkers and model clinkers produced in a laboratory oven with or without the addition of different trace elements. The chemical composition and trace element content of the commercial clinkers were determined. The trace element content was determined, after the digestion of the test samples with HNO The grindability of the clinkers was determined with the Zeisel and Bond methods equipment ( The fineness, specific surface of the ground material, is determined by a method based on permeability measurement (Blaine number). The Bond method models closed circuit dry grinding in a laboratory ball mill. The test equipment is a ball mill with an internal diameter of 305×305 mm and with a 20-kg steel ball charge, in which the grinding is made in steps. The test lasts until the stationary condition is reached at the circulation factor of 3.5, the material quantity ground by each turning of the mill is the so-called ball mill grindability, from which the “Bond work index” ( The model clinkers were ground in a laboratory mill to a different specific surface, and the grinding time required to reach each fineness was measured; the grinding time is proportional to the work applied for grinding. The laboratory grinding equipment used for the tests was a steel-shell mill with a capacity of 5 l, operating at 68 rpm, and filled with 8 kg 20×20 mm steel cylpebs. The preparation of the material for grinding was made on a hammer mill (with an upper size limit of 3.4 mm). The quantity of feed into the mill was 1 kg. Based on the grindability testing of about 200 commercial clinkers, the clinkers were divided into “easy”, “medium”, and “heavy” grindability clinkers. The “specific grindability” ( The classification of clinkers based on the Bond “work index” ( The Bond “work index” ( During the examination of the texture of clinkers produced with alternative fuels and/or raw materials, it was found that in these clinkers the shape and structure of alite and belite crystals had sustain characteristic changed, which can be connected with the effect of certain trace elements ( For the profound analysis of the effect of trace elements, further on the effect of the individual trace elements on clinker texture and grindability was studied on model clinkers produced under the same conditions. All trace elements tested—with the exception of nickel (Ni)—favorably influence the grindability of clinkers ( Because we found very favorable effects in the case of chromium (Cr) addition ( The electron micrographs and the pertaining X-ray spectra show that during the burning of clinkers, chromium (Cr) is mainly concentrated in the silicate phases (alite, belite) but is also present in the “interstitial phase” ( In clinkers containing chromium (Cr), the sizes of the alite and belite crystals are generally larger than usual (>100 and 80–90 μm, respectively), the crystals are often of green color with “smaragd effect”, which is caused by the chromium incorporated into the silicate minerals (alite, belite) in the form of a solid solution. The incorporation of chromium (Cr) into the alite (C During clinker burning in the oxidizing atmosphere of the kiln, the three-valent chromium is transformed to a six-valent chromium and is incorporated in the complex form of [CrO From the study of commercial and model clinkers, it was concluded that trace elements can influence the grindability of cement clinker. The trace elements studied by us, chromium (Cr), zinc (Zn), barium (Ba), titanium (Ti), and phosphorus (P), generally improved the grindability of the clinkers. These trace elements had a favorable effect on the porous structure of clinkers, on the shape, size, color, etc. of the clinker crystals—primarily that of the alite and belite. These effects of trace elements are due to the fact that they favorably influence the clinker formation processes (the quantity and property of the “molten phase”) on the one hand and on the other hand that during clinker burning they form solid solutions with clinker minerals. One important crystal chemistry property of clinker minerals is that the major elements (Ca, Al, Si) found in their structure can be substituted with certain trace elements. The incorporation of the trace elements may have the effect that the microsymmetry and electrostatic relations of the structure of clinker minerals, the chemical bonds (covalent, ionic) between the ions, the coordination of ions, etc., and at the end certain physical–mechanical properties (hardness, rigidity) of the clinker minerals may change too. The change in the grindability of clinkers is the macroscopic manifestation of these processes, effects. The grindability number is an important property for the materials of the clinker, and its regular examination allows to trace back any changes and/or occasional irregularities that has taken place in the production technology. The support of OTKA (National Scientific Research Fund) No. T 029195 is gracefully acknowledged.