Intruded coal is one type of unconventional coal resources in many coal fields of China. The research into the flotation of intruded coal has not received enough attentions. Plenty of intruded coal fines are produced during coal mining, screening and gravity separation. However, the intruded coal fines are difficult to float using common oily collectors because the intruded coal surface is porous and naturally hydrophilic. In this investigation, heavy oil was used as a collector associated with dry-grinding process to enhance the flotation recovery of intruded coal. The flotation recovery of intruded coal dry-ground with heavy oil was 82.40% which was higher than that (71.28%) of coal dry-ground with kerosene. The mechanism of heavy oil enhancing the flotation recovery of intruded coal was fully discussed by a combination of Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), attachment time measurements. FTIR results showed the heavy oil contained more unsaturated hydrocarbon and oxygen containing groups than the kerosene. The coal-bubble attachment was greatly improved because the attachment time was reduced after the dry-grinding with collectors. The intruded coal surface hydrophobicity was effectively improved by heavy oil through the adsorption of heavy oil drops, which made bubble catch intruded coal particles readily. In addition, the pores of intruded coal surface were filled by plenty of crushed coal fines during the dry-grinding process, which enlarged the contacting area for coal-bubble attachment.Intruded coal is an unconventional coal resource in many coal fields of China ( In coal flotation industry, surface hydrophobicity is the main factor determining the floatability of coal particles ( Why the flotation of intruded coal should be paid sufficient attentions? Coal mining and crushing processes produce plenty of coal fines including intruded coal fines and others. In addition, gravity separation process produces another part of coal fines through the collision between lump coal and separators. The water immersion also has a negative role in the control of coal fines because coarse coal particles may be liberated during the water-based separation process. Therefore, a large number of intruded coal fines are produced and these coal fines usually need the flotation method to upgrade because these coal fines are difficult to separate using gravity separators, even using ultrasonic energy ( In the published reports, there are many improvements regarding the effective flotation of low rank/oxidized coals ( This investigation was to use heavy oil as a collector and enhance the flotation recovery of Ningxia intruded coal through dry-grinding process. The mechanism of heavy oil enhancing the flotation recovery of intruded coal was fully discussed. Throughout this paper, a novel method for the effective flotation cleaning of intruded coal was proposed. Intruded coal samples were selected from Ningxia province of China. The lump intruded coal was selected by density fluid of less than 1.5 kg/L. Then, lump coal was crushed and screened to pass 0.5 mm. The ash content of coal sample is 8.82% on an air dried basis. The grinding process was conducted in a laboratory ball mill (QM-1). The volume of ball mill was 1 L. The grinding media was zirconia ball. The rotation speed of grinding tank was 300 r/min. 100 g intruded coal was dry-ground for 15 min with heavy oil and kerosene, respectively. After grinding process, ground coal samples were forwarded to flotation tests. The dosage of heavy oil or kerosene was fixed at 10 kg/t coal. The size compositions of three coal samples, i.e. non-ground coal, coal dry-ground with heavy oil and coal dry-ground with kerosene were analyzed by the wet-screening process using 0.25, 0.125, 0.074 and 0.045 mm size screens. At last, five size fractions were obtained, i.e. 0.5–0.25, 0.25–0.125, 0.125–0.074, 0.074–0.045 and < 0.045 mm. The characteristic curve for the size composition of each coal sample was drawn. Quanta 250 SEM (FEI, USA) was used to analyze the surface morphology of intruded coal particles before and after dry-grinding process. The magnification time was fixed at 2000. Before the SEM tests, the coal samples were sputter-coated with a layer of gold. In this investigation, three types of coal samples were prepared for the SEM measurements. The first sample was non-ground coal, i.e. raw coal. The second sample was the coal dry-ground with heavy oil. The third one was the coal dry-ground with kerosene. All the above-mentioned three types of coal samples were conditioned in the flotation cell for 3 min. Then, they were forwarded to the wet-screening process to obtain a specific size fraction, i.e. 0.125–0.125 mm for the SEM analysis. The purpose of the conditioning and wet-screening processes is to remove ultra-fine coal particles as far as possible from coal surface (such as weakly adsorbed fines) and to investigate whether ultra-fine coal particles can strongly adsorb on the pore and surface of coal particles. If these ultra-fine coal particles cannot be removed from the coal surface through the conditioning and wet-screening processes, these fines will also be difficult to remove during the flotation process and hence have a significant role in the floatability of intruded coal particle. FTIR spectrums of intruded coals before and after dry grinding process were obtained with KBr plates. The FTIR spectrums of kerosene and heavy oil were also obtained with KBr plates. When the pellet was prepared, one drop of kerosene or heavy oil was put on the surface of plate, and then the plate was forwarded to the FTIR measurements. A Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy Vertex 80v (Bruker, Germany) was used in this investigation and the spectrum was obtained at 2 cm The bubble-particle attachment time measurements were conducted using the Attachment Timer, made by University of Alberta, Canada ( The same three coal samples used in the SEM measurements were also used in the attachment time measurements. Firstly, coal sample was transferred to a small cell. Then, the distilled water was transferred to the cell. A bubble holder was on the top of the coal particle bed. One bubble was generated using a micro syringe and then hold by the bubble holder. Next, the bubble was kept in contact with the coal particle bed for a controlled contact time from 10 ms to 10000 ms ( The flotation tests were conducted in a 1.5 L XFD flotation cell. The impeller speed of flotation machine was 1900 r/min and the airflow rate was 0.25 m The dry-ground coal sample (100 g) was first pre-wetted in the flotation cell for 3 min. Then, the frother (2-Octanol) was added into the flotation cell at a dose of 0.2 kg/t coal and the pulp was conditioned for 1 min. At last, the air inlet was opened and the flotation products, such as clean coal and tailings were collected. The flotation results were analyzed using clean coal ash and clean coal yield. As shown in Because of the porous surface properties of intruded coal, the pores and cracks on coal surface may be filled with the water in the flotation pulp and a thick hydration shell may cover the surface of intruded coal ( The pictures illustrating the surface morphology of intruded coal particles before and after dry-grinding process are presented in The intruded coal surface has a large number of pores and cracks. These pores and cracks can be filled up with the water during the conventional flotation process. In the conventional flotation, coal particle is pre-wetted in the water for a period of time and then the flotation reagents are added into the flotation pulp. The coal surface will be covered by a hydration shell during the pre-wetting process. Especially, the hydration shell may be very thick if the coal surface has more pores and cracks. Therefore, the intruded coal surface is very hydrophilic and difficult to be attached by bubbles and oily droplets. In this investigation, the intruded coal was dry-ground with kerosene or heavy oil prior to flotation. Therefore, the surfaces and pores can be covered by the oily collectors as well as ultra-fine coal particles ( The pores of intruded coal can be filled with oily collectors and coal fines during the dry-grinding process while the pores are filled with the water in the conventional flotation. The intruded coal surface with collector/coal fines covered is easy to attach to the bubble surface because these pore-filled collectors/coal fines increase the contact area for the formation of three-phrase contacting line. In other words, the contact area for the formation of three-phrase contacting line is small in the conventional flotation because the pores and cracks are fully filled with the water. The water-filled pores prevent the attachment between intruded coal particle and bubble. Therefore, the flotation recovery of intruded coal will be enhanced by the dry-grinding process associated with oily collectors, especially with heavy oil.  The heavy oil has some other new peaks at 3800–3700 cm As shown in However, the peak at –OH group is significantly weakened in the coals dry-ground with collectors, especially for the coal dry-ground with heavy oil. The –OH group is the primary hydrophilic group in the coal ( As shown in The attachment time is an important parameter which reflects the attachment probability during the collision of coal particles and bubbles ( As shown in From From This paper investigated the flotation performance of intruded coals dry-ground with kerosene and heavy oil. The principal conclusions are: The size composition of coal dry-ground with kerosene became much finer than that of coal dry-ground with heavy oil. For the coal dry-ground with kerosene, the adsorbed coal fines on intruded coal surface were weak and easy to remove during the wet-screening process, however the wet-screening process was difficult to remove these adsorbed coal fines from coal (dry-ground with heavy oil) surface. The intruded coal surface had many pores and cracks. These pores and cracks were filled with both oily droplets and coal fines during dry-grinding process. The intruded coal surface with collector/coal fines covered was easy to attach to the bubble surface. Heavy oil had more unsaturated hydrocarbon and oxygen containing groups than kerosene. The unsaturated hydrocarbon and oxygen containing groups adsorbed on coal surface through hydrogen bonding and π-bonding. The hydrophobicity of intruded coal surface was greatly enhanced using the heavy oil than the kerosene. The attachment time of intruded coal dry-ground with heavy oil was the shortest while that of non-ground coal was longest. The non-ground coal surface was difficult to attach to the bubble. After the dry-grinding process, the coal surface was covered by many oily droplets and ultra-fine coal particles. These oily droplets and ultra-fine coal particles not only increased the surface hydrophobicity of intruded coal but also increased the contact area during coal-bubble attachment. Therefore, the floatability of coals dry-ground with kerosene or heavy oil is higher than that of non-ground coal. The clean coal yield (82.40%) of the flotation of intruded coal dry-ground with heavy oil is higher that (71.28%) of coal dry-ground with kerosene. The intruded coal can be well cleaned using the dry-grinding process associated with oily collectors. Future studies regarding the economic aspect of the work in the industrial application are needed. This work was supported by the