Systematic screening for optimal formulation composition and production parameters for nanosuspensions consumes a lot of time and also drug material when performed at lab scale. Therefore, a cost-effective miniaturized scale top down approach for nanocrystals production by wet bead milling was developed. The final set-up consisted of 3 magnetic stirring bars placed vertically one over the other in a 2mL glass vial and agitated by a common magnetic stirring plate. All of the tested actives (cyclosporin A, resveratrol, hesperitin, ascorbyl palmitate, apigenin and hesperidin) could be converted to nanosuspensions. For 4 of them, the particles sizes achieved were smaller than previously reported on the literature (around 90nm for cyclosporin A; 50nm for hesperitin; 160nm for ascorbyl palmitate and 80nm for apigenin). The “transferability” of the data collect by the miniaturized method was evaluated comparing the production at larger scale using both wet bead milling and high pressure homogenization. Transferable information obtained from the miniaturized scale is minimum achievable size, improvements in size reduction by reduction of beads size, diminution kinetics and potentially occurring instabilities during processing. The small scale batches also allow identification of optimal stabilizer types and concentrations. The batch size is 0.5mL, requiring approximately 50mg or 5mg of drug (5% and 1% suspension, respectively). Thus, a simple, accessible, low-cost miniaturized scale method for the production of pharmaceutical nanocrystals was established.Nanocrystals are meanwhile well established for the formulation of poorly soluble actives, preferentially for oral ( For assessing the comminution ability of crystals, formulation screening (e.g., type and concentrations of stabilizers, stabilizer mixtures) and first physical stability investigations, a downscaling to small volumes is desirable. This saves time, and often very important, saves active. This is especially important in case of new chemical entities with potentially very limited amount available (often rather milligrams than grams). Commercial bead mills in their small volume version have suspension volumes rather in the range 50–100 A very simple approach in bead milling is filling of a 20 In this study, a down scaled system was developed based on the preferable glass vials, having a special optimized arrangement of the stirrer bars, and avoiding the use of a planetary mill by using a multiple magnetic stirring plate. Systematically investigated were the effect of number and arrangement of stirring bars, the effect of the type of active to be diminuted, and effect of milling bead size in this miniaturized system. The results obtained from the small scale were compared to data from larger scale high pressure homogenization and the Bühler bead mill PML-2, to judge the transferability of data from miniaturized to larger scale. Resveratrol, hesperitin, ascorbyl palmitate, apigenin and hesperidin were purchased from Denk Ingredients GmbH (Germany). Cyclosporin A was a donation from PharmaSol GmbH (Germany). Vitamin E polyethylene glycol succinate (TPGS) (trade name Kolliphor The production principle was a top-down approach, in this case wet bead milling with stirring bars in a super reduced scale. The milling chamber consisted of a 2 The volume of the 3 stirring bars was 0.7 All the formulations investigated were aqueous suspensions and contained 5% active and 1% stabilizer (all w/w). The proportion of beads to suspension was 1:1 (volume), in other words, 0.5 The vials were stirred on a magnetic stirring plate RCT basic (IKA-Werke GmbH & Co. KG, Germany) at 1200 The bench scale production by wet bead milling was performed using a bead mill PML-2 (Bühler, Switzerland). Milling beads of 0.2 or 0.4–0.6 The bench scale production by high pressure homogenization was performed using a homogenizer Micron LAB 40 (APV Deutschland GmbH, Germany). The suspension was first pre-processed by 2 high pressure homogenization (HPH) cycles at 150, 500 and 1000 The particle size of the nanocrystals was analyzed by photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS), using a Zetasizer Nano SZ (Malvern Instruments, UK). The results are the hydrodynamic diameter (z-average, z-ave), which is the intensity weighted mean diameter of the bulk population, and the polydispersity index (PdI), which is a measure for the width of the size distribution. Samples were diluted in water to a suitable concentration and the mean values were calculated from 10 single measurements. Potential larger particles or aggregates (>3–5 To complement laser diffraction regarding the presence of large particles or agglomerates, light microscopy using a microscope Orthoplan (Leitz, Germany) was performed at 160, 600 and 1000 fold magnifications. Stirring using 1, 2 and 3 magnetic stirring bars was compared. The objective here was to determine how many stirring bars were necessary to reduce or even completely avoid the presence of a “dead volume” of the suspension not being processed. An optimal stirrer arrangement creates a homogeneous energy dissipation in the milling volume, the movement of all the beads and suspension parts is similar. The presence of a dead volume represents loss in milling efficiency (since part of the suspension is not being processed) and could result in problems regarding reproducibility and up-scaling. This step was realized both visually and by evaluating the particle size of nanosuspensions produced by different milling set-ups. In When only 1 stirring bar was used, it is evident that part of the “suspension” was not being agitated together with the milling beads (clearer supernatant) ( The next step was to use the 3 different milling set-ups (1, 2 or 3 stirring bars) and evaluate the particle size of the resulting nanosuspensions. What had been hypothesized by visually evaluating the different set-ups was confirmed by particle size measurements ( The bead milling process is frequently used for industrial production. The production processes for the cosmetic nanocrystals rutin and hesperidin were developed by our group (now products of Dr. Rimpler GmbH, Germany; INCI: rutin submicron crystals, smartCrystal-lemon extract). The reproducibility of the final crystal size at identical production conditions was found to be very high in the validation process, typically ±20 The miniaturized bead milling method was tested by milling other selected actives with poor solubility, all of which could benefit from the special features of nanocrystals. All of the processed suspensions consisted of 5% drug and 1% stabilizer (all w/w), details cf. The milling process (beads size 0.05 Cyclosporin A was one of the actives milled using this self developed method. In previous studies, cyclosporin A nanosuspensions were obtained by bead milling and high pressure homogenization and had mean diameters of around 200 The antioxidant resveratrol was also investigated. It has been previously formulated as nanocrystals by high pressure homogenization and had a mean particle size of around 200 Hesperitin was the active which yielded the smallest particle size of all compounds tested. After 24  Apigenin was only milled up to 24 Hesperidin reached its smallest particle size after 24 The different actives showed different maximum reduction in particle size and different particle size reduction velocities ( Based on the data in Easy disintegratable: cyclosporin A, hesperitin and apigenin (minimum size <100 Medium disintegratable: resveratrol and ascorbyl palmitate (minimum size >100–200 Disintegratable: hesperidin (minimum size bout 300 Interesting is also the “kinetics” of size reduction ( Of course, the rotation speed influences the velocity of size reduction. In general, increase in stirring speed accelerates crystal diminution due to the higher input of energy, but at the same time increases erosion from the production equipment. Using a stirring speed as high as possible is desirable in production lines (e.g., continuous bead mills) to minimize industrial production costs. However, in this study time is no critical factor, critical factor is however to avoid erosion from the milling bars. Very distinct size reduction was achieved for most samples within 1–6 The bead size affects also the minimum achievable size, nanocrystal size decreases with decreasing milling bead size. A very rough rule of thumb is that the minimum achievable nanocrystals size is 1000 less than the bead size, e.g., 0.1 The small scale production provides also first hints regarding aggregation phenomena during milling, and potential gelling (affected by crystal size). It is known that the particle size achieved by bead milling is related to the size of the milling beads used. The smaller the milling beads, the smaller will be the particle size obtained. Smaller beads mover faster and consequently their capacity to erode the surface and/or break the crystals being milled is stronger. There is a rule of thumb that a 1000 fold smaller crystal size is obtained than the size of the beads used (i.e., 0.4 Sometimes nanosuspensions are required which are sterile or have at least a very low microbial load. This is more tedious to produce with a bead mill arrangement, thus alternatively nanocrystals can be produced with high pressure homogenization (HPH). HPH yields a sterile product; production can be made in a laminar air flow cabinet. To show the production ability, ascorbyl palmitate was used as example. Previous studies showed that ascorbyl palmitate could be formulated as nanocrystals using HPH ( When the same ascorbyl palmitate formulation was processed by HPH, it was observed that there was a strong particle size reduction to 290 In summary, after 24 Ascorbyl palmitate was also milled using the discontinuous mode of a Bühler PML-2 to verify if the data generated by the miniaturized method could be extrapolated to the commercial available equipment. For this, the same ascorbyl palmitate formulation was processed during 60 Considering the bead size of 0.2 The physical stability of the bead milled nanosuspensions can be further increased by applying an additional, second processing step: HPH. This step can be made not only on larger scale but also on the proposed miniaturized scale, e.g., processing the bead milled nanosuspension through a small scale high pressure homogenizer, e.g., Avestin B3 with 3 After 1 subsequent HPH cycle at 1500 It was possible to develop a miniaturized method using only 0.5 Most important information from the miniaturized scale are the minimum achievable size of a compound, the diminution kinetics, effect of bead sizes on both minimum size and kinetics and changes potentially occurring in the constitution of the suspension during processing (e.g., aggregates). From this, conclusions can be drawn for defining production parameters on large scale. This accelerates large scale process development. The developed miniaturized method clearly accelerates formulation screening compared to present lab scale and allows estimation of large scale production parameters, and this at simultaneously low-cost and high throughput of test formulations. The authors would like to thank the