Aims
                  The aim of our study was to examine the effects of statin therapy (atorvastatin) on post-implant structural changes of bovine pericardial tissue in a subcutaneous animal model.
               
                  Methods and results
                  Sixty male C57BL/6 mice underwent subcutaneous dorsal implantation of bovine pericardial fragments. Animals were randomized to treatment with atorvastatin (50 mg/kg) (statin group — SG) or to vehicle (control group — CG). After 1.5 months, all fragments were explanted and submitted to histopathological assessment (semi-quantitative analysis) to elucidate extent of inflammatory infiltrate, signs of tissue injury, or presence of microcalcification. Calcium determination of the implanted pericardial tissue was also performed by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) assessment.
                  ICP-MS analysis showed that pericardial fragments in SG had significantly (p
                     <0.01) less calcium content than CG (625±142 vs. 962±590 µg/g, respectively). Light microscopy showed marked inflammatory infiltrates and tissue injury of pericardial specimens in CG animals, whereas SG animals maintained a better preserved original pericardial structure.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Our findings indicate that atorvastatin significantly attenuates the post-implant structural degeneration of artificial valve bovine pericardial tissue in a subcutaneous animal model. Further observations are mandatory to assess the effects of statins on the implanted bioprosthetic valve tissue in the blood circulation.Since the first implants of heterologous tissue valve prostheses in the sixties, improvements of tissue valve design and manufacturing have been outstanding. Biological prostheses today offer a reliable and effective solution for valve replacement to treat cardiac native valve dysfunction without the need for anticoagulation and better hemodynamics as compared to mechanical substitutes. Postoperative tissue degeneration, however, remains a critical issue and represents the most frequent cause of reoperation All animals were used in accordance with the 1996 NRC Guide for the Care and use of Laboratory Animals. The study was approved by the Laboratory Institutional Research and Ethics Committees of the University of Parma, School of Medicine. Sixty male C57BL/6 mice, 9 weeks old (range 110 to 120 days), were obtained from Charles River Laboratories Italia S.p.A. (Lecco, Italy). On day 0, two 8-mm discs of glutaraldehyde-fixed bovine pericardium (Perimount Valve, Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA) were aseptically prepared and rinsed according to the manufacturer's recommendations and implanted into two specular (symmetrical) dorsal subcutaneous pockets in all the animals. The mice were anesthetized by an intraperitoneal tribromoethanol (800 µL, with a 70 mM solution) injection and subsequently a skin incision (about 2 cm) was made in order to insert the two fragments of pericardium in the back of each animal. On day 1 after surgery, mice were randomly assigned to treatment with AT (50 mg/kg, statin group — SG) or vehicle by gavage (control group — CG) for 30 days. This dose of AT in mice has been shown to correspond to a daily dose of 80 mg of atorvastatin in humans All animals were on normal diets (standard mice diet according to the Randoin–Causeret, Laboratory Piccioni, Gessate, Milan, Italy). On day 45, all the animals were sacrificed by a lethal intraperitoneal dose of tribromoethanol (2.400 µL, 70 mM solution) and the pouches of bovine pericardium were retrieved. Each of these fragments was cut into two parts, one of which was immediately fixed in a 10% formalin buffered solution for 24 h. The other sides of the pouches were used for specific calcium content assessment. After the fixation process, each sample was embedded in a paraffin tissue block from which 5-µm thick histological sections were obtained. Following standard procedures, two of these sections were stained with both hematoxylin-eosin and the Von Kossa method for calcium. The remaining unstained sections were used for immunohistochemical assessment of the inflammatory infiltrate. The following primary antibodies were tested using the manufacturers' protocols: anti-CD3 (Novocastra, Newcastle, UK, dilution 1:100), anti-CD20 (DakoCytomation, Glostrup, Denmark, 1:50) anti-CD68 (DakoCytomation, 1:50), anti-CD138 (Novocastra, 1:50) and anti-Myeloperoxidase (DakoCytomation, 1:300). The negative control procedure omitted the primary antibody. A semiquantitative grading was used in order to assess, along the pericardial fragments, the inflammatory infiltrate (0 = absent, 1 = slight, 2 = moderate and 3 = severe), necrosis (0 = absent, 1 = focal, 2 = diffuse) and microcalcifications (0 = absent, 1 = focal, 2 = diffuse). In addition, the proportions of the various inflammatory elements were quantitatively evaluated on the histological sections tested with anti-CD3, CD20, CD68, CD138 and myeloperoxidase primary antibodies. This morphometric measurement was carried out using a light microscope (Olympus BX 51, Tokyo, JPN, magnification x Pathologists were blinded to the kind of treatment the animals received along the study course. The explanted valve tissues were dried at 100 °C for 2 h and then were digested by hyperpuric nitric acid for 30 min at 70 °C. The solutions were adequately diluted by deionized water and injected in an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS)(Elan DRCII, Perkin-Elmer, Milan, Italy). Calcium was determined by using a quantitative method To exclude confounding factors implicated in post-implant pericardial tissue modifications, growths of bacterial colonies in the implanted fragments were postoperatively assessed and cases characterized by microscopic evidence of bacterial infection were excluded from the study analysis. Randomization was carried out by Stats Direct for Windows, release2.3.8 (Stats Direct Ltd, Cheshire, UK) employing the Mersenne Twister algorithm of Matsumoto and Nisimura which has a resolution of 32-bits and a period of 2^19937. The allocation sequence was generated by S.G.GDC assigned participants to their Group. The variables are expressed as number of cases and percentage for the ordinal and mean During the study period, four animals in the CG and six in the SG died. At histology, signs of infection were observed in five animals (3 in CG and 2 in SG, respectively) which were excluded from the tissue evaluation. Therefore, this study reports the results obtained from 45 animals. Light microscopy showed that the pericardial tissue of the CG animals exhibited marked tissue injury ( Proportions of the different inflammatory cells in the pericardial fragments from treated and untreated mice did not change significantly, as shown in the table. ICP-MS analysis showed and confirmed a significant reduction in tissue calcification in animals treated by AT ( To our knowledge, this study is the first demonstrating that AT significantly mitigates postoperative structural changes of implanted pericardial tissue of heterologous heart valves in a subcutaneous animal model. The statin treatment attenuated the global extent of inflammatory infiltrates in the pericardial samples without any changes in proportions of the single inflammatory subsets. This enhanced structural preservation, with diminished calcific deposition and, particularly, limited tissue derangement, in contrast to control animals which showed profound tissue abnormalities in the implanted pericardium. These effects were independent of high cholesterol levels, in that the animals were on a regular diet throughout the study, thus corroborating the pleiotropic effects of statins. The effects of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor used in our investigation, however, did not fully prevent post-implant degeneration since, compared to pre-implant tissue values, the calcium content also increased in the pericardium of statin-treated animals, indicating that this agent may be beneficial without being the only means to counteract and avoid postoperative tissue valve dysfunction. Postoperative degeneration of biological heart valves is a well known limiting factor of these type of valve substitutes, particularly in young patients The protective effect of statin therapy on the progression of bioprosthetic degeneration has been addressed by Antonini-Canterin and collaborators. In a retrospective clinical study which included 167 patients (13% on statin therapy) submitted to bioprosthetic valve implantation, they reported that xenograft valves showed reduced valve deterioration during follow-up if patients were on statins, despite higher levels of cholesterol, if compared to patients without statin therapy, suggesting an independent effect of statins from the cholesterol levels Our findings indicate that AT induced a rather homogeneous tissue response to host implantation, as shown by similar data and findings in all the samples of the AT group, likely blunting the well known individual differences in calcium metabolism or inflammatory response involved in tissue valve degeneration. Finally, our study has shown that AT alone was not sufficient to fully prevent calcification of the implanted pericardial tissue. Nonetheless, this pharmacological approach might be a useful adjuvant therapy in association with the proposed anti-mineralization processes to be applied during tissue valve manufacturing, as well as the correct application of secondary prevention approaches towards atherosclerosis risk factors. Furthermore, any kind of tissue treatment during valve assembly might significantly lose its efficiency, whereas statin therapy might add its effects in a long-lasting mode. The results of any tissue treatment in a subcutaneous animal model have sometimes failed to be confirmed in the circulation model and, therefore, our data should be interpreted with caution. Furthermore, the relationship between tissue valve calcification mitigation in animal model studies and clinical outcome has not been established. Obviously, these preliminary effects of HMG-Co reductase inhibitors must be confirmed either after implantation in the circulation or in clinical trials. In conclusion, our study has demonstrated that AT mitigates post-implant valve degeneration. In particular, AT significantly reduces the total extent of the inflammatory infiltrate in the implanted bovine pericardium routinely used to manufacture bioprosthetic cardiac valves, without affecting the proportion of the different inflammatory subsets. In addition, AT decreased both the total areas of necrosis and the tissue calcium deposition in the subdermal pericardial sheet. Further studies are nevertheless mandatory to explore whether the observed effects of such a pharmaceutical agent in a subcutaneous animal model will also be exerted in bioprostheses implanted in the blood circulation. We would like to thank Luigi Bertana (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA) for the provision of the biological tissue of artificial heart valve for animal implantation, the invaluable support of “Associazione Cuore e Ricerca”, and Judith Wilson for the English revision of the paper. The authors of this manuscript have certified that they comply with the Principles of Ethical Publishing in the International Journal of Cardiology