To reduce complications and increase fixation after the internal fixation of proximal humeral fractures, interlocking intramedullary nailing and tension-band and locking sutures were used simultaneously, and their results are reviewed. Twenty-six consecutive patients who underwent open intramedullary nailing with tension-band and locking sutures for proximal humeral fractures were selected. The mean follow-up period was 39 months. With regard to the functional evaluation, the mean Neer score was 90 points and the mean American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score was 85. When patients were divided into those aged less than 65 years and those aged 65 years or greater and into those with 2-part fractures and those with 3-part fractures, postoperative pain, the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score, and the Neer score showed no difference between the 2 groups. Open intramedullary nailing accompanied by tension-band and locking sutures for proximal humeral fractures shows sufficient fixation in older patients, and therefore, good postoperative shoulder function can be expected.Proximal humeral fractures account for 10% of all fractures occurring in patients aged older than 60 years, and they comprise 45% of all humeral fractures. Many methods are available for internal fixation of a proximal humeral fracture, including wires, We performed interlocking intramedullary nailing with placement of tension-band and locking sutures simultaneously for proximal humeral fractures to reduce the complications associated with internal fixation and to increase the fixation strength and then reviewed the results obtained. Our hypothesis is that tension-band and locking sutures with intramedullary nailing make early range of motion possible and give more stability compared with other techniques. In a retrospective study with a prospective protocol, 29 consecutive patients with proximal humeral fractures according to the classification of Neer The inclusion criteria for open intramedullary nailing combined with a tension-band and locking suture were 2- or 3-part fractures with severe comminution or osteoporosis and valgus-impacted 4-part fractures or fracture-dislocations ( The participants were 5 men and 21 women ( Anteroposterior bone mineral density from the second to fourth lumbar spine was measured in patients aged older than 50 years preoperatively (21 patients; mean age, 67 years). The mean bone mineral density was 0.74 g/cm The skin incision was performed via the deltopectoral approach with patients in the beach-chair position ( Direct manipulation of the fractured fragment was minimized by use of traction sutures on the rotator cuff attached to the greater or lesser tuberosity when a 3-part fracture was verified to be present ( In those cases of a surgical neck fracture, a guide wire was used to reduce the fracture and reaming was performed ( It was then determined whether the fractures of the greater or lesser tuberosity were reducible without tension ( Autologous bone grafting was performed at the fracture site in 6 cases with 2- or 3-part fractures with severe comminution or osteoporosis and in 1 case with a 4-part fracture. Two cases of proximal humeral fracture combined with a shaft fracture also underwent bone grafting. After internal fixation, we confirmed whether the nail protruded above the humeral head. The incised rotator interval was sutured via a No. 2 nonabsorbable braided suture (Ethibond). One case with a massive rotator cuff tear underwent open repair. Acromioplasty was carried out in 9 patients who were identified to have a type II or III acromion with a spur, by abduction of the arm after internal fixation and palpation of the undersurface of acromion. No patient required a blood transfusion intraoperatively or postoperatively. In all patients, the proximal tip of the nail was located below the humeral head or at the same height; the nail was inserted on average 3 mm (range, 0-9 mm) deeper than the humeral head on postoperative radiography. The number of proximal interlocking screws averaged 3 (range, 2-4), whereas the number of distal interlocking screws averaged 2 (range, 1-2). Antegrade static interlocking nailing was carried out in all cases. All wounds were closed in layers with drainage, and the limb was put in an arm sling for 4 to 6 weeks. Systemic antibiotics with cefazolin and gentamicin were used for 3 to 7 days based on the status of wound healing. Postoperative abduction bracing or cast immobilization was not used. On the first day after the operation, pendulum exercises and passive forward elevation exercises of the shoulder joint were started. On the second day, a pulley exercise was performed, and in the fifth week after surgery, patients started external rotation exercises with a stick. Radiologic examinations were carried out at 6 and 10 weeks and 4 and 6 months after surgery, and active range of motion was allowed if bony union was identified in the sixth week or tenth week after operation. A visual analog pain evaluation with a scale ranging from 0 to 10 was carried out at the final follow-up. The functional evaluation of the shoulder joint used a 100-point score according to the evaluation of Neer A physician’s assistant determined the range of motion by measuring forward elevation of the shoulder, external rotation with the patient’s arm at the side, external rotation in 90° abduction, and internal rotation. All patients, except one, were followed up at monthly intervals until the fracture consolidation was apparent on X-ray and then reviewed at 3 monthly intervals for this study to record the functional outcome. If the final follow-up was not possible, a telephone survey was conducted. For statistical analysis, the Student Bony union was obtained in 25 of 26 cases on final follow-up. The time to union averaged 8.7 weeks (range, 7-12 weeks). The mean operation time and blood loss were 2.1 hours (range, 1.5-3.2 hours) and 230 mL (range, 120-320 mL), respectively. The mean pain score was 1 point (range, 0-6). The mean Neer score was 90 points (range, 45-99) and was considered excellent in 18 cases, good in 5, and unsatisfactory or a failure in 3. The mean postoperative ASES score was 85 points (range, 40-100) and was considered excellent in 11 cases, good in 9, fair in 4, and poor in 2. The patient whose case was considered a failure by the Neer evaluation and who had a poor result by the ASES evaluation had a fracture-dislocation accompanied by a 2-part surgical neck fracture and a large Hill-Sachs lesion. This patient was admitted to our hospital for a loss of reduction at the fracture site 1 month after closed reduction and percutaneous pin fixation. Although open reduction–internal fixation was performed, a Bankart lesion repair was carried out because of redislocation. In the fourth month of follow-up, humeral head replacement was performed because of the development of avascular necrosis. The patient who was considered to have an unsatisfactory result by the Neer evaluation and a poor result by the ASES evaluation had a 3-part fracture-dislocation in the greater tuberosity and surgical neck. In this patient, postoperative nonunion and upward protrusion of the nail occurred. A humeral head replacement was performed for nonunion after 14 months. The patient whose case was considered a failure by the Neer evaluation and who had a fair result by the ASES evaluation was admitted for a loss of reduction after closed reduction with percutaneous pin fixation at another hospital. Combined injuries included an ipsilateral ankle fracture and a fracture in the thoracic spine. Although open reduction, internal fixation, bone grafting, and acromioplasty were carried out, we could not obtain an accurate reduction because of the delay in surgery. Postoperative angulation was 40° at the fracture site. The patient had muscle weakness and motion limitation postoperatively. Three cases had a satisfactory result by the Neer evaluation and a fair result by the ASES evaluation: two with 3-part fractures and combined extremity injuries and one with a surgical neck fracture and a cardiovascular condition. All had mild pain and limitation of range of motion. When patients were divided into those with 2-part fractures and those with 3-part fractures, postoperative pain, ASES, and Neer scores showed no significant differences ( Mean forward elevation was 139° (range, 90°-160°) (7° decrease compared with contralateral shoulder), mean external rotation was 45° (range, 0°-70°) (11° decrease compared with contralateral side), mean external rotation at 90° abduction was 66° (range, 30°-90°) (5° decrease compared with contralateral side), and internal rotation was to the spinous process of the T12 vertebra (range, spinous process of T4 to L5) (decrease of 3 vertebral heights compared with contralateral side). Postoperative complications included nonunion (1 case), avascular necrosis of the humeral head (1 case), and protrusion of the proximal interlocking screw (1 case). There were no implant failures or superficial or deep infections. Two cases showed more than 20° of anterior angulation of the surgical neck (20° and 40°), and both patients had an unsatisfactory Neer score. More than 5 mm of malunion of the greater tuberosity was seen in 2 cases of malunion superiorly (5 mm and 8 mm) and in 2 cases of malunion inferiorly (5 mm and 8 mm). However, the treatment outcomes of these 4 cases were better than good with regard to the Neer and ASES scores ( There were 3 cases of revision operations: 2 had humeral head replacements for avascular necrosis of the humeral head and nonunion and 1 had lysis of adhesions for a surgical neck fracture combined with a myositis ossificans after head injury. Different forms of intramedullary nailing have been used for humeral fractures (eg, Rush rod, Enders nail, and Seidel nail) since Christensen However, Chapman et al Fixation by use of a Rush rod and tension-band wiring As reported by Ruch et al Fixation by use of nonabsorbable heavy sutures yielded good results even though rotational instability occurred sometimes. Lin et al In summary, open intramedullary nailing accompanied by tension-band and locking sutures for proximal humeral fractures shows sufficient stability in older patients, and therefore, good postoperative shoulder function can be expected. 