Solvent extraction experiments were conducted to separate iron and nickel from a spent FeCl3 etching solution. Alamine336, MIBK and PC88A were tested as extractants and the highest extraction percentage of iron was obtained with Alamine336. It was possible to separate iron and nickel by extracting the spent etching solution with Alamine336. In the operation of mixer-settler, seven extraction stages with 1.0 M Alamine336 led to 99% extraction of iron at an O/A ratio of 7. Ten stripping stages with 0.01 M HCl solution resulted in an aqueous solution with 133 g/L of iron at an O/A ratio of 7.Etching of nickel–lead frame with FeCl Ferric ions have a strong tendency to form complexes with chloride ion, such as FeCl In order to separate iron and nickel from a spent FeCl Solvent extraction experiments were performed with the spent etching solution which resulted from the etching of nickel–lead frame. In all the solvent extraction experiments, the concentration of each extractant was adjusted to 1.0 M by diluting with toluene. Solvent extraction experiments were carried out in a separatory funnel. The two phases were stirred with a wrist action shaker for 30 min. The aqueous phase was separated from the organic phase after settling the mixture for an hour at room temperature. Stripping experiments of iron from the loaded organic phase were performed with HCl solution. The bench scale mixer-settler system consisted of 20 pump type acrylic mixer-settlers. Each mixer had a mixing volume of 280 mL and a settling volume of 880 mL. The aqueous feed solution was a synthetic chloride solution consisting of 29.2 g/L Fe(II), 114.8 g/L Fe(III) and 4.8 g/L Ni(II). The organic feed solution was 1.0 M Alamine336 in toluene. Flow rates of each feed were controlled by using a diaphragm pump. After attaining a steady state, the aqueous phase was taken for analysis from the settling chamber of each stage. Throughout the mixer-settler operation, an equal volume ratio of aqueous to organic was maintained. The concentration of iron and nickel in the aqueous phase was measured with ICP-AES (Spectroflame EOP). The concentration of metal in the organic phase was calculated by using mass balance. It was reported that the extraction percentage of iron with MIBK was lower than with TBP at any given HCl concentration ( Solvent extraction experiments of iron from the spent FeCl It is seen in Solvent extraction experiments of iron with Alamine336 from a synthetic solution consisting of FeCl The concentration of chloride ion in the spent etching solution was 312 g/L and the solution pH was − The result on the solvent extraction of the spent FeCl An extraction isotherm was obtained for the solvent extraction of iron by 1.0 M Alamine336 from the spent etching solution containing 144 g/L of total iron. In order to recover iron from the loaded organic phase, the effect of HCl concentration in the stripping solution was investigated. Stripping percentage was defined as It is seen in   In order to determine the equilibration time for the extraction of iron from the spent etching solution by 1.0 M Alamine336, experiments were performed by varying shaking time from one to 30 min. In the mixer-settler operation, the sum of flow rate of aqueous and organic was maintained at 40 mL/min, so that a mixer residence time of about 7 min was obtained.  In the etching of nickel–lead frame, the concentration of FeCl Solvent extraction and stripping experiments were conducted to separate iron and nickel from a spent FeCl This work was supported by The Korea Energy Management Corporation.