Crack initiation and propagation in a brittle material such as a rock are affected by the friction between crack surfaces. Choosing an appropriate fracture criterion for frictional crack surfaces plays an important role in determining fracture parameters. To this end, a two-dimensional crack propagation code (TDCPC) was developed in this study based on the displacement discontinuity method (DDM) to predict the crack propagation path under the effect of friction. In this study, three classes of fracture criteria were defined: (1) classical fracture criteria (maximum tangential stress criterion, minimum strain energy density criterion, and maximum strain energy release rate criterion) under mixed mode loading without the effect of friction (CFC-I-II), (2) classical fracture criteria under the pure mode II (shear fracturing) without the effect of friction (CFC-II), and (3) the Swedlow criterion which takes into account the effect of friction between crack surfaces (SW-II). A special element (Swedlow-element) was developed and used in the displacement discontinuity method to predict crack trajectories under the effect of friction. The Swedlow criterion was developed to study the fracture process under bi-axial loading. Results indicated that CFC-I-II are not valid for frictional crack surfaces. Crack propagation paths predicted by CFC-II and SW-II under uniaxial loading proved that friction coefficient has a significant effect on the crack initiation angle (the first stages of the crack propagation path), and away from the crack tip, CFC-II and SW-II almost have the same path. For bi-axial loading, crack propagation paths predicted by SW-II deviate away from the original crack as friction coefficient is increased. The stress ratio (Ko) and friction coefficient have opposite effects on the crack propagation path. Crack trajectory deviates away from the original crack under the effect of friction coefficient and moves toward the original crack under the effect of the stress ratio. The present study indicated that the results predicted using TDCPC are in good agreement with the experimental and numerical results of other studies.maximum tangential stress criterion minimum strain energy density criterion maximum strain energy release rate criterion crack inclination angle equivalent crack inclination angle under the effect of friction crack extension angle radial distance from the crack tip stress intensity factor under pure mode I stress intensity factor under pure mode II shear modulus Poisson’s ratio normal stress on crack surfaces shear stress on crack surfaces shear strength between crack surfaces cohesion friction coefficient in-plane stresses (T-Stresses) remote vertical stress stress ratio (the ratio between horizontal stress and vertical stress) normal displacement discontinuity shear displacement discontinuity According to geological engineering, a variety of discontinuities such as joints exist in rock masses and dominate the mechanical and physical properties of these rocks. Rock masses are subjected to different loading patterns, which are in turn transmitted through joint surfaces. Rock fracture mechanics deals with the stress state of rock joints by taking into account most influential factors to determine fracture initiation and propagation. There is no comprehensive criterion which takes into consideration all factors that influence the fracture process. The most common criteria used in this area are: maximum tangential stress criterion (MTS) Regarding the closed crack situation, the effect of friction cannot be neglected. In this case, we consider frictional fractures or shear fractures under the effect of friction. The applicability of classical fracture criteria in this case is a very important issue. These criteria are mainly based on the stress distribution functions at the crack tip This study aimed to assess the effect of friction on the fracture process (crack initiation and propagation) by developing a two-dimensional crack propagation code (TDCPC) based on the displacement discontinuity method. The allowed range for using classical fracture criteria and Swedlow criteria and the problems associated with them were considered as the fundamental points in this study. The TDCPC can be used to predict the crack propagation path under uniaxial and bi-axial conditions with and without the effect of friction between crack surfaces. This study focused on yielding when shear stress exceeded shear strength between crack surfaces. The displacement discontinuity method is preferred in cracking problems Classical fracture criteria include the maximum tangential stress criterion (MTS), the minimum strain energy density criterion (S-criterion), and the maximum strain energy release rate criterion (G-criterion). The G-criterion has some problems under compression Based on the MTS criterion, fracture initiation occurs when the maximum tangential stress at the crack tip reaches the critical value of material strength, and the direction of crack extension is perpendicular to the direction of the maximum tangential stress Considering the S-criterion, when the minimum strain energy density reaches the critical value of the material, fracture initiation takes place, and crack extension direction corresponds to the direction of the minimum strain energy density. Based on crack tip stresses, the general expression for strain energy density can be written as Eq. To use classical fracture criteria by taking into account the shear strength between crack surfaces (friction + cohesion), a crack in an infinite plate under mixed mode I-II loading with associated stresses can be analyzed as follows ( When a slip between crack surfaces occurs, the term of cohesion vanishes, and the term of friction remains. Thus, the previous expression of stress intensity factors becomes a function of the friction coefficient. It must be noted that the ratio of stress intensity factors in the absence of the shear strength between crack surfaces corresponds to the tangent of the crack inclination angle. Thus, the equivalent crack inclination angle β Based on the previous analysis, the crack extension angle is shown in Swedlow CFC-I-II: classical fracture criteria under mixed mode loading I-II, including MTS-CL and S-CL. CFC-II: classical fracture criteria under pure mode II loading, including MTS-SF and S-SF. SW-II: Swedlow criterion under pure mode II, including MTS-SW and S-SW. MTS-CL: classical maximum tangential stress criterion (K MTS-SF: classical maximum tangential stress criterion under shear fracture (K MTS-SW: maximum tangential stress criterion with Swedlow assumptions. S-CL: classical minimum strain energy density criterion (K S-SF: classical minimum strain energy density criterion under shear fracture (K S-SW: minimum strain energy density criterion with Swedlow assumptions. The term of T-stress and friction (f) affect the distribution of tangential stress (σ As mentioned above, the crack extension angle was obtained based on MTS-SW and S-SW for different values of the friction coefficient (f). As previously noted, the Swedlow criterion is applicable to the yielding case (τ > τ′). Based on this condition and Eqs. The crack extension angle versus the crack inclination angle and the friction coefficient under MTS-SW and MTS-SF is shown in  In the Swedlow criteria, only uniaxial remoter compressive stress was taken into account. In this study, bi-axial loading was investigated by taking into account the effect of vertical and horizontal remote stresses. Under bi-axial loading, there are three parameters affecting the fracture process: crack inclination angle (β), friction coefficient (f) and stress ratio (K Under uniaxial loading, it was indicated that the crack inclination angle correlates with the friction coefficient by the equation β ≤ atan(1/f) for the yielding condition. In this case (bi-axial loading), based on the yielding condition τ > τ′ and Eqs. Based on Based on what was mentioned above, The displacement discontinuity method, a branch of the boundary element method, was used to study the effect of the friction coefficient between crack surfaces on crack initiation and propagation for the case of an inclined crack in an infinite plate in a brittle material such as a rock. The boundary element method has widely been used in linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM) problems and has provided good solutions for finite and infinite problems with arbitrary loading conditions and geometries To achieve the aim of this study, a two-dimensional crack propagation code (TDCPC) was developed by taking into account classical and Swedlow criteria to predict the crack propagation path for the closed crack situation in the case of uniaxial and bi-axial loading. Previous studies on the crack extension angle for classical and Swedlow criteria have only dealt with the initiation angle (the first stage of the crack propagation path). However, the crack propagation problem is more difficult than the crack initiation problem, and the numerical problems that must be overcome become more complicated. Thus, a numerical model was developed to help solve the crack propagation problem under the effect of shear strength between crack surfaces. In this regard, Crouch First, TDCPC was developed to study the applicability of classical fracture criteria for predicting the crack propagation path in a rock under tension and compression The results of the TDCPC were verified and calibrated in three stages based on the numerical and experimental results. Stage I included verification and calibration of the stress intensity factor. Stage II involved the crack extension angle under uniaxial compressive stress. Finally, the crack propagation path under uniaxial and biaxial stress was verified in stage III. It was shown that the results predicted using the TDCPC are in good agreement with the experimental and numerical results of other studies. The stress intensity factor predicted by the TDCPC was verified by comparing the TDCPC results with those of Bobet Some researchers have experimentally and numerically predicted the crack extension angle for frictional crack surfaces for the friction coefficient f = 0.3 and the Poisson’s ratio 0.15 For more accuracy, the TDCPC was verified for the crack propagation path under uniaxial and biaxial compressive stress. The results of the TDCPC was compared with the numerical results obtained by De Bremaecker and Ferris For biaxial compressive stress, the same previous characteristics were used except that lateral stress σ Crack propagation paths under uniaxial and bi-axial loading with the effect of friction between crack surfaces for an inclined crack with different crack inclination angles were predicted by using classical and Swedlow fracture criteria. Crack propagation paths were predicted under the plane strain case and for the Poisson’s ratio of 0.33 based on the strain energy density criterion and the MTS-criterion. The results of the present study are as follows. In this case, crack propagation paths were predicted in three situations. In the first situation, classical fracture criteria MTS-CL and S-CL were used for open crack situation without the effect of friction. For the second situation, classical fracture criteria MTS-SF and S-SF were used to predict the crack propagation path in pure mode II under a shear fracture (SF). In the third situation, Swedlow criteria MTS-SW and S-SW were used for closed cracks by taking into account the effect of friction between crack surfaces. The results showed that the effect of the friction coefficient is significant in the first stages of the crack propagation path, as shown in For the MTS-Criterion, For crack inclination angles of about 30 degrees ( For the crack inclination angle of 45 degrees ( For the S-criterion, the first stages of crack propagation paths indicated that S-SW and S-SF almost provide the same estimation for crack inclination angles less than 30 degrees ( Crack propagation paths predicted by classical and Swedlow fracture criteria for different values of the crack inclination angle and the friction coefficient are shown in Some points can be noted by comparing the maximum tangential stress theory and the minimum strain energy release rate theory. For crack inclination angles less than 45 degrees, S-CL and S-SW predict crack extension angles greater than MTS-CL and MTS-SW, and crack trajectories for the S-criterion are more curved than those for the MTS-criterion, especially for the crack inclination angle of 30 degrees. For the crack inclination angle of 45 degrees, the S-criterion and the MTS-criterion provide the same estimation of crack propagation paths, because the effect of normal stress ϭ For the crack inclination angle of 60 degrees, it is noted that the crack trajectory under pure mode II has a convex section near the crack tip. This convex section has been noted for crack inclination angles more than 45 degrees. This phenomenon can be explained from the point of view of the sliding mode, as shown in In this case, the effect of the friction coefficient (f), the stress ratio (K To show the effect of the stress ratio (K We numerically investigated in detail the validity of classical fracture criteria, compared with the Swedlow criterion (SW-II), under mixed mode loading I-II (CFC-I-II) and pure mode II (CFC-II) for predicting crack initiation and propagation under the effect of friction between crack surfaces. The Swedlow criterion was developed to take biaxial loading into account. The crack extension angle under the effect of the friction coefficient and the stress ratio was estimated for bi-axial loading. A special element (the Swedlow-element) was developed to be used in the displacement discontinuity method. Crack propagation paths were predicted based on CFC-I-II, CFC-II and SW-II. The results showed that: Classical fracture criteria under mixed mode loading I-II lose their credibility in the closed crack situation. For the uniaxial loading case, CFC-II and SW-II indicated that the friction coefficient has the main effect on the first stages of the crack propagation path, and that, away from the crack tip, crack trajectories seem to have no differences. Therefore, the Swedlow criteria should be used for the first stage of the crack propagation. CFC-II can be used with good agreement for the entire crack propagation path. For bi-axial loading, results indicated that the crack propagation path deviates away from the original crack with increasing the friction coefficient. The effect of the stress ratio (K