In this work, the effect of cobalt on the properties and performance of lead anodes for zinc electrowinning is investigated. An attempt was made to produce Pb–Co mixture anodes by mechanical alloying. It is observed that milling is not capable of producing a solid solution, even by adding stearic acid as a process controlling agent, as all powders stuck to the balls or cold welded together. Moreover, plasma spraying method was used to apply Co-containing lead layers on the surface of the pure Pb sheets followed by rolling in order to smooth the surface. Both as sprayed and sprayed and rolled samples with 1, 3 and 5wt.% Co concentrations were evaluated in terms of corrosion properties and oxygen evolution potential. The analysis of the microstructures and voltammograms confirm the best corrosion resistance for 3wt.% Co containing, sprayed-rolled samples compared to none treated lead sheet. Microstructure investigations revealed that the spherical Co particles were distributed on and within the sprayed layers. Potentiostatic measurements of the rolled samples show that the addition of Co up to an optimum amount of 3wt.% decreases the oxygen evolution potential from 1.64 to 1.55V; and the starting current values decreases noticeably from 3.1×10−4 to 5.5×10−5
                     A, respectively. Moreover, the effect of the amount of area reduction on the anodic properties of the rolled samples was investigated. The microstructure of anodic layer was also studied using SEM.The production of high purity zinc in large scale, by conventional methods, has always been encountered with problems due to the corrosion of lead anodes during the Electrowinning process. To extend the working life, the anodes should have outstanding characteristics such as excellent electrochemical properties, high corrosion resistance, good electrical conductivity and acceptable mechanical properties. Lead based alloys have been used extensively as anode material in most hydrometallurgical zinc production plants. However, there are some disadvantages associated with the use of lead anodes such as increased energy consumption due to high overpotential of oxygen evolution reaction (OER) ( Generally, the supplied energy to Electrowinning process is utilized in three positions; a) reduction of zinc on cathode surface which can be reduced by controlling the thermodynamics and kinetics parameters, b) downfall of energy in electrolyte, electrical circuits and conjunction that can be amended by increasing the conductivity, redesigning and improving the electrical circuits and cell house, and c) the anodic reactions, this can be modified by improving the anodic reactions. In most Electrowinning processes, the following oxygen evolution reactions are the main anodic reactions: The real potential for these reactions is, however, depended on the polarization values and/or kinetic status of the system ( Many techniques have been proposed for reducing the anodic reaction potential. The alloying elements can be categorized into three groups ( Silver is the most common and effective additive for producing lead based anodes. Therefore, employing Pb–Co Alloys is beneficial both technically and economically. Pb–Co is an immiscible metal system, and their immiscibility continues even at high temperature ranges above their melting points. Although the solvent extraction is a marvelous technique for gaining the purred liquor solution (PLS) of zinc, the corrosion of anodes is the main source of contamination for the zinc products during the electrowinning process. Therefore, improving the quality of the lead anodes is necessary if ultra high pure (UHP) zinc is required. One of the methods to prepare alloys from immiscible metal systems is the mechanical alloying process. Based on our experiments, the results of this process, however, were not favorable and acceptable. The purpose of this study is to develop a method, plasma spraying, to produce high quality anodes, and to investigate the merits of this alternative technique in providing desirable properties for anodes at reasonable price. Plasma spraying is one of the effective techniques for coating the surfaces especially with refractory metals. Higher contact temperature and longer interaction time for spraying the metals result in higher diffusion depth, better bonding quality and good cohesion strength. Moreover, limited oxidation of the metal substrate during the spraying, improves the bonding quality and subsequently the performance of the lead anodes ( Commercial Pb (purity 99.9 The compositions of the samples for mechanical alloying were Pb-5 Plasma spraying method was employed to cover the lead anodes with a Pb–Co layer. Lead sheets were used as substrate for plasma spraying after grinding by emery paper 600. The mixtures of lead with 1, 3 and 5 The microstructure of the samples was evaluated using a Cambridge S360 scanning electron microscope. The corrosion properties of both sprayed and rolled samples were evaluated by potentiodynamic polarization technique. Potentiodynamic experiments were carried out in a standard flat cell connected to an Autolab PGSTAT30 apparatus, using Ag/AgCl reference electrode, at ambient temperature. The apparent exposure area of the samples was 1 The purpose of the mechanical alloying of lead together with 5 and 30  The reason for the failure of the milling for Pb–Co immiscible metal system is the very low melting point of Pb (600.5 The homogeneous mixture of lead with 0, 1, 3 and 5 The typical SEM image in topography mode for the sprayed sample with 3 The SEM micrographs of the sample containing 3      A literature survey showed that the starting current value for oxygen evolution reaction has frequently been used as a measure of the corrosion rate ( The high amount of corrosion rate in sprayed samples is attributed to the surface roughness. It seems that the corrosion resistance could be improved by employing a technique such as rolling.  The structure of the anodic layers on the surface of the lead sheet and sprayed-rolled samples are shown in SEM micrographs of As mentioned before, the PbO These results also are in agreement with the potentiodynamic evolution results for the sprayed-rolled sample with 3 This study aimed at first to evaluate the behaviour of Pb–Co immiscible metal system during mechanical alloying at ambient temperature. The goal was to prepare a super saturated solid solution of Co in Pb in the form of powders in order to improve the corrosion resistance and oxygen evolution potential of anodes. The results show that the mechanical alloying is not an effective technique to produce a uniform solid solution. As the intrinsic annealing temperature (the ratio of vial in situ temperature to the melting point) is more than 0.5, dynamic recrystallization occurs which decreases the work hardening. Additionally, the SEM observations suggest a simple mechanical contact between cobalt particles and lead matrix with a heterogeneous dispersion of cobalt and pores. Therefore, the authors believe that the mechanical alloying route is not an appropriate technique to produce lead alloys anodes, both practically and economically. Metal spraying technique was employed in the next step to obtain a homogeneous coated surface with cobalt. For this purpose, the mixtures of lead and cobalt powders, containing 1, 3 and 5 The SEM, XRD and EDS analyses of the formed oxide slime after voltammetry experiments showed that increasing the cobalt content in sprayed-rolled samples up to 3 The project was supported by