The HPGR technology has become more attractive to the copper industry because of its high throughput capacities and its low specific energy consumptions. A HPGR model, able to give enough information based on pilot plant testing, in order to back up HPGR engineering studies, was developed. The model was based on the physical phenomena of the grinding operation. The model parameters were fitted with pilot scale test results, corresponding to a Chilean copper ore, classified in two lithologies (andesitic and porphyrytic ores). Some sets of data were not used in the fitting stage, to test the predictive capability of the model. The pilot scale tests were performed at the facilities of two HPGR manufacturers, changing operating pressure and rolls peripheral velocity (only one of the manufacturers). The simulated specific energy consumptions and particle size distributions, compared with the experimental data, were considered good enough. The model was able to predict adequately throughput capacity, specific energy consumption and particle size distributions of the edge, centre and total products.High-pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) technology has struggled for acceptance into the hard-rock mining sector, has had many advances in this sector, but is still regarded as an “immature” technology ( The HPGR consists of two counter-rotating rolls mounted in heavy-duty frictionless bearings, enclosed in a strong frame. Pressure is applied to one of the rolls that can move linearly by means of a hydro-pneumatic spring system, while the other roll is held in a fixed position in the frame ( Roll diameters of industrial and semi-industrial units vary from 0.8 to 2.8 At present, the three HPGR producers will all give guarantees of throughput and useful life of their equipment, as long as they complete sufficient representative test work ( Several tests have been developed in order to quantify the behaviour of different ores in the various crushing and grinding applications (Bond work index, JK Drop weight test, SAG power index, etc.). However, none of these tests can be applied to high-pressure grinding ( At present, in a greenfield hard-rock application, to include HPGR in a flow sheet relies on its ability to provide a significant reduction in comminution costs at a similar operating availability ( Successful pilot-plant testing carried out in the last years has proven the operational reliability of HPGR technology in hard rock applications. As an important result for the copper industry six HPGRs were commissioned in two copper concentrators in 2006, four in South America and two in Indonesia ( A relevant case is the conceptual engineering study for the Los Bronces expansion project ( With respect to modelling of the high-pressure grinding roll, the most important work was done by Morrell and some co-authors ( In the pre-crusher zone, if particle are bigger than a certain critical size, they will be broken directly by the roll faces as would occur in a conventional roll crusher. For The Morrell et al. model considers that breakage at the edge of the rolls is different to that at the centre and is more similar to that occurring in a conventional roll crusher ( Since the HPGR technology is based on applying high pressures, the compression zone is by far the most important comminution zone, as it is where the majority of the breakage processes take place. Under normal HPGR process conditions the edge and pre-crusher parts of the model are not dominant, but contribute to the overall accuracy ( Several aspects of this model, regarding the prediction of product size distribution, are not well explained or are not detailed. For example, with respect to some parameters as the ore specific split factor or the correction factor used in the equation to predict throughput, are they fitting parameters? Must be determined experimentally? With respect to the compression zone, what is the model describing the breakage in this zone? How is included the rolls speed, which has an effect ( The main goal of this work is to model the HPGR operation, for the development of a simulator able to give enough information, based on pilot plant testing, in order to back up the continuation to more advanced steps in potential HPGR engineering studies. The HPGR model will be fitted with pilot data, corresponding to a Chilean copper ore. Some sets of data will be kept apart and will not be used in the fitting stage, to test the predictive capability of the model. The high-pressure grinding rolls model presented in this paper is a set of equations that on the basis of the ore characteristics, equipment dimensions and operating conditions is able to predict the equipment performance in terms of throughput, power consumption and particle size distribution of the product. The model structure has its basis on the work developed by Morrell et al. at the JKMRC. Both models, the proposed by Morrell et al. ( The model equations are based on physical phenomena that govern the operation: mass balances for throughput estimation, physics equations for the power consumption and a population balance model for the particle size distribution. The stream of particles inside the comminution zones in the HPGR is limited by the roll surfaces and the liner patterns, and it is modelled as a plug flow. This hypothesis has been accepted by researchers and manufacturers ( The plug flow hypothesis is the base of the modelling; the applying of this criterion in the deduction of the model equations is discussed next. As it has been discussed, the HPGR model is made up of three sub-models which predict the throughput, power draw and the particle size distribution. The theoretical tonnage treated by a HPGR of diameter Thus, the velocity of the band, The density of the ore band at any angle The tonnage of the ore band, The width of the ore band as a function of the angle Under steady state conditions the difference of tonnage between the beginning and the end of the particle bed compression zone is equal to zero. Using Eqs. Only the higher root is considered in the solution, because it is the only one to give acceptable values for the Thus, the throughput can be calculated with Eq.  Eq.  As the power required to spin both rolls is equal to twice the torque multiplied by the rolls angular velocity, then the total power draw The specific energy consumption The HPGR is considered as a series of two size reduction stages. The differences between the stages are the breakage mechanisms. In the single particle compression zone, located between the angles The product size distribution of the single particle compression zone, The product of the single particle compression zone rejoins with the fraction of material of size lesser or equal than the critical size On each block, the material is broken gradually as it reaches the extrusion zone. The intensive property Under these considerations, the model equation consists in a system of To solve these equations the following border conditions are used: Eq. For the breakage functions, For the breakage rate, the functional expression ( The Holdup of each block As was above mentioned ( Be In mathematics the floor function, The particle size distribution of the total product, The particle size distribution of the centre product then, is calculated by balance using Eq. To test the potential use of HPGR technology in the feasibility studies for a new project, an important Chilean copper producer decided to send several samples of two lithologies present in their ore to two HPGR manufacturers. These samples were treated in pilot units changing different operating conditions. The deposit is located in northern Chile and its ore is classified in two main geological units: Porphiric and Andesitic copper ore. To match the feed requirements for the equipment, the samples were crushed and screened to an approximate top size of 40 The grinding tests consisted in a series of open and locked circuit tests to measure the specific energy consumption, The specific gravity of both andesitic and porphiric ore were measured by the first manufacturer, being 2.74 for the porphiric ore and 2.80 for the andesitic ore. The pilot HPGR used by the first manufacturer, M1, has studded rolls of 800 The pilot HPGR used by the second manufacturer, M2, also has studded rolls, but of 710 Selected results, corresponding to manufacturer M1, are shown in As was explained in chapter 2, the HPGR model developed in this work, consists in a throughput equation (Eq. The correlation coefficient for the modelled and experimental values is 80%. As can be seen in For each set of data ( The model parameters were estimated using the gradient descent algorithm to minimize the sum of least squares between the experimental data and the modelled data. As a goodness of fit indicator, the correlation coefficient ( For a 95% confidence interval and 5 degrees of freedom calculated as: number of size classes – (number of model parameters The model parameters obtained for each ore and manufacturer are shown in For validation purposes the remaining subsets of data were compared with simulation results obtained with the model, using as fixed parameters those parameters obtained by the model fitting procedure shown above ( The prediction quality is good for the particle size distribution of the total products. The correlation coefficient values are all over 98%, but the chi-square test fails in two of the predictions (centre and edge for the same test) of product size distribution. In A phenomenological and steady-state model of the HPGR was developed as a function of operating variables, equipment specifications and ore characteristics. A novel approach was used in the estimation of the product size distributions. The results of the pilot scale tests ( The results of the model fitting procedure showed that the parameters of the selection function are manufacturer-dependent. The selection function curves for each manufacturer were very similar, independently of the ore. Between manufacturers M1 and M2, greater differences were observed for coarser sizes, but quite small for the finer ones. With respect to the parameter The experimental results showed that for different operating pressures, Although the chi-square goodness of fit tests failed in few (4 out of 39) of all particle size distributions, the model fit is good. For the fitting of the total particle size distributions, mean square errors lower than 3.46% with an average of 2.66%, were obtained. Finally, the predictive capability of the model is accurate, a correlation coefficient The following calculations were made for a HPGR of     Calculate the inter particle compression angle from Eq. Calculate the HPGR throughput from Eq.  Calculate the compression force from Eq. Calculate the total power draw from Eq. Calculate the specific energy consumption from Eq. The calculations were done using the parameters for Andesitic ore and Manufacturer 1 and a given particle size distribution of the feed. For simplification purposes, three blocks ( Calculate the breakage and specific selection matrices from Eqs. Calculate the height of the particle bed compression zone from Eq. Calculate the critical size from Eq. The class sizes considered in the feed are lower than the critical size, from Calculate the holdup of each block using Eq. Calculate the centre and the power of each block using Eqs. Calculate the rate of breakage of each block using Eq. Calculate the particle size distribution of each size class and block using Eq. Calculate the total particle size distribution from Eq. Calculate the edge particle size distribution from Eq. Calculate the centre particle size distribution from Eq.