SiC porous ceramics can be prepared by introducing the polyurethane preparation method into the production process of ceramic biscuits, followed by sintering at 1300 °C for 2 h under N2 flux after the cross-linking of polycarbosilane at 220 °C for 4 h in air. The microstructures, mechanical properties and infiltrations of the SiC porous ceramics are investigated in detail. The best dispersal effect comes from the SiC slurry with xylene as the solvent and a mixture of Silok®7096 (1 wt%) and Anjeka®6041 (4 wt%) as the dispersant. The compressive strength of SiC porous ceramics with high porosity (69.53%) reaches 16.9 MPa. The heat treatment can increase infiltration, the rate of which (4.296 × 10−7 mm2) after the heat treatment at 750 °C in air is approximately two times faster than that before the heat treatment. The SiC porous ceramics fabricated in this study will have potential application in active thermal protection systems.SiC porous ceramic has a three-dimensional space network structure and is candidate material for high-temperature structural applications, mainly due to its high porosity, excellent high temperature oxidation resistance, mechanical properties and so on Currently, various methods have been successfully used to fabricate SiC porous ceramics, including directing foams from blowing agent, the sacrificial template method (impregnation of ceramic slurry with organic-inorganic template), the sol-gel process and the freezing method In this novel fabrication process, polycarbosilane (PCS, a type of preceramic polymer containing Si/C = 1:1) is used as the binder among the SiC particles to reduce the sintering temperature. Notably, PCS is subjected to conversion from a polymer to a ceramic under heating at temperatures higher than 1000 °C in N The fabrication procedures of SiC porous ceramics consist of the following steps. First, the ceramic slurry is prepared. A certain proportion of dispersants (Silok®7096, a high molecular weight copolymer alkylamine salt, Guangzhou Silok Polymer Co., Ltd., Guangdong, China; Anjeka®6041, Ezhou Anjeka Technology Co., Ltd., Hubei, China) and polycarbosilane (PCS, Suzhou Saifei Group Co., Ltd., Jiangsu, China), the mean molecular weight and melting point of which are 1184.5 and 217 °C, respectively, are dissolved in xylene (Tianjin Yongda Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., China). A pinch of kaolin (Lingshou Yanxi mineral processing plant. Hebei, China) with an average particle size of 3.4 µm is added to the solution to improve the rheology and thixotropy of the slurry, which has enough viscosity under static conditions and good fluidity when stirred The foam morphology of SiC porous ceramics is characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, S-4800, Hitachi, Japan) after polishing and ultrasonic cleaning. The bulk density of SiC porous ceramics is determined from the ratio of the mass and volume of the specimens. The thermal diffusion coefficient and thermal conductivity of SiC porous ceramics at room temperature are measured using a thermal conductivity tester (DRE-III, Xiangtan Xiangyi Instrument Limited Company., Hunan, China). Testing specimens with dimensions of 20 mm × 20 mm × 20 mm are cut from the original samples, and then, the crushing strength of the SiC porous ceramics is determined at room temperature by compressive testing using a microcomputer controlled spring tension and compressive testing machine (Jinan Liangong Testing Technology Co., Ltd., Shandong, China) at a crosshead speed of 1 mm/min. The infiltration of the test pieces is obtained using a piece of in-house simple equipment that consists of a beaker and circular tube filled with clean water. It is hard to form a stable SiC suspension in xylene due to the low polarity of xylene. Therefore, the stability of SiC particles in xylene containing different types and amounts of dispersants is studied by means of the sedimentation test. It is reported in  It is estimated from The microstructure of SiC porous ceramics with different contents of polyurethanes is shown in The second aspect is the pyrolysis of polycarbosilane and polyurethane at high temperatures. It is well known that the mechanical properties of SiC porous ceramics mainly depend on the strength of the adhesive bond among SiC powders Compression strength curves of SiC porous ceramics are shown in As shown in The infiltration results are shown in As shown in The thermal diffusion coefficient (0.05 mm SiC porous ceramics with high porosity and a high compressive strength are fabricated using the polyurethane preparation process. PCS evenly coats the SiC particles as a result of the homogenization of the SiC particles in xylene with a mixture of Silok®7096 (1 wt%) and Anjeka®6041 (4 wt%) as the dispersant. The porous ceramic has an interlinking open pore structure when the mass ratio of the polyurethane slurry/SiC ceramic slurry is 40% and the compressive strength of the SiC porous ceramics with high porosity (69.53%) is 16.9 MPa. The heat treatment can increase infiltration, the rate of which (4.296 × 10 This work was supported by the