Pyrite was oxidised by growth of Thiobacillus ferrooxidans aerobically at 32°C by orbital shaking at 90 revolutions per minute (rpm) in the laboratory. The analyses of the experimental solutions showed a long period of adaptation (lag phase) before the onset of rapid bio-oxidation. Lag phase lasted for approximately 400 h. During this period, the dissolved iron and sulphur content increased very slowly compared with a very rapid rise during the exponential phase of growth. The molar ratio of the dissolved Fe to S in solution decreased from 1.3 to approximately 1 during the lag phase. The molar ratio continued to fall during the exponential phase and reached approximately 0.5, which is the ratio defined by the stoichiometry of pyrite. The form of dissolved iron during the lag phase was ferrous, while during the exponential phase, it was mostly ferric. On the other hand, all the dissolved sulphur was in the form of SO4 during both the lag and exponential phase. These indicate that the Fe is preferentially leached from pyrite, but S is the main source of energy for T. ferrooxidans during the lag phase.
                  The solution chemistry and scanning electron microscope images of the pyrite surfaces reveals that both direct and indirect leaching are important for pyrite oxidation during the exponential phase. During the lag phase, however, direct leaching appears to be the dominant mechanism, which may explain the preferential oxidation of S during the early stages of growth.Oxidation of pyrite in contact with water leads to dissolution of the mineral and production of a highly acidic solution with a high metal content, which plays a key role in mineral processing Several acidophilic microbial species are associated with the oxidation of pyrite, for example the iron-oxidiser, In a closed system, microorganisms have a typical growth pattern, which, for convenience, is divided into stages; starting with the lag phase (described below), exponential phase (the stage of the most rapid growth, in which the number of cells doubles during each unit time period), stationary phase, and ending with death phase. The pyrite used in our experiments was from Poonglim coal mine in Imgok, Korea. The pyrite occurs in quartz veins as coarse, well crystallised grains. Pyrite-rich parts of the hand specimen of the quartz vein were crushed into grains of less than 2 mm, and pyrite was hand picked under a stereomicroscope. The pyrite grains were ground in an agate mortar in acetone and dry-sieved to various mesh sizes. The 125-μm to 90-μm fractions were transferred into a beaker and ultrasonicated in methanol for 30 s. After the ultrasonic cleaning, the pyrite was rinsed with 1 N HNO A freeze-dried sample of We prepared 30 conical 250 ml flasks for the pyrite oxidation experiment. Each flask contained approximately 0.2 g of ground pyrite, prepared as above, and 55 ml of medium, modified slightly from that described by The contents of two inoculated flasks were sampled at days 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 13, 16, 20, 24 and 28, while sterile flasks were sampled on days 0, 8 and 28. A 10-ml aliquot of the solution/cell suspension was taken for microbiological analysis, and the remainder was used for chemical analyses. The subsample for chemical analyses was filtered through a 0.2-μm syringe filter and transferred into an acid-washed, 60-ml HDPE bottle Flask 25 (24 days of growth) was used to measure the number of attached microorganisms, by first removing the cell suspension, washing once with 5 mM sulphuric acid, then ultrasonicating the pyrite for 10 min in 5 mM sulphuric acid containing 0.5% (w/v) TWEEN 80. The number of cells detached from the pyrite by this treatment was measured as described below. The number of viable microorganisms in the suspension was determined by serial 10-fold dilution of the microbiological sample in 5 mM H  The extent of evaporation may be deduced from the concentration variations of the conservative dissolved components, which are not affected by microbial metabolism or pyrite dissolution in the flask.   Such a long lag phase has occasionally been reported  Nearly all of the dissolved iron remains reduced as ferrous ion during the lag phase, but is oxidised quickly to ferric ion in the exponential phase It is poorly understood why A comparison of the energy released from the oxidation reactions may provide a clue as to why The oxidation of sulphur produces much more energy than the oxidation of iron. The oxidation of sulphur may be represented as: When the pH of the solution is 2, the concentration of dissolved sulphur is 10 We tried to correlate changes in chemistry with pyrite degradation observed by SEM We used the morphological criteria of  The orientation of bacterial cells on pyrite was random, which is contrary to the observation of SEM observations also show that there was no obvious secondary precipitation of iron on pyrite surfaces. The natural oxidation of pyrite by During the lag phase, the concentrations of the dissolved components released from pyrite, Fe and S, increased very slowly and the pH of the solution remained more or less constant between 2.0 and 2.1. The concentrations of dissolved components increased quickly and the pH dropped rapidly when the microbial growth became exponential. Most of the dissolved Fe was ferrous, while all the detectable S was in the form of sulphate, during the lag phase. As soon as the bacterial growth became exponential, most of the ferrous ions were converted to ferric. This indicates that SEM images of pyrite surfaces indicate that both direct and indirect leaching are important in pyrite oxidation in the exponential phase. We could not see attached cells on the pyrite surface during the lag phase. However, the solution chemistry, especially the deficiency in Fe From this and other studies on biologically mediated pyrite oxidation, we can conclude that direct leaching by The results can be considered also in terms of Darwinian strategy for exploitation of a newly available energy source, although our experiment is not perfect to test such ideas, since only one species was involved. Strategies might involve competitive removal of the possible energy source either by more efficient metabolism or by increasing the number of organisms. It seems likely that, in this case, the energy obtained has been channeled mainly into metabolic processing of sulphide; and the release of Fe(II), which could aid growth, was a secondary target. Clearly, this indicates that the evolutionary force was competition with other sulphide oxidisers, rather than iron oxidisers, which would have helped by the dissolution of reduced iron. Further and more complex experiments may contribute to answering this question. This study was undertaken during the visit of J-YY to Reading University, partly supported by the Research Foundation of Kangwon National University. TJM was supported by Reading University Research Endowment Trust Fund. We greatly acknowledge the following people's help: Ms. N. Page of the NERC ICP facility for ICP-AES analyses, Mr. S. Humphrey for IC and Fe(II) analyses, Dr L. Granier for soxhlet extraction, Mr. D. Thornley for sieving, Dr P. Isles for SEM observation, Mr. G.A. Patterson and M. Andrews for XRD analyses, and Ms. D. Whitmore for printing photographs.