Igneous reservoirs are characterized by heterogeneity and anisotropy, which makes logging interpretation difficult. In order to identify their lithology, deep learning to establish the deep belief network (DBN) by logging data is proposed in this study. By the least square method, the mean square error function is used to measure network performance, and network parameters such as the number of RBMs, the number of neurons in the hidden layer of each RBM, and the classification boundary. Then, the logging data that require interpretation are processed by DBN that is trained. The results are divided into four cases and are analyzed and discussed further. First, the lithology classification results are continuous, stable and the formations are thick. At this point, there is no need to correct the results. Second, there are several lithological discontinuities in the thick layer. In this case, if the thickness of the discontinuous formations is >0.5 m, the corresponding formations can be divided according to the identification results; if the thickness of the discontinuous formations are less than or equal to 0.5 m, the discontinuous formations are merged into adjacent thick formations. Third, the lithology of formations cannot be determined by the identification result. At this time, it is generally considered that the lithology of the formations do not appear in the training samples. Fourth, there are a few identification results for one formation. At this point, a cross plot is adopted to correct these results. An accuracy of 94.8% is achieved for lithology identification by the deep belief network with lithology correction.As the consumption of fossil fuels has increased, research on petroleum exploration and development has focused on igneous reservoirs, which have become extremely popular in oil and gas exploration. Igneous rocks vary greatly because of their complex diagenesis. The minerals in these rocks differ widely, and their textures and structures are complex. Moreover, igneous reservoirs exhibit unevenly distributed and widely varying porosities, which are typically characterized by heterogeneity and anisotropy. Accurate identification of lithology is the primary objective of interpretation of igneous reservoir logging.  In general, the most effective methods for lithology identification of igneous reservoirs are ECS logging and imaging logging. However, both methods are expensive and cannot be carried out on a large scale. In the case of conventional logging curves only, the common interpretation methods are cross plot, multivariate statistical analysis, and BPNNs. The cross plot is a simple and easy interpretation method, but because of the complexity of igneous reservoirs, the use of only the cross plot cannot achieve ideal results. Multivariate statistical analysis is an efficient method, but there are many parameters that need to be adjusted to solve the complex nonlinear problem of igneous rock identification, which can easily result in significant errors. The BPNN is widely. a type of “shallow” neural network. It suffers from the disadvantage of local minimization and often fails to obtain the global optimal solution. Moreover, it has the shortcoming of slow convergence. Since entering the 21st century, artificial intelligence technology has become the research hotspots in many fields, which has also been applied in logging interpretation ( Proposed by Rumelhart and McClelland in 1986, the BPNN is a multilayer feedforward neural network (MLFNN) based on the error back propagation algorithm. It is widely used in function approximation, pattern recognition, classification, data compression, data mining, and other disciplines. The BPNN can be divided into three layers: the input layer, hidden layer, and output layer. There is only one input layer and one output layer, whereas there may be one or several hidden layers. Through the input and output of the network, the final output vector can be obtained. The final output vector is compared with the desired result, and if the error satisfies the requirements, the calculation will be stopped. If the error does not meet the requirement, the error will be conveyed from the output layer to other layers in some way, and distributed in each layer. Then the weight BPNN is a typical “shallow” neural network. When more than two hidden layers are present, the calculation results become very unsatisfactory. The Deep Belief Network, a type of deep learning, was proposed by Geoffrey Hinton, the ‘father of the neural network’, in 2006. Deep belief network is a “deep” neural network developed on the basis of BPNN. It consists of some restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs). RBM, an unsupervised learning method, is the key to operating deep belief networks. As shown in For an RBM, if the input vector is Thus, the probability of the hidden layer neurons that will be turned off (represented by Finally, we compare the probability that the hidden layer neurons will be turned on with a random value u (u∈[0,1]) from the uniform distribution by the function is as follows: The above procedure will determine whether each hidden layer neuron will be turned on or not. Thus, the first restricted Boltzmann machine is trained completely. The state of the hidden layer neurons (on or off) can be expressed as the matrix G1, which is used as the input of the second restricted Boltzmann machine. After repeating the above training process (like the first restricted Boltzmann machine), the training of the second restricted Boltzmann machine will be carried out. The final output result after training p restricted Boltzmann machines is G According to the mode of BPNN training (the second part of this paper), the G Therefore, DBN is essentially a “deep” neural network trained by a series of restricted Boltzmann machines with the error back propagation algorithm. The logging data in this paper come from a block in the east of the Junggar Basin. From drilling data, the formations in this block are found to be mainly comprise igneous and sedimentary rocks. The sedimentary rocks are mainly sandstone and mudstone, and the igneous rocks include basalt, trachyte, andesite, diabase, and gabbro. Considering the actual situation, the feasibility of logging identification, and the need for reservoir research, the basalt can be further divided into dense basalt and non-dense basalt, and the trachyte can be divided into dense trachyte and non-dense trachyte. Logging response characteristics of igneous reservoirs are more complex than sedimentary reservoirs and traditional methods can therefore not be used for lithology identification. To address this, this paper introduces a deep belief network, a method of deep learning, for igneous reservoir logging interpretation. After the network structure is determined by the optimization algorithm, the lithology can be identified more accurately. In order to train the DBN, logging data whose corresponding formations' lithology are already known are required. The data is categorized into a sample set and test set. The sample set is used to train the DBN, including 1000 sets of logging data of typical sedimentary rocks, dense basalt, non-dense basalt, dense trachyte, non-dense trachyte, andesite, diabase and gabbro respectively in the area. In addition, 500 sets of logging data with the same lithologies are used to test network performance. The physical principles of each logging curve varies, and the dimensions and orders of magnitude of the measured physical parameters also vary greatly. However, the computer cannot recognize this and it is therefore necessary to preprocess all logging data to make their dimensions and numerical distribution ranges uniform. Normalization is generally adopted: The computer cannot recognize all eight lithologies in this paper. Therefore, lithology must be digitalized to satisfy the computer's reading. In this paper, lithology is recorded as matrix Y, which is composed of eight groups of vectors. The rows of Y represent the different depths, and the columns of Y represent the eight kinds of lithology. Y's elements are 0 or 1, which are used to judge the lithology. A certain kind of lithology is represented by 1, and 0 indicates the absence of this lithology. The formations lithology of different depths in a well can be represented as In order to optimize the performance of DBN, it is necessary to select suitable logging data to train the network. In this paper, the relationship between logging data and lithology is reflected by grey correlation analysis. Ten logging curves, including deep lateral, shallow lateral, mmicrosphere focusing, spontaneous potential, natural gamma, calliper, acoustic, density, compensated neutrons and photoelectric cross-section, are written as X The grey relational grades between 10 logging curves and 8 kinds of lithology can be calculated as shown in for each kind of lithology, the grey relational grade is >0.7. the geometric mean of the grey correlation degree corresponding to all kinds of lithologies is >0.8. Accordingly, RLLD, GR, DEN, AC, CNL and PEFL are selected as the input parameters of DBN. Using the sample set to construct the DBN, the lithology identification can be transformed into the mathematical calculation. The inputs of DBN are six vectors, namely normalized RLLD, GR, DEN, AC, CNL and PEFL logging curves. The output is a matrix comprising eight vectors whose elements are 0 or 1. The eight vectors represent sedimentary rocks, dense basalt, non-dense basalt, dense trachyte, non-dense trachyte, andesite, diabase, and gabbro. According to the digitalization of lithology given in section 4.2; for example, if the formation at a certain depth is made up of sedimentary rocks, the element of the vector corresponding to the sedimentary rocks is 1, and the elements of the vectors corresponding to other rocks are 0. After DBN's training is completed, the network performance can be tested with the test set to adjust the network parameters. Increasing the number of RBMs improves the performance of DBN nonlinearly, which shows “rapidly first and then slowly”, while also increasing the operation time. Therefore, we should select the appropriate number of RBMs, taking into account the training effect and computation speed. From experience, RBMs are usually limited to 5 to 30. The number of RBMs is used as a variable to train the DBN. The normalized logging data of the test set are used as input to obtain the matrix representing eight kinds of lithology. The output is not an ideal result; that is, the matrix does not consist of 0 and 1, but the numbers in the interval of [0,1]. From the basic idea of least squares, the output matrix is recorded as Y Each RBM consists of a visible layer and a hidden layer. The number of neurons in the visual layer is relatively easy to determine. The number of neurons in the visible layer of first RBM is the same as the number of input logging curves (6), and the number of neurons in the visible layer of other RBMs is equal to the number of output vectors from the previous RBM. The number of neurons in the hidden layer is closely related to network performance and is not easy to determine. If the number of hidden layer neurons is too small, the relationship between logging curves and lithology cannot be well extracted, and “under-fitting” appears. If the number of hidden layer neurons is too large, the relationship between logging curves and lithology in the sample set will be excessively extracted such that the trained DBN will be only applicable for sample sets, and will not be good for other logging data, i.e. “over-fitting” occurs. Presently, few good methods of determining the number of neurons in the hidden layer exist. This paper proposes the following method. It is known that the number of neurons in the hidden layer is usually one order of magnitude less than the number of samples. There are 8000 samples in this paper; accordingly the number of neurons in the hidden layer should be between 100–999. Hypothetically, the number of neurons in the hidden layer in 10 RBMs is n The output of logging data processed by the trained DBN is usually comprised of the numbers in the interval of [0,1], not the integer 0 or 1. These numbers should ideally be rounded off; that is, 0.5 is the lithology classification boundary. The number greater than or equal to 0.5 is approximately 1, and <0.5 is approximately 0. However, because the relationship between logging curves and lithology is very complex, errors such as lithology identification errors, classification overlap (belong to one lithology, but also belong to another lithology) and no classification (not belong to any lithology) are bound to arise. In this paper, the classification boundary w∈[0.3,0.7], the output matrix is considered as matrix Y After the parameters are determined by the above process, DBN is applied to the lithology identification of the MXX well in this block. The results are analyzed and discussed below. The identification results are continuous and stable, and the formation is thick. y At a certain depth, the thick formation is mixed with discontinuous formation. The lithology identification from 3246.00 m to 3261.50 m in MXX well is shown in Lithology cannot be identified The lithology identification from 3012.00 m to 3019.50 m is shown in Lithology classification is overlapped. The lithology identification from 4111.00 m to 4117.25 m is shown in By crossing each logging curve, dense trachyte and non-dense trachyte can be well distinguished using the AC-GR and GR-RLLD cross plot, as shown in The lithology identification results of DBN and BPNN are compared in  In this study, DBN is applied to identify the lithology using logging data. Our findings are as follows. First, when there are no ECS logging and imaging logging data, it is very feasible to train DBN to identify lithology by conventional logging curves. Second, depending on AC, DEN, and CNL logging curves, DBN can identify lithology, as well as judge the compactness of key formation. Third, using the MSE function to measure the performance of DBN, the number of RBMs, the number of neurons in the hidden layer of each RBM and the classification boundary are determined. Fourth, in order to improve the accuracy of lithology identification results, they are divided into four categories. If the lithology identification result is continuous and stable, it will not need to be corrected; if the formation thickness is >0.5 m, it can be divided; if the thick formation is mixed with discontinuous formation which does not exceed 0.5 m, the thin formation should be merged into adjacent thick formation; if the lithology cannot be classified, the lithology ioutside the sample appears; if the classification overlap occurs, it should be corrected by the intersection map method. Finally, apart from using lithological correction methods, increasing the number of samples also improves network performance. We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted. This research was supported by the