The paint and coating industry can benefit significantly from smart manufacturing. A modern paint/coating (P/C) product is a complex mixture of polymer resins, pigment dispersions, organic and aqueous solvents, plasticizers and coalescing aides, and other additives. Many consumer attributes are required to describe its quality. The dependence of the attributes on the properties and amounts of the polymer resins, the pigment dispersions, solvents and other additives, and P/C preparation conditions is complex, not always well understood, and currently impossible to describe using first-principles (FP) models. Currently, P/C manufacturers customize their products mostly through laborious experimental trial and error and have limited ability to predict which polymer resins and dispersants lead to a specific customized P/C product. This chapter discusses how combined FP multiscale modeling and machine learning can be used to achieve in silico P/C product design, real-time P/C product quality prediction, real-time P/C product defect detection and diagnosis, etc.Adhesion Crosslinking Pigment wetting and stabilization Viscosity when first mixed Viscosity 2 Dry to cotton Dry to touch Dry to assemble Dry to resist masking tape printing Dry enough to recoat Buffability window Gas spot Biofuel spot Ethanol spot Water spot Acid Base Bee juice Skydrol Gravel impact Scratching Deformation Delamination Degradation (durability) Gloss Distinction of image Color Opacity Cost Ease of application Shelf life Odor Feed flow rates Feed type Jacket cooling water flow rate Jacket steam flow rate Feed quality Surrounding temperature Reactor temperature Reactor pressure Solution viscosity Solution density Molecular weight distribution Composition distribution (copolymer) Live polymer concentrations Number of terminal double bonds Short-chain branching distribution Long-chain branching distribution Introduction Resin intermediates Dispersion intermediates Paint manufacturing Smart manufacturing concepts and methods Sample smart manufacturing opportunities Process systems engineering view of the manufacturing problems Mathematical modeling and inference methods Statistical machine learning Probabilistic forward and backward inference Copulas Rolling pin method of JPD estimation Electronic-scale modeling of polymerization reactions Polymerization experimentation and macroscopic-scale modeling Prior methods and concepts: Their advantages and disadvantages Future opportunities Probabilistic modeling of the dependence of P/C product quality Electronic-scale modeling of polymerization reactions Macroscopic-scale mechanistic modeling of resin and dispersant processes Real-time P/C product quality prediction Computational (in silico) design of P/C products Real-time P/C product defect detection and diagnosis Real-time multirate control of polymer resin and P/C product quality Conclusion Acknowledgments References This material is based upon work supported by the The global paint and coating market is forecasted to grow from US$ 161 billion in 2017 to US$ 209 billion by 2022, which is a compound annual growth rate of 5% over the 5 years A modern paint/coating (P/C) product is a complex mixture of interacting compatible chemicals, whose properties and amounts and how they are mixed strongly affect the properties of the resulting P/C product. Its main components The production of modern paints with desired properties is challenging due to several factors. First, paint production involves blending and mixing ingredients in an irreversible way. The order and duration of the additions and the mixing intensity during the additions strongly affect the final product quality. Second, the quality of raw materials including intermediate and semifinished products also affects the final paint quality. Currently paint manufacturers rectify variance in the final paint quality caused by changes in raw materials quality, through using slow and costly postproduction adjustment procedures. Thus it is desired to eliminate the sources of the paint quality variance to produce high-quality paints the first time through and reduce the need for postproduction corrections. Third, a significant number of quality control tests are required to ensure a satisfactory product quality, as many quality indices (properties) such as color matching are needed to uniquely characterize such a product. The color matching challenge is partially due to the existence of many paint formulas, owing to the infinite number of color formulas possible and different paint chemistries. Fourth, some formulas are “on demand,” implying that properties need to be adjusted per customer feedback in day-to-day operation. The scale of paint production is very broad ranging from very small producers, making less than 1 kiloton per year, to very large producers, making hundreds and thousands of kilotons per year. Large manufacturers comprise 25% of the total market, which is estimated to be close to 55 thousand kilotons per year Lean manufacturing is of interest in the paint and coating industries. Lean manufacturing refers to designing and operating processes that produce high-quality products without any waste, where wastes are activities that do not create value for customers. A paint-making process consists of a series of mixers of varying intensity dedicated to color and noncolor families and typically manifolded back into key ingredient storage to speed raw material addition Resin intermediates fall into the broad categories of acrylics, polyesters, alkyds, epoxy-based cathodic electrodeposition resins, polyurethanes, lattices, and other resins. These can be categorized as chain growth or step growth polymers that typically differ in their exothermic and endothermic behavior having important consequences for equipment design and layout. In a paint plant, many different formulas—often 1000's formulas with 20,000 unique formulas not uncommon—are produced, and 100’s of resin formulas are typically required to tailor final paint properties. Acrylics are typically made from acrylate, methacrylate, and styrene monomers, the relative ratios of which depend on the properties required of the resin and processed using peroxide and/or azonitrile initiators. A typical acrylic process is shown in Polyesters and oil-containing alkyds are step-growth polymers that are typically produced at temperatures between 180°C and 280°C in batch reactors ( Pigment dispersions are the other class of key paint intermediate. Pigment dispersions are most often produced via wet milling, which is a process to grind pigment, resin, and solvent together using an agitated dispersion mill filled with grinding media such as yttria-stabilized zirconia ceramic beads to reduce the size of the pigment particles to a specified fineness. The milling process at first wets and homogenizes the solid pigment into the solvent and resin liquids and then deagglomerates and disperses the pigment particles with eventual comminution of the primary pigment particles to the appropriate size for the best appearance. In most cases a grind resin is used to provide viscosity to the mill, and in some cases a dispersant resin is used to stabilize the particle once ground. The dispersant resin normally has dual affinities along its chain with one affinity for the pigment surface and the other for the liquid. In this way the small pigment particle will not readily agglomerate or flocculate over time, and the pigment dispersion need not be used right away. Important in making a pigment dispersion is the proper wetting of the pigment in liquid solution before starting the grinding process. The wetting out is achieved by mixers with proper power/volume and agitator design and by controlled addition of the pigment to the liquid components. The wetted predispersion is then milled until the particle size of the pigment is adequately reduced. A typical flow sheet is shown in The two key intermediates, dispersions and resins, feed the paint production floor where they are mixed. In a paint plant the production floor typically has different lines for making different products The order of the additions and the duration and intensity of mixing across the additions, monitoring and control of key process parameters like temperature and power per unit volume, and testing and control of key adjustable properties like color and viscosity are all needed to ensure successful production. In many paint facilities an enterprise resource planning (ERP) software package is responsible for the plant production scheduling and operational management and establishes the basic plant schedule including production, material use, delivery, and shipping while keeping track of inventory levels and operating on a day/week/month time frame Smart manufacturing involves vertical and horizontal integration of information along the value chain The quantity of information available is significant in today's information technology infrastructure. For example, for the dispersion making process, one can imagine a large set of characteristic product data for each step in the process and a large set of spatiotemporal process data throughout the process ( A practical idea for improving batch product quality and reducing the number of adjustments in making a product of proper quality is a dynamic batch card where the formula and operating conditions are adjusted ahead of the production batch to account for variability in raw materials and process. As an example, in the production of dispersions, it is typical that pigment quality and resin properties such as molecular weights, functional group distributions, solids content, viscosity, glass transition temperature, pH (for water-borne resins), solvent properties like purity, and the presence of certain impurities can vary from batch to batch. It is also common that the process equipment performance can change with time. One example is that grinding mills are run with a certain grinding media level with media that wears over time, and so the amount of media in the mill at any time can become unknown. Another example is that the predispersion or mill base that feeds the grinding mill may have been made in any one of multiple sets of predispersion equipment, yielding different qualities depending on the production facility capabilities and constraints. The quality of the predispersion including the degree of pigment wetting is important in setting the conditions within the grinding mill. If all of this is known, the batch card can be adjusted accordingly in advance of production, and a new recipe with differing amounts of materials and differing process operating conditions can be downloaded to improve the probability of successful production. Examples of the dynamic batch card adjustments for dispersion and tint manufacture include: adjusting the amount of solvent in the predispersion to control dispersion viscosity during the grind to account for differences in grind energy; changing the number of passes or time spent recirculating through the mill based on specific mill energy; using a different first pass energy profile to account for different predispersion techniques; and following a different temperature profile over the passes or time spent grinding. In the case of tint or paint production: the color position and color strength of the dispersion or the tint can vary from batch to batch, and with time as dispersion settles; different mixer types are often employed owing to availability; and the binder properties can vary as with the making of dispersions. It is desired to compensate for these variances in real time to ensure the production of consistently high-quality products. To address the operation problem described above, the relationships between the inputs (causes) and outputs (effects) must be known, which is possible given the large spatiotemporal data sets available over time and from certain first-principles relations. However, the data often need to be cleaned to ensure that the data contain the key information required to generate reliable input-output relationships. This data cleaning can be a significant effort. In the case of tint or paint production, the availability of a reliable knowledge of input and output relationships allows for compensating for the dispersion or tint color position and color strength batch to batch and with time, mixer type, and binder property variations. Compensating for these variances before production begins and in real time is desired to ensure consistent production of high-quality products. In the case of resin synthesis, say as in the production of an acrylic resin, knowing the monomer assay, initiator activity, solvent purity, and solvent boiling point (in the case of reflux processes) and having information on reactor design including jacket area to reactor volume ratio, feed point location, the impact of micromixing, heat input limitations, total condenser limitations, reactor loading accuracy and even reactor startup profiles allow for in-advance adjustment (offline calculation of optimal values) of key inputs like heat duty, temperature profile, the amount of solvent stripped, the feed time, and feed profiles of monomer, initiator, and solvent to optimize the operation. In the case of the time it takes for different products to move through the production process, machine learning methods can be used for proper scheduling of production. Like the idea of predicting airplane arrival times in the aviation industry from the reams of data collected everyday The use of on-line measurements of key product properties in control of these properties in real time by adjusting the process conditions and recipe components will ensure that the process product meets desired specifications and requires no further adjustment. This automation represents a contribution of smart manufacturing to these processes. Key product property tests (measurements) in paint manufacturing often include color, transparency, viscosity, nonvolatile content, density, clarity, and pH. Testing is done via sampling either at line or off line in a control laboratory. Process and operation adjustments derived from the testing results, if required, add time and cost to manufacture and reflect a process and recipe not optimal. But if the controller action is taken and implemented in line and automatically as part of the process, then the adjustments will not require additional processing steps and allow for improved quality and faster throughput. The challenge is threefold. First, in-line instruments capable of measuring the key properties in a timely fashion (capable of providing delay-free frequent online measurements) are required, but not all the key properties can be measured in real time with the currently available sensors. Second, there must be enough fundamental understanding of the process and formula to allow for proper controller action ahead of time. And third the measurement and adjustments must be reasonably fast and effortless and appear automatic to the operation. Good in-line measurement of viscosity of process fluid Estimation and monitoring of the key product properties in real time, prediction of the quality of the end product in real time, and detection and diagnosis of product defects in real time are interesting but challenging problems in these processes. The last problem is to detect defects in products and then to find the root cause(s) of the product defects, both in real time. The computational tools resulting from solving these problems will inform operations of progress status and reassure when processing smoothly and alert when not and allow for and suggest intervention if needed. The model-based monitoring allows for the estimation of properties like molecular weight distribution or functional group distribution in resin manufacture or particle size distribution in dispersion manufacture for which only inferred properties exist during processing that can be later validated with more advanced analytical techniques. Model-based process monitoring uses the available spatiotemporal process inputs such as mass fed, temperatures, pressures, agitation rates, power/volume inputs, and heat duties to predict key properties like conversion, molecular weight, and functional group concentrations. Measurement after production with more advanced analytical techniques allows for the development of machine learning (ML) models that predict the end-product quality. Model-based process monitoring can also be used to calculate safety-related properties such as the exotherm potential at any point for acrylic polymerizations where acrylate, methacrylate, and styrene monomers can build up in concentration in the reactor if not reacted properly. In the absence of first-principles models, ML modeling can also be used to predict properties against a standard and identify where and why properties are deviating versus standard production. Hybrid mathematical modeling combines first-principles modeling with machine learning to develop a model that has a better predictive capability than the individual models. There is a growing need for robust hybrid modeling architectures, allowing for incorporating prior knowledge, such as known physical and chemical laws into artificial intelligence to ensure robust predictions. The general problem that a hybrid model needs to solve is the prediction of multiple output variables such that model predictions agree well with measurement data and do not violate any first principles. There are many robust known physical and chemical laws at different time and length scales. Consider the jacketed reactor in The pigments in paints are solid particles, which should be dispersed, wetted, and stabilized well in formulations to assure consistent quality, durability, and color. Pigment dispersants, which are highly specialized chemicals (often polymers), are used to achieve the crucial dispersion and stability The complexity of the currently used dispersants is partially due to the complexity of polymer resins (polymer solutions). As listed in Currently, paint and coating manufacturers customize their P/C products mostly through experimental trial and error, they have limited ability to predict the set of polymer resins and dispersants that lead to a specific customized P/C product, and they need to commit a significant amount of time to achieve a product customization. The current state of the industry is a result of several prevailing factors. First, many indices are needed to characterize the quality of a P/C product. Second, these indices (consumer attributes) are often abstract. Third, multivariate relationships between these P/C consumer attributes and the properties of the polymer resins and pigment dispersions that P/C products are made from are complex, poorly understood, and currently impossible to describe using first-principles models. Many studies have investigated how polymer resin and pigment dispersant properties and P/C preparation conditions relate to P/C attributes (customer specifications) The paint and coating industries have a wealth of confidential historical data on the properties of polymer resins and dispersants and the quality of the P/C products that were made from the resins and dispersants. As shown in Machine learning has been identified a key technology in the field of big data The central component of an SML algorithm is a joint probability distribution (JPD) In many machine learning applications, one important terminal goal is to be able to perform reasoning (either prediction or diagnosis) upon receiving inference queries or evidences. Some form of inference can be recognized in all machine learning tasks (e.g., perceptron algorithm of classification Copulas are employed to describe the dependence structure of random variables. According to Sklar's theorem The ability of a This decomposition allows one to model the marginal CDFs The rolling pin method The first step in implementing the RP method is the use of one-to-one As the relationship of every pair ( The advantages of the RP method over existing JPD estimation methods include the following: Unlike conventional parametric copulas, it is capable of modeling nonmonotonic relationships between variables ( The RP method needs further development to address the following currently open research problems: The RP method is not applicable to nonfunction patterns, that is, underlying patterns for which there is more than one output value are possible for one input value, and it is not applicable to categorical variables. The RP method was used to develop an efficient semiparametric method of identifying regression models based on a parametric copula-based joint probability distribution of input and output variables It has been shown that RP method-based JPDs can be used systematically to conduct probabilistic modeling and inference computationally efficient To study the applicability and performance of the RP method for large systems, the method was applied to the Tennessee Eastman (TE) chemical process As the estimated multivariate JPD has 91 random variables and thus is impossible to show, bivariate distributions of sample pairs of the process variables are shown in   Advances in quantum mechanical methods in recent years have made wave function– and density functional theory (DFT)–based Quantum chemical calculations at both DFT and MP2 levels have been shown to provide accurate molecular geometries and frequency calculations Experimental study and macroscopic-scale modeling of a variety of polymerization systems have been conducted by many. For example, such studies for spontaneous polymerization of MA, EA, and Currently, paint/coating (P/C) manufacturers customize their products mostly through experimental trial and error, have limited ability to predict which polymer resins and dispersants lead to a specific customized P/C product, and have to spend a considerable amount of time to conduct product customization. These are due to several factors. First, many indices are needed to characterize the quality of a P/C product. Second, these indices are often abstract. Third the multivariate (Y1, …, Y7)–Z relationships are complex, poorly understood, and currently impossible to describe using FP models. The use of combined multiscale first-principles and ML models (multiscale hybrid models) for P/C processes in real time allows for modeling the entire sequence of processes involved in the manufacture of P/C products. This is possible thanks to P/C industry historical process data. These models and their algorithmic realization enable P/C manufacturers to design and validate customized P/C products in silico and produce customized P/C products with consistent properties in the presence of operation uncertainties. The extraction and quantification of the poorly understood dependence of Z on Y1, …, Y7 ( The multivariate relationships between (a) the P/C attributes (Z in For polymerization systems that have not already been studied or for which reliable kinetic reaction parameter values do not exist, one can identify the governing polymerization reaction mechanisms and calculate kinetic reaction parameter values using wave function–based and DFT methods combined with transition-state theory One can use electronic-scale modeling to understand and quantify polymerization reactions. Significant advances have already been made in efficiently using computational quantum chemistry in concert with spectroscopic analyses of polymer samples from designed batch polymerization experiments and have identified conclusively mechanisms for monomer self-initiation, backbiting, β-scission, monomer-cyclohexanone coinitiation, and chain transfer to monomer, polymer and solvent reactions of acrylates, and calculated frequency factors and activation energies for the reactions Using polymerization reaction mechanisms and kinetic parameter values that already exist in the literature or obtained via electronic-scale modeling of (applying computational quantum chemistry to) the reactions, macroscopic-scale mechanistic first-principles models can be developed to describe the dynamics of polymer resin and pigment dispersant processes. The roles that these two types of macroscopic-scale models play can be seen in As On the basis of the hybrid (first-principles and ML) models, one can develop algorithms for computational (in silico) P/C product design. As shown schematically in This problem is to detect defects in the resin, dispersant, and P/C products and then to find the root cause(s) of the product defects, both in real time. As shown schematically in The objective is to control resin, dispersant, and P/C product properties in real time using frequent and infrequent measurements (RS1, RS2, DS1, DS2, PS1, and PS2) that are received from the polymer resin (PR), pigment dispersant (PD), and P/C preparation processes. One approach is to use the cascade multirate control structure shown in Smart manufacturing methods can contribute significantly to the paint and coating industries. In particular, recent advances in machine learning allow for accurately describing the complex poorly understood relationships in paint and coating manufacturing. The smart manufacturing methods discussed in this chapter enable P/C manufacturers to design and validate customized P/C products in silico and produce customized P/C products with consistent properties in the presence of operation uncertainties. These can revolutionize the way P/C industries manufacture paints and coatings. The success of these ideas requires integration of concepts from a wide range of areas such as machine learning, probabilistic inference, multirate state estimation, product defect detection and diagnosis, multirate model-based control, computational quantum chemistry, multiscale modeling, polymerization, pigment dispersion, and paints/coatings.