Platinum extraction from the spent reforming catalysts in iodine–iodide solutions at temperatures from 25 to 95 °C was investigated. The reforming catalyst mostly consists of a porous gamma alumina support with metallic platinum finely dispersed on the walls of the nano-pores of the catalyst support. The effect of a variety of factors, including catalyst particle size, impeller agitation speed, reactant concentrations, liquid to solid mass ratio, temperature and the solution pH on the Pt extraction rate and recovery were investigated. It was found that the catalyst particle sizes less than 106 µm and impeller agitation speed higher than 700 rpm eliminated the effects of catalyst size and agitation level, respectively, on platinum leaching. The initial iodine–iodide concentrations and the liquid to solid ratio were mostly affecting the solution pH and the concentration of “active” iodine species, which in turn, affected the rate of Pt extraction. Higher acidities, generated by adding concentrated HCl, resulted in faster Pt extractions. Increasing the reaction temperature also produced faster platinum extraction kinetics. The “active” iodine species (HIO, I2(aq), and I3
                     −) concentration decreased mostly due to conversion to “inactive” iodine–oxygen species and evaporation from the solution.The platinum group metals are employed as the active species of many catalysts, such as the one used in the catalytic reforming process. This process is implemented to upgrade the low octane naphtha to higher octane aromatic hydrocarbons. A significant step in the development of these catalysts was made by commercialization of bimetallic catalysts. The platinum/rhenium bimetallic catalyst is widely used throughout the world due to its activity, stability and selectivity ( A variety of authors have investigated the recovery of platinum group metals from spent catalysts through pyro- or hydrometallurgical processes. Pyrometallurgical processes are highly energy consuming. Hydrometallurgical processes are based on the selective dissolution of the noble metal. A variety of complexing agents such as neutral ammonium solution and bromide ions and oxidizing agents such as oxygen, iodine, and bromine have been employed for this purpose ( Platinum recovery from spent reforming and isomerization catalysts has been studied by selective dissolution of base metals in 50% H  Many major precious metal producers and research groups are actively developing alternate processes. For instance, the merits of using hypochlorite/NaCl alternate lixiviate system for gold extraction from ores was examined in our group ( Platinum extraction from used catalysts by aqua regia solution has been investigated by three groups: 1. Iodide/iodine solution is also suggested for extraction of precious metals under pressure in an autoclave ( Although promising, very little work has been done so far on platinum/iodine leaching system. In this work, we experimentally studied the effect of various parameters on platinum extraction from the spent reforming catalysts using iodine–iodide solutions. The conditions that produce maximum platinum recovery in iodine/iodide solutions are also discussed. The batch platinum leaching tests were performed in a sealed 1.5 L Pyrex reactor, equipped with a coated stainless steel turbine-type impeller. A reflux condenser was used to recover the water vapor and send it back to the reactor. Any non-condensable gases at the exit of the condenser were scrubbed into an alkaline solution. A hot-plate heater and temperature sensor-controller were used to control the reactor temperature at the desired level within ± The spent naphtha reforming catalysts was obtained from a petroleum refinery. The catalysts were dried in an oven at 110 °C overnight and then pulverized into particle sizes less than 106 µm to minimize the internal mass transfer resistances. The crystalline phase of the catalyst was identified by powder XRD. The major components of the catalyst were identified by XRF elemental analysis. The concentration of platinum in the catalyst was measured by dissolving 5 g of the catalyst in hot aqua-regia solution for up to one week. When the solution was finally clear and the catalyst was totally dissolved, the aqua-regia solution was made to 100 mL volume with de-ionized water and then analyzed for platinum by a UV/Visible spectrophotometer (as explained below). For each experiment, a total of 600 g de-ionized water was used to prepare the lixiviant solution. 500 g of the water and the desired amount of the powdered catalyst was placed in the reactor. The slurry was agitated at 700 rpm and then heated to a temperature slightly higher than the desired temperature. In a separate beaker, the desired amounts of iodide, iodine, and concentrated HCl were dissolved in 100 g de-ionized water. This solution was then quickly added to the reactor and the time was set to zero. At specified times, the solution pH was measured using a pH electrode and a 10 mL slurry sample was taken using a pipette. The sample was then quickly centrifuged and the supernatant solution was decanted to stop further Pt extraction for that sample. The supernatant solution was then analyzed for platinum concentration. A UV/Visible spectrophotometer (M501 single beam scanning, Camspec) was used to measure platinum concentration in solution, based on the absorbance at the wavelength of 403 nm. The instrument was calibrated with 10, 20 and 30 ppm standard platinum solutions. For each Pt measurement, 1.00 mL of the leached solution sample was placed in a 25 mL measuring flask. 8.75 mL of 37% hydrochloric acid and 10 mL of 1 M stannous chloride solution was added. The solution was then brought to the 25 mL mark volume by adding de-ionized water. The Pt concentration of the obtained solution was then measured by the spectrophotometer ( The “active” iodine species (HIO, I The elemental analyses of the main components of the spent catalysts are shown in It is noticeable that aqueous iodine solutions slowly disproportionate into highly oxidized iodine–oxygen species, such as IO The platinum % leached values that are reported in this section were calculated based on the total percentage of platinum that was dissolved from the catalyst at any time based on the measured concentration of Pt in solution and known amount of solution at that time. In these calculations, the net rate of water evaporation (especially at temperatures of 75 and 95 °C) was also taken into account by tracking the total weight of the reactor as a function of time. The effects of catalyst particle size and the impeller agitation speed on platinum extraction were investigated in tests 1 to 3. As reported in To investigate the effect of iodine–iodide concentration on Pt extraction, tests 4, 5 and 6 were performed. As reported in The effect of liquid to solid mass ratio on Pt extraction was evaluated in experiments 5 and 7 at the ratios of 10 and 20 g/g, respectively. Both tests were performed at the same temperature of 25 °C and the same amount of 0.66 mol/L added HCl. The obtained results are shown in The effect of reaction temperature on the performance of Pt extraction was investigated in tests 5, 8 and 11. As reported in The effect of solution pH on the platinum extraction performance was tested at two different temperatures of 75 and 95 °C. For the temperature of 75 °C, the tests 9, 10 and 11 at three initial HCl levels of 0, 0.33 and 0.66 mol/L, respectively, were performed ( The effect of solution acidity on Pt extraction at 95 °C was investigated in tests 12 and 13. The results are shown in A few of the solution samples from various tests were selected and tested for aluminum content using atomic absorption. Those solution samples and the obtained results for the aluminum extraction at the corresponding times are reported in Aqueous I Due to the rather large value of the equilibrium constant for Reaction (II), the concentration of I The aluminum of the catalyst support is also partially extracted in an acid solution according to Reaction (VI), ( Generally, to keep the undesirable aluminum extraction low, the platinum extraction in iodine solutions should not be performed at very high acidities (as evidenced from the data in The stoichiometric amount of iodine needed for Pt extraction is rather low. The high rate of decrease in the “active” iodine concentration during the Pt extraction tests is due to two other routes, namely, evaporation and conversion to “inactive” iodine–oxygen species. It was found that the catalyst particle sizes less than 106 µm and impeller agitation speed higher than 700 rpm eliminated the effects of catalyst size and agitation level, respectively, on platinum leaching. The observed large effect of temperature on the overall reaction rate implicitly indicates that the intrinsic surface reaction is the controlling step. Higher initial iodine–iodide concentrations and higher liquid to solid ratio produce higher solution acidity which increases the concentration of the “active” iodine species (HIO, I Financial support of the Deputy of Research of Sharif University of Technology is greatly appreciated. TRC (Iran) is also acknowledged for supplying the reforming catalysts.