Gold can be effectively extracted from various sources such as refractory ores and jewelry scrap by dissolution in ammoniacal solutions with the aid of appropriate oxidants. Electrochemical and kinetic aspects of the dissolution of gold from the elemental state and various ores in ammoniacal solutions are presented and discussed in this paper. The role of a number of oxidants including oxygen, cupric ammine, cobaltic ammine, and iodine has been examined and discussed. Also included in the discussion is the effect of concentration of free ammonia, ammonium ion and other salts on the overall rate of dissolution of gold. Excellent dissolution yielding better than 95% gold and silver recovery from sulfidic and carbonaceous refractory ores after 1 to 2 h of leaching at about 160°C to 190°C is possible in a single stage operation. Gold dissolution is affected greatly by reaction temperature and concentration of ammonia and oxidants.One of the challenges faced by the gold industry worldwide is the extraction of gold economically and efficiently from various sources, including refractory ores and jewelry scrap, without using cyanide. Although cyanide leaching remains the overwhelming option for the treatment of gold ores because of its economy and simplicity, it suffers from certain inherent drawbacks such as toxicity, slow leaching rate and inefficiency in treating refractory gold ore deposits. Various methods for treating refractory gold ores have been reviewed and discussed by numerous experts in the field ( Ammonia has been successfully identified as an attractive alternative to cyanide as a lixiviant for gold ( Analytical grade chemicals were used when the electrochemical investigation was carried out. The pH of the solution was kept constant at about 9.57 in most experiments by maintaining a constant ratio of free ammonia to ammonium ion concentration. Sodium sulfate and sodium chloride were used as supporting electrolytes. The solution was purged with nitrogen gas for an hour before the polarization tests were carried out. Most experiments were performed at 75°C in a constant temperature water bath. The gold disc, supplied by the Landstrom Gold (Rapid City, SD) for the study, was 99.9% pure. The disc, 0.97 cm The EG&G PARC model K47 corrosion cell was used throughout the electrochemical study. The EG&G Princeton Applied Research Model 352 Softcorr TMTI Corrosion measurement software was used to control the EG&G PARC Model 273A potentiostat/galvanostat. All potentials are reported against the saturated calomel electrode (SCE) at 60°C which was the temperature at the tip of the reference electrode in the electrode bridge. The SCE potential at 60°C against the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) potential at 25°C was found to be 0.212 V. The detailed experimental procedure is given in previous publications ( When the study was concerned with the dissolution behavior of elemental gold, batch leaching experiments were carried out in a 1-l autoclave manufactured by Parr Instrument. High-purity gold (99.9%) bars with sphere-equivalent diameter 0.04±0.006 cm and a total weight of 0.2 g were used in each leaching experiment. The gold concentration of the solution sample was analyzed by an atomic absorption spectrophotometer. Ore samples finer than 100 mesh were subjected to leaching in an autoclave with 2–4 mol/dm Various refractory gold ore samples from many different gold mines in the USA. were provided for this investigation. Ammonia has already been established as an effective complexing agent for such transition metals as copper ( The anodic dissolution of gold in ammoniacal solutions has been studied by potentiodynamic polarization, galvanostatic, and cyclic polarization experiments ( When the overpotential is not too small and the back reaction is negligible, which is the case for gold dissolution, the potential-current curve can be described by the following equation: There are many potential cathodic reactions which could be coupled with the anodic reaction given above. Some of the important cathodic reactions are: For the cathodic reaction using cupric ammine as an example, At the applied potential, At the mixed potential, It is noted that the exchange current density, As can be seen in It has been found that the role of oxidants on the dissolution of gold in ammoniacal solutions is very important in bringing about appreciable amounts of gold into the solution. The cathodic reduction of oxidants such as cupric ammine, cobaltic ammine, oxygen, sodium hypochlorite and hydrogen peroxide was studied in the absence of the anodic reaction with the help of an inert platinum disk electrode ( It is well known that iodine, I One of the key advantages of such a reaction is to regenerate iodine from iodide, I As can be seen in It should be noted however that when iodide is placed in solution, there are at least 12 equations relating various iodide-containing species ( The distribution of various species containing iodide was calculated as a function of pH at various temperatures ( When 0.01 mol/dm The dissolution behavior of gold and platinum-group metals using ammonia with iodine as an oxidant is currently being carried out in the author's laboratory. Excellent recovery of these metals is achieved at temperatures less than the boiling point of water ( The effect of temperature on the dissolution of elemental gold is very significant, as shown by the results given in   It is noted that the oxidation of sulfide minerals in ammoniacal solutions is an exothermic reaction with the heat of reaction being −1687 kJ/mol of FeS Gold dissolution in ammoniacal solutions is theoretically possible even at room temperature. However, the kinetics of dissolution is so slow that the leaching of gold is practically not possible unless the temperature of the leaching system is raised to at least 80°C, but more practically above 120°C. The anodic dissolution current density is found to increase with the increase of the overpotential and with the ammonia concentration. The anodic reaction comprises of gold reacting with ammonia producing aurous di-ammine, Au(NH The cathodic reaction consisting of cupric ammine reducing to cuprous ammine is found to be the most favorable oxidant tested to date. However, iodine is the most effective oxidant since it acts as an oxidant as well as complexing reagent. In the presence of oxygen in the system, iodine can be regenerated in the system. Ammonia leaching has been found to be very effective for sulfidic and carbonaceous refractory gold ores. The recovery of gold in solutions containing ammonia, ammonium and proper oxidants at 160–200°C has been found to be better than 95% within 1–2 h reaction. K.N.H. would like to extend his appreciation to his former students and research associates who have worked on these projects.