Vertical Pauwels Type III fractures of the neck of femur in young patients are difficult fractures to treat. These are usually as a result of high energy trauma which are associated with a significant degree of fracture comminution in the neck of femur. This makes the fracture reduction and fixation difficult. Many fixation methods and implants have been described for use in these fractures but are not without reported complications such as non-union and varus collapse. In this article, we highlight the incidence of fracture comminution in both the anterior and posterior cortices of the femoral neck, better visualised with axial computed tomography scanning and describe a simple technique utilizing lag screws and a DHS implant to adequately address these fractures.Vertical angle fractures of the neck of the femur are a challenging clinical scenario to manage and are more commonly encountered in young patients as a result of a high energy trauma Implants: 135 degree Dynamic Hip Screw (DHS), 6.5mm 16mm partially threaded Cancellous screws Preoperative: Along with standard pelvis and hip radiographs, a CT scan must be performed to better identify the fracture pattern and fracture comminution. Fracture angle was determined by a previously described modified method Reduction: Patient was put on a fracture table in a semi-lithotomy position. Traction is applied to the affected limb with the limb in internal rotation of about 40°. The reduction was confirmed under the C-arm and where satisfactory anatomical reduction was not achieved, Flynn's manoeuvre was performed to achieve reduction Approach: 8-10cm straight lateral incision starting at the middle of the greater trochanter (GT) and sub vastus approach to the lateral femur. Intraoperatively, 3 ways are followed depending on the nature of comminution as was evidenced by the CT scan. The patient could either have No comminution of either anterior or posterior cortex Comminution of one of the cortices either anterior or posterior Comminution of both anterior and posterior cortices. In the fracture scenario, where there was no comminution in either cortex, two 6.5mm 16mm threaded cancellous screws were employed as lag screws, one near the anterior and one at the posterior margin of the femoral neck. These screws are perpendicular to the fracture site on AP view, starting roughly at the proximal flare of the GT and ending at the inferior (infrafoveal) aspect of the femoral head. On the lateral view, these screws are parallel to the anterior and posterior cortices as well as parallel to each other. Care is taken to ensure a sufficient corridor exists to pass the guidewire, triple reamer and the DHS lag screw in the centre of the neck in the lateral view. In a scenario where there was comminution of one cortex, the lag screw was employed on the opposite side, that is if the anterior cortex was comminuted a posterior corridor lag screw was utilized and vice versa. Tightening of the lag screw was done before implantation of the DHS. In case the comminution was present in both the cortices, the same screws were employed as position screws in which case the final tightening of these screws was carried out after the DHS implantation. Our technique is based on the following rationale. Lag screws work best when the angle is perpendicular to the fracture line. Lag screws work only when there is no comminution In the case of comminution, Position screws help maintain the length of the anterior and posterior columns thereby preventing excessive post-operative collapse. Lag screws need to be neutralised and the DHS implant acts both as a neutralisation as well as an augmentation to the construct.  Unrestricted hip and knee range of movement exercises were initiated from post-operative day 1 and crutch assisted weight bearing from day 2 to progress to full weight-bearing by 6 weeks. At 10 weeks, patients were allowed to mobilise full weight bearing without support. Between July 2018 and September 2019 we operated 15 patients less than 60 years old with vertical high shear angle neck of femur fractures at our centre with the above described technique. All fractures were operated within 24 hours of the injury. Ten of these patients were male and five female with a mean age of 42.6 (26-60) years. Of the 15 patients, 13 (86.6%) had some degree of comminution identified on CT scan. Of these 13 patients, 3 (23%) had comminution in the anterior cortex, 4 (30.7%) in the posterior cortex and 6 (46.1%) comminution in both cortices. The mean preoperative fracture angle was 67.3 degrees (58.4-79.8 degrees). At 6 months post-operative evaluation of all 15 patients achieved radiologic union with no complications. Close reduction was performed in all of the cases and none underwent open reduction. Case examples are shown in Vertical angle neck of femur fractures produce high magnitude shear forces across the fracture site resulting in fixation failures and overall complication rates ranging from 20-86% Garden In our technique we employ 6.5mm, 16mm threaded cancellous screws as lag screws as they are mechanically superior to cannulated cancellous screws The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. None of the above authors have any conflicts of interest to report