The aim of this research is to investigate whether a relationship exists or not between various brittleness concepts and fragmentation of rock under brittle compression. The term ‘brittleness’ at present has no clear definition. Fragmentation of rock under compression depends on it self-sustaining failure and the energy available at the peak strength to shatter the rock. It appears from review of the literature that no research has attempted to link rock brittleness and its corresponding fragmentation in compression. Rock failure under conventional compression tests and the subsequent fragments size distribution is a little-understood phenomenon. The research carried out involved determination of post-peak modulus for various rocks using a closed loop servo-controlled testing machine and fragmentation of the rock in brittle compression in accordance to ISRM (2007) suggested methods. Various brittleness concepts were evaluated from static mechanical properties, energy balance, normalised pre-failure curves and extension strain criterion. They were compared with fragments size obtained from compression. Brittleness concepts form static mechanical properties show that the higher its value the finer the fragmentation. Both concepts from normalised pre-failure curves and extension strain criterion appear to treat fragmentation of Class I and Class II rocks as a separate entity. They show better correlation with fragmentation for the segregated samples, Class I and Class II than other concepts. The concepts correlated with the post-peak modulus of the rocks and as such could be useful to quantify the brittleness of the rock under compression.This research investigates the relationship between the shattering of brittle rocks under compression and its brittleness. The fragmentation produced under this condition depends to a large extent on the energy available to cause fragmentation and its self-sustaining failure or brittle nature of the rock ( The purpose of this investigation is to determine whether a relationship exist between brittleness and fragmentation under steady compression. The research seeks to provide answers to the following questions: Is there a link between fragmentation and brittleness under compression? In addition, Class II rocks have self-sustaining fracturing response during unconfined uniaxial compression test. Therefore, do Class II rocks relate more to fragmentation than Class I rocks under compression? The study contributed to knowledge by providing: An understanding of the relationship between the brittleness and fragmentation of rocks, Information on Class I and Class II rocks behavior under brittle compression. At present, the term ‘brittleness’ has no clear definition. Different definitions and methods used to determine this term are based on the purpose and its use. Therefore, their values vary from method to method. These methods include: determination from energy ratio, strength ratio, stress–strain curves, strain ratio, and ratio internal friction etc. Comprehensive definitions of brittleness in the literature are discussed in Brittleness is described as a property of material to shatter with little or no ductility ( A general theory with regard to rock brittleness states that a more brittle rock will break under very little deformation ( At present there is no clear cut method accepted by the mining community to quantify brittleness. Therefore, its meaning is vague. However, there are number of methods to determine it in the literature. Different definitions and methods that are used to determine it are based on the purpose and the use. Definitions that appeared in the literature are coined from the methods of its determination. At low confining pressures, specimens failed with the formation of a number of long tensile cracks. At higher confining pressures, the failure mode changes to one with a shear plane inclined to the specimen axis. So, the gradual transition from one fracture mode to the other is accompanied by increasing instability of the failure process as a whole (  A material can be considered brittle or ductile with respect to its mechanical properties. With higher level of brittleness, high ratio of compressive to tensile strength is observed. In the literature, brittleness is often estimated from the ratio of Brazilian tensile strength to the uniaxial compressive strength and frequently used in many studies as brittleness indices. ( In addition, using the product of uniaxial compressive strength and Brazilian tensile strength of rock, brittleness,  The energy balance between the elastic strain energy stored in the material body (specimen) and the total potential energy of testing system has been used to estimate brittleness of rock under compression by many researchers ( The elastic energy withdrawn, The following brittleness indices are derived from energies balance calculated on the basis of elastic modulus, Brittleness “ The brittleness index The physical justification that implies the brittleness measurements concepts above as direct measures of the energy released can be inferred from At equilibrium between the testing system and the specimen when there no crack extension or contraction. At infinitesimally increase in crack length, ∂ It can be stated that the Griffith energy balance concept and the above brittleness concepts measurements (Eqs. Therefore, as shown in Eq. Therefore, at equilibrium between the testing system and the specimen when there is no crack extension or contraction. At infinitesimally increase in rupture energy, The normalised stress-axial strain curve reveals that the steeper the slope, the more stiff the rocks are. Therefore the stiffness might somehow relate with the brittleness of rocks. This is illustrated in An example of how the NSSC is calculated is shown for Spotted Anorthosite using  “Fracture of brittle rock will initiate when the total extension strain in the rock exceeds a critical value which is characteristic of that rock type” ( Damage is induced in rock when it is stressed beyond a certain damage initiation threshold (crack initiation). The critical value of the extension strain is obtained from laboratory test by plotting axial strain against the lateral strain. The point of inflection coincides with the damage/crack initiation threshold ( The critical extension strain is not affected by the confining pressure ( In order to answer the research questions so that the research could contribute to the body of knowledge, a well-planned and meticulous laboratory determination of the rock parameters were done. In addition, homogeneous rock samples were selected to include all rock types of varying strength (low to high strength). The suggested  To overcome the problem of comparing brittleness, a single number with fragmentation, which is a distribution, fragmentation is viewed as the aperture at which selected percentages of the fragmented material passed through the sieves. Using just a single point, e.g. the commonly used 50% passing sieve size or X  In addition, fragmentation becomes finer with increase in the brittleness values of The relationships between the combined characteristic of the pre- and post-peak moduli with fragmentation is evaluated. With Eq. For As for Little reliance can be placed on the observed trends in the brittleness indices estimated from energy concepts due to generally low correlation coefficients. However, brittleness Brittleness concept designated as NSSC is related with fragmentation for both the combined and the segregated samples. NSSC did not correlate with the fragmentation of the combined sample but shows comparably good correlation with the segregated samples (see Brittleness estimated from critical extension strain designated as Brittleness estimated as The relationships between brittleness indices estimated from static mechanical properties and fragmentation show an inverse relationship, meaning that the higher the property value the finer the fragmentation. The correlation appears stronger for Class II rocks and also at X Little reliance can be placed on the observed trends in the relationship between brittleness based on energy concepts and fragmentation due to low correlation coefficients. On the other hand, Much reliance can be placed on the observed trends in the brittleness concepts evaluated from normalised stress-axial strain curve and extension strain criterion. The concepts appear dependable for the estimation of fragments size from compression especially for the more brittle rocks. It appears that both concepts (NSSC and The various brittleness concepts evaluated in this study show that there is a link between brittleness and fragmentation. In summary: Brittleness correlated with fragmentation. The correlation between brittleness and fragmentation is stronger for the Class II rocks than the Class I rocks included in this study. Brittleness designated as NSSC is a better concept to describe brittleness based on its correlation with fragmentation from compression Brittleness is better evaluated as a separate entity for the segregated sample i.e. Class I or Class II rocks than combined sample.