Hip fractures are a common injury that have significant morbidity and mortality. Both intracapsular and extracapsular hip fractures have inherent treatment challenges and associated complications. This review article considers the common pitfalls in fracture fixation, focusing on basic principles of fracture reduction, biomechanics and implant selection in an attempt to reduce the incidence of fixation failure. In addition, we discuss the management options for dealing with complications should they occur.Hip fracture is the most common serious injury of older people in the UK. In the majority of cases it leads directly to emergency surgery with non-operative management largely being reserved for those patients who are deemed ‘unfit’ for surgical intervention. It is the leading cause of death following accident, with 30-day mortality in the UK being around 6.9%. As with any surgery, there is inherent risk of postoperative complications associated with hip fracture surgery. Patients admitted with hip fractures are often frail, with multiple co-morbidities. The fracture is often a sequela of chronic functional decline in health combined with an acute physiologic disturbance leading to delirium or iatrogenic syncope. This is reflected in the demographics of patient admissions; those living in residential or nursing homes are at three times the risk of fracture than those in the general population. In addition to medical complications there are complications directly related to the fracture itself. These include malunion, non-union, metal work failure and periprosthetic fracture. These risks are precipitated by patient factors such as malnutrition, obesity, multimorbidity, poor compliance and cognitive impairment. Some of these variables are modifiable but in the short term very little can be realistically done to significantly impact the outcome of treatment, with the possible exception of nutrition. Therefore, a key component in patient care is their selected fracture management and execution of operative intervention, with the Get It Right First Time (GIRFT) concept being extremely appropriate. In this paper we will discuss both the careful initial operative management to minimize complications and also the management of the complications themselves. The more controllable variables that we will focus our attention are implant choice, surgical technique and postoperative management. If these are done well, they lead to a more favourable outcome. Hip fractures can be divided into extracapsular or intracapsular depending on their anatomical location. The main blood supply to the femoral head is formed by an extracapsular arterial ring at the base of the femoral neck supplied by branches of the medial and lateral circumflex femoral arteries that run in a retrograde fashion along Weitbrecht's retinaculum into the hip capsule. Those over 60 years with displaced intracapsular fractures should undergo replacement with hemiarthroplasty or total hip arthroplasty (THA) based on the criteria of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines.   A large, international, multicentre randomized control trial known as ‘FAITH’ was performed in 2017 which compared the outcomes of sliding hip screws versus cancellous screws. Over 1000 patients were followed up for 2 years and the study found that there was no advantage in either device in terms of outcomes. However, it did show that sliding hip screws reduced the risk of reoperation in patient with displaced fractures, basicervical fractures and in smokers. For cannulated screw fixation three 6.5 mm, partially threaded, cannulated screws should be placed in a pre-planned configuration. After reduction, screw placement and configuration are important predictors of success. We would recommend the following inverted triangular configuration; Centre (anteroposterior) – Centre (lateral), Centre (anteroposterior) – posterior (lateral) and inferior along the calcar (anteroposterior) – centre (lateral). This can either be performed percutaneously or through a minimal direct lateral approach if internal fracture reduction is required. Other configurations have been suggested such as triangular parallel screws or crossed trochanteric and femoral head screws but these have been shown to have inferior outcomes. When using a CHS we favour a 135° plate with a tip-apex distance of <25 mm and a 6.5 mm partially threaded cancellous screw placed superiorly to provide rotational stability. In smaller patients the hip screw may need to be placed slightly inferiorly to accommodate a cancellous screw above, although should remain central on lateral imaging thereby keeping the tip-apex distance low. For intracapsular fixation we generally select a two hole plate for two bicortical shaft screws but for basicervical patterns we recommend using four bicortical screws to provide increased stability by increasing the lever arm. For both implant designs, the patient must remain protected weight-bearing for 3 months. Radiological follow-up is usually at 6–8 weeks, 12 weeks, 6 months and then 6-monthly thereafter for up to 2 years to monitor for evidence of AVN.  In patients who progress to non-union, AVN or metalwork cut out, arthroplasty is the best option to return function. For the majority this should take the form of a THA, but in those patients who are less surgically fit, hemiarthroplasty or excision arthroplasty remain possible options. In 2013, Archibeck el al. prospectively followed up 102 THAs that had undergone replacement following failed fixation of a hip fracture. They reported clinically successful outcomes and recommended the use of larger diameter femoral heads and provision of revision femoral components. When choosing the femoral component, it should bypass the site of any previous metalwork by at least one cortical width and we would generally choose cemented femoral components for these cases, primarily to reduce the risk of peri-prosthetic fracture during insertion. The decision between an uncemented versus cemented acetabular component is up to the performing surgeon, with a similar decision-making process as to that in their primary THA practice. Dislocation is a well-recognized complication of revision arthroplasty following fixation. In a 2016 systematic review by Mahmoud et al., they reported a relative risk of early dislocation of 1.46 compared to a control of primary THA, with an overall dislocation rate of 7%. Per-trochanteric fractures of the proximal femur represent between one-third to a half of all hip fractures. Unlike intracapsular fractures, the blood supply is sufficient enough to allow fracture healing so they should be universally managed with anatomical reduction and internal fixation. Subtrochanteric fractures of the proximal femur have been considered separately in a previous paper by the authors.  If closed reduction techniques fail, utilisation of various reduction methods often help including the use of the finger reduction tool, bone hook, percutaneous joystick or Schanz pin with a T-handle placed in the proximal fragment as previously described. Anatomical reduction is the cornerstone of treatment. It is vital the fracture is reduced before any device, particularly intramedullary, is inserted as if not this often fixates the fracture in its malreduced position. In some cases, if the fracture is malreduced, then component insertion can in fact worsen the fracture malreduction and in doing so you increase the risk of non-union, implant cut-out and implant failure. A classic example would be a proximal femoral fracture inadequately reduced on table with residual varus deformity. Insertion of a nail in this position or with more lateral than ideal entry point will worsen the varus deformity and inevitably lead to failure.  Additionally, there remains debate over the use of long versus short intramedullary devices due to the perceived risk of periprosthetic fracture at the tip of the nail due to presence of a stress riser. This needs to be weighed against the benefits of shorter operating time and reduced blood loss that occurs due to the absence of reaming. The literature does report a slightly higher incidence of periprosthetic fracture in individuals with short nails versus long, however, this is relatively low particularly with the introduction of new implants.  The entry point of the intramedullary nail is dependent on the biomechanical design of the manufacturer and establishing the correct entry point is key to maintaining reduction. Broadly speaking, most designs on the market recommend either a piriformis or trochanteric entry point. The benefit of the piriformis entry point is that it aligns with the axis of the femoral shaft reducing the tendency of fractures to collapse in varus. If using this technique care must be taken not to anteriorize the entry point as this may increase the hoop stresses precipitating iatrogenic fracture. We recommend that, regardless of implant design, attempts should be made to medialise the entry point. This helps address the tendency of varus malreduction. This can often be challenging, particularly in obese or well-muscled individuals. Several techniques can be used to facilitate this including adduction of the leg, the use of an awl or inserting the guidewire only 1 cm into the trochanter followed by intentionally reaming medially prior to reaming in a distal orientation. Additionally, if initial guidewire placement is found to be too lateral the use of the ‘Gatling gun’ wire guide can be used to place subsequent wires using the initial wire as a reference point.  Around the metal work there is often lucency, particularly the distal locking screws in intramedullary devices, suggestive of self-dynamization and impending failure. Computed tomography (CT) can be useful to evaluate evidence of healing or signs of infection in these cases. Patients should undergo a thorough examination including inspection of their wound sites for evidence of infection or discharge. A full blood work-up should be performed screening for evidence of infection, malnutrition, endocrine dysfunction or comorbid factors that may be poorly controlled such as diabetes mellitus. Lifestyle factors, particularly smoking, should be addressed with smoking cessation therapy offered. The original fracture pattern and subsequent surgical management should be critiqued for possible causes of biomechanical failure. In impending failures these factors should all be addressed. Attempts should be made to biologically optimize patients by addressing malnourishment, endocrine dysfunction and lifestyle changes such as smoking. If these steps fail to address the issue more significant intervention should be considered. In our practice, the cause of failure is often multi-factorial and each patient case should be looked at individually. Patient's functional level, goals of care and life expectancy should be evaluated. The majority of non-unions referred for treatment are often due to poor implant choice, inadequate fracture reduction and suboptimal implant positioning. Screw cut-out remains the most common mode of failure with the tip-apex distance <25 mm being well recognized as an important technical factor precluding failure, particularly with CHS. This inevitably leads to cartilage damage, necessitating conversion to THA ( If adequate bone stock is present, particularly in young patients, revision fixation is indicated. Simple exchange of metal work is seldom adequate as the biomechanical factors that have led to failure remain largely unchanged. If recognized early, simple procedures such as nail dynamization by removal of the distal locking screw can often provide enough stimulus for fracture healing to complete. Failing this, fracture sites should be thoroughly debrided and bone allograft should be considered. The use of proximal femoral locking plates, larger nails and quadriceps femoris flaps are all viable options. However, proximal femoral locking plates have been shown to be associated with a significant failure and complication rate. Therefore, in our institution they are rarely used. For fractures with sub-trochanteric extension we would consider the use of augmentary plates either as temporary reduction aids or permanent augments to aid fixation rigidity. These can be anterior plates to help neutralize the tendency for the proximal femur to flex or lateral plates to aid compression at fracture site as well as functioning in a ‘tension band’ fashion to prevent varus failure. As with all revision surgery, possible peri-prosthectic infection must considered as a potential cause for failure. All patients should be worked up appropriately with preoperative inflammatory markers including full blood count, C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. If there is a concern of infection, then aspiration/bone biopsy should be performed prior to planning definitive revision. Furthermore, intraoperative cultures should be obtained at the time of revision regardless if infection is suspected or not. Olszewski et al. showed that 20% of patients in a large case series of 666 non-union revision had a positive culture with 11% thought to have clinical significance. The mainstay of treating hip fracture complications is preventing their occurrence in the first place. Thereafter patient optimization and swift and appropriate medical management all play an important role in decreasing patient complications. From a surgical perspective, timely surgery utilising correct choice of implant(s), fracture reduction where appropriate and appropriate soft tissue handling should all improve surgical outcome. In our practice, most implant failures are retrospectively predictable and are commonly due to malreduction and poor biomechanical fixation methods. Revision surgery has a significant associated mortality due to the patient population and a significant cost to the NHS. We hope this article has managed to highlight some of the main pitfalls in their management.