The decontamination of some extractable fission products, such as Zr and Ru, is an important issue in the Thorex process. Acetohydroxamic acid (AHA) is an organic ligand composed of only C, H, N and O atoms. It can be used as complexing and reducing agent to inhibit the extraction of Zr and Ru. In this paper, the effect of AHA and preheating on the extraction of Th, U, Zr and Ru was studied. It is found the extraction of Zr and Ru would be inhibited in the presence of AHA and preheating, meanwhile there was no obvious effect on the extraction of Th and U. Afterwards, the countercurrent extraction using centrifugal extractors was performed to further test and verify the effect of AHA in a typical Thorex process. The results indicate that the decontamination of Zr and Ru could be enhanced evidently due to the effect of AHA, and the corresponding decontamination factor would be improved from 27.0 to 3.3 × 103 and 111.0 to 1.5 × 103, respectively. Thus, the use of AHA would be an efficient means for enhancing the decontamination of Zr and Ru in Thorex process.In addition to uranium, thorium is also a usable nuclear fuel ( Acetohydroxamic acid (AHA) is an organic ligand with low solubility in organic medium ( TBP, Vortex mixer (Vortex-genie 2, Scientific Industries Company of the United States) and centrifuge (TDZ4-WS, Hunan instrument centrifuge instrument co., LTD of China) were used for the mixing and separation of organic phase and aqueous phase in batch extraction experiments. The Φ10 centrifugal extractors were originally developed by Tsinghua University and used for multistage countercurrent extraction experiments. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) (Perkinelmer NexION 300D of the United States) and inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometer (ICP-AES) (Perkinelmer Optima 8000 of the United States) were used for analyzing the concentration of Th, U and FPs. UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Evolution Array, Thermo scientific of the United States) was used to determine the concentration of AHA. The distribution studies of Th, U, Zr and Ru in 30% TBP/ A continuous multistage countercurrent extraction using centrifugal extractors was operated to further test the effect of adding AHA in feed solution and preheating on the recovery of Th/U and decontamination of FPs in 1A cycle of Thorex process ( For contrast, the experiment without adding AHA in feed solution and preheating was also performed. To investigate the stability of AHA in HNO As the same as Purex process, the decontamination of FPs in Thorex process is mainly dependent on the 1A cycle, in which Th and U would be extracted into the organic phase, meanwhile, FPs are kept in aqueous phase due to the difference of distribution ratio between them. For the process itself, one of the methods to improve decontamination efficiency is suppressing the extraction of extractable FPs. Thus, the effect of AHA on the extraction of Zr and Ru was investigated. On the other side, the extraction experiments of Th and U were also performed to evaluate their recovery in the presence of AHA. As shown in As mentioned above, the effect of AHA on the extraction of Th, U, Zr and Ru is different due to the difference of complexing ability of AHA with them. There is a weaker effect on the extraction of Th, U and Ru when the concentration of AHA is at a lower level, and the adding of AHA can remarkably reduce the extraction of Zr by TBP. It can be concluded that the decontamination of Zr would be enhanced, meanwhile keeping the recovery of Th and U, when a moderate concentration of AHA is added into the feed. However, there would not be obvious effect on the decontamination of Ru. In consideration of the reduction property of AHA, it would destroy the structure of Ru(III)NO and turn the Ru from extractable form to nonextractable form at high temperature ( Above phenomenon can be explained by the stability of AHA, which would gradually decompose at higher temperature. In this case, the complexation of AHA with Th and U would be destroyed and the extraction behavior of Th and U in TBP/ For the application of AHA in Thorex process to enhance the decontamination of Zr and Ru, the stability of AHA is an important factor to be considered. As shown in Eq. In above experiments, it was proved that the adding of AHA in feed solution, coupled with preheating, could effectively inhibit the extraction of Zr and Ru. In order to test and verify the decontamination of Zr and Ru, and the recovery of Th and U in Thorex process in the presence of AHA, the continuous multistage countercurrent extraction using centrifugal extractors was performed. The concentration of Th and U in 1AW and 1AP at different running time is shown in The concentration of FPs in 1AW and 1AP in the presence of AHA at different running time is shown in The stage profiles of Th,U, Zr and Ru in 1A cycle after equilibrium are shown in The main technical indexes of 1A cycle in Thorex process in the presence and absence of AHA are shown in Due to the complexation and reduction ability of AHA, it can be used in Thorex to improve the decontamination of Zr and Ru without adverse effects on the recovery of Th/U and process operation. Furthermore, AHA is salt-free reagent and can easily be decomposed to gases. So, the waste volumes would not be increased in the case of using AHA as additive agent. In the future work, the irradiation stability of AHA will be investigated, and a “hot” test will also be performed to further verify the availability of adding AHA in Thorex process. In addition, the complexation and reduction mechanism of AHA with Zr and Ru also will be studied. This work was financially supported by