To control the collapse of cavitation bubbles induced during shock-wave lithotripsy (SWL), a piezoelectric annular array (PEAA) shock-wave generator was fabricated and combined with an experimental electrohydraulic (EH) shock-wave lithotripter with a truncated HM-3 reflector. The PEAA generator consists of eight individual transducers of 200-kHz resonant frequency. At a discharge voltage of 15 kV, the PEAA generator produces a shock wave with a peak positive pressure of 8.2 MPa, a positive half cycle duration of 2.9 μs, and a −6-dB beam width of 5 mm. The trigger of the PEAA generator was controlled via fiberoptic link with reference to the spark discharge of the EH generator. Hence, the PEAA-generated shock wave could be used to interact with cavitation bubbles induced by the EH source at various stages of their oscillation. The duration of bubble oscillation during SWL was monitored by a 2.25-MHz focused hydrophone, and this information was used to control the release timing of the PEAA generator. Stone fragmentation tests in vitro were carried out, and demonstrated that stone comminution could be significantly enhanced when the shock wave-bubble interaction occurred during the collapsing phase of the bubbles. A maximum increment of 60% to 80% in stone fragmentation was achieved when the PEAA-generated shock wave arrives near the collapse of the bubbles. Under these conditions, much intensified collapse of the bubbles near the surface of the stone, with strong secondary shock-wave emission and increased stress concentration at the impact site of the solid boundary, was observed using high-speed shadowgraph and photoelastic imaging.In shock-wave lithotripsy (SWL), cavitation bubbles are induced by the trailing tensile stress of the lithotripter shock wave There is, however, some recent evidence that suggests that appropriate shock wave-bubble interaction could improve stone fragmentation Toward this goal, we are developing a piezoelectric annular array (PEAA) shock-wave generator that can be retrofitted on a clinical (for example, a Dornier HM-3) lithotripter. The PEAA generator is intended to produce an auxiliary shock wave to control and force the collapse of lithotripter-induced bubbles toward the target concretion for improved stone comminution. Here, we report the design and physical characterization of a prototype PEAA generator that was combined with an experimental electrohydraulic (EH) shock-wave lithotripter with a truncated HM-3 reflector. Stone fragmentation tests To assess cavitation control in a clinically relevant configuration, an experimental lithotripter utilizing a combined EH/PEAA shock-wave generator The PEAA and EH source were energized individually by two independent high-voltage pulse generators of local design. The pulse generator for the PEAA source uses a 0.5 μF capacitor and a discharge voltage adjustable between 10 and 20 kV; the pulse generator for the EH source uses two 40-nF capacitors in parallel, and operates between 20 and 30 kV with standard Dornier electrode. In all the experiments reported here, the PEAA generator was operated at 15 kV, and the EH generator at 24 kV, either individually or combined. Both generators were shielded and grounded to reduce the emission of electromagnetic noise produced by the high-voltage discharge. Moreover, trigger signals for the generators were provided by optical-to–electrical converters through optical fibers to prevent cross-talking between the two shock-wave sources in operation. In a typical cavitation control experiment, the EH source was fired first. The spark discharge from the electrode was then picked up by a fast photodetector (PDA450, Thorlabs, Newton, NJ) and relayed through a digital delay generator (DG535, Stanford Research Systems, Sunnyvale, CA) to provide a time-delayed signal to trigger the PEAA generator. The jitter for the PEAA generator (time delay between the input trigger signal and output shock wave) was found to be less than 5 μs. Because bubbles induced by an EH lithotripter usually expand and then collapse within 200 to 400 μs, the shock wave produced by the PEAA generator could be used reliably to interact with the bubbles at different stages of their oscillation. The pressure waveform produced by either the PEAA or EH source individually was measured using a calibrated polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane hydrophone (Sonic Industries, Halboro, PA) that has a resonant frequency of 20 MHz, a minimal rise time resolution of 11 ns and a sensitivity of 6.8 kPa/mV. To map the acoustic field of the PEAA generator, the PVDF hydrophone was scanned at 1- or 2-mm steps, either along or transverse to the shock-wave axis. For the EH source, measurements were only carried out at the focal point because the pressure waveform and distribution around the beam focus of a Dornier HM-3 lithotripter has been reported previously The duration of bubble oscillation induced by the EH or PEAA generator was determined using a passive cavitation detection system described previously To compare stone fragmentation produced by either PEAA, EH or the combined EH/PEAA generator, plaster-of–Paris stone phantoms in slab configurations (45 × 25 × 12, L × W × T mm) were used because of their consistency in size, shape and physical properties that are similar to renal calculi When the combined generator was used, the arrival time for the PEAA-generated shock wave at F2 with respect to the spark discharge of the EH source was determined by: To visualize the shock wave-bubble interaction and the transient stress field produced in an adjacent solid, a high-speed imaging system combining shadowgraph and photoelastic imaging (see For photoelastic imaging, a bright field polariscope was used. Two quarter-wave plates (Q1 and Q2) were aligned with their optical axes at +45° and −45°, respectively, to the polarization axes of the polarizer (P) and analyzer (A), which are parallel to each other. With this arrangement, simultaneous observation of the shock wave and bubble oscillation in water, as well as the isochromatic fringes caused by stress waves in a photoelastic material, could be obtained. In this study, epoxy blocks (PSM-9, Measurements Groups Inc., Raleigh, NC) that are birefringent with a stress-optic coefficient of 10.5 kPa/fringe/m and acoustic impedance similar to the plaster-of–Paris stone phantoms were used. In principle, when the epoxy block is stressed, the electric field of the incident polarized light will be resolved into two components along the axes of principal stresses built up in the material. Because of the different refractive indices along the axes of the principal stresses, the two components will be retarded differentially as they propagate inside the stressed epoxy block. As a result, an interference pattern will be formed when the two components recombine outside the sample. Based on the correlation between stress and the indices of refraction for temporary birefringent materials formulated by Maxwell, in the simplest case the stress-optic law for a stressed plate with only variable in-plane principal stresses can be written as Typical pressure waveforms produced at the beam focus by the PEAA and the EH generator, respectively, are shown in The −6-dB beam size of the PEAA generator was determined to be 40 × 5 mm along and transverse to the beam axis at F2, as shown in The dynamics of bubble oscillation induced by the EH generator near the surface of a plaster-of–Paris phantom were captured using high-speed shadowgraph imaging In comparison, bubble dynamics induced by the combined shock-wave source are shown in First, it was found that the PEAA generator, when operating alone, does not produce any visible damage to the stone phantoms. Therefore, the role of PEAA-generated shock waves is merely to control (or influence) the collapse of cavitation bubbles produced by the EH source. To quantify the impact of the combined shock-wave generator on stone fragmentation, an increment ratio in mass loss of the stone phantoms following shock-wave exposure was calculated using the follow formula: The increment ratio in mass loss was found to vary significantly with the interpulse delay between the EH- and the PEAA-generated shock waves. Using the combined shock-wave generator at optimal interpulse delay (α = 1.0 with respect to The transient stress field induced in an epoxy block (12 × 12 × 40 mm, H × D × L) exposed to EH-generated shock waves is shown in The incident shock wave also induced a cluster of cavitation bubbles near the epoxy block (see frames Using a PEAA generator that is combined with an experimental EH lithotripter, we have demonstrated The observation that stone fragmentation was reduced when the PEAA-generated shock wave interacts with the bubbles near their maximum expansion (see results in On the other hand, the improved stone fragmentation achieved by shock wave-bubble interaction during the collapsing phase of the bubbles is likely caused by the intensified collapse of the bubbles near the surface of the stone (see The most unique advantage of the concept of a retrofitted PEAA generator is its flexibility, independence in operation, and compatibility with an existing clinical lithotripter. Although the operation and principle by which current (EH) lithotripters comminute kidney stones remain unchanged, the PEAA generator provides a potential means to augment the effectiveness of cavitation in stone comminution. By controlling the beam overlap between the PEAA generator and the lithotripter, shock wave-bubble interaction in kidney tissues adjacent to the target stones and, thus, potential increase in tissue injury, could be minimized (Delius and Brendel 1987; In summary, using a combined EH/PEAA shock-wave generator with optimal pulse sequence, significant enhancement in stone comminution was demonstrated We are indebted to John Goodfellow and Mike Gunter for their technical support in the fabrication of the supporting frame for the PEAA generator. This work was supported by NIH grants RO1-DK52985 and PO1-DK20543.