Adhesive joints between polybutylene terephthalat (PBT) and aluminum with epoxy (EP) and polyurethane (PU) resins have been tested after surface treatment by low-pressure plasma. By this means the adhesive bonding strength increased slightly in case of PU adhesive, but 3.5–10 times in case of EP adhesive. In accordance the fracture turns from an adhesive failure to a fracture predominantly in the plastic part. Freshly injected surfaces showed high adhesive strength with EP adhesive as compared with unfreshly injected ones. The increase of joining strength can be attributed to a corresponding increase of the PBT surface tension.Polybutylene terephthalat (PBT) is a partial-crystalline thermo-plastic material. It is characterized by high rigidity and strength, good dimensional stability at elevated temperature, low water absorption as well as high resistance against many chemicals and weather. Therefore, the application of PBT for construction of vehicles, electrotechnical engineering, electronics and telecommunications, precision and mechanical engineering became indispensable. For bonding of PBT parts with aluminum plates in so-called hybrid building method, only the adhesive joining process is possible. For obtaining optimal adhesion of epoxy (EP) and polyurethane (PU) on PBT surfaces, low-pressure plasma pretreatment was examined with process gases argon and oxygen. Investigations into the adhesive strength of PBT surfaces are rare. Excimer laser pretreatment causes a significant improvement of the adhesive properties with increasing laser impulse times in comparison to grinding and degreasing with acetone Systematic investigations regarding the influence of plasma treatment on the adhesion of adhesives at PBT surfaces as well as on the modification of the surface topography and the chemical composition have not been presented so far. Therefore in this investigation PBT surfaces were pretreated both with oxygen and argon low-pressure plasma and for adhesion bonding EP and PU adhesives were used. As metallic joining partners for single overlapped tensile shear test specimens 1 The selection of the adhesives took place considering the demands of the automobile industry, regarding favorable mechanical (e.g. strength and ductility) and thermo-physical characteristics (e.g. resistance to aging and temperature). Therefore, the cold-hardening two-component PU adhesive Tivopur 1667 as well as two cold-hardening two-component EP adhesives Araldite 2011 (EP 1) and Permabond E 32 (EP 2) were selected, Aluminum and steel sheets were covered in the delivered state with a layer from rolled oil as well as contaminations, which deteriorates adhesion. Therefore, the surfaces of the aluminum plates and the steel blocks were cleaned with ethanol at ambient temperature under ultrasonic activation (5 The adhesive components were mixed manually. For avoidance of bubbles the EP adhesive mixtures were degassed in vacuum for some minutes. For keeping an even adhesive thickness of 0.08 For determination of adhesive strength the tensile shear test according to DIN EN 1465 was used, For collecting the topographic structures of differently pretreated PBT surfaces and fracture surfaces the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used. The determination of the chemical composition of the PBT surfaces, before and after cold plasma treatment, and the surfaces of fracture took place by means of EDX analysis. For the determination of the dispersive and polar portions of the surface tension the static contact angles with 3 liquids of different polarity were measured by means of video-supported contact angular measurements of the drop contour analysis by using the DSA10DO4 system (KRUESS GmbH Hamburg). The liquid data are represented in The PBT strips were injected both in the plastic center at TU Berlin (named freshly) and in the company BASF (named unfreshly). Bonding of freshly injected strips took place with EP adhesives (EP 1, EP 2) and PU adhesive however of unfreshly injected strips with EP 1 and PU. The SEM photographs, surface tension measurements and EDX analyses were accomplished only with freshly injected strips. The SEM photographs show that the topographic structures of PBT surfaces in the as-delivered state is to a large extent smooth, however with scratches, which replicated the topographic roughness of the injecting device. Further mark-like structures can be recognized on the surface with 10,000 time magnification. Degreasing with ethanol and isopropanol does not cause substantial change of the topographic structures in relation to the as-delivered state; however, the mark-like structures of the surface disappeared, The PBT surface exhibited a nonpolar character in the delivered state. Due to contact angle measurement the dispersive portion of the surface tension represents nearly the entire surface tension of 43.60 On the PBT surfaces both in the delivered state and after plasma treatment (argon, oxygen) carbon and oxygen were detected by EDX analysis. The carbon concentration (area integrals, X-ray quantum COUNT in %) was determined between 79.53% and 80.64% and the oxygen concentration between 19.36% and 20.47%. The EDX analyses do not correlate with the results of the surface tensions. This is due to the fact that the depth of the EDX analysis amounts to 10 With EP 1 the bonding strength of freshly injected PBT strips is approximately 2.5 times higher in the delivered state than with the unfreshly injected ones. With freshly injected samples two samples broke cohesively in the plastic part at the aluminum lap end, while with two further samples showed additionally adhesive fracture at the plastic surface. The fifth sample with lower bonding strength failed adhesively at the plastic surface. Unfreshly injected strips exhibited adhesive fracture at the plastic surface. Degreasing unfreshly injected strips with isopropanol slightly increased the bond strength in relation to the delivered state, but the adhesive fracture at the plastic surface hardly changed. On the other hand, the freshly injected strips (degreased with ethanol) showed a reduction of the bond strength by approximately 50% and the fracture took place adhesively at the plastic surface, With EP 2 the bonding strength is in the delivered state 7 times and in the degreased condition 4 times lower than with EP 1, In contrast to EP the PU adhesive attained, independently of adhesive thickness, up to 4-fold higher bonding strength, whereby the bonding strength with freshly injected strips was approximately 3 With EP 1 plasma treatment of unfreshly injected PBT specimens with oxygen and with argon causes a strong increase of bonding strength up to 3.5 fold in relation to the untreated and degreased condition. Highest values occur at 60 With EP 2 adhesive the bonding strength values increase by argon and oxygen plasma up to 10 fold compared with delivery and degreased condition. With argon plasma the adhesion bonding strength values rise with increasing duration of treatment, With PU adhesive the adhesion bonding strength of the samples rises only slightly in the argon and oxygen plasma with increasing duration of treatment in relation to the as-delivered state. The influence of the adhesive thickness on the adhesion strength is negligibly small, Bending peel tests of PBT–steel-adhesion joints showed very low bending peeling resistance for EP 1 and EP 2 in the as-delivered and in the degreased condition (ethanol) due to adhesive fracture at the plastic surface, With EP 1 adhesive the peel resistance rises significantly after plasma treatment up to 17 fold in relation to the as-delivered state. With 6, 30 and 60 With EP adhesives PBT surfaces exhibit in delivery and degreased condition lower adhesion bonding strength and bending peel resistance compared with PU adhesive. By plasma treatment with oxygen or argon the adhesion bonding strength can be increased with EP adhesives to 3.5 fold (EP 1), 10 fold (EP 2) and the bending peel resistance up to 17 fold (EP 1). The adhesive fracture at the plastic surface in the degreased condition and delivered state changes to a fracture predominantly in the plastic part at the aluminum lap end in tensile shear test and the bending peel test. With PU adhesive the values increase after plasma treatment only slightly. However, the cohesive fracture in the plastic part at the aluminum lap end shifts to a fracture close to the restraint or to approximately 20 The authors thank the companies BASF, Tivoli Werke, Ciba Speciality Chemistry, Permabond and VAW Aluminum for the supply of plastics, adhesives and/or aluminum sheets. Further thanks are due to the plastic technical center at the TU Berlin (Mr. Dipl. -Ing. Mähler) for injection molding parts and the company KRÜSS GmbH Hamburg (Mrs. Christine Bilke-Krause) for surface tension measurements.