The objective of this study is to analyze the effect of dynamic solidification and vanadium additions in a range from zero to 6.42 ​wt% to a high chromium white iron with the purpose of refining the microstructure and to improve hardness. The alloys were characterized by optical and electron microscopy, EDS and X-ray diffraction and complemented with phase quantification undertaken by image analysis and XRD data. Bulk hardness was measured for different casting thicknesses in both as-cast and after a destabilization heat treatment at 900 ​°C for 45 ​min. The results show that V addition produces a refining effect on the M7C3 carbide as well as the VC carbide formation which can nucleate as primary carbide for V contents higher than 4.75 ​wt%. Dynamic solidification of the experimental irons produced a notable decrease in the size of the carbide phase and increased its volume fraction. This solidification technique also produced a transformation of the iron matrix of the base alloy from predominantly austenitic to a fully pearlitic matrix, while for the 6.42 ​wt% V alloyed iron a notably smaller, slightly elongated and isolated VC carbides embedded in a highly martensitic matrix were observed. This microstructural modification resulted in the maximum harness values obtained in the as-cast conditions. After the destabilization heat treatment, a softening of the microstructure of the V alloyed irons was observed due to the C depletion of the matrix inhibiting the martensitic transformation; conversely, the base alloy experienced a considerably increase in hardness as a result of the high amount of precipitated carbides embedded in a highly martensitic matrix. The results of the present study show that, V alloying and the dynamic solidification technique can be used as effective ways to refine the carbide phase obtaining high hardness levels in the as-cast condition, avoiding this way heat treatments.High-chromium white cast irons are ferrous alloys with Cr contents between 12 and 30% and 1.8–3.6% C. The as-cast microstructure is typically composed by a M For the case of high chromium white cast irons the formation of the VC primary carbide has not been reported for V contents up to 4.73 ​wt%. In spite of that, these additions have considerably improved the hardness and wear resistance due to the increase in M Another technique to modify the morphology and phase distribution of an alloy is via dynamic solidification by vibration along a vertical, horizontal or rotational axle. These technique has been successfully applied in sand cast aluminum alloys where the use of high accelerations allowed to obtain a completely non-dendritic microstructure with a globular appearance [ In a recent study the effect of vibration frequency on the microstructure and performance of a high chromium cast irons was shown [ The aim of this paper is to present a systematic study to analyze the V effect in amounts up to 6.42 ​wt% on a high chromium white cast iron (13 ​wt% Cr) statically solidified at different cooling rates and dynamically solidified under a reciprocating symmetric motion. Four different alloys with 0, 4.13, 4.93 and 6.42 ​wt% V content were melted in an induction furnace of 30 ​kg capacity. Each melt was poured at 1450 ​°C into sand molds with 3 cavities of 200 ​mm length and square cross section of 18, 25 ​y 37 ​mm respectively. This procedure was used to obtain 3 different cooling rates and ensure the same chemical composition. Two additional melts with 0 and 6.41 ​wt% of V respectively were poured into cylindrical sodium silicate bonded sand molds to produce bars of 37 ​mm diameter and 200 ​mm length which were dynamically solidified under reciprocating motion with symmetric oscillations of 180° at 16 ​Hz. Chill samples were obtained during the pouring process for chemical analysis by Optical Emission Spectroscopy. The bars were sectioned with a metallographic cutting machine to get 10 ​mm length samples for characterization. A half the samples were subjected to a destabilization heat-treatment to promote the secondary carbide precipitation; this heat-treatment consisted in annealing for 45 ​min at 900 ​°C and subsequently air cooled to room temperature. The retained austenite volume fraction for the heat treated samples was calculated from XRD data by the technique described by Kim [ Metallographic samples were etched with Vilella’s reagent (5 ​mL of HCl and 1 ​g of picric acid in 100 ​mL of ethanol) for 15 ​s to reveal the microstructure. The Secondary Dendrite Arm-Spacing (SDAS) was measured by the linear intercept method by averaging the distance between adjacent side branches on the longitudinal section (parallel to the alloy growth direction) of a primary arm. A second batch was subject to deep etching for 24 ​h in a solution of 50 ​mL of FeCl As-cast characterization and after heat treatment was undertaken by optical microscopy (OM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu-Kα radiation. A Vicker’s hardness tester with load of 10 ​kg for 15 ​s was used for bulk hardness measurements. The chemical composition of the experimental irons is shown in For the 4.13 ​wt% V iron, small amounts of eutectic VC carbides and a considerably increase in the presence of martensite were observed (see The above results are in agreement with the equilibrium phase diagram calculated by JMat-Pro®, shown in The presence of the VC carbides and the higher martensite contents produced by the V additions are also confirmed by the XRD pattern and the micrograph shown in   The observed refining effect is attributed to the mechanical mixing produced during solidification. According with Kumar et al. [ For the case of the base alloy, the solidification begins with the proeutectic austenite nucleation rejecting solute at the solidification front; however, the solute-rich layer is continuously removed by the mechanical mixing which allows austenite to grow with a lower solute concentration enriching the remaining liquid with solute. This effect increases the austenite susceptibility to transform during cooling and produces an increase of the eutectic carbide volume fraction as it is shown below. As mentioned before, V addition modifies the amount and distribution of the different phases present in each alloy. The plot in  Another important effect mentioned before and observed in In support to the above observations For the dynamically solidified irons the retained austenite volume fraction and its C content is considerably diminished; this was attributed to the continuous mixing of the solidifying melt which reduced the solute segregation during solidification. Therefore, this decrease in the C solution in the iron matrix produces an increase of the Carbide Volume Fraction (CVF) as can be seen from the plot in As previously discussed and as shown from The microstructures of the base and 6.42 ​wt% V alloys after destabilization are shown in Consequently, in the 6.42 ​wt% V alloy, the austenite impoverished in carbon obtained at 900 ​°C and the increase in the eutectoid transformation temperature altogether enhanced the ferritic transformation during cooling which considerably affects the hardness values.  The plot on On the other hand, a different behavior in hardness as a function of thickness is observed for the base and 4.13 ​wt% V irons compared with the two other alloys. For the case of the lower V content irons, a predominantly austenitic matrix was observed for the 18 ​mm thickness. For the case of 25 ​mm thickness, which means a lower cooling rate, a martensitic transformation occurred due to a C depletion at the vicinity of the eutectic carbide during cooling down; this in turn increases the hardness value. The same behavior was observed for the 37 ​mm thickness alloy but in this case, a slightly decrease in hardness was observed compared with the 25 ​mm thickness which was attributed to a microstructural coarsening. For the case of the dynamically solidified irons, a decrease in hardness was observed compared with those statically solidified in the as-cast condition. For the 6.41 ​wt% V alloy, the hardness value decreased from 613 to 571.6 ​H ​V. Even when the CVF is increased via dynamic solidification, the iron matrix which represents about 70% in volume of the alloy has a considerable influence on the overall hardness. Therefore, for this particular case the decrease in C content of the matrix produced by the increase in the CVF promoted a reduction in hardenability giving rise to the formation of lower C content martensite. Based in previous experiments and according with the literature [ In a similar way, the hardness for the dynamically solidified base alloy decreased to 464.2 ​H ​V compared to that of 536 ​H ​V measured in static conditions of solidification; this could seem contradictory considering that a higher carbide volume fraction was obtained in the dynamic conditions. However, in this case, the reduction in hardness results from the matrix transformation to a fully pearlitic microstructure instead of the mixture of austenite with small amounts of martensite obtained in static conditions of solidification.  From Contrarily, the 6.41 ​wt% V dynamic solidified and destabilized alloy, produces a considerably C depleted matrix due to the high amount of M Based on the results of the present study, dynamic solidification can be used as a technique to increase the volume fraction and refine the carbide phase for application where good fracture toughness is required. Likewise, V alloying can be suitable method to refine the carbide phase and obtain high hardness levels in the as-cast condition without requiring a secondary processing such as destabilization heat treatment. The V addition in the range of 4.13–6.42 ​wt% resulted in the VC carbide formation which nucleated as primary carbide for V contents greater than 4.93 ​wt%V. At the same time, V additions produced a refining effect on the M The increase in V addition increased the martensite content due to the C depletion caused by the VC carbide formation, consumes a high amount of C reducing the austenite stability coupled with the V effect of raising the Ms transformation temperature. Therefore, a decrease of the retained austenite volume fraction was produced with the increase in V content. Dynamic solidification produced a considerably decrease of the size of the carbide particles and increased its volume fraction. This technique also produced the transformation of the base alloy matrix from predominantly austenitic with small amounts of martensite to fully pearlitic reducing the hardness values. In the case of the V alloyed irons a predominantly martensitic matrix was obtained. Likewise, for the case of the 4.93 and 6.42 ​wt% V dynamically solidified irons a notably smaller, slightly elongated and isolated VC carbides embedded in a highly martensitic matrix were observed which resulted in the higher harness values obtained in as-cast conditions. After the destabilization, the microstructure of the base, 4.13 and 4.93 ​wt% V alloyed irons consisted in a predominantly martensitic matrix with a high amount of precipitated carbides, while the eutectic carbide did not suffer any change at this destabilization temperature. However, the martensite volume content and the secondary carbide precipitation decreased with the increase in V addition due to the lower C content in the matrix decreasing the bulk hardness. For the 6.42 ​wt% V iron, the excessive C depletion of the matrix after destabilization inhibited the martensitic transformation; therefore, this effect is more pronounced in the 6.41 ​wt% V dynamically solidified iron, resulting in the lowest hardness values for this condition. Conversely, the dynamically solidified and destabilized base alloy experienced the maximum increase in hardness as a result of the high amount of precipitated carbides embedded in a highly martensitic matrix coupled with the maximum carbide volume fraction. Data available on request. A. Bedolla-Jacuinde was the main responsible of the management and coordination of the project; he also contributed with the formal analysis of the results. A. Sánchez performed the experiments and wrote the original draft. I. Mejia contributed with the thermodynamic analysis by JMatPro and some discussion. F. V. Guerra helped with the review and editing of the manuscript. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This paper results from the financial support of the