At temperatures above 0.5 T
                  m, where T
                  m is the melting temperature of metallic materials in degrees absolute, the strain hardening produced by plastic deformation tends to be counteracted by dynamic restoration processes, i.e., dynamic recovery (DRV) and dynamic recrystallization (DRX), leading to little or no strain hardening or even to strain softening at high strains, see Figure 1. In materials of low stacking fault energy (SFE) or under deformation conditions in which DRV is significantly retarded, the dislocation density increases to a high level and eventually the local differences in density are high enough to permit the nucleation of new grains followed by the migration of high angle boundaries (HABs). Such conventional DRX leads to the elimination of large numbers of dislocations and so brings about clearly observable strain softening in the flow curves accompanied by the evolution of a new equiaxed grain structure. This will be categorized here as discontinuous DRX (dDRX).
               By contrast, when DRV is rapid, such as in materials of high SFE, the rearrangement and annihilation of dislocations take place during deformation, leading to the formation of subgrains and to the establishment of steady-state flow. This occurs by means of a dynamic balance between strain hardening and DRV and is accompanied by the pancaking of the original grains. Recently, it has been shown that, even when only DRV is operating, new grain structures can evolve at very high strains, not only under hot working conditions, but even during straining at warm and cold temperatures. The mechanisms involved can be considered as strain-induced continuous reactions and so this phenomenon is referred to as in-situ or continuous DRX (cDRX). In this article, the characteristic flow behaviors associated with dDRX and cDRX are reviewed and the microstructures that evolve and the mechanisms that operate under these conditions are described.In materials of low to medium stacking fault energy (SFE), such as Cu, Ni, Au, ?–Fe, and austenitic stainless steel, dynamic recovery (DRV) is retarded because dislocation climb and cross slip are impeded in the widely faulted dislocations. This in turn retards the annihilation and rearrangement of dislocations and therefore the formation of subgrains. Under such conditions, discontinuous DRX (dDRX) is initiated and flow curves generally exhibit the characteristic shapes illustrated by the continuous solid lines at temperatures above 623 The initiation of dDRX in polycrystals is preceded by increasing fluctuations in grain boundary shape and then by the development of serrations, followed by the nucleation of new grains along the prior grain boundaries. The evolution of grain size ( The dependence of the density of fine grains (<10   At large strains, where dDRX has been propagated through the entire volume, the substructure density varies from grain to grain. Such microstructures can be subdivided into the three categories illustrated schematically on the lower half of When DRV takes place with ease, the flow curves that result have simple shapes; there is strain hardening at low strains followed by steady-state flow at high strains. In materials of high SFE, such as Al, Zn, Mg, and a-Fe, the dislocations produced by deformation first become entangled; then climb and annihilation take place, leading to the development of subgrain structures in the grain interiors. The geometry of these substructures does not change during steady-state deformation, while the original grains deform in conformity with the outward change in shape of the object, i.e., they adopt a flattened or pancaked shape. The subgrains are coarser at higher temperatures and lower strain rates, i.e., at low values of  Some typical microstructures developed in a Fe–20% Cr alloy subjected to MDF at 773 The continuous increase in misorientation between subgrains and grains during SPD is an essential feature of the strain-induced formation of UFGs. The evolution of this process can be described using the dependence of the sub-boundary misorientation ? (1) ? (2) During second stage deformation, MSBs begin to appear at e (3) The process of forming UFGs during SPD is similar, whether deformation takes place by MDF or by other methods. Nevertheless, the critical strain e A model for the strain-induced formation of UFGs based on the evolution of MSBs followed by grain fragmentation was proposed by Somewhat different considerations appear to apply to hcp materials. For example, The transient deformation behaviors taking place during changes in strain rate in the cases of cDRX and dDRX are compared in The characteristics of dDRX and cDRX considered in Static recrystallization (SRX) is a phenomenon in which new dislocation-free grains appear in strain-hardened metals and alloys during annealing (c.f. The phenomena taking place during annealing after cold working to small strains on the one hand and to large strains on the other are compared in In summary then, after deformation to low strains, annealing plays the most important role in the formation of new grains. By contrast, under SPD conditions, new grains are formed predominantly during deformation, although they only adopt their equilibrium configurations on subsequent annealing.