Nano-Al2O3 was employed as the micro-column packing material for simultaneous separation/preconcentration of osmium(Os) and iridium(Ir) species. It was found that both of Os and Ir species could be adsorbed quantitatively on nano-Al2O3 within a pH range of 4.0–8.0, however, only Ir(IV) could be quantitatively retained on the micro-column within a pH range of 8.0–10.0, Os(IV) were passed through the micro-column without the retention. Based on this fact, a new method of micro-column separation/preconcentration was developed for simultaneous separation of Os and Ir species. The extraction recoveries for the mentioned noble metals were more than 95%. Nano-Al2O3 micro-column was reused for four times without obvious significant loss of its adsorption activity for Os and Ir species. In order to validate the developed method, recovery of Os(IV) and Ir(IV) from simulated leaching solution of spent catalysts (SLSSC) was achieved successfully. The negligible uptake of Cu(II), Zn(II), Co(II), Ni(II), Cd(II), Pb(II), and Fe(III) in SLSSC was due to the high selectivity and extractability of nano-Al2O3 for osmium and iridium.As precious platinum group metals (PGMs), such as Os and Ir are extensively used in automobile, catalysis, petroleum and electronics industry owing to their specific physical and chemical properties Os and Ir elements in the same period tend to have similar chemical properties Several separation methods such as solvent extraction Compared to these methods, SPE has achieved widespread use because of its simple procedure, higher pre-concentration factor, rapid phase separation and combination with different detection techniques The present work deals with the evaluation of nano-Al Nano-Al (NH A standard stock solution of Os(IV) (1000 All the other reagents including hydrochloric acid, nitric acid and sodium hydroxide, were of analytical reagent grade and obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. without any further purified. The standard stock solutions of all of the other metal ions were obtained by dissolving their chloride or nitrate salts (⩾99.99%) and used to investigate the adsorption selectivity. Deionized water was used throughout the experiments. A Cary 5000 UV–vis–near-IR spectrophotometer (Varian) was used for the determination of Os(IV) and Ir(IV) ions. A Mettler X Series II inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS; Thermo Scientific) was used for the determination low concentrations of Os(IV), Ir(IV) and other metal ions. A pHSJ-4F pH meter Instrument (Shanghai LEICI Co. Ltd.) was used for pH measurement. HZQ-Q thermostat oscillator (HDL APPARATUS Co. Ltd.) was used in static batch experiments. A Malvern Zetasizer Nano-ZS particle analyzer (Malvern, UK) was used to determine the zeta potential of adsorbents. A constant flow peristaltic pump with computer displaying and fraction collector (Shanghai Huxi Analysis Instrument Factory CO., Ltd.) was used in separation and pre-concentration process. Adsorption tests were carried out to examine the adsorption behavior of Os(IV)/Ir(IV) on the nano-Al The column was a simple glass tube with an inner diameter of 6.0 The pH value of the mixture solution was adjusted to 9.5, and passed through the nano-Al The pH value of the mixture solution containing 5 SLSSC solution was prepared by dissolving metal salts in 1.2 Os and Ir on nano-Al The influence of contact time on the adsorption of Ir(IV)/Os(IV) was presented in In order to investigate the adsorption rate of Os(IV) and Ir(IV) on the adsorbents, pseudo-second-order kinetic model was used. Pseudo-second-order rate equation: To understand the adsorption behavior of nano-Al Adsorption capacity is an important factor to evaluate the property of the adsorption material, because it determines how much nano-Al The Langmuir isothermal constants were calculated from the plots of In order to find a proper eluent for the retained Os(IV)/Ir(IV) ion, after its uptake from aqueous media, the desorption test were carried-out. From The flow rate is an important parameter affecting the adsorption of metal ions in a packed-bed column, because the retention process is usually controlled by the mass transfer process. The sample flow rate should be optimized to ensure quantitative retention along with minimization of the time required for sample processing. The effect of flow rate on Os(IV)/Ir(IV) adsorption was studied by varying the flow rate (0.05, 0.1 and 0.2 The effect of eluent flow rates on the desorption of Os(IV)/Ir(IV) was examined at the flow rate range of 0.05–0.1 The change in the initial Os(IV)/Ir(IV) concentration had a significant effect on the breakthrough curves, as illustrated in Since nano-Al When the adsorption was finished, 2 Separation during desorption was also examined, a continuous-mode column experiment was performed to obtain a breakthrough profile where a binary mixture of Os and Ir solution (5 After complete saturation of the column, elution tests were carried out using 0.1 In addition to that, nano-Al Based on the results of the adsorption tests, the applicability of nano-Al In this study, the simultaneous separation of Os and Ir from SLSSC samples was examined, with effective separation of both metals achieved within four repetitions of the adsorption–desorption step. Furthermore, external Cu(II), Zn(II), Co(II), Ni(II), Cd(II), Pb(II) and Fe(III) ions had no significant effect on pre-concentration of osmium and iridium ions. Thus the information obtained in this study sheds new light upon potential techniques for the separation of valuable metals from other base metals in hydrometallurgical operations, or in the recycling of waste materials. This project was supported by the