A uniform discharge from a closed circuit jaw crusher is 200 The shaft power of the rod mill The size of the industrial mill Data: Rod Mill: Grindability Index at 10 Step 1 From (A factor of 1.1 may be required if the work index is in kWh/short ton) Substituting values: Step 2 Evaluate correction factors. Correction factor F Correction factor F Correction factor F Since the feed size is 16,000    Since the feed is less than the optimum, no correction is necessary. Correction factor F Correction factor F  Correction factor F Correction factor F  Total Power required for rod mill =W Step 4 Preliminary selection of a commercially available rod mill may now be made from the manufacturer’s catalogue. For example, Allis Chalmer’s catalogue shows that the nearest mill size would require 655 Step 5 The diameter efficiency factor, F Hence, the corrected power = 640 Step 6 Referring again to Allis Chalmer’s rod mill performance in Appendix B-4, for a mill power draw of 618 The factor F Since (R − R*) = (16.0 − 15.5) = 0.5, the factor F Rod Mill –Ball Mill Circuit: Consider the set-up in  Step 1 The discharge from the rod mill is the feed to the ball mill. Therefore in this case the work, W, will be: Step 2 Corrections to the work index value: Correction factors F Correction factor F Correction factor F Check for oversize using The feed size (1000 Correction factor F Correction factor F Correction factor F Correction factor F Step 3 Mill Power required = 6.0 Step 4 To determine the commercially available ball mill that would suit the conditions, refer to the manufacturer’s literature, for example, Allis Chalmers’ as published by Rowland and Kjos  The diameter efficiency factor, F F Hence, the correction factor, F Step 6 The factor F Since (R − R*) = (6.7 − 13.2) = −6.5, which exceeds −2, the factor F Correction factor F F The corrected mill power then is given by: Total Power required for the ball mill = 1200 Referring again to Allis Chalmers’ ball mill performance table, for a mill power draw of 1412  The design characteristics of industrial rod mills are similar to ball mills. Most rod mills used in mineral processing are of the overflow discharge type as illustrated in The spout feeders are designed to have a head of about 1.5 The diameters of the discharge end of the spout feeders are about 100-200 Data from Rowland The cross-section of the rods is generally circular, but rods having square and hexagonal sections have been used. Rods having cross sections other than round do not have any particular advantage on performance. Rods with round sections are possible easier to handle. Liners protect the rod mill shell and are made of rubber or steel and are bolted to the shell with or without rubber backing. The liners are 65 to 75 The discharge in overflow rod mills falls through a trommel to remove any tramp iron in the material stream. Due to relatively uniform coarse product size and low slimes, rod mill products have been generally used as feed material for ball mills. The comminution circuits are generally arranged to receive crushed ore from a secondary crusher first to rod mills and then to ball mills. The product from the rod mill is either fed directly to a ball mill or to a classifier. The coarser fraction if then fed to the ball mill. The rod mills are normally operated in open circuit and ball mills normally are operated in closed circuit. Some common circuits are illustrated in  In some cases open circuit single stage rod mills are used especially where the product is used directly for gravity concentration or for example in the iron ore industry where the product goes directly to a pelletising plant. Closed circuit rod milling is uncommon but may be used where a coarse grind and a tight tolerance is required on any oversize particles in the product.  For the efficient use of rods it is necessary that they operate parallel to the central axis and the body of the mill. This is not always possible as in practice, parallel alignment is usually hampered by the accumulation of ore at the feed end where the charge tends to swell. Abrasion of rods occurs more in this area resulting in rods becoming pointed at one end. With this continuous change in shape of the grinding charge, the grinding characteristics is impaired. The bulk density of a new rod charge is about 6.25 During wet grinding, the pulp charged to the mill is usually held between 60 – 75% solids by mass. Rod lengths greater than 6 Rod diameters have to be carefully chosen since during the grinding process they wear in different manners. For example, at the feed end where the wear is maximum, the rod wears down to a pointed shape. At the middle it wears into an elliptical shape while at the discharge end it becomes conical. This produces uneven stresses along the length as a result the rods break into smaller sizes. The choice of rod diameter is also related to the ore characteristics, chiefly the work index, ore feed size (F  During operation of rod mills, rods have to be replaced occasionally as they are subjected to wear and liable to break. The replacement rate should be equal to the rate at which rod size deterioration occur so that equilibrium is maintained. Bond To use the table, determine the largest size of the rod to be charged using The reduction ratio, R, in rod mills varies from 2 – 20 depending on the characteristics of the ore. The usual reduction ratio is about 8. According to Bond  If for a certain situation the actual reduction was 20 and R The capacity of rod mills will depend on the tonnes of the finished product of required size produced per unit time and thus will be a function of: Mill Characteristics, i.e., length, diameter, speed of rotation, lifters, Feed (ore) characteristics i.e., soft, brittle or hard, Initial and final size of the ore, i.e. the reduction ratio. The capacity will also depend on the kinetic energy available for transfer from the rods to the feed during its passage through the mill. Under a given load and size requirement, the capacity of a rod mill is therefore proportional to the length and diameter. It is usually considered as: The relationship between capacity and mill diameter and length is shown in The effect of mill length on capacity as determined by Kurimoto  The capacities of rod mills are limited by practical operational problems like: Limitations of steel mills to produce perfectly straight steel rods more than 6 Tangling of rods Swelling of the charge, particularly near the feed end Increasing slurry density due to loss of water Faulty liners and lifters As in ball mills, the power draft of a rod mill is the product of capacity and work index, which is the energy required to break a mineral of a given size to the required size. The mill power is also increased by increasing the rod charge and the mill speed while the mill power and capacity are both increased with increasing mill length. Based on these observations and working on wet overflow mills Rowland and Kjos    The expression is applicable to mill diameters between 1.52 and 4.1 In industrial situations where conditions differ from Bond’s set-up 1. F 2. F 3. To account for the effect of a mill diameter which is different from the 2.44 The solid line in 4. Oversize has been defined by Austin et al   The value of W The correction factor F This factor is not required for a ball mill fed by a rod mill or if F 5. A correction factor for fineness of grind is applicable when greater than 80% of the ground product is less than 75 The correction factor is: 6. This correction is mainly for low reduction ratios. The correction factor F Correction factor F The correction is not always needed for high reduction ratios but is used if W  If the ball mill reduction ratio is less than 6 a correction factor, F This correction is particularly applicable for regrind mills. 8. For efficient operation of rod mills the feed should preferably be uniform in top size. The manner of feeding either from conveyors or directly from bins and chutes affects the power consumption and mill performance. To correct for feed preparation is difficult. The rule of thumb suggested by Rowland and Kjos The total correction F For a milling condition when a certain factor is not applicable it should be neglected. The total mill power will then be: The above considerations for determining the mill power draw serve as a guide for the selection of mills for a particular job.  To cope with the situation one of the methods practiced is to introduce an air-clutch, which helps to start the motor with no load. When the motor is in full speed the clutch is released to transfer the load smoothly. An alternate arrangement is to use an induction motor or a synchronous motor coupled directly to the pinion shaft of the mill.  8.1. The inner dimensions of a rod mill were 1.8 The limiting speed at which the mill should be permitted to operated, The mill loading. 8.2. A 3 The mill volume occupied by the charge (J) The fraction of the mill volume occupied by the ore if U = 1.1 The fraction of mill volume occupied by the rods The mass of rods in the mill. 8.3 A wet rod mill was loaded to 45% of its volume with a charge consisting of a gold ore and steel rods. The rods diameter was 70 The fraction of the critical speed at which the mill operates The maximum power drawn The difference in power requirements if the mill was filled to the same extent with balls having the same diameter as the rods. 8.4. The length to inside diameter ratio of a rod mill was 1.5 when the length was 4.72 Calculate the mill power required for operating at a 100 Wet grinding Dry grinding Power required if the rod mill was a grate discharge type. 8.5 The power consumed by a tumbling mill as measured at the shaft was 152 The inside dimensions of the mill (assume a L/D = 1.65) The mill power and capacity 8.6 The internal diameter and length of a dry rod mill measured 2.74  The power consumption at the pinion shaft under dry and wet conditions The specific grinding energies under dry and wet conditions of grinding. 8.7 The test work index of the feed to a rod mill was 10.1 8.8 Gold ore was crushed successively in a primary and then in a secondary crusher. Product from the secondary crusher analysed 80% passing 2000 The percent mill volume occupied by the charge during wet open circuit grinding Optimum operating speed (rpm) of the mill Mill capacity (t/h) 8.9 Crashed nickel ore was ground in a wet over-flow rod mill with an inside liner diameter of 4.37 The rod diameter at commence of crushing The rod length Date: 8.10 A wet overflow rod mill was operated at 75% of the critical speed and found to draw 8.5 Estimate: Volume of mill occupied by the new charge  Mill capacity after removal of rods. 8.11 A rod mill was fed from a cone crusher at the rate of 250 The total power required in the operation The diameter of the mills. 8.12 A wet rod mill (2.44 Grindability Laboratory Test Data: Between the rod and ball mill an intermediate separator in the form of an hydrocyclone was placed. Determine power at the pinion shaft (including loss due to bearings, friction etc) for: Wet rod mill grinding Wet ball mill grinding.