The leaching of gold in thiourea–thiocyanate solutions has been studied by the rotating-disc technique using ferric sulfate as oxidant. The effects of initial concentrations of ferric, thiourea (Tu) and thiocyanate as well as temperature and pH on gold leaching rates were studied. An initial gold leaching rate in the order of 10−9
                     mol cm−2
                     s−1 was obtained at 25°C, which was higher than rates obtained when either ferric–thiocyanate or ferric–thiourea solutions were used separately. The synergistic effect was attributed to the formation of a mixed ligand complex Au(Tu)2SCN. Determinations of apparent activation energy indicate that the process was controlled by a combination of chemical reaction and diffusion in the mixed lixiviant system. Open circuit potentials show that thiocyanate stability is increased in the mixture.A possible alternative reagent to cyanide for gold leaching is thiocyanate, as first reported by The mechanism of dissolution of gold by ferric–thiocyanate solutions is directly linked to the auto-reduction process, in which ferric is spontaneously reduced to ferrous while oxidizing SCN Occasionally, the combination of lixiviants can produce a synergistic effect. Copper sulfate is a good coordinator for gold dissolution in thiosulfate solution compared to other oxidants ( The rotating disc technique was employed for leaching experiments. A gold disc (99.9% purity, 14.0 The gold leaching experiments were carried out in a cylindrical reactor immersed in a thermostatically controlled water bath. A 1.00 The standard conditions employed were a thiourea 5 Potential measurements between the gold disc and reference electrode (SCE) were made through a Luggin capillary using a Gamry Instrument PCI4G750 Potentiostat. The solution volume was 200 The FTIR Transmission spectra were recorded in the range of 4000–400 The effect of ferric sulfate concentration on the gold leaching rate in the presence of thiourea and thiocyanate is shown in In sulfuric acid solutions with ferric and thiocyanate present (e. g. thiocyanate only solutions), gold dissolves according to reaction In thiourea–thiocyanate solutions, the gold leaching rate remains constant with time, which means the mixed ligand exhibits behavior similar to thiourea solutions. Increasing ferric concentration leads to a small increase in the gold leaching rate when ferric sulfate concentration increases from 0.0055 Previously, SERS results suggested a possible formation of a mixed ligand complex [Au(Tu) When thiocyanate was added into the above solution, a band related to the stretching mode of sulfur in SCN The red shift of the C–N stretching mode band upon the addition and increase of thiocyanate indicates the increased character of the bond of C–N. This is interpreted as being caused by forming a new mixed ligand complex in the solution. The stability constants for the soluble species of Au(Tu) The effect of thiocyanate concentration on the gold leaching rate is shown in Due to the low thiourea concentration used (0.005 The results at various concentrations of thiourea at a fixed thiocyanate concentration of 0.01 To better understand the leaching process, the gold leaching rate for the mixed thiourea/thiocyanate solution compared with that in thiourea or thiocyanate only solutions is shown in It is easy to get the initial gold leaching rate from the results presented previously. These results are summarized in Previous electrochemical results indicate the lowest polarization resistance for gold dissolution at potentials of 0.3 and 0.4 Ferric ion forms complexes with SCN The rates observed are the same magnitude as reported for cyanide leaching of gold (typically, 10 The dissolution in thiocyanate only solution is very slow, which means that thiocyanate does not participate significantly in the direct dissolution of gold, rather thiocyanate must be assisting thiourea to increase the rate of dissolution, which again suggests that thiourea and thiocyanate have some synergistic effects and gold dissolves according to reaction To understand the synergistic effect further, the open circuit or mixed potential of gold was measured over time. The reverse occurs in the thiourea system as shown in In the mixed system with thiocyanate concentration from 0.005 to 0.02 The mixed potential measured at 20 By comparing the potential change with time in The effect of pH on gold dissolution in a mixed thiourea/thiocyanate solution is shown in The effect of temperature on gold dissolution is presented in To confirm the rate-controlling step, the effect of rotating speeds on gold dissolution was studied and the results are shown in The addition of small amounts of thiourea to thiocyanate–ferric solutions reveals a synergistic effect on the dissolution of gold. The dissolution rate is higher than those obtained when either ferric–thiocyanate or ferric–thiourea solutions are used separately at the concentrations used in the mixture. The synergistic effect is ascribed to the formation of a mixed ligand complex Au(Tu) The authors are grateful to