In mineral beneficiation, the mineral liberation spectrum of the plant feed conveys valuable information for adjusting operations, provided that it is available in minutes from particulate sampling. X-ray micro-tomography is the only technique available for unbiased measurement of composite particle composition (on a 3D basis). The bottleneck of current micro-tomographic systems is the X-ray scanning time (data acquisition) rather than the slice reconstruction time (data processing). An algorithm capable of reconstructing tomographic slices of composite mineral particles from a limited number of radiographic projections, thus significantly reducing the overall measurement time, is presented and demonstrated with numerical examples. The algorithm is cast around the discrete algebraical reconstruction technique and requires less than one tenth of the projection data needed by the currently used filtered back-projection methods, thus allowing a dramatic reduction of the scanning time.The metallurgical performance (metal recovery and concentrate grade) of an operating plant is determined by the liberation spectrum of the particles undergoing concentration and by the efficiency of the separation process. Ideally, maximum separation efficiency is achieved when particles are fully liberated. In practice, optimum liberation is always a compromise between ore mineralogy and energy required for comminution. The latter is often the most energy intensive and costly operation thus capable of compromising the profitability of the entire beneficiation process. In this contest, the possibility to assess the mineral liberation in the feed to the plant is a key factor for tuning the grinding systems at one side and to adjust the separation circuit at the other side. The potential of process mineralogy and automated laboratory characterization is recognized both by academia and industry ( The combined use of SEM measurements of areal-grades (QEM-Scan) or linear intercepts on transects (MLA) of polished sections of the particles is popular to assess mineral liberation. However, these methods provide biased estimates of liberation ( The use of X-ray micro-tomographic systems specifically designed for this purpose is very attractive. The principle of X-ray computed tomography is conceptually simple: the X-rays are attenuated differently while traversing the composite particles. The intensity of the X-ray signal is converted by a scintillator into light and recorded by a camera as a radiographic digital image. The object is then rotated by small angular steps and the radiographic operation repeated each time until completing full rotation. The collection of several hundred projections is employed to reconstruct the inner structure of the particles. Commercial tomographic system are available from a number of makers but a tomographic system can easily be built in-house by assembling the three basic components (one cone beam micro-focus X-ray source, one traditional CCD or CMOS based X-ray digital camera or flat panel, and one precision air-bearing rotation stage) in a lead-wall cabinet for X-ray shielding. Prof. J. Miller's research group at the University of Utah introduced the micro CT system into the mineral processing laboratory ( Unfortunately, the current tomographic systems are not yet fast enough to provide liberation data in a few minutes or less, as desirable for a practical use in plant operations. The bottleneck is the scanning time required to take a sufficient number of radiographic projections with a full coverage around 360° of the rotating sample. Often, several hundred projections are needed to be taken to satisfy the minimum sampling requirements of the filtered back projection (FBP) algorithm that is the standard slice reconstruction method. The minimum number of projections prescribed to strictly respect the Nyquist sampling frequency principle is: number of projections Roughly, one can envisage that even with a routinely and well-established workflow protocol for sampling, scanning, reconstructing and post-processing the tomographic digital volume, not less than a few hours are necessary for having the liberation data available for decision making. Most of the time burden is ascribed to X-ray scanning. When the number of projections is less than the prescribed minimum, the filtered back projection yields a reconstruction that is pathologically affected by radial streak artifacts and unsuitable for automatic image analysis procedures. The alternative strategy proposed herewith is to reconstruct the tomographic slices with a method that is much less demanding in terms of number of radiographic projections and thus appropriate to cut the scanning time and in turn the overall time required for having usable liberation data. The method uses prior-knowledge of the attenuation of the mineral species that can be easily acquired with one single standard tomography. The novelty proposed is in the slice-reconstruction algorithm. Therefore, the method does not require any modification of the hardware of the existing tomographic scanning machines. Indeed, prior knowledge of the single mineralogical species allows introducing the additional constraints needed to significantly reduce the number of projections required for a high quality segmented reconstruction. Rather than de-convolving the integral information content of the projections with the inverse of the Radon transform and its filtered back-projection implementation (Xiaochuan When the solution sought should take discrete values the method is referred to as Discrete Algebraical Reconstruction Technique (DART). A vast literature exists on the DART methods where a binary (0,1) solution is required ( The constraint prescribing that the sought image should contain pixels taking luminosity in a small discrete set is an extremely valuable a priori information and allows to reconstruct using few tomographic projections. The number of columns of the ART system matrix is the number of pixels of the square (N Formally, for continuous tomography, the ART equality constraints are: is the column vector of pixel values of the sought image, the ((n is the sparse, real-valued matrix of the severely under-determined tomographic reconstruction problem, is the projection vector. In short, the ij-th element of the system matrix S is non-zero if the i-th ray beam passes through the j-th pixel. Normally the sample undergoing tomography is a cylinder then only the coefficients corresponding to a disk contained in the square image domain of the slice are non-zero. S is sometimes referred to as tomographic projection matrix. The element s In practice, in an operating plant the mineral species and their attenuation are known and the sought slice image has a discrete number of gray levels. Thus the pixel values in the vector x (see Eq. To simplify the formalization we assume, at this stage, that composite particles are made up of two mineral phases: a high density valuable phase with attenuation H and a low density phase with attenuation L. The feasible values of the unknown vector are {0, L, H}. The value 0 represent the void. However, the model can be extended to more than two solid phases as untangled in The general terms of the i-th equality constraint of the original continuous ART problem is: By introducing a change of variable the equality can be re-written as a Discrete ART (DART) problem. In addition, the system of Eq. The DART problem is solved as a Boolean problem, with y taking values in {0, 1}. The binary solution y is then post processed as: And x — the vector of the pixel values of the reconstructed slice image — is retrieved. The image that arises from the solution of Eqs. In contrast, images reconstructed with continuous tomography have real valued pixels and require further filtering and use of threshold and segmentation procedures to allocate the pixels to the void or to one of the two mineralogical phases with different x-ray linear attenuation coefficients. Eq. where ϵ (ϵ For the solution of Eq. As a tutorial and illustrative example, the sparsity pattern of the matrix of constraints (see Eq. The fraction of non-zero elements over the total number of elements in real S matrices is often of 10 The proposed methodology has been presented for the case of two mineralogical species aforementioned with the labels L and H. However, in the real word of mineral processing the operator rarely deals with one single valuable phase (H) and most frequently with solid particles containing several mineral species (i.e. multi-phase particles). Some phases may be valuable others may be penalizing impurities for the concentrate-smelter. In X-ray computed tomography a prerequisite for ‘sensing’ the different phases is the diverse attenuation to the X-rays; that is usually attained when there exists a good contrast in their density. Two different mineral species with very close density cannot be distinguished by X-ray tomography. In the case in which a particle bears two species of interest with different density — e.g. linear attenuation H1 and H2 in addition to the gangue L, the model presented above can be straight-forward extended provided that the equality ( These constraints prescribe that a pixel can be H1 or H2 or L or 0. The DART problem is solved as a Boolean problem, with y taking values in {0, 1}. The binary solution y is then post-processed as: This extension does add computational complexity to the problem but the solution remains at the reach of a workstation. The proposed DART method can be extended to distinguish even more mineral species by intuitive modifications of Eqs. In this section the DART method proposed for fast tomographic reconstruction is demonstrated with a more complex numerical example. The aim is to reconstruct a slice of a sample of composite particles containing particles of pure phase L, pure phase H and middling particles both looked and exposing the inclusions. The phantom image is 512 For comparison in In The relative error decreases further at the increase of the number of projection view angles but the computational effort for the solution of the problem increases as a consequence and requires major hardware resources. The reconstructions reported in this paper were obtained with a low-cost workstation based on a multicore E5 Intel Xeon processor. We consider that the size of the image processed (512 Preliminary numerical experiments on synthetic data show that DART methods offer the possibility to limit the number of X-ray projections necessary to reconstruct a slice image in a tomographic system applied to the characterization of composite particles. By and large, our initial experiences show that discrete tomography cast around the algebraical reconstruction methods allows reconstructions with one fraction of the number of projections required by the traditional continuous filtered back projection method that is in use today. In turn, the scanning time — that is the bottleneck of a tomographic acquisition — is reduced proportionally. Conservatively assuming that one X-ray projection requires 2 Here the proposed DART method is demonstrated numerically with a two mineralogical phase synthetic sample. In The discrete tomography method proposed still requires validation with real noisy tomographic projections and comparison with continuous tomography. This is currently under investigation. Undoubtedly the numerical preliminary experiments show that also a limited set of projections encompass the information sufficient to recover the sample's morphological and mineralogical composition and methods of tomographic reconstruction alternative to those in use today deserve attention. No modification of the hardware of the existing X-CT machines is required. In addition — due to the lower number of projections taken — the X-ray detector component is subjected to less stress and lasts longer. % Img is the N % Sys is the tomographic system matrix N % L & H are the X-ray linear attenuation coef. of the low and high density mineral species. % N_proj is the number of projection rays. N_pix N_fs parfor i: 1: N_fs % parallel loop to generate and save feasible solutions. r %build new matrix with projection order given by r by re-arranging the rows of Sys. Aeq(r,1:2:N_pix Aeq(r,2:2:N_pix Aeq beq Y X save(filename(i));% save binary solutions X. end % end parallel for loop. % load files to retrieve N_fs solutions X and sum up X_sum. X % Img % Img is the DART solution image. 