The government of Quebec (Canada) is trying to find a useful outlet for the mixed waste glass pilling up in its landfills. One solution to consider is the use of fine glass powder from mixed waste glass as alternative cementitious materials (ACM) in concrete, using an open-loop circular-economy principle.
                  To quantify the environmental feasibility of this concept, life cycle assessment (LCA) methodology, in combination with a real case study (i.e., a concrete sidewalk in Montreal, Canada) are both assessed. More specifically, two different scenarios are compared, the business-as-usual (BAU) concrete production model, and a glass powder (GP) concrete production process model. All modeling efforts are performed using SimaPro 8.2 software, the Ecoinvent 3.2 database and the IMPACT 2002 + impact method. Finally, a Monte Carlo simulation, in addition to different sensitivity analyses, are carried out to assess the influence of data uncertainty and key parameter changes, such as the distance from suppliers, potential lifetime extension of the concrete, and possible particulate emissions during GP production.
                  Results show the environmental benefits of using GP as an ACM in terms of every indicator. Moreover, the significant contribution of cement production in the environmental burden of concrete is noted. It appears as the main hotspot in most midpoint indicators, and in all four endpoint indicators. It is especially highlighted as a global warming indicator, with 74% of the greenhouse gasses (GHG) related to cement production for the BAU scenario and 68% for the GP scenario. The emissions of particles into the atmosphere (such as CO2, NOx, and SOx) from the clinker kiln chimney plays a major role in the overall environmental impact of concrete production. Another key result is the importance of transportation distance of the base materials, which could reverse the conclusion.
                  The originality of this paper relies on the environmental assessment of the up-cycling of GP as a supplementary cementitious materials (SCM) in concrete. Indeed, this study allows for a better understanding of environmental impact of concrete and highlights the extent to which environmental benefits remain when mixed waste glass is used in an open-loop circular-economy context. At a larger scale, this study aims to encourage all municipalities/government that are struggling with common waste – such as mixed waste glass -- to find industrial symbioses at a local scale.A circular economy (CE) in one of the main concepts that emerged from the waste and resources debate ( In Quebec, Canada, despite a recovery rate of glass near 85% ( However, finely ground glass is now known to have pozzolanic properties ( To analyze the potential environmental burdens associated with concrete production, life cycle assessment (LCA) is an appropriate tool to investigate the potential environmental impacts via a holistic approach through the entire life cycle, from materials extraction to end of life. This approach is often used to assess the environmental burdens of non-conventional concrete ( The assessed concrete in this study is based on a sidewalk construction project carried out for the House of Sustainable Development in Montreal, Canada. The Research Laboratory on Alternative Cementitious Materials (LMCA) at the University of Sherbrooke designed a concrete mixture containing GP (fulfilling the sidewalk construction standards) to be poured into new sidewalk sections. Many LCA studies were found dealing with roadways, but only a few focused on pedestrian pavements ( The aim of this study is to challenge the environmental benefit of using open-loop CE principles in the waste management of glass, using a real case study that is laboratory tested in order to ensure the functional equivalence. Therefore, this paper analyses and compares the life cycle environmental impacts of two concrete applications; a conventional concrete sidewalk, referred to as the business as usual (BAU) scenario, and one containing a GP concrete sidewalk, referred to as the GP scenario. To reach this paper's objectives, two scenarios were modeled and compared using the following methodology, in accordance with the following LCA standards (     The goal of this study is to determine the potential benefits due to the use of GP as an SCM in concrete, to identify major contributors of the overall environmental impact of sidewalks, and to define the main sensitive parameters of the results. The functional unit (FU) is defined as follows: Providing an adequate service to pedestrians over a 1 m long by 2 m wide sidewalk for 40 years. The sidewalk shall comply with Canadian “best construction practices” ( The software used to conduct the assessment was SimaPro 8.2, and the database used to model both sidewalk product systems was Ecoinvent 3.2 ( The sidewalk production refers to the exploitation (extraction, mining, etc.) of raw materials necessary for the required concrete mix ingredients. The sub-processes, like coarse aggregate mining, sand mining, and concrete mixing, are connected through transport processes such as freight transportation by road or by train. The production life cycle stage of both sidewalks stops before the construction phase.  The production of the transformation of post-consumer glass into fine glass powder is modeled following the recycled content cut-off approach ( The use phase refers to everyday practices in urban areas, like sweeping, snow clearing, salting, washing, and maintenance. They are not assessed in the model because they were considered to be the same from one scenario to another, and hence equal (as both scenarios have the same life span). Thus, exclusion of these sub-processes from the model does not affect the comparison. Regarding the possible gain in performance that the glass powder could confer to the concrete; the hypothesis of assuming the same maintenance operations is optimistic with regard to the BAU scenario and pessimistic for the GP scenario. The end of life refers to the dismantling, transportation, and final disposal in a landfill of the sidewalk at the end of its service life. The concrete layer and the granular subbase are both sent to the landfill without any reuse in both the BAU and GP scenarios. The selected impact method to assess and compare the potential environmental impacts of both cases is IMPACT 2002+ ( 15 midpoint indicators that translate the impacts into environmental media via a problem-oriented approach, such as: global warming, acidification, ecotoxicity, nutrification, eutrophication, etc. 4 endpoint indicators that translate the damage of those midpoint indicators into issues of concern, such as human health, climate change, natural resources, and ecosystem quality. Interpretation of the case study was carried out in section To identify key parameters that influence most of the outcomes, different hypotheses of the model were modified. The first sensitivity analysis involved changing the life cycle impact method by TRACI V2.1 ( The output of the results could also be affected by data from the model itself. So, to estimate the variability of the real case, different scenarios were modeled, thus changing the inventory of the base GP scenario (see Four main parameters were modified independently for each scenario. The first parameter that was modified is the distance supplies had to travel for the concrete main ingredients (cement, sand, and gravel), in order to show the influence of transportation on the results (scenario 1). The new distances are based on real life suppliers. Then, as mentioned before, the use of GP as an SCM in concrete can significantly enhance its durability. This can be seen when testing and comparing our two case study concretes with various performance indicators. Monte Carlo analysis is a method used to assess the propagation of data uncertainty through the final results (  “Concrete layer” represents the production and transportation of the concrete. It includes the production and transportation of cement, aggregates, water, glass powder, and chemicals. It also includes the energy needed to mix all of those materials and to produce the concrete. “Subbase materials” refer to the production and transportation of the polystyrene, geotextile, and gravel included in the subbase layers. “Construction” represents all processes and materials used during the construction of the sidewalk, such as excavation, soil compacting, and wooden formwork. “End of life” represents transportation to the landfill and the emissions linked to the dismantling and retaining of materials in the landfill. The first observation that can be made is that the GP scenario always has the lowest potential environmental burden for every midpoint indicator compared to the BAU scenario. The biggest difference can be noted on the global warming (GW) indicator, with a reduction of 20%, whereas the lowest reduction is of respiratory organics (RO) (3%). The major contribution of concrete over most of the impact is explained by the cement production in itself. Indeed, for GW, T-ACI/NUT, RI, N-CA, and A-ACI, the fabrication process of clinker -- the main ingredient of cement -- requires a combustion of various fuels in a furnace reaching around 1450° Celsius. The combustion emits large quantities of different pollutants into the atmosphere, such as carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and sulfur oxides. These pollutants are responsible for producing acidic rains (T-ACI/NUT and A-ACI). Small particulates under 2.5pm (RI) and dioxin 2,3,7,8 tetrachlorodibenzo-p- (TCDD) are also emitted and have carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic effects on human health (CA and N-CA). The production of the hard coal, used as fuel in the furnace, also appears as a major environmental contributor. Besides being a non-renewable energy resource (NRE), hard coal mining generates significant aluminum pollution due to the blasting process, which then exposes living species, contributing to the ecotoxicity indicators (A-ECO and T-ECO). Because of phosphate spoil in water during various mining operations, hard coal is also a main contributor to eutrophication (A-EUT). The mineral extraction indicator is not driven by the extraction of concrete base materials but rather by nickel extraction from various background processes. Indeed, the nickel mineral is proceeded as a ferronickel and then used in steel production to build infrastructure. In our case study, it is the steel that is used in cement or concrete factories and machineries. The ionizing radiation (IR) refers to the radioactivity that comes from the treatment of low level radioactive waste and nuclear electricity production, which are used in multiple background processes of every process and material used in the model. This is mainly driven by Quebec's electricity consumption mix, which imports a small portion of energy from Ontario and from the northeastern United States (NPCC), both using nuclear power plants. The emission in air of aromatic hydrocarbons during polypropylene production explains the high contribution of the geotextiles in the carcinogens indicator (CA). The construction has a clear and significant impact on two indicators. As expected, land occupation (LO) is driven by the land use required to produce the wooden products needed for the formwork. The volatile organic compound (VOC) emissions during the soil compaction process affect the respiratory organics (RO) indicator. Ozone layer depletion (OLD) is driven by halon and CFC leakage during petroleum production, which is used in multiple processes of the product system requiring petroleum or diesel fuel consumption (for machines or heat), such as clinker production, the construction and dismantling of machinery, or the freight. Regarding GP, its environmental impact should be mainly driven by the electricity production needed to crush the glass into a fine powder. This production being done in Quebec, where most electricity is generated from hydropower; so the contribution of GP to the overall environmental impact of concrete is low. It goes from 0.1% on LO up to 2.9% on IR. Regarding the influence of transportation, it is particularly significant on ecotoxicity indicators (around 20% in T-ECO and 10% on A-ECO), mainly because of the brake wear and tire emissions.  Using a different life cycle impact method, in this case TRACI over IMPACT 2002+, shows no significant differences (see The sensitivity of the results was also tested using four variations of the GP scenario (explained in  The Monte Carlo analysis allows us to see the propagation of the uncertainty among the results and gives an indication of the robustness of our conclusions. For midpoint indicators, the uncertainty propagation can significantly affect indicators like RO, IR, CA, and OLD. It can be explained by looking at  The use of post consumed mixed glass, in an open-loop circular approach as a supplementary cementitious material, can reduce the overall environmental impact of concrete production and use. The LCA performed on a pedestrian sidewalk shows reductions in every environmental indicator, midpoint as well as endpoint. For instance, the concrete containing GP allows a greenhouse gases emission reduction of 20% (in CO Nevertheless, the perpetual debate regarding the waste glass management system to implement in Quebec remains to be answered. The low quality of the waste glass, resulting from the collection system in place, and the difficulty to find a market for glass product makes the closed-loop approach questionable in terms of environmental benefits. When most of the waste glass comes from imported goods, it is reasonable to question the environmental benefit of a container deposit system, or an intensive waste glass sorting system, to ship to a faraway glass making industry. This is especially true when there is the possibility to up-cycle this low quality mixed waste glass to replace a relatively high environmental impact material, in an industrial symbiosis approach. The authors strongly suggest that to provide recommendations on the circular approach that could be implemented, it is necessary to perform an analysis of waste glass management in Quebec that grasps its environmental, economic, and social implications. This analysis will need to consider the actual waste glass steam qualities to find a global functional unit to compare different waste glass management systems combinations with regard to the demand for closed-loop recycling (returnable bottles, glass cullet) and open-loop recycling (SCM, glass, wool, etc.) products. On a larger scale, this study encourages municipalities or governments struggling with waste disposal of materials such as mixed glass in order to establish local symbiosis and promote upcycling and a circular approach. The authors would like to acknowledge the CRIB (Center de Recherche sur les Infrastrucres du Béton) Research center and the Industrial Research Chair (SAQ de valorisation du verre dans les matériaux) at the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at