Complications, including nonunion and avascular necrosis, are relatively common after internal fixation of a femoral neck fracture. Young patients are particularly impacted by these complications as salvage options often result in a suboptimal functional result. The quality of reduction appears to be of primary importance; however, it is unknown whether the choice of internal fixation affects the incidence of complications. In this article, we present the rationale and evidence for available internal fixation options. Current evidence is insufficient to recommend an optimal method of internal fixation, and this review demonstrates the need for high-quality randomised, controlled trials to study this problem.Intracapuslar femoral neck fractures typically occur from high-energy mechanisms in young patients and low-energy falls in the elderly population. In the elderly population, the focus of treatment shifted away from internal fixation towards arthroplasty after multiple level-1 studies demonstrated improved functional outcomes and reduced reoperation rates in the arthroplasty cohort Implants for internal fixation of intracapsular femoral neck fractures can be divided into 3 groups: multiple cancellous screws, fixed angle devices that allow sliding/compression, and fixed angle devices that do not allow for sliding/compression. Multiple cancellous screws may be placed in a variety of configurations including parallel partially threaded screws, parallel fully threaded screws, and Pauwel screws (a trochanteric lag screw followed by multiple screws parallel to the neck). Fixed angle devices that allow for compression include sliding hip screws and certain intramedullary nails. Fixed angle devices that do not allow for compression are the dynamic condylar screw, proximal femoral locking plates, and blade plates. The choice of which device to use is controversial with advocates of both cancellous screws and fixed angle devices. When choosing a device, the surgeon must consider the mechanical performance of the implant, the ability of the implant to allow for dynamic interfragmentary compression, and the ease of use and familiarity of the device. Additionally, the surgeon must consider patient and injury factors such as fracture pattern (e.g. Pauwels angle), amount and location of comminution, presence of an ipsilateral femoral shaft fracture, and bone quality. This review focuses on the available biomechanical and clinical evidence regarding multiple cancellous screws and fixed angle devices for the treatment of femoral neck fractures. Multiple cancellous screws are the most commonly used implant in the fixation of femoral neck fractures Proponents of fixed angle devices cite the greater strength of these devices (see biomechanical section below), particularly in vertical shear fracture patterns (Pauwel III) and basilar neck fractures. These implants may have a greater ability to resist varus angulation and inferior displacement of the head fragment than traditional inverted triangle screw configurations. Additionally, proponents of fixed angle devices argue that they may have superior mechanics in femoral neck fractures with comminution and in patients with osteopenia. However, these devices are technically challenging to implant and require an open approach specifically for implant insertion with a greater associated blood loss. If an anterolateral approach (Watson-Jones) is used for reduction, then the implant may be placed through the same incision. However, if a direct anterior approach (Smith-Petersen) is used for reduction, then a separate lateral incision is used for implant placement. Similarly to screw configurations, not all fixed angle devices are created equal. This group of implants is diverse, particularly with regard to the amount of interfragmentary compression that is allowed. On one end of the spectrum, the sliding hip screw allows for interfragmentry compression until the screw threads contact the barrel (typically 17 Biomechanical studies provide important information when choosing an implant for fixation of a femoral neck fracture. Biomechanical parameters such as the overall strength and degree of fragment deformation are important and need to be considered in conjunction with all parameters. While the biologic response to mechanical stimuli is important in many fractures, it is paramount in femoral neck fractures. For instance, in a biomechanical study, proximal femoral locking plates were found to be the only implant that was strong enough for physiologic loading The majority of biomechanical studies demonstrate that fixed angle devices outperform multiple cannulated screws. Aminian et al. created a vertically oriented femoral neck fracture in cadaveric femurs and subjected this model to incremental and cyclical loading Most commonly used screws are placed in an inverted triangle configuration with partially threaded screws placed at the periphery of the femoral neck. However, the stiffness of the construct can be modulated by using a Pauwel screw configuration or strategically placed fully threaded screws. In a biomechanical study, Pauwel screws, which include a trochanteric lag screw followed by screws placed parallel to the femoral neck, were 70% stiffer than parallel screws A number of non-comparative studies have reported on the clinical outcomes after fixation of femoral neck fractures with a variety of nontraditional fixed angle devices. A 130-degree blade plate was used to fix 34 femoral neck fractures in young patients The optimal amount of interfragmentary compression to achieve femoral neck union without significant shortening is unknown. Zlowodzki et al. reported that a healed yet shortened femoral neck resulted in poorer functional outcome scores compared to patients who healed in an anatomic position Few comparative clinical studies exist to guide implant choice for fixation of femoral neck fractures. The entirety of the literature is represented by European randomised, controlled trials from the late 1990s and some more recent retrospective cohort studies. The older, more robust randomised studies are limited by the inability to generalise to our young patient population as they were performed on an elderly population with displaced fractures that would now more likely be treated with arthroplasty. Two recent studies have compared fixed angle devices to multiple cancellous screws in younger patients; however, both are retrospective studies and limited by selection bias. In an older randomised, controlled trial, 104 elderly patients with displaced femoral neck fractures were treated with 4 multiple cancellous screws or a sliding hip screw with a derotational screw In these young patients with high-energy mechanisms, 2 retrospective studies provide information on the complication rate after fixation with a fixed angle device versus multiple cancellous screws. Liporace et al. performed a retrospective review of 62 young (age range 19–64) patients with mostly displaced vertical femoral neck fractures The optimal implant for internal fixation of femoral neck fractures is currently unknown. There are advantages and disadvantages to both fixed angle devices and multiple cancellous screws. Femoral neck fractures are a bimodal injury with the majority of patients being elderly with low-energy mechanisms. Although a substantial amount of literature exists on the ideal treatment of low-energy femoral neck fractures, these injuries are a different clinical entity from high-energy femoral neck fractures in young patients. Currently, there exists a paucity of observational studies and no level-I trials to guide treatment of our young patients with femoral neck fractures. Therefore, further studies are required, particularly in the young population, to determine the optimal implant for treatment of these difficult and potential debilitating injuries. Robert V. O’Toole was a paid consultant for the company/supplier iMDS and Smith & Nephew and provided research support as a PI for the company/supplier Synthes and Stryker. He was also a board member/committee appointee for the society Orthopaedic Trauma Association. C. Max Hoshino received royalties from the company/supplier Lippincott and was also a paid consultant for the company/supplier Smith & Nephew.