Matrix extracellular phosphoglycoprotein (MEPE) is an extracellular matrix protein that was first detected in tumor-induced osteomalacia (TIO). Investigations in mice revealed that MEPE is expressed in bone and teeth in a maturation-dependent manner, reaching its maximum during mineralization. However, from knockout experiments, although it has become clear that MEPE might function as a mineralization inhibitor, the exact mechanism of action is still unclear. Even less is known about the regulation of MEPE in men. Therefore, we have studied the time- and maturation-dependent expression of MEPE in two human osteoblast culture systems, the osteosarcoma cell line HOS 58 and primary trabecular osteoblasts. Cells were cultured for up to 29 days, and the influence of beta-glycerophosphate (bGP), ascorbate, transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta), BMP-2, and dexamethasone was studied. HOS 58 cells showed no significant effect on MEPE gene expression up to 5.0 mM, but a significant inhibition was revealed at 10 and 20 mM, when osteocalcin (OC) expression was maximal. Under the same conditions, primary human osteoblasts showed no effect on MEPE gene expression. However, when cultured in the presence of 5 mM beta-glycerophosphate, ascorbate, and dexamethasone for 29 days, which are similar conditions to those described by Owen in his differentiation model in rat osteoblasts, a progressive inhibition of MEPE gene expression to 20% of the maximum was observed. Increasing osteocalcin expression indicated advancing differentiation.
                  In conclusion, in contrast to the results in mice, when MEPE was maximally expressed during mineralization, in the human system, this factor seems to be maximally active in the proliferation and early matrix maturation phase. It was, however, strongly suppressed, associated with the mineralization phase.In recent years, a new regulatory system of phosphate and bone metabolism has been described that is presently under intensive investigation In mice and rats, it has been shown that MEPE–OF45 is increasingly expressed with progressive osteoblast differentiation There is very little information on the expression and regulation of MEPE in human osteoblasts. Therefore, we have studied the expression of MEPE in two well-characterized culture models of human osteoblasts Bone specimens were obtained from the iliac crest of four patients between 30 and 78 years of age, two men and two women, undergoing corrective surgery following fracture. None of the patients showed any signs of bone or joint disease, or autoimmune disorder. Informed consent was obtained from all patients, and the study was approved by the local ethical committee. All cell culture media and fetal calf serum (FCS) were purchased from Biochrom (Berlin, FRG). Cell culture disposables were purchased from either Nunc (Wiesbaden-Biebrich, FRG) or Greiner (Solingen, FRG), and medium supplements (antibiotics, glutamine) from GIBCO/BRL (Eggenstein, FRG). Standard laboratory reagents were purchased from Sigma (Deisenhofen, FRG), unless noted otherwise. The human osteosarcoma cell line HOS 58 was derived as described Primary human bone cell cultures were prepared from bone specimen, as previously described HOS 58 cells from passage number 68 were plated in 6-well plates with ISCOVE medium supplemented with 10% FCS, 1% glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 U/ml streptomycin to reach confluence at day 7 (1.3 × 10 Cells from the explants grown on the culture dish were released from the surface after 14–21 days, divided into two 75-cm Primary human bone cells in second passage were plated at a density of 4 × 10 Differentiation dependent on time in culture was investigated during continuous treatment with a combination of FCS (10%, PAA, Cölbe, Germany), bGP (10 mM), vitamin-C-phosphate (10 μmol/l, Sigma, Taufkirchen, Germany), and Dex (10 Total RNA was prepared using the RNeasy-Mini-Kit from Qiagen (Hilden, Germany). cDNA was synthesized from 1 μg of total RNA in a 40-μl reaction mixture containing 5× RT-buffer, 0.1 M DTT, dCTP, dGTP, dATP, and dTTP, each at 0.1 mM (Roche, Mannheim, Germany), 40 U of RNAse inhibitor (Roche), 200 U of M-MLV reverse transcriptase (Gibco BRL, Karlsruhe, Germany), and 8 nmol of poly-(dT) Semiquantification of RT-PCR products was done using a competitive PCR approach by including exogenous DNA competitors (“mimics”) as an internal control, as described before All values are expressed as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Comparison between groups was made by using the Mann–Whitney In this project, we have investigated the developmental and time-dependent gene expression of MEPE in comparison to the osteoblast characteristic proteins AP and OC in two cell culture systems. First, we used the human osteosarcoma cell line HOS 58, which we have been investigating extensively In an initial experiment, we had observed an increase of MEPE expression after stimulation with 5 mM bGP at day 14 in culture, whereas 3 mM bGP or shorter culture periods showed no effect (data not shown). Therefore, we performed an experiment with different concentrations of bGP at day 14 in culture to determine the optimal conditions for MEPE gene expression; the results of which are summarized in We then turned to primary human osteoblasts. First, we wanted to reproduce the effect of different concentrations of b-GP on MEPE, AP, and OC expression observed in HOS 58 cells. We choose a 28-day culture period, which corresponds approximately to the 14 days for HOS 58 cells. These data are shown in We then investigated short-term stimulation (24 h) with different factors to see whether any regulatory influence on MEPE expression could be detected. Primary human osteoblasts in the second passage were cultured for 28 days. For the final 24 h, the different factors were added separately to the medium. The results of this experiment are shown in AP expression was not significantly influenced by any of the short-term stimulations In a final attempt to study the regulation of MEPE expression, we chose a model of osteoblast differentiation using a long-term 29-day culture with continuous stimulation of first passage cultures with a combination of FCS, bGP, vitamin-C-phosphate, and Dex. These conditions are identical to those used by Owen et al. As demonstrated in In 1990, Owen developed his well-known model of in vitro differentiation of osteoblasts using a rat system. He formulated three stages of differentiation: proliferation, matrix synthesis and maturation, and mineralization. These stages were associated with different levels of AP and OC gene expression Thus, we compared the time course of expression observed in the last experiment with the expression sequence during the in vitro differentiation published by Owen et al. MEPE is a protein of the extracellular matrix that was first described in tumor-induced osteomalacia where it is highly expressed. Current knowledge suggests that the excess of MEPE may be responsible for the mineralization defect observed under these conditions. This can be concluded from MEPE knockout mice, where an increase of trabecular bone mass was observed yet there was no derangement of phosphate metabolism Argiro et al. In contrast to the data in mice, in the rather differentiated human osteosarcoma cell line HOS 58, MEPE expression was suppressed by high concentrations of bGP. The increasing differentiation under these conditions was confirmed by high OC expression. However, HOS 58 cells are not a suitable model for studying mineralization. Although we extensively investigated this cell line This inhibitory effect by high bGP concentrations on MEPE gene expression was not observed in primary human osteoblasts under similar conditions despite, once again, an increase of osteocalcin gene expression. Yet, when human osteoblasts were cultured similarly to Owen's differentiation model (FCS, bGP, ascorbate, Dex), a significant inhibitory effect was observed with increasing culture time. The time course of AP and OC expression clearly shows increasing differentiation and is very similar to the data published by Owen et al. Has any additional clarification been obtained by the short-term stimulation experiments with TGF-beta, Dex, ascorbate, and BMP-2? We observed two significant effects concerning MEPE: stimulation by ascorbate, and inhibition with BMP-2. Short-term effects may not only differ from prolonged culture conditions, but are also dependent on the stage of differentiation BMP-2 seems to be a regulator of the terminal differentiation and mineralization phase In summary, in contrast to the data from mice, MEPE gene expression was progressively reduced during the time-dependent differentiation of primary human osteoblast cultured under adapted differentiation conditions developed by Owen et al. for rat calvarial cells. Together with the short-term stimulation results with ascorbate and BMP-2, it appears that the most active regulatory function of this gene in humans would be in the late proliferation and early matrix maturation phases. Parts of this study were presented at the Meeting of the German-Speaking Societies of Osteology in Göttingen, March 2003. We thank Shonna McKenzie for help with the English version of the manuscript.