In this study, leaching kinetics of Ovacık gold ore, which is the first project of what is potentially a large new mining industry in Turkey, has been investigated and major parameters have been determined using cyanide, thiourea and thiosulphate. The dissolution of gold is discussed in terms of extraction rates and reagent consumption during leaching.Ovacık gold mine will be the first gold project in Turkey. As with any new project, there has been controversy between miners and other groups on the environmental effects of cyanidation process. The company which will produce 3 t of gold and silver annually has recently started operation after an elaborate permission procedure. The sample on which the leaching experiments were performed was taken from Ovacık Gold Deposit (between Bergama and Dikili about 80 km from İzmir, in Turkey). After the determination of leachability characteristics of the ore, cyanidation, thioureation and thiosulphate leach were compared in terms of extraction rates and reagent consumption. Although over 90% of gold recovery was obtained from thioureation at short leach periods, thiourea consumption was found to be excessively high. Further reading about the subject can be found in the related literature Approximately 200 kg of sample in an average size of 150 mm lumps were collected. These lumps were crushed to −3 mm, riffled into 900 g lots. One 250 g lot was prepared for head grade, XRF, XRD and wet chemical analyses. The chemical composition of the ore is 14.09 g/t Au, 60.75 g/t Ag 94.77% SiO The leaching tests were conducted at ambient temperature in a mechanically agitated container. All leach parameters were tested to find optimum leach conditions. Reagent grade chemicals and tap water were used for test work at diverse solid/water ratio. All the tests were controlled by sampling at predetermined time intervals ( Cyanidation, thiourea and thiosulphate tests were performed to obtain optimum leach conditions. The result of the cyanidation tests related to gold recoveries is given The highest gold and silver extraction and the lowest thiourea consumption were obtained using 38 μ particle size ( As seen in All processes gave high recoveries above 90% which can be accepted for economic gold extraction. On the other hand, silver recovery in thioureation is less than cyanidation and thiosulphate leaching since rate of silver dissolution in acidic thiourea solution is lower. This may be noted a handicap for thiourea process for the ores containing economic silver minerals.  The use of cyanide for the extraction of gold from ores or concentrates has been the predominant treatment method and has proven to be very effective and economical for processing many types of gold bearing materials. In our case, its economics and easy leachability characteristics were again proven. Thiourea leaching of Ovacık ore was found to be technically possible with slightly better extraction rates. Dissolution rates were also faster than cyanidation and thiosulphate leaching. However, relatively high consumptions of thiourea and thiosulphate turn these processes into an expensive operation compared to cyanidation. In addition to that, there are difficulties in controlling leach system since effective gold dissolution requires narrow pH–Eh interval and sensitive SO The authors would like to acknowledge Newmont gold company for their help in providing samples.