Introduction
                  Tibial pilon fractures are often treated with initial external fixation followed by delayed definitive fixation. It has been postulated that the external fixator pin site may correlate with infection risk. The purpose of this study was to determine whether external fixator pin-site distance from definitive implants impacts the risk of deep infection in pilon fractures.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A retrospective cohort study was completed at a single level 1 trauma center. All patients ages 15–65 who underwent open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of a distal tibial fracture (AO/OTA Classification 43) from 2007 to 2013 were included. The final study population was 133 patients. The impact of external fixation pin location (relative to the definitive implant location) on postoperative infection was measured.
               
                  Results
                  As a continuous variable, the distance between the closest pin site and plate was 62.1 ± 44.1 mm in the infected cohort and 62.2 ± 49.7 mm in the non-infected cohort (p = 0.991). Further analysis was performed by grouping the distances into less than 0 mm (i.e. overlapping), >0.0 – 25.0 mm, >25.0 – 50.0 mm, >50.0 – 75.0 mm, >75.0 – 100.0 mm, and >100.0 mm of separation. No significant differences were noted with regards to the risk for infection.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Staged care has been shown to be an effective treatment strategy for AO/OTA type 43 fractures. There are many variables to consider when placing an external fixator construct. In this cohort, pin site distance from definitive implant location was not associated with an increase in deep infections.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level III.Despite advances in technique and implant technology, high-energy fractures of the distal tibial pilon remain a difficult problem for orthopaedic traumatologists. Due to a combination of soft tissue injury, articular disruption, and metaphyseal comminution, these fractures are predisposed to complications and poor outcomes, including deep infection. The predominant treatment algorithm for these fractures has evolved over time. Although Ruedi initially showed promising results in a group of skiers treated with immediate open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) [ Since the early 1990s the mainstay of treatment of these fractures has been application of an external fixator device as a temporizing measure followed by definitive fixation in a delayed fashion [ Pin site infection is the most common complication of external fixation, occurring up to 63% of the time [ The aim of the current study was to examine a large cohort of AO/OTA type 43 fractures to determine whether external fixator pin-site distance from definitive implants impacts the risk of deep infection [26]. A secondary goal of the study was to identify other potential risk factors for deep infection after definitive fixation. After institutional review board approval, a retrospective chart review was performed on 178 patients who underwent open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of a distal tibial fracture as defined by a type 43 fracture pattern by the AO/OTA classification from 2007 to 2013 by four fellowship-trained foot and ankle or trauma specialists at a single level 1 trauma center. The inclusion criteria were: (1) all sub-types of the 43 AO/OTA classification (2) age 15–65 years old. Patients were excluded if (1) no external fixation was placed prior to ORIF (2) postoperative ORIF radiographs did not show the external fixation pin holes and thus no measurements of pin-plate separation were possible (3) no postoperative clinical follow up of at least 6 months. Of the 178 patients who met inclusion criteria, 15 patients were excluded for not having prior external fixation placed, 17 for not having adequate postoperative radiographs, and 13 for having inadequate clinical follow-up, resulting in a final study population of 133 patients. The treatment protocol was at the discretion of the treating surgeon. Twelve percent (16/133) underwent placement of external fixation at an outside facility not associated with our health system. In these cases, the traumatologist managing the definitive fixation had no input into the design of the external fixator or pin placement. In each situation, a staged protocol was followed. The average interval from the time of external fixator placement to definitive fixation was 18 days. Intravenous antibiotics were administered upon admission for all open fractures and continued until final wound closure. At the time of definitive fixation, intravenous antibiotics were given within 1 h of incision and for an additional 24 h for closed wounds. At the time of definitive fixation, pin sites were debrided and irrigated. The skin was not closed and a sterile bandage was placed which was left for approximately two days. A chart review was performed to collect patient and injury demographics including diagnosis of diabetes mellitus, tobacco use, body mass index (BMI), gender, and the presence of an open fracture. Operative details were also recorded including tourniquet use, fibular ORIF, and time interval between external fixation and definitive ORIF. Initial injury radiographs, computed tomography (CT) scans, and postoperative ORIF radiographs were reviewed by two orthopaedic residents. To evaluate for pin-plate separation, measurements were made using Carestream PACS (Centricity; GE, Waukeshaw, WI), the hospital’s medical imaging database, in which magnification was accounted for by measurement tools within the software. Values from the tip of the plate to the closest tibial external fixation pin site were recorded to the closest 1/10th of a millimeter ( A postoperative infection was defined as a deep infection requiring irrigation and debridement similar to other published reports on this topic [ A biostatistician completed the statistical analysis of the collected data using SPSS (SPSS, version 22, Chicago, IL). All potential risk factors which might influence the rate of deep infection were evaluated for a univariate association using independent-samples t tests for continuous variables and chi-square calculation for discrete variables when possible. When the sample size was insufficient to support a chi-square calculation then a Fisher exact test was performed, and p-value recorded for a two-tailed test with clinical significance defined as p < 0.05. The number of days between external fixator placement and definitive fixation was evaluated as both a dichotomous variable (less than or equal to 7 days) as well as a continuous variable. Pin site-plate separation was evaluated as a nominal variable as discrete groups of separation (≤0, >0.0 – 25.0 mm, >25.0 – 50.0 mm, >50.0 – 75.0 mm, >75.0 – 100.0 mm, and >100.0 mm) using a Chi-square goodness of fit test to determine whether the observed sample differed significantly from expected values. Additional testing of pin site-plate separation as a continuous variable was performed with student’s t-test. There were 22 deep infections out of 133 patients (16.5%) which underwent irrigation and debridement ( When examining the impact of external fixation pin location on postoperative infection, there did not appear to be any contribution. As a continuous variable, the distance between the closest pin site and plate was 62.1 ± 44.1 mm in the infected cohort and 62.2 ± 49.7% in the non-infected cohort (p = 0.991). Further analysis was performed by grouping the distances into less than 0 mm (i.e. overlapping), >0.0 – 25.0 mm, >25.0 – 50.0 mm, >50.0 – 75.0 mm, >75.0 – 100.0 mm, and >100.0 mm of separation. No significant differences were noted with regards to the risk for infection. Additionally, there was no significant difference in the infection risk between fractures treated with provisional external fixation at an outside facility as compared to those treated at our institution (p = 0.238). Other factors which were not found to impact infection rate included the presence of pin-site infection treated with oral antibiotics (p = 0.226), or definitive fixation performed less than seven days after external fixation (p = 0.821). 81.8% (18/22) of patients with a postoperative infection had sustained an open fracture, which was found to be a significant risk factor (p < 0.0001). Additionally, fibular ORIF at the time of definitive tibial fixation was also found to be a significant risk factor for an infection. 21/22 (95.5%) of postoperative infections had undergone fibular fixation compared to 71/111 (64.0%) of cases which did not lead to future infection (p = 0.003). Neither fracture classification nor tourniquet use affected the infection risk, and patient age, gender, and medical comorbidities also did not reach significance. There is debate in the literature whether the distance between external fixator pin site and location of definitive fixation is a risk factor for post-operative infection. The primary objective of this study was to determine whether that distance was significant in pilon fractures treated with a staged protocol (AO/OTA type 43). The deep infection rate in the current study was 16.5%, and the published rate varies from 2% to 37% depending on the series. The infection rate documented within this cohort is comparable to recently-published rates in similar studies which has trended around 15% [ Shah and colleagues reported on a group of high-energy tibial plateau and pilon fractures treated at their institution. While they were able to show a relationship between infection rate and pin-site overlap, their statistical analyses were limited to the combination of plateau and pilon fractures; no analysis was performed for the individual fracture types. While both are prone to complications, tibial plateau and tibial pilon fractures are unique entities which require unique considerations in management. Combining these as a single cohort fails to account for this. Additionally, their analysis of the effect of pin site distance was limited to a binary classification as either “overlapping” or “nonoverlapping.” By doing this, pin sites located even a few millimeters from definitive plate fixation were classified as “nonoverlapping,” which may obscure differences in infection rates that might exist between pins located close to as opposed to far from definitive fixation. Of note, the rate of overlap in Shah’s cohort was 17% as compared to only a 6% rate of pin/plate overlap in our cohort. There are many variables to consider when developing external fixator constructs. A treating surgeon must use their discretion to weigh these variables. Lengthening the construct, spanning a joint, and placing pins in metaphyseal bone all may have negative impacts on the construct. With the current data available in the literature, it is difficult to weigh the risk of infection and then make quantitative decisions—if it lowers the risk of infection to not overlap a pin site with the definitive implants, how far away should it be? Ultimately, many variables are considered on a case by case basis based on the literature and treating surgeon’s experience. In this cohort, the pin site distance to definitive plate location did not affect the deep infection rate. In addition to the pin site to plate distance, several other possible risk factors for infection were investigated ( The influence of fibular ORIF was a particularly interesting finding as this has not been clearly established as a risk factor in the literature. One advantage of fibular stabilization is the restoration of fibular length which can be used as a guide to help anatomically reduce the tibia [ There are several limitations of this study. Any retrospective study is limited based on the available data in the medical record; it is possible that not all deep infections were captured. The relatively modest number of patients limited the ability to perform a multivariate analysis. One deficiency in our data that might provide additional insight is total operative time, which was not available for the majority of the cohort. Although presence of an open fracture was noted, the soft tissue injury was not further classified. Additionally, surgical approach was not assessed. Finally, the independent variable of the study was the presence of a deep infection. This was defined as the need to return to the operating room for a formal irrigation and debridement. In this cohort, this decision was based on individual surgeon discretion. Pilon fractures remain one of the most difficult fracture types to treat, often with high complication rates. Staged care with initial external fixation followed by delayed internal fixation has been shown to be an effective treatment strategy for AO/OTA type 43 fractures. There are many variables to consider when placing an external fixator construct. In this cohort, pin site distance from definitive implant location was not associated with an increase in deep infections. Ultimately, treating surgeons will need to use their judgement to determine the appropriate external fixation construct. Subsequent research may help inform these decisions. No other authors had conflicts of interest to report.