Low grade iron-bearing manganese ore is a potential solid waste resource. In this study, an innovative technology of suspension reductive roasting and magnetic separation (SRMS) was used to treat the iron-bearing manganese ore for comprehensive recovery of iron and manganese. The phase transformation of minerals in roasting process was systematically investigated by X-ray diffraction analyzer (XRD) and high-resolution transmission electronic microscope (HRTEM). The results show under the optimum conditions of reduction temperature 680 °C, reduction time 30 min, CO concentration 20% and particle size −0.9 mm, iron concentrate with iron grade 67.38% and iron recovery 87.14% and manganese concentrate with manganese grade 30.51% and manganese recovery 87.02% were obtained respectively. Magnetite converted from hematite was enriched in the concentrate of magnetic separation, while manganosite transformed from pyrolusite and braunite was enriched in the tailings of magnetic separation. SRMS can achieve full component utilization of iron-bearing manganese without residues.Manganese metal is widely used in the manufacturing of steel, batteries, ceramics industry [ The separation methods of iron and manganese for low grade iron-bearing manganese ore could be divided into several categories: physical separation process, direct reduction leaching process, smelting process of manganese rich ore slag, sulfuric acid roasting leaching process, magnetization roasting magnetic separation process. For physical separation process (gravity separation, magnetic separation and flotation), it was difficult to separate manganese and iron effectively due to the complex distribution characteristics of iron-bearing manganese ore [ In this study, a suspension reductive roasting process with high efficiency of heat and mass transfer was proposed for the separation of manganese and iron from low grade iron-bearing manganese ore. The effect of different magnetization conditions on the separation of manganese and iron was studied by precise adjustment of roasting conditions, and the phase transformation mechanism in the process of suspension magnetization calcination was studied by XRD and HRTEM. The materials used in the test are provided by a mine. In order to understand the chemical composition of the ore, the chemical multi-element analysis of the ore was carried out. The results were expressed in It can be seen from It can be seen from The chemical reaction of iron-bearing manganese ore in the process of magnetization roasting has been extensively studied, mainly including reduction of iron oxide and reduction of manganese oxide. The main reaction can be described in It can be known from The test was carried out as shown in X-ray diffraction analyzer (XRD) was used to analyze the phase change of main minerals under different roasting conditions [ Roasting temperature is a significant factor affecting the quality of roasting products and magnetic separation products. Under the conditions of feeding particle size of −0.9 mm, CO content of 20% and roasting time of 30 min, the influence of roasting temperature on the products of suspension reductive roasting and magnetic separation was explored, and the results were given in It can be summarized from The roasting time directly determined the roasting effect. The roasting time was too short to effectively reduce iron and manganese minerals, while the roasting time was too long to lead to over reduction. Under the conditions of feeding particle size of −0.9 mm, CO content of 20% and roasting temperature of 680 °C, the influence of roasting time on the products of suspension reductive roasting and magnetic separation was explored, and the results were delivered in It was manifested from The reductant content can directly affect the reduction reaction efficiency. In this study, CO was used as the reductant, and N  The ore particle size determined mineral dissociation degree, which also affectd the effect of reduction roasting and magnetic separation. Under the conditions of roasting time of 30 min, roasting temperature of 680 °C and CO content of 20%, the influence of roasting time on the products of suspension reductive roasting magnetic separation is explored, and the results are expressed in  To understand the phase change law of iron minerals in different stages, the iron phases analysis of raw ore, roasted ore and magnetic concentrate was carried out respectively, the results were shown in It can be seen from In order to explore the phase transformation of low grade iron-bearing manganese ore in the process of suspension reductive roasting, XRD analysis was carried out on the roasted materials under different roasting temperature and roasting time, the results were shown in   In order to further explore the crystal structure of manganese and iron minerals, the products of suspension reductive roasting were analyzed by TEM. The analysis results of magnetic separation concentrate and magnetic separation tailings were given in In view of the low grade iron-bearing manganese ore containing hematite, pyrolusite and braunite, a suspension reductive roasting and magnetic separation process was proposed. Under the optimized conditions of reduction temperature 680 °C, reduction time 30 min, CO concentration 20% and particle size −0.9 mm, the iron concentrate with iron grade of 67.38%, iron recovery of 87.14%, manganese grade of 30.51% and manganese recovery of 87.02% were obtained respectively. XRD and HRTEM analysis showed that during the magnetization roasting process, hematite was selectively reduced to magnetite, pyrolusite was successively reduced to braunite and manganosite. Magnetite was enriched in the magnetic separation concentrate, while manganosite was enriched in the magnetic separation tailings by magnetic separation, which realized the full component utilization of ferromanganese resources without tailings. This research work was supported by the None.