Nanofibers coated onto the bone implant as a dual-layered material has supported the regeneration of bone cells suitable for bone tissue engineering. Herein, we report the electrospinning of Poly(3-Hydroxybutyric acid)-Poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone) NanoFibrous Matrix (NFM) loaded with Layered Double Hydroxides (LDH) was coated over the Hydroxyapatite (HAP) pellet as a dual-layered nanofibrous bone graft for bone tissue engineering. The morphology of the fabricated dual-layered nanofibrous bone graft was characterized using scanning electron microscopy. Further, the existence of the LDH and HAP over the dual layer were analyzed with EDX spectrum. The in vitro biocompatibility and fluorescence activity of the dual −layered nanofibrous bone graft (NFM-LDH: HAP) against MG63 cell lines was studied over 1, 3, 7 and 14days. The osteoblast like MG63 cells assisted excellent cell adhesion and proliferation over both top and bottom layer of the dual-layered nanofibrous bone graft. In conclusion, the fabricated bone graft proved to be promising bone implant in tissue engineering application.The development of bone graft as a suitable substitute to autograft and allograft types still remains as the one of the most interesting technique in bone tissue engineering Magnesium nitrate hexahydrate (Mg(NO Aqueous solution of metal salts (Mg and Al nitrates with 1:2) was added drop wise at a rate of 1 The HAP pellet was made using the manually operated hydraulic press applied with 10 ton force and kept separately. The 6 The ethylene oxide sterilized scaffolds were further evaluated for the The cell attachment and proliferation of MG63 cell line were quantified for live cell staining assay at regular time intervals (1, 3, 7 and 14 Results are presented as mean The surface morphology of the fabricated bone graft was analyzed by Scanning electron microscopy ( The cell viability ( A dual-layered nanofibrous bone graft loaded with layered double hydroxides was fabricated using electrospinning and simple hydraulic press technique. The surface morphology of the top and bottom layers with their cross-section was exhibited to possess merged layers for easy cell adhesion. The dual-layered nanofibrous bone graft showed excellent cell proliferation of MG63 cells over both side of the graft and may be served as suitable alternative in bone tissue engineering application. The author RGP thanks CSIR, New Delhi for the award of SRF. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: