This work is part of an ongoing investigation being conducted to recover and upgrade rare earth elements (REE) minerals from iron oxide and silicate rich tailings generated at a South Australian mining operation. Detailed mineralogical characterisation via Quantitative Evaluation of Minerals by Scanning electron microscopy (QEMSCAN) of the tailings established the presence of low grade (<1 wt% REE), fine-sized REE minerals. The REE minerals (bastnäsite, monazite, florencite, stillwellite, brannerite, and stetindite) identified were in intimate associations with weakly ferromagnetic/strongly paramagnetic iron oxides (mainly hematite and goethite) and diamagnetic silicate (quartz, illite, and annite) minerals. Chemical analysis showed the tailings comprised 26.2% Fe, 18.6% Si, 3.9% Al, and 1.07% total rare earth oxides (TREO). A rougher–scavenger–cleaner magnetic separation process was deployed to produce two useful streams of REE minerals concentrate and tails using a wet high-intensity magnetic separator (WHIMS). Typical metallurgical results indicated the rejection of 25% of the iron oxides at 0.11 T, whilst producing a magnetic concentrate with TREO recovery of 51% at a grade of 1.25% and non-magnetic tails with TREO recovery of 41% at a grade of 1.08%, both at 1.74 T. Bastnäsite, monazite, florencite, and stillwellite minerals were confirmed to be paramagnetic, whilst stetindite and brannerite were found to be diamagnetic. Whilst the applied magnetic field intensity was the most important factor in the minerals’ magnetic separation efficacy, particle size distribution and mineralogical characteristics of ores also had significant effect. The findings exemplify both the challenges and opportunities for the beneficiation of complex, low grade REE-bearing iron oxide silicate rich tailings using WHIMS. They indicate that magnetic separation may be used to achieve modest preconcentration, the success of which is limited by the complex nature of the tailings and its concomitant magnetic properties, and thus warranting the need for further downstream processing (e.g., froth flotation) to produce cleaner, higher grade REE minerals concentrates for subsequent values extraction.Currently, about 8% of global REE (e.g., Ce, La, Nd, Pr, Sm, Y, and Eu) production comes from Australia, whilst approximately 85% comes from China and the remaining 7% is distributed among Brazil, India, U.S.A., South Africa, Russia, and Malaysia. Development of new REE projects is still underway in Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, Finland, Greenland, India, Kyrgyzstan, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Sweden, Tanzania, Turkey, and Vietnam ( The current rapid depletion of high grade REE resources implies that future supplies will have to be augmented by low grade ores and mining tailings to meet cut-off grades and demand ( Our knowledge of the mineralogical characteristics of REE-bearing IST is well established ( Magnetic separation has been an important technique usually employed in combination with other separation methods for the beneficiation and recovery of REE minerals ( The aim of this study is to exploit the differences in the magnetic properties between valuable REE and gangue minerals in the South Australian complex, low grade IST, with the target of producing higher grade REE minerals concentrates as the feed stream for subsequent recovery and upgrade via froth flotation. Specifically, the magnetic separation of IST by WHIMS and the characteristics of the resulting REE concentrates and the tails were investigated as a function of magnetic field intensity. A further goal was to characterise the magnetic properties of valuable REE minerals in the IST, specifically aimed at brannerite and stetindite, of which there is a paucity of data and knowledge in the literature. As a part of the overall IST beneficiation and enhanced REE minerals recovery strategy, complementary studies involving downstream froth flotation of the desired REE concentrate and the tails produced by WHIMS and complete process flowsheet, inculcating magnetic separation and froth flotation, are presented in a follow up publication [i.e., Part 2, ( Real South Australian plant IST samples were used in this study. A subsample of the material was pulped as received at 25 wt% and stirred at 800 rpm for 60 min, to de-agglomerate the particles. The particle size distribution of the agitated material was determined by laser diffraction using Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern Instruments Ltd., United Kingdom) and results presented in Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) analysis was conducted on representative samples to identify the distribution of elemental species to foster mineral phases identification. An aliquot of each sample was accurately weighed and fused with lithium metaborate at high temperature in platinum (Pt) crucible. The fused glass was then digested in nitric acid to ensure complete mineral dissolution before analysis. A nominal one in twenty (5%) of all samples was analysed in duplicate, to detect any variance at the analytical stage. Also, blanks and standards (within the expected range of REE concentration) were inserted into every batch of samples during analysis, to provide a measure of accuracy. All the standards’ assays were accepted, and samples’ assays were reported, respectively within 95% confidence interval. The information obtained from this test is crucial in determining the head chemical assay of the tailings material, as well as calculating the recoveries of the valuable minerals. Two forms of mineralogical analyses were employed in this study: Quantitative X-ray Diffraction (QXRD) and QEMSCAN analyses. QXRD analysis was basically used to characterise the iron oxide-rich concentrates obtained when the feed was processed at low magnetic field intensity. QXRD analysis of the samples was performed using Scintag ARL X’tra diffractometer equipped with mineral identification XPowder search/match software. The samples were measured twice. The first measurement was done on the as-received samples whilst the second measurement was done on ∼10 wt% ZnO spiked samples. The first measurement was used primarily for phase identification, thereafter coupled with the second measurement for quantification, with the ZnO spike phase acting as reference to allow calculation of the amorphous phases. The XRD patterns were collected on powdered samples in θ/2θ scanning mode using Cu Kα (λ = 1.54056 Å) generated at 40 kV and 30 mA. The scanning speed was 1° per min between 2 and 90° 2θ. Rietveld quantitative analysis was performed on the XRD patterns using the commercial package, SIROQUANTTM V3. QEMSCAN analysis was a very useful tool in characterising the mineralogical composition of the IST sample and selected separation concentrates and tails, providing detailed mineralogical description, which was crucial in decision-making and understanding the magnetic response of the IST. Selected samples were riffled to produce subsamples of required mass. These were then mounted in epoxy resin to produce blocks of cross-sectional diameter, 30 mm, polished and then carbon coated. Manual investigation (with 1 000 000 counts) allowed for developing Species Identification Protocol (SIP) to specify the elemental composition of unclassified phases which were present in the samples. Specific attention was given to the discrimination of REE minerals. The Particle Mineral Analysis (PMA) method of QEMSCAN measurement was used to quantify the percentage mineral mass abundance, average grain sizes, minerals association, liberation, and locking statistics data of the phases present. Laboratory scale WHIMS [Model (L-4), Eriez Magnetics, USA] was used for the magnetic separation tests. The separator consists of two electromagnetic coils with a stainless-steel canister containing a flux-converging element located between the magnetic poles, with a funnel provided as a feeding point. The matrix type used was medium expanded metal (MEX) matrix with a 4 mm aperture size and 15 mm width. For each test, approximately 1.0 kg of 17 wt% pulp (at a flow rate of 1 m The chemical composition of the head sample obtained via ICP-MS analysis is given in Detailed mineralogical composition of the IST obtained via QEMSCAN analysis is shown in The chemical analysis ( The TREO grade and recovery, respectively in the IST feed and separation products (concentrates and tailings) reported in this work were calculated using the equations; The magnetic response of the REO was compared with that of Fe and Si in the IST, at different magnetic field intensities (0.11–1.08 T). The magnetic field intensities required to remove iron oxides with minimal REO loss, and to concentrate REO, respectively were ascertained. The results obtained have been presented in The grade-recovery curves for TREO, along with Fe and Si as the magnetic field intensity was increased are shown in The idea of using the WHIMS is to remove hematite (Fe The rougher stage involved the use of low magnetic field intensity of 0.11 T, to reject strongly magnetic iron oxides. The tails from the rougher test were processed at 1.74 T to recover all the remaining magnetic particles. The concentrate obtained was then cleaned at 0.11 T to remove entrained strongly magnetic iron oxides that may still be present. For each separation stage, feed samples were recycled three times to ensure complete recovery of the respective concentrates. The flowsheet configuration used has been summarised in Three magnetic separation products were obtained after the test; ferromagnetic iron oxides rich concentrate (FMC), paramagnetic REO–iron oxides concentrate (PMC), and non-magnetic tails. Using the flowsheet in  REO upgrades [in the increasing order La  Mineralogical studies were carried out on the magnetic concentrates and non-magnetic tails to gain comprehensive knowledge on the magnetic response of the minerals in the IST. Furthermore, these studies were undertaken to understand the minerals association and possibly explain anomalies, such as high Si content in the PMC. QXRD analysis was conducted on FMC, whereas QEMSCAN analysis was conducted on PMC and non-magnetic tails. Results obtained from the QXRD analysis are shown in QEMSCAN analysis has shown to be reliable by providing detailed mineralogical characteristics of samples, including mineral mass abundance, average mineral grain size, and mineral association, liberation and locking characteristics ( Detailed upgrade of REE minerals, along with selected gangue minerals in the PMC and non-magnetic tails is shown in The results from this study suggest that although the differences in magnetic properties of the valuable REE and gangue minerals could be exploited to recover REE minerals, the efficiency of the process is inhibited by particle and mineralogical characteristics. The three-stage separation process produced three products, where fine Fe particles were concentrated into low-intensity product, whilst the REE minerals were split between the high intensity concentrate and non-magnetic tails. Based on the results in this study, three main phenomena could be conjectured with respect to the magnetic properties and separation of the IST; (i) selective rejection of strongly magnetic iron oxides at low magnetic field intensity, (ii) unselective concentration of paramagnetic REE and gangue minerals at high magnetic field intensity, and (iii) concentration of REE and silicate minerals into non-magnetic tails. Some of the possible factors responsible for the outcomes of the magnetic separation of the IST are discussed in this section. The work of To the best of our knowledge there is a paucity of knowledge on the magnetic properties of brannerite and stetindite in the literature, whereas those of all the other REE minerals have been well documented ( Monazite is shown to be the most paramagnetic compared with all other REE minerals, which is indicated by the significantly high upgrade in the PMC. The enhanced monazite upgrade in the PMC could also be attributed to unliberated middling association between monazite and iron oxides (50%) ( The REE minerals are generally unliberated from the gangues in both magnetic separation products. Specifically, about 30% of bastnäsite particles in the PMC, formed complex middling association with gangue minerals compared with 1% monazite, 1% stetindite, 5% brannerite, and 12% other REE minerals particles, respectively. However, majority of the REE minerals were locked in the gangue of the PMC (64% bastnäsite, 99% monazite, 99% stetindite, 95% brannerite, and 88% other REE minerals). Similarly, the REE minerals in the non-magnetic tails were generally unliberated, with 79% bastnäsite particles, and all (100%) of monazite, stetindite, brannerite, and other REE minerals particles, respectively were completely locked in the gangue minerals. Although bastnäsite is known to be paramagnetic ( The feed in the present work is significantly complex compared to those used in the works of  It is well documented in the literature that magnetic field intensity plays a major role in the recovery and upgrade of magnetic minerals ( The images of PMC and non-magnetic tails obtained via QEMSCAN in A review of the relevant literature has revealed that, increased magnetic field intensity could reduce the loss of fine paramagnetic iron oxides, as well as other magnetic minerals to tails ( The results from this study suggest that although the differences in magnetic properties of the valuable REE and gangue minerals could be exploited to some extent to recover and upgrade REE minerals, the efficiency of the process is limited by mineralogical characteristics and magnetic properties of the IST. It is expected that when the REE minerals are well liberated, higher REE minerals recovery and upgrade can be obtained during the multistage magnetic separation process. Liberation and particle size distribution thus play important role in enhancing or reducing preconcentration of REE minerals by magnetic separation. It is well established that magnetic separation performance deteriorates with decreasing particle size ( The specific aim of this study was to use the WHIMS to produce REE minerals concentrates, for complementary studies involving downstream froth flotation. A key contribution of this work is the selective rejection of 25% iron oxides, which are deleterious to REE minerals flotation with anionic collectors (e.g. hydroxamates, oleic acid, and sodium oleate) as shown in previous works ( The upgrade in the REE–iron oxides rich concentrates was comparatively higher than the upgrade in the non-magnetic tails. However, further processing is required to ascertain the chance of rejecting barren or semi-barren iron oxides by downstream froth flotation. It is anticipated that the use of depressants during multistage flotation tests will help produce some appreciable level of barren or semi-barren iron oxides rejection ( Although the REE minerals upgrade in the non-magnetic tails is lower, a comparatively better chance for further upgrade is envisaged. Previous studies have indicated better selectivity of REE minerals against silicates in the presence anionic collectors ( The use of froth flotation to recover and enhance the upgrade of REE minerals in the two magnetic streams are presented in a follow up publication [i.e., Part 2, ( Typical, fine (d A rougher–scavenger–cleaner magnetic separation was reasonably effective at low magnetic field intensity (0.11 T) in removing up to 25% iron oxides which comprised about 40% of the original feed. The multistage magnetic separation led to a good recovery of 51% TREO at grade of 1.25% into a concentrate produced at a high field intensity (1.74 T), and 41% TREO recovery at a grade of 1.08% into the silicate-rich non-magnetic tails. Mineralogical analyses revealed that iron oxides (hematite and goethite) predominates the bulk of the high field intensity concentrate, whereas silicate minerals (mainly quartz, illite, and annite) dominated the non-magnetic tails. The chemical and mineralogical data suggest that both the high-intensity concentrate and non-magnetic tails could be sent to a downstream flotation stage for further upgrade of REE minerals. Based on the mineralogical data of the separation products, the magnetic properties of bastnäsite, monazite, florencite, and stillwellite were confirmed to be paramagnetic, whilst stetindite and brannerite were found to be diamagnetic. Selective magnetic separation of REE minerals from the complex, low grade tailings is limited due to fine/ultrafine sizes of REE minerals, coupled with their strong associations with both iron oxides and silicate minerals. Typically, the recovery of quartz and other silicate minerals into high-intensity concentrates is largely expedited by unliberated association with magnetic particles. The limitation is exacerbated by the genuine magnetic recovery of weakly ferromagnetic and strongly paramagnetic iron oxides and paramagnetic muscovite particles at high magnetic field intensity. Overall, the present results indicate that magnetic separation may be employed as a preconcentration method during the recovery of REE minerals from the IST, prior to froth flotation separation for further upgrade. This work was supported by the