Hydrate-based desalination was suggested as a new method in recent years. In this study, compressed natural gas (CNG), mixed with various produced water samples and the hydrate formation reactions were performed at the pressure of about 95bar and temperature of 274.2K. After hydrate formation, the concentrated salty water was extracted from the reactor and the formed hydrate was washed with a suitable amount of fresh water to successfully improve desalination efficiency. Then, the hydrate was dissociated to produce fresh water. Desalination efficiencies for dissolved mineral extraction from produced water samples were measured and it has been found that with 3-stages hydrate process, 79.5%-–84.3% of dissolved mineral components will be removed using gas hydrate formation. This study indicated that the CNG hydrate formation for desalination can be applied for produced waters with initial total dissolved solids (TDS) less than 160,000mg/L.ion concentration (mg/L) the number of moles (mol) pressure (MPa) pressure drop (MPa) universal gas constant (8.314 temperature (°K) time (h) volume (cm gas compressibility factor desalination efficiency (%) initial state gas  atomic absorption spectroscopy cyclohexane cyclopentane electrical conductivity (mS/cm) hydrate-based Desalination produced water reverse Osmosis total dissolved solids (mg/L) Gas hydrates are crystalline complexes composed of water and gas molecules. The guest molecules are decoyed in host molecules cavities that are composed of hydrogen bonding in water. Typical natural gas molecules include CH Natural gas hydrate formation and dissociation processes have many applications in energy and environmental aspects; such as fuel storage/transportation, recovery of energy, safely and desalination of seawater The main investigations on HBD are being focused on the use of crystalline complexes for the seawater desalination but as yet no pilot plant for it exists, however it continues to compete with conventional techniques One of the saltiest water is Produced Water (PW) that can be reused after treatment. On the other hand, oil and gas operations produce a large volume of waste water that is considered as the largest byproduct of oil and gas generation As mentioned before, many researchers in the field of HBD have investigated on seawater; while various produced waters are saltier than seawater In the present study, CNG hydrate former is introduced in a HBD system for high salinity PW. Electrical conductivity (EC) of water produced from hydrate dissociation has been measured to check the removal efficiency of salt. Desalination efficiency of dissolved mineral components has been also examined for PW samples. In addition, for the first time, various synthesized PW with different salinity were tested to discuss the usable range of initial total dissolved solids (TDS) in a CNG- HBD system. Compressed natural gas (CNG) with composition specified in For synthesized produced water, Sodium chloride (Kimia, > To make real PW synthetic samples, two various PW samples were collected from oil fields and their composition were analyzed. The first PW sample was obtained from Bangestan reservoir in the Shadegan oil field of Khuzestan Province in Iran. Organic components from The second sample was based on information of Asmari reservoir in the same oil field which By applying the composition of above mentioned real samples, six PW samples were synthesized by chemicals listed in the materials section. The first synthetic sample was prepared applying the chemical composition of Bangestan reservoir while the second sample was based on data of Asmari reservoir. Other four samples (2–1, 2–2, 2–3 and 2–4) are based on 80, 70, 60, and 50% TDS of sample 2, respectively. The experimental setup used in this research was the same as it was described before The reactor pressure is enhanced to 1600 Finally, amount of dissolved mineral components such as K In order to achieve greater efficiency several step of hydrate formation process is required because salty water is trapped between hydrate crystals. Therefore, the second and third stages were performed with the water previously formed by hydrate dissociation of the first stage. CNG hydrate formation rate in the sample 1 PW for the first, second and third stages have been plotted in The desalination efficiency of three mentioned stages using HBD has been shown in Hydrate dissociation of the third stage and an example of measuring EC using a conductivity meter (WTW Multiline P4) have been shown in Analysis of salt ions in the water formed from third stage is demonstrated in  It is observed that the desalination efficiency of sodium ions is higher than that of potassium ions. This result may be related to the smaller sodium ions than potassium ions. In fact, because of the small size of Na After performing experiments on sample 1, HBD process was used to other samples to discuss a suitable extent of PW salinity. For PW desalination, CNG hydrate was not formed in the sample 2 after about 20 As The purpose of this study was to evaluate an application possibility of hydrate-based desalination process. In experiments, CNG hydrate former was applied for produced water. Electrical conductivity of water formed by hydrate dissociation was examined in 3-stages to investigate the desalination efficiency. The results showed that the salinity of produced water can be reduced by about 82% using hydrate formation with CNG guest gas, and 79.5-–82% of cations and 81–84.3% of anions were removed. Also, various synthesized produced water samples with different salinity were tested to discuss the usable range of initial TDS in a CNG hydrate based desalination process. It has been concluded that the maximum extent of produced water to which HBD with CNG is EC