The microbial fermentability, ruminal degradability and digestibility of 48 maize silages were determined using in vitro gas production (GP), in situ degradability and in vitro digestibility procedures. The silages were produced from forage maize harvested throughout the summer of 1998, and represent a wide range of physiological maturities. Large variations among samples were observed for all biological parameters, with the exception of in vitro digestibility and the asymptote of in vitro GP. The potential of near infrared reflectance spectroscopy (NIRS) to predict the biological parameters measured was determined by regression of the biological data against the respective spectral profile. NIRS demonstrated only a moderate ability (R
                     2>0.60–0.80) to predict in vitro digestibility, modelled kinetics of gas production (excluding the asymptote of gas production) and the modelled ruminally soluble dry matter (DM) fraction. Calibration statistics for remaining biological parameters were unacceptably poor (R
                     2=0.60).Future refinement of ruminant rationing systems to allow prediction of animal performance, and composition of the outputs is likely to be based on knowledge of the kinetics of feed digestion and the supply of nutrients to the animal (e.g. Total tract digestibility of a feedstuff, although used in some rationing systems, is of little nutritional value for mechanistic models, as it fails to describe the dynamics of nutrient supply in terms of both the site and rate of digestion. Maize silage is both a concentrate (i.e. the starch fraction) and forage (i.e. the fibrous fraction). Consequently, the total tract digestibility of the whole plant is a function of the digestibility of the two plant fractions. It has been widely observed that increasing maize maturity is associated with substantial changes in the chemical composition of the plant, but with little effect on net digestibility ( The aim of this study was to assess the potential of NIRS to predict the biological parameters of maize silage as determined using a variety of techniques including an in vitro GP and an in situ technique. Forty-eight maize silages were produced from material harvested on four occasions (i.e. maturities) being 07-09-98, 17-09-98, 28-09-98 and 14-10-98 from 12 forage maize cultivars grown at CEDAR (The University of Reading, UK). The cultivars differed in maturity class (first early or second early) and the traits exhibited (i.e. six cultivars exhibited one or both of the staygreen or compact traits, while the other six cultivars exhibited neither). Sample comminution prior to ensiling was achieved by passing the forage maize through a rotary shredder (Honda 5.0 Hva, Aoyama, Japan). The plant material (about 3.5 After opening the silos, the ensiled plant material was thoroughly mixed on a plastic sheet and the DM content determined by oven drying a representative sub-sample (approximately 0.5 The in vitro two stage digestible organic matter in the DM (DOMD) of the maize silages was determined in triplicate using the two-stage rumen fluid pepsin technique of In vitro fermentability was measured using the GP procedure of In situ DM degradability of the maize silages was determined based by the method of To determine the extent of undegraded small particle loss (USPL) from the polyester bags, the true solubility of the sample was established by incubating a weight of fresh material equivalent to 1 Prior to NIRS scanning, the dried and milled silages were re-dried for 4 The least variation existed within DOMD, derived using both the two-stage in vitro digestibility technique and the in vitro GP procedure, together with the asymptote of GP ( NIRS demonstrated only a moderate ability ( The maize silages had a wide range of physiological maturities due to the sequential harvest dates. This variation in physiological maturity between maize silages was evident from the DM and starch content (mean 282±36 and 247±67 Despite the large physiological variation in the maturity of the silages, in vitro DOMD measured using the two-stage technique of The in situ ‘ Little variation was evident in total gas produced (asymptote), which agrees with earlier work on maize silage by This work confirms the potential of NIRS to predict the digestibility of maize silage, consistent with earlier work of The inability of this study to account for the observed variation in the asymptote of GP may be peculiar to maize silage since it contains both grain and fibrous components. When NIRS has proved successful at predicting the asymptote of GP ( The potential of NIRS to predict the fractional rate of fermentation, the lag phase and NIRS was unable to accurately predict parameters of the kinetics of maize silage DM degradability, with the exception of those parameters highly dependent on the chemical composition of the maize silage. This is perhaps not surprising, as the technique is well known to be predictive of the chemical composition of maize silage ( The potential of NIRS to predict the various biological parameters of maize silage appears dependent on the reference technique employed with the accuracy of calibration statistics being greatest for the GP technique, poorest for in situ parameters and intermediate for two-stage DOMD. Reasons for the relative differences in accuracy between techniques are most probably explainable through the ‘closed nature’ of the two in vitro systems enabling the whole sample to be evaluated. This compares to the more ‘open’ system employed within the in situ technique which allows a proportion of the substrate to escape from the system prior to degradation (USPL was found to account for 293±59 If dynamic nutritional models based on rate and extent of nutrient supply within the gastro-intestinal tract are to be successfully used, it is essential that a rapid method of determining the kinetics of nutrient supply is available. NIRS appears to offer potential to estimate some biological parameters of maize silage, such as two-stage DOMD and the kinetics of gas production. However, the NIRS technique can only be as good as the reference method used, and the large proportion of DM lost as small particles prior to degradation, highlights the unsuitability of the in situ technique in evaluating the nutritive value of whole plant maize silage. Further research should investigate the effectiveness of different statistical procedures, sample preparation and the ability of NIRS to predict individual points on the degradability or fermentability curve, thereby allowing the kinetics of disappearance/fermentability to be calculated.