Most of the industrial operations need size reduction in some form or other. Compression, impact, attrition and cutting are the principle reduction. It is now an established fact that size of fineness by some grinding technique accounts for more than half of the total cost. In the present study hematite ore of hardness 5.5–6.5, specific gravity 5.26 has been subjected to grinding tests in a ball mill. The experiments were conducted at three feed sizes (i. e., −10 + 8 mm, −8 + 5.6 mm, −5.6 + 4.7 mm) and three ball sizes (i.e. 1 inch, ½ inch, ¼ inch). As the grinding time increases, specific surface and energy consumption per unit specific surface area also increases. As the specific surface area increases, energy consumption also increases. As the size of the ball increases specific surface area and energy consumption per unit specific surface area are also increased. Similarly, as the size of the ball decreases energy consumption also decreases uniformly for a particularly feed size. Energy consumption of feed decreased with quantity of feed. The new specific surface area generated also decreases with increase in feed quantity. Energy consumption per unit surface area of the feed is decreased with increase in feed quantity.Density of the particle (g/cm Sphericity of the particle ( mass fraction in given increment number of increments average particle diameter consumption of energy, kilowatt hr/ton power, watts work index in, kilowatt hr/ton average diameter of the feed particle, cm average diameter of the product particle, cm weight of the material retained on a particular sieve total weight of the feed taken, g specific breakage rate, min time of grinding, min The natural sequence of comminution in the mineral processing plant is crushing and grinding. Crushing is the first mechanical stage in the process of comminution in which the main objective is the liberation of the valuable minerals from the gangue. Crushing accomplishes either by compression of the ore against rigid surfaces or by impact against surfaces in a rigidly constrained motion path. Grinding is the last stage in the process of comminution, in which the particles are reduced in size by a combination of impact, abrasion and attrition of the ore by the grinding media such as balls, pebbles or rods in rotating cylindrical vessels known as tumbling mills. In many industries the final product or the raw materials at some stage of the manufacturing process is powdered form and cheap preparation of powdered materials is a matter of considerable economic importance. The principal reasons for the grinding of industrial materials may be summarized under the following cases. For the grinding of largest quantities, the ball, rod, tube mill is used almost exclusively, since these are the only types of mill which possesses through the capacity of the required. Grinding in a ball mill is influenced by the size of the grinding media, the speed of the mill, the size of the quantity and size of the feed and types of circuit used. In batch grinding, the particle size is continuously reduced with time but minerals of various complexities behave differently and studied to predict the product size with other influencing parameters. The present study consists of experiments conducted to relate the specific surface area generated and the energy consumption per unit surface area produced with the above parameters as time of grinding, feed size, feed quantity and ball size and mill speed. The name hematite is derived from the Greek word for “blood aim at” because hematite can be red, as in rouge, a powdered form of hematite. Hematite is the mineral form of iron (III) oxide (Fe The ball mill used for the studies is an ordinary cylindrical type vessel with 8′' × 8′' size, closed permanently at one end and with a provision to close the other end by using a lid tightly. The inside surface of the mill is smooth except that it is provided with three baffles of square cross section of 0.5′' × 0.5′' size, along the length of the mill fixed firmly and evenly around the periphery. The essential dimensions of the mill are given below. Inside diameter of the mill is 8 in. and length of the mill is 8, with a wall thickness of 0.38 in. and critical speed of themillis100rpm. Thewidthofthegroove = 2.54 cm. Here three balls with different size and weights are used. They are 2.54 cm (1 in.) − 64.7 g (100No.), 1.27 cm (0.5 in.) − 28.75 g (225No.), 0.635 cm (0.25 in.) − 27.29 g (237No.).To rotate the mill on its horizontal axis at one end a stepped pulley framework is fixed and along with it shafts though toothed wheel reduction gear was arranged. AV belt connecting the motor and pulley frame work in turn enables the mill to rotate. The stepped pulley framework is provided with four steps and hence the mill can be run at four different speeds namely 21, 42, 66, and 81 rpm. The mill is supplied with 100 balls of 2.54 cm diameter, 225 balls of 1.27 cm diameter and 237 balls of 0.635 cm diameter. The other accessories used for conducting the experiment, include a rotap sieve shaker with an automatic time switch, a set of BSS sieves with mesh numbers 10, 16, 60, 100, 150, 200 with lid and pan and a stop watch to note the time. In the present study the feed material was prepared in the required size range to be used in these studies. The material was initially reduced to lower sizes and further crushed in crushing rolls. The crushed material was thoroughly screened using a set of sieves until the feed material of required size range was obtained. Totally three feed sizes (0.8 cm, 0.56 cm and 0.47 cm) were selected for the present study. Experimental work was carried out without additive. And also in this study the effect of several operating variables like: Time of grinding in the mill (t, min), Quantity of feed (Q, g), Speed of the mill (N, rpm), Different grinding media (Bs, cm) , Size of the feed (Fs, cm). The batch grinding operation was carried out with the selected quantities of 25, 50, 75, and 100 g. and fed to the ball mill half filled with the grinding media of 2.54 cm steel balls counting 100 in number. The open end of the mill was closed by clamping the tightly to the mill so that no leakage of the material takes place during grinding operation. Then the mill was run for a period of 4 min, and ground material was allowed for sieve and in the present study the whole experiment was conducted by running the mill at a constant speed of 66 rpm. The material was discharged from the mill using a brush after unclamping the lid. The material was allowed to fall on the meshed tray placed on a cubical container. When the material was discharged onto the meshed tray, the balls would remain on the wired mesh while the grounded material was passed through the mesh and was collected in the container. Adequate measures were taken everywhere to prevent the loss of the material. The material was subjected to sieving as follows. It was divided into three equal fractions and then each part was subjected to sieve analysis independently on the set of seven BSS sieves with mesh numbers 10, 16, 60, 100, and 150 with a pan and a lid. This method was adopted to prevent the overloading of the material on the sieves. A rotap sieve shaker was used for the purpose of sieving. Each part was subjected to sieving for a period of 6 min. using an automatic timer. All necessary steps for effective screening, like stopping the shaker for every 2 min for gentle tapping and rotating the sieves by 180° were taken. The product material was carefully brushed from the sieves, collected and weighed on a balance and finally the material was discarded. The specific surface of the product at the end of the experiment was calculated from the sieve analysis data for each run of the mill by using the formula: By taking an arithmetic average of smallest and largest particle diameters in increments, (assuming the ground particles of the product to be spherical). The effect of mill speed was studied at three different speeds of the mill (42, 66, and 81 rpm) provided with the mill, fixing the grinding time 32 min and keeping 100 balls of 2.54 cm size as grinding media. The quantity of feed was kept at 50g. The Size reduction involves, mainly, two breakage mechanisms, impact and attrition. These mainly depend on grinding media and feed material characteristics such as size, shape, weight and composition. The effect of grinding media was studied at three different ball sizes (2.54 cm, 1.27 cm, and 0.635 cm) in a ball mill. The other parameters were maintained as 32 min mill time at a mill speed of 66 rpm and the feed quantity. To estimate and calculate the energy required for a given size reduction process, a number of theories have been advanced. These theories depend on the basic assumption, that energy required to produce a change in a particle of a typical size dimension is a power function of Dp. Bond postulated (Eq.  Gross energy requirement in kilowatt-hours per ton of feed to reduce a very large feed to such a size that 80 percent Passes a 100 µm screen. From the above equation, it leads to a relation between and (Eq. P in kilowatts and ̇in tons per hour. If 80 percent of the feed passes a mesh size of In Bond's equation, is expressed in centimetres. If other size units are preferred, the equation must be adjusted with the appropriate conversion factor. These equations are used to make comparisons between the power requirements for various degrees of reduction. The above Eqs. Continuous grinding operation was carried out with 50 g of the material taken and fed to the ball mill for grinding. The mill was half filled with the grinding media of 2.54 cm steel balls and the lid of the mill was tightly clamped. Now the material was grounded for a period of 4 min and was taken out for screen analysis carried in a set of seven sieves as in the previous case. The weights retained on each sieve were noted down and the whole of the material is mixed together which becomes the feed for the batch run. The material was loaded and ground for another 4 min so that the total time of grinding (t) now becomes 8 min. The material was withdrawn from the mill and subjected to sieve analysis again. This process was continued a total time of 32 min for each sample. The whole study was conducted on three different sizes and results were tabulated to estimate the specific breakage rate k (min In this chapter the important variables which affect the performance of ball mill are studied. The study consists in terms of the following factors: Surface area, size distribution of the product & power consumption and the following parameters: Effect of time of milling, Effect of ball size, Effect of feed quantity, Effect of mill speed, Effect of feed size. The effect of time of grinding in a ball mill has been studied covering a range of 4 min to 32 min. 50 g of feed with size 0.475, 0.56 and 0.8 cm were fed to the mill and run at the speed of 66 rpm. The number of balls of one inch size kept as constant at 100. The specific surface area per each run is calculated and the results are shown in Three sizes of ball Viz., 2.54 cm (1 in.), 1.27 cm (0.5 in.) and 0.635 cm (0.25 in.) are chosen. The effect of ball size has been found for a feed quantity of 50 g and keeping the time of grinding at 32 min and speed of the mil at 66 rpm. Even though the sizes of the balls are changed, the total weight of the balls was kept constant at 6470 g. From To study the effect of feed quantity on the performance of the ball mill measured in terms of the surface area generated and the energy consumed, three samples of 25, 50, 75 and100 g respectively were taken. In all these systems the feed was ground for a grinding time of 32 min, at a mill speed of 66 rpm using one inch steel balls. The effect of speed of the mill on the specific surface area was studied at 3 different specified speeds 42, 66, and 81 rpm while other variables were kept constant. The values of grinding time, feed quantity and ball weight were maintained at 32 min, 50 g and 6610 g respectively. From the To study the effect of feed size on the performance of the mill measured in terms of the surface area generated and the energy consumption, three samples of sizes –‘1mm”+8mm” (0.8 cm), –8mm”+5.6 mm” (0.56 cm), –5.6 mm”+4.7 mm” (0.47 cm), etc. respectively were taken. In all these systems the feed was ground for a grinding time of 32 min, at a mill speed of 66 rpm using 1″ steel balls. As the grinding time increases, specific surface increases. As the specific surface increases, Energy consumption also increases. Energy consumption per unit specific surface increases with time. As the size of the ball increases specific surface increased uniformly. As the size of the ball increases energy consumption is almost increases whereas the size of the ball decreases energy consumption decreases uniformly for a particular amount of feed. As the Mill speed increases the specific surface area was also increase dup to 66 rpm and then decreased because 66 rpm is the practical critical speed. The energy consumption was increased with the mill speed, but beyond 66 rpm it was decreased with further increase in mill speed. Hence it is worthless to run the mill at higher speeds of rotation. Energy consumption per unit specific surface area of feed increased with increase in ball size. Energy consumption of feed decreased with quantity of feed. The new specific surface area generated also decreased with increase in feed quantity. The Energy consumption per unit specific surface of the feed is decreased with increase in feed quantity. The design of experiment studies can be carried out for batch grinding experimental data. And also the optimization of parameters can be extended by the application of Artificial Neural network method for the batch studies to stablish a further statistical analysis. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The author’s heartfelt gratitude towards the support of the Andhra University, Visakhapatnam and acknowledged. Gratefully for the contribution of laboratory facilities for carrying out this research work.