Fe3+ and Al3+ ions existed in phosphoric acid–nitric acid solutions are very troublesome for the neutralization process of nitrophosphate (NP) fertilizer. This paper studied the performances of three chelating resins (S957, S950 and S930) on the removal of Fe3+ and Al3+ ions from phosphoric acid–nitric acid solutions, and one strong acid cation resin (001×7) was also studied for comparison. The batch adsorption equilibrium of Fe3+ ion and Al3+ ion on four resins and the effects of phosphoric acid and nitric acid concentrations on the separation characteristics of four resins were firstly investigated. After that, the dynamic adsorption and elution processes through the fixed bed column were carried out. The batch adsorption results reveal that S957 and 001×7 resins present the higher adsorption ability to Fe3+ ion and Al3+ ion in pure water. But in phosphoric acid–nitric acid solutions, the adsorption ability of S957 and S950 resins is better for the removal of Fe3+ ion and Al3+ ion, whereas 001×7 and S930 resins present very low or even no adsorption ability. The dynamic adsorption and elution processes show that S957 resin is more suitable for the further dynamic operation in view of the recyclability of separation process, while S950 resin expresses poor regeneration performance. Moreover, the coexistent Ca2+ and Mg2+ ions in phosphoric acid–nitric acid solutions have little influence on the removal of Fe3+ and Al3+ ions through the fixed bed S957 resin column. All results demonstrate that S957 resin is capable of removing the Fe3+ and Al3+ ions from phosphoric acid–nitric acid solutions.Nitrophosphate (NP) fertilizer using the Odds process plays an important role in phosphoric and compound fertilizer industry. In its production process, phosphate ore is digested by nitric acid instead of sulfuric acid, and Ca One of the methods widely applied in removal of metal ions from aqueous and other solutions is the ion exchange, or adsorption, because of its simple operation, good cycling stability, and easy post treatment ( Furthermore，it is well known that the adsorption process of metal ion on resin will be strongly affected by the reaction condition, solvent composition and nature of the resin ( Herein, in order to effectively remove the Fe The chelating resins used in this study were supplied by Purolite, SAC resin 001×7 was obtained from Tianjin Fu Chen Chemical Reagent Factory of China, and their chemical structures were shown in The typical compositions in neutralization mother liquor of NP fertilizer are as shown in In batch experiments, single Fe The dynamic column adsorption and elution of Fe The resin was firstly loaded into the column, and then the deionized water was fed from the top of column to rinse the resin. The feed solution was passed through the column upward at different operation parameters as shown in The different regeneration solutions as shown in The next adsorption and elution processes were run as described in the steps of a.) and c.) at the operation parameters as shown in The simultaneous adsorption processes of Fe Adsorption capacity of metal ion on resin is an important parameter to choose the suitable resin for the removal of different metal ions from solution. Thus, the adsorption equilibrium of single Fe In order to explore the feasibility of these resins in the removal of Fe In order to clarify the effect of acids on adsorption behavior of Fe The adsorption equilibrium of Fe The dynamic separation of metal ion through the fixed bed resin column is highly significant for the practical application, especially the formulation of elution process, which not only needs to focus on the elution efficiency but also should consider the availability and reprocess-ability of the elution solution in a practical point of view. The consecutive adsorption and elution processes of Fe In order to evaluate the applicability of S957 resin, the consecutive adsorption and elution processes of single Fe Based on the above results, the simultaneous removal of Fe Furthermore, since there generally are four metal ions of Fe This paper studied the batch adsorption, dynamic adsorption and elution performances of three chelating resins and one SAC resin on the removal of Fe The work described in this paper was substantially supported by a grant from