Utilization of smelter by-products, such as metal scrap, slag, flue-dust, and other residues, is necessary if the goal of zero waste in metal production is to be achieved. One of the possible utilizations of the by-products is by using them as raw materials for the production of commercial metals or alloys. Laboratory experiments of the production of ferro-silico-manganese alloy using manganese ore and copper smelting slag as raw materials were carried out in the present study. Manganese ore and different amounts of copper smelting slag were reduced by bituminous coal at final holding temperatures of 1450, 1500 and 1550 °C. The equilibrium compositions and phases were predicted by FactSage thermodynamic software and were used to assist the analysis of the present experimental results. The influences of temperature and the addition of copper smelting slag on the metal product size, total metal recovery, metal composition, and recoveries of elements in the metal product were determined. The final slag obtained from the reduction process were also characterized. The present study demonstrates the possibility of producing ferro-silico-manganese by utilizing manganese ore and copper smelting slag as raw materials.Copper smelting slag, as one of the by-products of copper smelter, is classified as hazardous waste in most regions in the world. Depending on the smelting technology, the amount of produced copper smelting slag is in the range of 1.37–2.85 tons per ton of copper with an average value of 1.98 The characterization and utilization of copper smelting slag were reviewed and summarized by Gorai et al. Several researchers investigated the extraction of metals from the copper smelting slag through pyrometallurgy routes. The extraction of iron from copper smelting slag by carbothermic reduction using coke at 1250 °C was studied by Kim et al. Manganese is primarily consumed by the steel industry and is commonly introduced in the form of ferroalloys, such as ferromanganese and silicomanganese. The silicomanganese alloy is also known as ferro-silico-manganese (FeSiMn). The ferro-silico-manganese commercial grade has average composition of 62.5 wt.% Mn, 22.5 wt.%Si, <3.5 wt.%C, <0.2 wt.% P and <0.03 wt.% S with Fe as balance The copper smelting slag used in this study was supplied by PT. Smelting, Gresik, East Java, Indonesia. The manganese ore was obtained from East Nusa Tenggara Province, Indonesia. The slag was ground using a ball mill, sieved to obtain grain size of less than 65 mesh (210 µm), and then dried at 135 °C for 24 h. The manganese ore and bituminous coal were also ground and dried using the same procedures. The crystalline phases and the initial compositions of the raw materials were examined by X-ray Diffraction method (XRD, Rigaku Smart Lab) and Wavelength Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometer (WDXRF, Rigaku ZSX Primus IV), respectively. The XRD analysis of the copper smelting slag sample shows that the slag is amorphous ( The experimental technique used in the present study is similar to that used in previous study by the author on the reduction of low-grade nickel laterite ore Each crucible was then inserted into a muffle furnace where the oxides in the briquette was reduced under different temperature profiles. The temperature profile in the muffle furnace was divided into three stages ( Each experimental condition was performed three times to ensure reliable experimental trend. The reduced briquettes were weighed and documented. After breaking the briquettes using mortar and pestle, the resulting metal and slag pieces were manually separated through visual inspection. The metal products were not completely spherical, the average diameter of each metal piece was therefore measured by a digital caliper at six different places. The metal and slag pieces were mounted in epoxy resin, cross-sectioned using SiC papers, polished using diamond paste, and platinum coated. The morphologies of the samples were examined using Optical Microscope and Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM, JSM 6510 A, JEOL). The compositions of the metal products were analyzed using standardless Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) of the SEM with ZAF correction method. The SEM was operated at an acceleration voltage of 15 kV and a probe current of 7.5 nA. A selected slag sample was analyzed using Electron Probe X-ray Microanalyzer (EPMA, JEOL JXA 8200 L) at the Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis at The University of Queensland. The EPMA is equipped with Wavelength Dispersive Detectors (WDD) and Duncumb-Philibert ZAF correction procedure. The EPMA was operated at an acceleration voltage of 15 kV and a probe current of 15 nA. Reference materials in Charles M. Taylor block were used as standards. The sample was re-polished and carbon-coated prior to EPMA analysis. The present experimental results were compared with the thermodynamic calculation results using FactSage 7.3 (Thermfact/CRCT) software The typical photographs of the briquette before and after the reduction, the metal products and the slag are presented in In general, higher reduction temperature produces larger metal diameter ( The amount of formed metal products was used to determine the total metals recovery (R For a given copper smelting slag addition, increasing final holding temperature results in the increase of the overall metals recovery. Higher temperature provides better thermodynamic and kinetic conditions for the reduction of the oxides and promotes the formation of liquid metal and molten slag which stimulate the agglomeration of the metal products into bigger sized metal particles. At 100% copper smelting slag addition, the total metal recovery increases from 35.74% to 49.25% with the increase of temperature from 1450 °C to 1550 °C. Experimental result obtained from the reduction with 60% slag addition is used to evaluate the effect of temperature on the metal composition and recoveries of elements. The metal composition and recoveries of elements were obtained by examining the metal products using SEM. The summary of EDS spot and EDS area analyses, after excluding the Pt peak, is provided in The fractions of the three different areas were determined using image analysis software. The calculated composition of the metal product is similar to that from the EDS area analysis. The time required to perform EDS spot analysis of different areas is significantly lesser than the time required to perform EDS area analysis. Due to the analysis time constraint, the following metal product compositions have been calculated based on the information from the EDS spot analysis and the fraction of different areas in the samples. The calculated metal compositions are summarized in The contents of iron, silicon, manganese and copper in the metal product as a function of temperature are shown in The individual recoveries of iron, silicon, manganese and copper as a function of temperature are presented in The presence of copper in the ferro-silico-manganese can give negative impacts for certain steel applications in the steel industries. The concentration of copper in a number of steel applications is therefore limited to below 0.2% to avoid its detrimental effect on the steel properties. However, if the ferro-silico-manganese product is to be used for the production of weathering steel, then a high copper concentration in the ferro-silico-manganese product is desired. Experimental result obtained from the reduction with final holding temperature of 1500 °C is used to evaluate the effect of the addition of copper smelting slag on the metal composition and recoveries of elements. The influence of the addition of copper smelting slag on the composition of metal is shown in The recoveries of elements in the metal are shown in Final slag from reduction experiment with 60% copper smelting slag addition and maximum final holding temperature of 1550 °C was characterized using SEM. The SE image provided in Careful analysis of the final slag composition was undertaken using EPMA and the result is presented in Phase diagram relevant to the slag system of the present study was calculated using FactSage and is shown in FeMn unfluxed slag practice, where no flux is added during the smelting operation; FeMn high-MnO slag practice, where slag with 30–45% MnO is produced and sent for silicomanganese production; FeMn discard slag practice, where ore is reduced in one process and slag with 15–20% MnO is discarded; SiMn slag, where slag with 6–12% MnO is produced and discarded. Typical slag compositions of all four slag practices are plotted on Based on the calculated phase diagram, the experimental slag from experiment at 1550 °C with 60% copper smelting slag addition is located in the tridymite primary phase field, while the industrial slags are located within the olivine, wollastonite and Ca The present study demonstrates the possibility of the ferro-silico-manganese production using manganese ore and copper smelting slag as raw materials. The manganese and silicon concentrations are still relatively lower than those of typical commercial ferro-silico-manganese products, however this can be corrected by increasing the reduction extent through increasing the operating temperature, adjusting the manganese ore to copper smelting slag ratio and adding material with high-silica content. The copper concentration in the metal product is interestingly low and appear to decrease with increasing reduction temperature. And due to the absence of fluxing material, the final slag of the present study has relatively lower slag volume compared those of the FeMn high-MnO and discard slag practices. The ferro-silico-manganese production by using mixture of manganese ore and copper smelting slag has been experimentally studied. The metal size and the metal recovery increase with increasing final holding temperature and addition of copper smelting slag. At constant copper smelting addition of 60%, the contents and recoveries of iron and copper in the metal product decrease as the temperature increases, while the contents and recoveries of manganese and silicon in the metal product increase with increasing temperature. The decrease in the copper content in the metal product is beneficial since the presence of copper in the alloying material can be detrimental for several steel grades. At constant temperature of 1550 °C, the contents of iron and copper in the metal product increases with increasing copper smelting slag addition, while the contents of manganese and silicon in the metal product decreases with increasing copper smelting slag addition. The iron recovery decreases with increasing copper smelting slag addition, while there is no clear trend between the recovery and copper smelting slag addition for the silicon, manganese, and copper. The final slag has lower volume compared those of the FeMn high-MnO and FeMn discard slag practices due to the absence of fluxing material. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors would like to thank to the Program of Research, Community Service, and Innovation of the Bandung Institute of Technology (P3MI–ITB) for funding this research and PT Smelting for providing the copper smelting slag sample. The authors would also like to thank Pyrometallurgy Research Centre (PYROSEARCH) and the Australian Microscopy and Microanalysis Facility (AMMRF) at the Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis at The University of Queensland for the access to the Electron Probe X-ray Microanalyzer facility.