A systematic investigation on the extraction of lithium from salt lake brine with high Mg/Li using a novel extractant, Na[FeCl4
                     ∗2TBP]org, is reported with an emphasis on the extraction thermodynamics, kinetics and process. In liquid-liquid extraction, this extractant shows high separation factor of lithium/magnesium up to 178.4. Thermodynamic analysis indicated that the extraction is an exothermic process. However, when integrated with the kinetic effect, the lithium mass transfer increases at elevated temperature. The kinetics of lithium extraction by this extractant was investigated via a single drop column method. The magnesium, lithium concentration in brine, sodium, ferric concentration in organic extractant were studied, and a linear relationship was found between the rate of lithium transfer and the concentration of each component. The contribution of the formation/coalescence of organic extractant droplets, end-effect, to the lithium mass transfer was investigated. Perturbation at the brine/organic phases was found to promote lithium mass transfer during the rising step of droplets, mainly due to the low interfacial tension. Finally, a process was proposed to extract lithium ions from East Taijinaier salt lake brine and the stability of the new extractant was demonstrated by four extraction/stripping/saponification cycles. These results indicate that the present extractant was suitable for extracting lithium from brines with a high Mg/Li ratio.Lithium and its compounds are greatly used in rechargeable batteries ( The chemical composition of the salt lake brine varies with the geological location. Comparing to the brine in South America, the brine in northwest China typically shows a very high Mg/Li ratio up to a few hundred ( In order to separate the lithium from brine of a high ratio of Mg/Li, ferric chloride (FeCl In this study, the thermodynamics and kinetics of the lithium extraction using the sodium form of TBP organic extractant are investigated. The kinetics of extraction was explored using single drop techniques ( In the TBP/kerosene extraction system, the ferric ion is selected as a co-extracting agent to promote the extraction of lithium. As seen To improve the extraction performance, the concentrations of lithium, ferric, sodium in this system are the key factors. Based on Reaction 4, the extraction rate of lithium ions can be expressed as: Tributyl phosphate (TBP), lithium chloride (AR), magnesium chloride, hydrochloric acid (AR), NaOH (AR), and FeCl The main composition of the East Taijinaier salt lake brine is listed in The TBP/sulfonated kerosene ( The LLE experiments were conducted using 250 Single rising drop technique was used to measure the mass transfer of lithium in the extraction process (the experimental setup is shown in The rate of Li Pendant drop method was adopted to measure the interfacial tension ( The concentration of the cations in the aqueous samples was analyzed using an Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrometry/ICP-AES (ICPE-9000, Shimadzu). Lithium in the organic phase was analyzed after being stripped completely into aqueous phase using a 7 Temperature is the most complex factor affecting the equilibrium state in the liquid-liquid extraction process. Located in the northwest China, the temperature in the salt lake brine reaches − By plotting logD against 1000/  In the liquid-liquid extraction process ( However, the lithium concentration in the organic phase showed a linear relationship to the length of the column ( As an example, for a column of 90 The time for the formation and coalescence of droplets, and the rising speed of droplets were measured to be constant. Although the end-effect for a 90  The lithium deposit brine in the salt-lake of China is characterized as high magnesium ion concentration. The separation of lithium from magnesium is crucial. It was known that the increase of one salt in aqueous phase would decrease the activity of other solutes, or called the salting-out effect ( The extraction performance of Na[FeCl Lithium concentration in brine phase plays an important role in the mass transfer. As shown in The organic extractant contains three different chemicals, the active extractant, Na[FeCl The extraction of lithium using Na[FeCl From  In this research, effects of operating parameters on the extraction of lithium from brine with Na[FeCl The authors appreciate the partial financial support from the The interfacial tension plays an important role on the process of droplet break-up and coalescence, as well as the integrity of the interface. More energy is needed to generate smaller droplets and to create perturbation at the interface if the surface intension is higher.