This volume is designed to characterize all aspects, i.e., the thermal engineering, of final heat treatment processing to produce quench and tempered steels with high-strength microstructures. Two aspects of thermal engineering are (1) modeling and quantitative characterization of the heat treatment and quenching process, aspects vital to the control of final manufacture; and (2) the documentation of steel microstructures and the properties resulting from that thermal processing, aspects vital to the selection of steels and their heat treatment for demanding applications. Chapters in this volume, as described, are devoted to both of these aspects of final thermal engineering of steel alloy systems.The editor expresses his sincere thanks and appreciation to all of the chapter authors for the time and effort devoted to sharing their expertise and the preparation of their valuable contributions to this volume. This volume is part of the multivolume work titled Final heat treatment processing of low alloy steels consists of three stages: Martensite forms only if the time-dependent formation of softer microstructures can be avoided on cooling. Generally this aspect is accomplished by rapid cooling, typically called Quenching or cooling is a complex process requiring understanding the coupling of cooling media and internal changes in sections of steel that develop during cooling to understand its effects on steel structure and properties. Heat transfer analysis and the measurement of cooling rates during the stages of quenching with various media are described in A major consequence of the various gradients operative during quenching is the development of residual stresses superimposed on the hardened microstructures produced during the quench. The measurement and development of residual stresses in through-hardened steels and steels surface hardened by induction and laser heating are described in There are two approaches to producing hardened microstructures in low-alloy carbon steels: through hardening and surface hardening. Parts that are through-hardened depend on steels that are selected to have sufficient hardenability for producing martensitic microstructures throughout most of the part cross section. The There are many hardening techniques that are designed to strengthen only the surface of steel parts. Three examples, carburizing, nitriding, and induction hardening, are described in detail in this volume. Not only is surface strength increased relative to part interiors, but also beneficial residual surface stresses are produced by surface hardening techniques. Carburizing and nitriding are examples of processes that produce changes in surface chemistry, i.e., thermochemical processes. Carburizing is described in The chapters noted present comprehensive reviews and state-of-the art descriptions of the various facets of thermal engineering of hardenable steels. All have been written by experts that have long and detailed knowledge in their areas of expertise. There are areas of subject overlap between some of the chapters, but that overlap only adds to the understanding of some of the complex phenomena that occur in the quenching and tempering of steels. There are chapters devoted to the processing, its control, and its effects, and there are chapters devoted to finished microstructures and properties. This coverage is of vital importance to the mechanical, materials, and manufacturing engineers that must specify and select steels and heat treatments for the demanding structural applications for which quench and tempered steels are well suited.