Miniature hydrocyclones have received increasing attention due to their advantages of improved separation precision, low cost, easy operation and high stability. However, because of small treatment capacity of a single mini-hydrocyclone, numerous mini-hydrocyclones need to be connected in parallel to meet capacity of treatment for industrial applications. Thus, optimal method of parallel design of the numerous mini-hydrocyclones becomes a major challenge. In this paper, a general mathematical model was developed for a UU-type parallel mini-hydrocyclone group. Detailed analytical solutions were obtained to predict the pressure drop and flow distribution under different flow conditions and geometrical structures. Furthermore, an experimental apparatus with 12 HL/S25-type mini-hydrocyclones parallel in the UU-type arrangement was set up to verify the model under different inlet pressures. The results showed that the inlet pressure could be used to adjust uniformity of flow distribution. It was found that the theoretical pressure drop and flow distribution were in good agreement with the experimental data at 0.10MPa. The percentage of relative error was within 8% and less than 5% for pressure drop distribution and for flow distribution, respectively. The present model also studied the influence of the split ratio on pressure drop and flow distribution since there were two exhaust headers. The uniformity of these distributions increased as the split ratio increased. The present methodology and results provide a simple yet powerful analysis that could assist in the design and optimization of new mini-hydrocyclone systems for industrial applications and commercialization.constant in Eq. constant in Eq. constant in Eqs. coefficient of turning losses diameter (m) fanning friction factor cross-section area (m constant in Eq. length (m) length of the intake distribution header (m) number of mini-hydrocyclones in parallel arrangement dimensionless pressure pressure (Pa) constant in Eq. root of characteristic equation constant in Eq. dimensionless channel velocity channel velocity (m/s) dimensionless volume flow rate in the channels dimensionless velocity in header velocity in header (m/s) dimensionless coordinate in header axial coordinate in header (m) split ratio average velocity ratio in header fluid density (kg/m wall shear stress (N/m total head loss coefficient for channel flow overflow tube underflow tube intake distribution header overflow exhaust header underflow exhaust header Hydrocyclone separation technology has been widely applied in petroleum refining, petrochemical industry, coal liquefaction, coal separation, natural gas purification, methanol-to-olefin conversion, mineral processing, textile and pulp, and other environmental industries However, because of small treatment capacity, a single mini-hydrocyclone is always unable to meet the requirement of large-scale industrial applications. Connecting mini-hydrocyclones in parallel can overcome the problem, and at the same time, meet high precision of separation A typical arrangement of mini-hydrocyclone group is shown in Under ideal conditions, the treatment capacity of a mini-hydrocyclone group is the linear sum of single mini-hydrocyclones while the precision of the separation remains unchanged. However, this linear relationship may not be easy to achieve due to the presence of an uneven flow field in the mini-hydrocyclone group. Some mini-hydrocyclone units may lack fluids, whereas others may have them in excess, both of which will reduce the performance of the mini-hydrocyclone group Although numerous attempts have been made for flow field designs in recent years, all of them are to study the internal flow field and characteristics of pressure drop by using computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and laser test method The objective of this paper is to develop a general mathematical model for predicting the pressure drop and flow distribution in a UU-type parallel mini-hydrocyclone group with two exhaust headers and then establish an optimal parallel design method to improve performance. Furthermore, an experimental device is set up to validate the proposed model. A theoretical model of the UU-type parallel arrangement is to calculate pressure drop and flow distribution in a mini-hydrocyclone group, where both the intake and the exhaust headers are in the same side as shown schematically in Each mini-hydrocyclone has the same geometry size. The distance between the adjacent mini-hydrocyclones is equal. The intake and exhaust headers are of constant cross-sectional area. The connecting pipes between each mini-hydrocyclone and its intake and exhaust headers have the same turning and resistance losses. Fluid is single-phase flow and isothermal. The control volume in the intake distribution header of The mass and momentum balances are described as follows:  Setting Δ  After inserting The control volume in the overflow exhaust header of The mass and momentum balances are described as follows:   After inserting Subtracting Eq. The flow in the channels can be described by using Bernoulli’s equation in consideration of flow turning loss. When the resistance of the adjustable connecting pipes between the intake, overflow, and underflow of mini-hydrocyclone is ignored, the velocity in the overflow tube is correlated to the pressure drop between the intake distribution header and overflow exhaust header, as shown by: According to the pressure drop formula of mini-hydrocyclone, For a mini-hydrocyclone, split ratio is Inserting Eq. For Eq. To solve cubic equation Eq. After regrouping terms, the following is given: Compared with Eq. Inserting the former into the latter then gives: The equation shown below turns out to be a symmetrical expression. Therefore, a value of The solutions are then given: Finally, the roots of the original equation are given as follows: These can be simplified by defining the following equation: Therefore,   When Overflow tube velocity is obtained by substituting Eq. Channel flow distribution is calculated by using Eq. Pressure drop between intake distribution header and overflow exhaust header is obtained after substituting Eq.   Two conjugated solutions of the characteristic equation can be reduced as follows: Thus, the general solution of Eq. Axial velocity in the intake distribution header and overflow exhaust header of mini-hydrocyclone group is obtained by: Overflow tube velocity is obtained by substituting Eq. Channel flow distribution is calculated by using Eq. Pressure drop between intake distribution header and overflow exhaust header is obtained after substituting Eq.   Two conjugated solutions are the same as in Eq. Axial velocity in the intake distribution header and overflow exhaust header of mini-hydrocyclone group is obtained by: Overflow tube velocity is obtained by substituting Eq. Channel flow distribution is calculated by using Eq. Pressure drop between intake distribution header and overflow exhaust header is obtained after substituting Eq. A The schematic diagram of the experimental apparatus is shown in The inlet pressure of the intake distribution header was adjusted from 0.06 The detailed dimension parameters of UU-type parallel arrangement in the experiment system are shown in Pressure drop distribution profiles of a mini-hydrocyclone group for UU-type parallel arrangement are shown in Flow distribution profiles of a mini-hydrocyclone group for UU-type parallel arrangement are shown in The flow profiles of this setup configuration belong to Case 3 for the current experimental structure size and operating conditions. The results showed that the analytical solutions of the present model were in good agreement with experimental data under different inlet pressures. It can be expected that a better agreement between theoretical calculations and experimental data can be achieved under the above condition. Therefore, the analytical model can be used to explore a wider variety of combination of structures and flow parameters. The influence of parameters The influence of parameters The influence of changing parameter For Case 2, the two roots of characteristic equation are dependent on parameter Channel flow distribution in the mini-hydrocyclone group in Case 2 is illustrated in The influence of parameter The influence of parameter Compared with U-type arrangement, the remarkable characteristics of the UU-type arrangement is its two exhaust headers. Thus there is a split ratio It is interesting that the influence is greater at the entrance end than that at the closed end for Case 1. In contrast, the influences at the two ends are greater than at the middle for Case 3. This may be because the flow distribution for Case 1 decreases monotonically from the entrance to the closed end but the flow distribution for Case 3 increases firstly and then decreases. As mentioned before, an increase of the split ratio will improve non-uniformity of the flow distribution. Thus, this forces the uniformity of both Case 1 and Case 3 increases as the split ratio increases. Numerous problems arise when an uneven flow field exists in the parallel mini-hydrocyclone group. Some mini-hydrocyclone units may be starved of fluids, whereas others may have them in excess. The above results demonstrate the capability of the present model used for the UU-type parallel mini-hydrocyclone group. The present model considers both friction term and inertial term. The results show that the effects of these terms work in opposite directions. Hence, selecting reasonable factors can greatly improve the distribution of flow field. The results demonstrate possibilities for preliminary design optimization. Therefore, this paper provides designers a flexible and direct tool for UU-type parallel mini-hydrocyclone group. A group of mini-hydrocyclones is often employed to meet treatment capacity for large-scale industrial applications. There is a major challenge of parallel design to ensure the uniformity of pressure drop and flow distribution in a mini-hydrocyclone group. To the best of our knowledge, a general mathematical model was developed to predict the pressure drop and the flow distribution of such a complex group of parallel mini-hydrocyclones in the UU-type arrangement for the first time. Analytical solutions were obtained and parameter sensitivity was analyzed using two general parameters ( An experimental apparatus with 12 HL/S25-type mini-hydrocyclones parallel in the UU-type arrangement was also set up to validate the theoretical model. Because the split ratio is less than 1, it is overflow-based. The results showed that the flow belongs to Case 3 for the current experimental structure size and operating conditions. Uniform pressure drop and flow distribution could be approached through adjustment of inlet pressures. While The present methodology and results provide a simple yet powerful analysis that could assist in the design and optimization of new mini-hydrocyclone systems for industrial applications and commercialization. The model can also be applied to other mini-hydrocyclone group systems, such as oil mini-hydrocyclone of dehydration, LPG-amine mini-hydrocyclone, liquid-solid mini-hydrocyclone, gas–liquid mini-hydrocyclone, and gas–solid mini-hydrocyclone, among others. We would like to express our thanks for the sponsorship of