U3Si2 has been considered as an alternative fuel for Light Water Reactors (LWRs) within the Accident Tolerant Fuels (ATF) initiative, begun after the Fukushima-Daiichi Nuclear accidents. Its main advantages are high thermal conductivity and high heavy metal density. Despite these benefits, U3Si2 presents an anisotropic crystallographic structure and low solubility of fission products, which can result in undesirable effects under irradiation conditions. In this paper, spark plasma sintering (SPS) of U3Si2 pellets is studied, with evaluation of the resulting microstructure. Additionally, exploiting the short sintering time in SPS, a molybdenum doped pellet was produced to investigate the early stages of the Mo-U3Si2 interaction, and analyze how this fission product is accommodated in the fuel matrix. The results show that pellets of U3Si2 with high density (>95% TD) can be obtained with SPS in the temperature range of 1200°C-1300 °C. Moreover, the short time employed in this technique was found to generate a unique microstructure for this fuel, composed mainly of closed nano-pores (<1 μm) and small average grain size (∼4.5 μm). The addition of Mo (1.5 at%) demonstrated no solubility of Mo in the U3Si2 matrix. The interaction of this fission product with the fuel matrix at 1200 °C formed, in the early stages, the stoichiometric U2Mo3Si4 ternary as well as precipitates of free uranium with small quantities of dissolved Si and Mo at the front of the reaction.The uranium silicide compound U The U Recently, Idaho and Los Alamos National Laboratories have produced U Idaho National Laboratory, on the other hand, produced U Overall, the authors have reported difficulty in achieving high densities, with controlled grain size and close porosity. From this it can be inferred that significant development is still required in order to produce tailored microstructures for U Another main concern with respect to U In this work, the viability of sintering U U Castings were prepared according to the desired stoichiometry of the product, i. e. 7.3%wt Si and 92.7%wt U. It bears mentioning that with this process, losses of silicon due to vaporization were very low Subsequently, the as-cast material was comminuted into fine, ready-to-sinter powder, using high-energetic milling performed under an inert atmosphere to prevent oxidation. A Retsch PM100 planetary mill confined in a glove box under Ar atmosphere were used to comminute the material. A SS316 cup and balls were used with a speed of 500 rpm. A 20 min milling process was used. With inversion of direction every 2 min. Oxygen impurities in the as-milled powder were determined using a LECO TC-436 X-ray diffraction (XRD) in the powder condition was performed employing an air-tight sample holder Bruker Model A1000B138-B141 sealed inside of an Ar-filled glove box. A Siemens D5000 diffractomer with a Cu k-α source were used to perform scan at 2θ range from 20° to 80° and a scan rate of 0.02°/s. The x-ray result revealed a predominant crystal structure matching that of the U The as-milled powder corresponds mainly (90%) of small particles (∼5 μm), with tendency to agglomerate, and some fraction (∼10%) of larger pieces of about ∼20-50μm ( After comminution, the powder was consolidated using the spark plasma sintering (SPS) method. This method is characterized by very short sintering times and lower temperatures, compared to the conventional route After sintering, the graphite foil bonded to the surface of the pellets was removed by grinding with SiC (P320) paper. Bulk characterization was performed on the pellet, i.e., density measurement, optical microscopy (LOM), SEM and a fraction of the pellets were cracked, pulverized, and characterized by XRD. No detection of C or UC was observed after the grinding process, in consistent with previous work Metallographic preparation was conducted by grinding with SiC (320, 600, 1200) and polishing with diamond suspension (9 μm, 3 μm and 1 μm), and diluted colloidal silica (1:3) as final polishing agent. An optical microscope Olympus PMG3 and two electron microscopes, (SEM Philips XL-30 and a JEOL SEM Quanta FEG 250 FEI) were used in the microstructural analyses reported here. Etching was performed using a mix of acetic acid 80% with nitric acid 65% with a volume ratio of 70/30 as reported in previous literature Average grain sizes were determined using the intercept method according to ASTM E 112-96 The densities obtained by Archimedean method, by image analysis, and the resulting average gain size are listed in From this it is possible to see that SPS is effective in producing high densities in U Microstructural analyses ( Increasing the sintering temperature/time to 1200 °C/6min resulted in a rather different morphology as can be seem in  The increase in hold time and temperature, generated an increase in resultant grain size as well as a decrease in the porosity, as can be seem in Having established the SPS conditions that result in a high density U  High resolution SEM in the as etched condition is presented in The results obtained here evidence the absence of solubility for Mo in U In this work, the microstructure of U Additionally, the inclusion of molybdenum in the milling process has been shown to be an efficient method for studying the chemical interaction of the solid fission products with the fuel matrix. The analysis of the produced pellet demonstrates the total lack of solubility for Mo in the U The author wishes to acknowledge the cooperation of Dr. Mirva Eriksson coordinator of the National Spark Plasma Sintering Facility in the Materials and Environmental Chemistry Department at Stockholm University.