In this study, the electrochemical degradation process of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in aqueous media was performed using a continuous flow reactor in an undivided cell (system I), and in a divided cell with a cationic membrane (Nafion® 424) (system II). In system I, 75% of 5-FU degradation was achieved (50 mg L−1) with a applied current density j
                     
                        app
                      = 150 A m−2, volumetric flow rate qv = 13 L h−1, after 6 h of electrolysis (kapp = 0.004 min−1). The removal efficiency of 5-FU was higher (95%) when the concentration was 5 mg L−1 under the same conditions. Nitrates (22% of initial amount of N), fluorides (27%) and ammonium (10%) were quantified after 6 h of electrolysis.
                  
                     System II, 77% of 5-FU degradation was achieved (50 mg L−1) after 6 h of electrolysis (kapp = 0.004 min−1). The degradation rate of 5-FU was complete when the concentration was 5 mg L−1 under the same conditions. Nitrates (29% of initial amount of N), fluorides (25%) and ammonium (5%) were quantified after 6 h of electrolysis.
                  In addition, the main organic byproducts identified by mass spectroscopy were aliphatic compound with carbonyl and carboxyl functionalities.
                  Due to, the mineralization of 5-FU with acceptable efficiency of 88% found in system II (j
                     
                        app
                      of 200 A m−2), this system seems to be more promising in the cytostatic drug removal. Moreover the efficiency of 5-FU removal in diluted solutions is better in system II than in system I.Over the years, the use of the cytostatic medicament drugs has increased owing to their application in the treatment of cancer patients. These chemical agents have been designed to disrupt or prevent the proliferation of infected cancer cells, so these compounds can be very dangerous to reach natural effluents ( Since 5-FU is excreted in the urine, its high concentrations are commonly found in effluents from hospitals with oncology departments (100 μg L For this reason, the Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs) appeared as promising wastewater treatment processes capable of degrading recalcitrant contaminants with acceptable effectiveness ( One of the most powerful AOPs is the electro-oxidation process (EOP), which involves a combined process: direct oxidation due to anode polarization and indirect oxidation due to the At present the BDD electrode is one of the most promising material in the environmental field due to its unique properties such as remarkable corrosion stability, inert surface with low adsorption and extremely high O A variety of techniques involving reactors are being examined for removal of organic contaminants from water sources employing BDD anode ( The present paper inquiries into the electrochemical degradation of the most widely used cytostatic drug, 5-FU, by means of a flow reactor with an undivided and divided cell using the BDD electrode. Operating parameters such as flow rate (4, 8, 13 L h The 5-FU standards were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Steinheim, Germany), Acetonitrile (ACN) and sodium sulfate (supported electrolyte) were obtained from P.P.H. Stanlab (Lublin, Poland). Potassium ferricyanide, potassium ferrocyanide, sodium hydroxide, sodium chloride, silver nitrate, potassium chromate, ammonium sulfate, potassium dihydrogen phosphate, potassium hydrogen phosphate, ascorbic acid, ammonium fluoride, ammonium nitrate were purchased from POCH S.A. (Gliwice, Poland). The galvanostatic experiments were carried out in a flow reactor with the 10 mL electrolysis cell. In the cell, two circular, flat (11.7 mm diameter) electrodes were placed, boron-doped diamond (Si/BDD) (Adamant Technologies, B/C ratio about 500 ppm) was used as an anode, stainless steel (SS) as a cathode. The distance between the cathode and the anode was 3.5 cm. Degradation experiments were performed in a flow reactor with divided and undivided cell as shown in Experiments were performed at room temperature 25 ± 3 °C. A comparison of kinetics of oxidative processes occurring in 5-FU was carried out for the initial drug concentration of 50 and 5 mg L The limiting current density was analytically determined based on the electrolysis process in the mixture of solutions: 0.05 M of potassium ferrocyanide (compound to be anodically oxidized), 0.10 M of potassium ferricyanide (compound to be cathodically reduced) and 6 g L N-dimethyl-p-nitrosoaniline (RNO) was used to estimate the relative amount of The concentration of 5-FU was determined by means of HPLC with UV detector (Perkin Elmer, Series 200) equipped with a Phenomenex C-18 column (150 mm × 4.6 nm, 2.6 μm). Acetonitrile HPLC was mobile phase A and water served as a mobile phase B. Both phases were selected via isocratic elution. For the 5-FU the flow rate in the system was 0.7 mL min The values of COD were measured using standard cuvette tests (HACH) and an Odyssey spectrophotometer. The concentration of by-products such as chloride was measured by argentometric method and fluoride (444-49), phosphate (Cadmium reduction), ammonium (Nessler method) and nitrate (21061-69) were measured using cuvette tests (HACH). Additionally, the reaction intermediate products were identified in sample without pre-treatment, with the use of an Agilent 1200 Series LC system (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, USA) coupled to an HCT Ultra ion trap mass spectrometer (Brucker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The chromatographic parameters were identical with those used during the HPLC-UV analysis. The MS analysis was conducted by using positive and negative mode electrospray ionization (ESI) over a mass scan range of 50–350 In the first step of the investigation, the direct oxidation of 5-FU was examined. 50 mg L In order to examine the hypothesis that decomposition and mineralization of 5-FU in galvanostatic conditions occurred mainly by reaction with For the analysis of the effects of volumetric flow rate on the decomposition of 5-FU the fixed current density value ( In the beginning, the effect of volumetric flow rate on the production of In the next step, the decomposition rate of 5-FU was analyzed in two initial concentrations of the drug. In 50 mg L A different situation was observed at low concentration of 5-FU ( In system II the pH value after 30 min of electrolysis dropped around pH ∼ 2 and was independent of the volumetric flow rate employed ( The results of the experiments that were performed at the flow rate from 4 to 13 L h In both systems at volumetric flow rate of 13 L h  In the low concentration of 5-FU (5 mg L In both systems mineralization of 5-FU was poor, but the values of TOC removal determined for system II were slightly higher than those obtained for system I ( Other research groups reported that mineralization of organic pollutants was complete after 6–8 h of electrolysis ( Therefore the experiments with electrochemical oxidation of 5-FU using 200 A m Despite that 5-FU is very rapidly decomposed by electrochemical oxidation, its mineralization required high charge consumption. This fact reflected in the mineralization current efficiency (MCE) values ( It was observed that after 6 h of the process the pH obtained in system I was about of 5, while in system II pH reached the value about of 2 during first 30 min of electrolysis ( However the oxidation process of 5-FU in system II, where the pH dropped to 2 during the first 30 min of electrolysis was more effective than in system I. This fact could be explained by the generation of SO This hypothesis was confirmed by the experiments in system II with the different electrolyte background: i) NaNO From the results in As a general trend, it can be observed that 5-FU - parent compound - was oxidized very fast at BDD electrode, while the intermediates were decomposed at a much lower rate. The result of their accumulation in the solution was observed in system I (at The increase of current density from 150 A m In next step, the mechanism of 5-FU degradation was analyzed based on the LC-UV and LC-MS/MS data of the aliquots taken during electrolysis carried out at A few intermediates were found by LC-MS/MS technique with the electrospray ionization (ESI) in positive and negative ion mode. The obtained results showed that the oxidation of 5-FU in system I and system II led to very small amount of intermediates, which can be identified by LC-MS in applied conditions. In system I, where the oxidation and reduction processes participated in decomposition of 5-FU the lower amount of intermediates were formed than in System II. Electrochemical decomposition of the drug resulted in three intermediates, namely [M-H] The decomposition of 5-FU in system II resulted in a higher amount of intermediates with the products being: [M+H] The possibly pathway of 5-FU electrochemical decomposition in system I and II was presented in When a BDD/Si anode in a flow reactor was used, in the absence of organic matter in solution, high values of volumetric flow rate and current density favor the performance of the electrochemical system I (without divided cell) more than system II (with anolyte and catholyte space) in the generation of At current density of 150 A m The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at