Talc, which is an extremely versatile industrial mineral, has found increasing number of uses in various industries such as paint, paper, plastic, ceramic and cosmetic. As it is well known, the particle shape is one of the main properties affecting the behavior and properties of mineral particles, especially for the bubble-particle attachment in flotation.
                  In this study, shape characteristics of talc particles produced by laboratory ball and rod mills were determined by automated image analysis using Malvern Morphologi® G3 instrument. The results were compared by previous studies on the same samples that used other shape characterization techniques namely Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) (Yekeler et al., 2004; Hiçyılmaz et al., 2004) and Clemex image analysis system (Ulusoy, 2008). About 10,058 particles for ball milled product and 7086 particles for rod milled product were measured for the shape analysis by the Malvern Morphologi® G3 instrument. They were expressed in terms of Aspect ratio, HS Circularity and Elongation and compared by applying t-test using the software Statistical Package for Social Science (SPSS) with a 0.05 significance level. t-Test revealed that, the difference between the image data group for different mill products are significant with a 95% confidence level.
                  Although lower sample population was used for the SEM and Clemex analysis techniques than for the new technique Malvern Morphologi® G3, there is a clear difference in the particle shape obtained by different grinding methods for the talc mineral used. The determined shape property depends on the measurement technique applied. However, the results are in good agreement with each other by this study. i.e., more elongated talc particles were obtained by rod mill product.One common method of producing mineral particles is by crushing and grinding. The particular mode of breakage is likely to affect the shape of product particles. Grinding is most frequently done in tumbling mills such as ball and rod mills, utilizing loose grinding media, lifted by the rotation of the drum, to break the ores in various combinations of impact, attrition and abrasion to produce the specified product ( Talc which has a theoretical formula of Mg Since, the shape of mineral particles produced by the comminution devices is generally non-spherical, the shape of comminuted mineral particles is important physical criteria for the bubble-particle attachment in flotation ( Image analysis systems capture a 2-dimensional (2D) image of the 3-dimensional (3D) particle and calculate various particle size and particle shape parameters from this 2D image. Automated image analysis is a fast method that eliminates operator bias and fatigue. It brings reliability, accuracy and reproducibility regardless who is performing the analysis. Besides, it allows statistically significant sampling of 10,000–500,000 particles in one measurement. The purpose of this study was first to measure the same talc sample which analyzed by two different techniques before, utilizing an automated image analysis by Malvern Morphologi® G3. Secondly, to determine whether the shape parameters obtained for two different mill products were statistically different from each other. And, lastly to compare the results obtained by previous different shape characterization techniques namely Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) ( The morphological parameters used in the Malvern Morphologi® G3 Software are as the following:    It is sometimes termed compactness. A perfect circle has an HS circularity of 1.0 while a narrow rod has an HS circularity close to 0.    Elongation values range from 0 to 1. A rod, for example, has a high elongation. The The statistics In this study, the same pure talc mineral (characterized by XRD analysis which was previously reported in the study by After jaw crushing and screening, feed sizes were prepared as −850 In order to compare the particle shapes of the same talc material by different previously employed techniques such as SEM ( Basic principles of image analysis which based on two dimensional technique, include four steps, namely; sample presentation, image capture, result and analysis, image processing. All of the samples appeared to be free flowing in nature and so dry dispersion using the Morphologi® G3’s integrated dispersion unit at low pressure was well suited. Prior to sampling, each of the samples was transferred to a sample pot and was manually tumbled 20 times. Method development was carried out on samples and they were measured twice to confirm repeatability. All samples were analyzed on the Malvern Morphologi® G3 ( Image analysis data belongs to two different mill products (ball and rod mill) were imported by a software called “Statistical Package for Social Science” 13.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) to determine whether the shape parameters of two mill products were statistically different from each other. Then the mean values of the shape parameters (length, width, perimeter, area, Elongation, HS circularity and Aspect ratio) were compared pair-wise for any statistically significant differences by the Since all values at the column of “Sig. (2-tailed)” in  These results are in good agreement with previous study carried out by the same sample determined by Clemex image analysis (  The previous study performed with the same talc mineral particles produced by ball and rod mill also provides good agreement with the findings obtained by this study, too. In fact, the shape parameters of HS Circularity determined by this study, roundness ( Similarly, Aspect ratio used in this study and relative width (  Some of the images analyzed for ball and rod milled particles of talc mineral were given in The shape results are similar to the findings obtained by the previous studies tested on the same samples ( Comparing the overall results with three different 2D measurement techniques used for the same talc mineral produced by ball and rod mill it has been revealed that, there is significant differences among the two products of mills with a confidence level of 95%. Although lower sample population was used for the SEM and Clemex analysis techniques than for the new technique Malvern Morphologi® G3 and the determined shape property depends on the measurement technique applied, more elongated particles were found in rod mill products. The shape parameters of the two different mill products for talc mineral which is previously studied by SEM and Clemex image analysis techniques, were determined successfully by using Malvern Morphologi® G3 based on the automated image analysis. Besides, the numbers of particles counted for this technique are too greater than other shape characterization techniques namely Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) ( The differences in the obtained shape parameters such as Aspect ratio, Circularity and Elongation for ball and rod mill products were found statistically significant with a 95% confidence level, i.e. the shape of the two different mill products were not similar. This was proved by applying The results are similar to the findings obtained by the previous studies tested on the same samples ( Authors would like to thank to Assistant Professor Dr. Erkut Kartal from the Department of Statistics at the Istanbul University for his statistical contribution to the study by using SPSS program. Authors also gratefully acknowledge the kind support by Deborah Huck from Malvern Instruments Ltd. in the image analysis of the samples.