Fixation of tibia bone fractures is quite convenient in terms of surgical procedure, but it can be challenging to find a suitable fixation method based on the fracture pattern; soft tissue considerations; whether it is an open or close fracture; and expected clinical outcomes. Body weight bearing of tibia fracture fixation in conjunction with range of motion at knee and ankle joints would affect preservation of the primary reduction from which fracture union is challenged. In this regard, the extents of body weight bearing and range of motion at various stages of fracture healing (hematoma, primary callus formation, secondary callus formation, bone mineralization, and consolidation) are vital to obtain successful clinical outcomes. Tibia fractures might occur due to high trauma energy from falling or accidents that compromise skin and soft tissues. It is crucial to consider treatment and preservation of the injured soft tissues during implantation of a trauma locking plate to prevent delayed union, malunion, nonunion, and infection complications. Plating of tibia fractures could be more challenging at proximal and distal zones. Various trauma plates with specific intended uses were developed to be placed on the intended aspect of tibia bone to buttress the fracture site while capturing the bone fragments in a multifragmentary fracture pattern. In this chapter, these concepts along with other biomechanical and clinical concepts of tibia bone fracture fixation are reviewed and discussed.Introduction General Biomechanical Concept of Tibia Bone Proximal Tibia Fracture Fixation Single and Double Plating Fixation of Proximal Tibia Fractures Lateral Plating Fixation of Proximal Tibia Fractures Loading and Boundary Conditions of Proximal Tibia Fracture Fixation Bone Grafting in Plating Fixation of Proximal Tibia Fractures Effect of Micromotion on Bone In-Growth Biomechanical Evaluation of Posterolateral Proximal Tibia Fracture Fixation Effective Selection of Plating Fixation Method Based on the Fracture Pattern Plating Fixation of Bicondylar Proximal Tibia Fracture Rafting Screw in Fixation of Depressed Fragmentary Plating Fixation of Proximal Tibia Fractures With Involvement of Medial Fragmentary Fracture Malunion in Plating Fixation of Proximal Tibia Fractures Combination of Internal-External Fixation of Severe Fragmentary Tibia Fractures External Plating Fixation of Proximal Tibia Fractures Some Clinical Considerations in Plating Fixation of Proximal Tibia Fractures Distal Tibia Fracture Fixation Comparison Between Medial, Anterolateral, and Lateral Plating Fixation of Distal Tibia Fractures Interfragmentary Compression in Plating Fixation of Distal Tibia Fractures Advantageous of Precontoured Plate in Medial Plating Fixation of Extraarticular Distal Tibia Fracture External Plating Fixation of Distal Tibia Fractures Advantageous of Using Dynamic Locking Screws in Fixation of Metadiaphyseal Distal Tibia Fracture Advantageous of MIPO in Plating Fixation of Distal Tibia Fracture Distal Fibula Fracture Fixation Discussion Remind and Learn Think and Challenge References  Fibula bone is thin and long. Its crucial role is the stabilization of ankle joint during internal and external rotations. Proximal and distal portions of fibula bone are joined to tibia bone through tibiofibular joints and at the shaft portion interosseous membrane ligaments join the tibia and fibula together. Fibula bone does not have bearing capacity to support tibia bone; however, some extensor and flexor muscles of toes originate from fibula bone. Tibia bone is biomechanically crucial to bear the body weight loading conditions. Body weight is applied as a Proximal tibia fractures have been fixed by utilizing single or double plating systems. In a single plating system, the plate is inserted in the lateral or medial aspect of proximal tibia bone, while in a double plating system; the plate is positioned at lateral and posterior medial aspects. Single lateral locking plating has been reported to have comparable biomechanical advantages over double plating fixation for fixation of proximal tibia fractures Hasan et al. To arrange the boundary and loading conditions of the proximal tibia fracture fixation, the load is applied to the bone-implant construct from tibia plateau and distal tibia is fixed. Physiologically, the force is transferred from distal femur condyles when the tibia bone is positioned vertical during full standing ( To enhance the loading conditions close to the physiological conditions, it is beneficial to use the distal portion of femur bone with internal-external rotation with similar physiologic angular range. Proximal tibia fracture fixation could be loaded by bending moment when the tibia bone is positioned oblique to the vertical position. In this position, the quadriceps muscle-tendons are stretched, which generates transverse force to the proximal tibia bone ( The attached muscle-tendons to the proximal tibia are adductor magnus, biceps femoris, biceps femoris short head, gracilis, quadriceps femoris, rectus femoris, sartorius, semimembranosus, semitendinosus, tensor fasciae latae, vastus intermedius, vastus lateralis, and vastus medialis. These muscles In some cases, the volume portion of the cancellous bone at the metaphyseal portion of the proximal tibia is destroyed or dead and needs to be extracted from the body during fixation of fracture. Such voids are filled by inserting bone graft, which could be cancellous autograft, allograft chips, structural allograft, or calcium phosphate cement. Hsu et al. The effect of bone micromotion on its biological remodeling process has been reviewed by Pauchard et al. Biomechanical evaluation of proximal tibia fracture fixation has been configured for mechanical testing of various fixation methods Selection of fixation method for treatment of proximal tibia bone fractures is crucial. Due to the high, width, and length of tibia bone, various portions of the tibia plateau could be In some cases, the tibia plateau could be fractured with multiple fragments in lateral, medial, posterior, or anterior. For these fracture types, lateral locking plate would be normally used to buttress the fragment at lateral side and capture the fragments in medial, posterior, or anterior sides. As explained earlier, the fragment capturing by the screws would not be very effective in providing stability of small fragments that are not buttressed by the plate. In this condition, use of other plate specifically to buttress the small bone fragment might be necessary to secure the fragment in anatomical position under cyclic physiological loading condition during the fracture healing period. The difference of compressive strength in single and double plating fixation of simple bicondylar fractures ( In severe bicondylar fractures, fixation of small medial fragment could not be effectively achieved by lateral plating, which may cause adduction dislocation of medial fragment and nonunion of the fracture ( Perez et al. Jiang et al. In order to clarify the union alignment, over 5 Gerber et al. Qiu et al. Overall, in recent years, using locking plate as external fixators has been clinically reported for low number of cases with promising clinical outcomes (lower nonunion rate compared to conventional external fixation, good function of knee joint, low rate of soft tissue complication in treatment of open fracture with compromised soft tissues, low rate of infection, and good union rate), which promotes this method for treatment of open proximal tibia fractures with compromised soft tissues. Diagnosis of fracture pattern has been found to be crucial for selection of adequate trauma locking plate and screws Naik et al. Spagnolo et al. Plating fixation of distal tibia fractures has been biomechanically investigated Anterolateral plating fixation of distal tibia would provide good exposure of the lateral malleolus and distal portion of tibia bone Aizat et al. In view of biological concerns, blood supply or vascularization would be preserved in anterolateral plating fixation while it might be affected by medial plating fixation. The poor blood supply would affect healing of fracture, which could cause delayed union or even nonunion or infection In addition of anterolateral and medial plating fixations, lateral plating of the distal tibia fracture has been also reported to be effective for simple fracture pattern with no fragmentary at medial side. Lateral plating of distal tibia fracture would also facilitate fixation of distal fibula fracture with no excessive exposure of the fracture site Fixation of fracture in the diaphyseal portion of distal third tibia could be performed by medial distal tibia plating with or without incorporation of lag screw. In general, the stability and flexibility of fracture fixation is the key for effective healing of the bone without malunion or even non-union effects (stability and flexibility of fracture fixation has been reviewed in Horn et al. Piatkowski et al. Gupta et al. Gao et al. Locking plate has been introduced to be used as external fixator in treatment of distal tibia fractures as utilized for fixation of proximal tibia open fractures Vicenti et al. It is worth to mention that MIPO and open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) methods have been utilized for fixation of distal tibia fractures. From the literature, the ORIF method has been found to have a lower rate of complication development Distal fibula bone is fractured due to severe bending of the foot in accidents or falling from a height. Indeed the severe rotation of talus bone would apply high torque to lateral malleolus of the distal fibula bone. This torque may cause fracture of distal fibula bone at the fibular notch due to constraint of tibiofibular ligaments at this zone. Various plating fixation The antiglide plating has been assessed in the literature Fixation of fibular fracture has been recently evaluated by Switaj et al. Various biomechanical and clinical concepts of plating fixation for treatment of tibia bone fractures have been reviewed in this chapter. According to the reviewed clinical investigations, two main reasons would cause complications associated with fracture healing: extent of loading conditions and soft tissues compromise. Soft tissue compromise would occur when the bone fragment is largely displaced or dislocated to some extent that can tear periosteal or skin. This soft tissue injury would eclipse the bone remodeling at the fracture site. It is therefore that soft tissues are treated first and an external fixator is used to reduce the fracture in anatomical position. After healing of the soft tissue injury, further internal fracture fixation would be managed for treatment of fracture. In view of loading, because the tibia fracture fixation would be strongly affected by body weight loading conditions, improvement in biomechanical evaluation methods could enhance understanding of plating fixation under various loading conditions (compression, bending, or torsion loads). This would result in higher effectiveness of plating fixation in treatment of tibia fractures, particularly fractures at proximal and distal third tibia bone. In plating fixation of proximal tibia fractures, buttressing of the bone fragments by the plate, preferably anatomical, has been found advantageous for enhancement fracture fixation stability during healing period. It is therefore that double lateral-medial plating of bicondylar fracture, medial plating of severe fragmentary at medial column, and posterolateral plating of fragmentary at posterolateral have been addressed as adequate fixation methods with good biomechanical and clinical benefits. In plating fixation of distal tibia fractures, anterolateral plating would provide better buttressing of the bone fragments compared to medial plating in multifragmentary fracture at the metaphyseal portion of distal tibia, particularly with involvement of interarticular fracture. However, medial plating would enhance biomechanical strength of fracture fixation in treatment of fracture at diaphyseal portion of distal third tibia bone. On the other hand, irritation of skin and soft tissues at medial plating of distal tibia has been reported to be a major complication, which was suggested development of precontoured low profile distal tibia plates to be anatomically placed on medial malleolus. Although, the clinical outcomes are promising to introduce the plating fixation of tibia fractures as optimum solution among the trauma fixation methods, further development of trauma locking plates and screws would be suggested to reduce In this section, some questions are provided to enhance the reading and learning of the concepts that were reviewed in this chapter. P 13.1: Describe the general biomechanical aspects of tibia and fibula bone. P 13.2: Describe single and double plating fixation of proximal tibia fractures. P 13.3: What is the main challenge of using lateral proximal tibia locking plate in plating fixation of proximal tibia fractures? In which conditions could thinner lateral locking plate be utilized with comparable biomechanical strength compared to traditional thick plate? P 13.4: How is the load transferring between femoral condyles and tibia plateau? P 13.5: Explain how boundary and loading conditions could be organized in biomechanical testing of proximal tibia fracture fixation for evaluation of lateral and medial plating fixation. How could loading conditions be enhanced to be close to the physiological conditions? P 13.6: Describe biomechanical testing of proximal tibia fracture fixation when the tibia bone is positioned oblique to the vertical axis. P 13.7: What bone grafting material has been used in the study of Hsu et al. P 13.8: What is the optimum micromotion for effective bone ingrowth to the implant and bone remodeling? What is the benefit of micromotion or bone strain evaluation during development stage of osteotomy plating system in deformity treatment of tibia bone? P 13.9: What are the acceptable limits of bone strain and volume fraction in FEA of trauma bone plating fracture fixation? P 13.10: What type of plating fixation has been found with highest biomechanical strength? Why? P 13.11: Express effectiveness of buttressing and capturing of the bone fragments in plating fixation of proximal tibia fractures. P 13.12: Describe bicondylar proximal tibia fracture pattern. Would single plating of bicondylar proximal tibia fracture be comparable with double plating? Why? P 13.13: What method could be helpful for fracture reduction in single plating fixation of bicondylar proximal tibia fracture? P 13.14: Describe severe bicondylar proximal tibia fractures. What types of plating methods have been found effective in plating fixation of these fractures? P 13.15: What is a rafting screw? Explain how a rafting screw could be utilized to enhance plating fixation of proximal tibia fractures with depressed fragmentary close to the articular surface (tibia plateau)? P 13.16: Compare and discuss biomechanical strength of single medial plating, double lateral-medial plating, double medial plating, and single lateral plating in fixation of proximal tibia fractures with involvement of medial fragmentary. P 13.17: What are the criteria of malunion or misalignment in plating fixation of proximal tibia fractures? What are the main challenges to reduce the risk of malunion in fixation of extraarticular fracture in proximal third of tibia bone? Discuss the effect of malunion on clinical outcomes. P 13.18: What type of fracture pattern at proximal tibia bone would be treated by internal and external fixation? Why? P 13.19: What conditions proximal tibia fractures would be treated by external plating fixation? Discuss the effectiveness of this method. P 13.20: What are the benefits of preoperative diagnosis of the fracture pattern in treatment of proximal tibia fractures? P 13.21: What are the benefits of minimally invasive technique or LISS in treatment of proximal tibia fractures? P 13.22: What are the challenges of plating fixation in treatment of complex proximal tibia metaphyseal fracture with extended fragmentary pattern to the diaphyseal zone? P 13.23: What are the biomechanical and clinical advantages and disadvantages of anterolateral distal tibia plating fixation in treatment of distal tibia fractures? P 13.24: What are the biomechanical and clinical advantages and disadvantages of medial distal tibia plating fixation in treatment of distal tibia fractures? P 13.25: Why would anterolateral plating fixation enhance the clinical outcomes compared to medial plating fixation in treatment of multifragmentary or comminuted distal tibia fractures? P 13.26: Discuss the effectiveness of anterolateral and medial plating fixation in treatment of extraarticular fracture. P 13.27: What types of fracture pattern could be treated by lateral plating fixation in treatment of distal tibia fractures? P 13.28: Explain how interfragmentary motion between the bone fragments (fracture gaps) is influenced by flexibility and stability of fracture fixation at the fracture site. P 13.29: What are the biomechanical benefits of using lag screws for interfragmentary lagging or compression in treatment of diaphyseal fracture at distal third portion of tibia bone? P 13.30: What are the clinical benefits of using lag screws for interfragmentary lagging or compression in treatment of diaphyseal fracture at distal third portion of tibia bone? P 13.31: How the loading conditions could be planned in treatment of severe diaphyseal fracture at distal third portion of tibia bone? P 13.32: Express the advantageous features of precontoured anatomical medial distal tibia plate in plating fixation of distal tibia fractures? What are the biomechanical and clinical advantages of this plate in treatment of distal tibia fractures? In this section, some questions are provided to explore the challenges that could be further discussed and investigated in relation with the concepts that were reviewed in this chapter. P 13.1: Discuss how plating fixation of tibia fracture could be biomechanically evaluated to reduce the malunion, nonunion complications. P 13.2: Discuss the effective arrangement of loading and boundary condition in biomechanical testing of distal and proximal tibia fracture fixations. P 13.3: Discuss how to study the fracture pattern preoperatively for selection of appropriate plating fixation method.