The crack initiation and propagation behaviour of St52-3N steel is investigated under biaxial conditions. Short crack behaviour is studied and pearlite bands are found to modify the crack growth rate. The behaviour under proportional and non-proportional (90°) loading is studied with different critical plane models; Wang–Brown, Fatemi–Socie, Smith–Watson–Topper, Liu I and Liu II. Smith–Watson–Topper and Liu I are found to best predict the crack orientation under proportional loading and Fatemi–Socie and Liu II under non-proportional loading. The best predictions in terms of fatigue life are obtained by Fatemi–Socie, both under proportional and non-proportional loads.fatigue strength exponent fatigue strength exponent fatigue ductility exponent fatigue ductility exponent crack growth rate parameter represents the influence of the normal stress in Fatemi–Socie model cyclic strength coefficient cyclic strength coefficient cyclic hardening exponent cyclic hardening exponent fatigue life, number of cycles sensitivity factor for Brown–Miller model angular strain amplitude fatigue ductility coefficient maximum angular strain amplitude range of normal strain acting on the plane subjected to Δ axial work shear work axial strain amplitude von Mises equivalent strain fatigue ductility coefficient angle between longitudinal direction of the specimen and the normal direction Poisson’s ration in elastic deformation Poisson’s ration in plastic deformation axial stress amplitude critical buckling stress maximum normal stress acting on the plane subjected to Δ normal stress yield strength cyclic yield strength fatigue strength coefficient ultimate tensile stress angular stress amplitude torsional stress cyclic yield strength fatigue strength coefficient The majority of mechanical components experience multiaxial cyclic loading conditions. As a consequence two or three principal stresses and strains change in time, both in magnitude and direction. A number of theories have been proposed to estimate fatigue life under such complex conditions There are a number of issues on multiaxial fatigue in which researchers do not completely agree Biaxial experimental tests are difficult, expensive and time-consuming, hence the amount of biaxial data available in the literature is not as large as for uniaxial fatigue Some of the experimental details have been previously shown The current work utilises both measured stress and strains, in contrast to the previous work The material investigated was St52-3N with the following chemical composition: 0.17% C, 1.235% Mn, 0.225% Si, 0.010% P, 0.0006% S, 0.032% Al, 0.072% Cr, 0.058% Ni and 0.016% Mo. This is a low carbon steel widely used in structural applications in construction, manufacturing, ship building and offshore industries. Monotonic tension, compression and torsion tests were conducted to evaluate the monotonic properties listed in Experimental tests were also carried out to characterise cyclic uniaxial properties, instead of obtaining them from analytical models. Results are shown in Part of the complexity of the current fatigue tests is due to the need to conduct them under strain control mode. By doing so, more information can be extracted from each experiment. While strain curves ( Cracks nucleated around a 0.15 Several cycles were captured with the digital camera every 250 applied cycles at 22 frames per second. This allowed us to have at least one image of the crack fully open every 250 cycles, which was then used to monitor the crack growth Early growth was studied in samples S1 and S2 following the procedures described in Section The fracture surface was studied by SEM. A series of biaxial tests were conducted both in-phase and out-of-phase (90°). Based on previous uniaxial results, strain levels were chosen so that number of cycles to failure was between 10  Cyclic properties obtained in torsional tests ( Results of shear strain amplitude and axial strain amplitude against fatigue life are shown in Critical plane criteria are based on observations according to which fatigue cracks nucleate and grow in specific planes, called critical planes. Critical plane models relate the fatigue life to the stresses and strains occurring in those planes, through the determination of an equivalent damage parameter. Therefore critical plane models aim at predicting not only the fatigue life but also the crack orientation or the dominant fracture plane. The critical plane and the damage parameter are defined in each model as a function of some external conditions. Five different critical plane approaches are considered in this work, namely Wang–Brown (WB), Fatemi–Socie (FS), Smith–Watson–Topper (SWT) Liu I and Liu II. For the sake of completeness, a brief overview of the three criteria is provided in this section. According to Wang and Brown Fatemi and Socie’s work Smith, Watson and Topper criterion The stress term, Liu’s criterion The fatigue life is calculated from the damage parameters introduced in previous equations The critical plane was studied for all loading cases investigated ( The normal strain acting on the plane subjected to Δ The normal stress acting on the plane subjected to Δ The shear stress term employed in Liu I and Liu II models is calculated according to: All damage parameters described in Section The evolution of the damage parameter against the angle In the proportional case the maximum and minimum values in time of Eqs. The critical plane according to WB and FS will be where Δ From a purely mathematical viewpoint, the maximum range of shear strain takes place exactly in two planes, namely the critical planes. However, the planes surrounding the critical planes are subjected to very similar strains. In fact the planes located at ±18° around the critical plane, experience strains of 90% of the strain at the critical plane and those in a range of ±10° experience strains of 97% of that of the critical plane. From a materials science viewpoint, there exist a number of microstructure irregularities such as grain boundaries, dislocations, and grain orientation. which also have a large impact on crack nucleation and are not accounted for in the models. As a consequence, a range of planes of ±18° surrounding the critical planes will be considered when comparing with experimental observations. The evolution of damage parameters for non-proportional loading is much simpler than that of proportional loading since they are always symmetrical with respect to 90°. Accordingly, the identification of the critical plane is much easier. The experimental failure plane was measured considering the normal direction to the crack plane when the crack was visible. The orientation was measured with respect to the longitudinal axis of the specimen at the initiation point of the crack. The initiation point of the crack was detected with a long distance microscope focused on the specimen. This surface observation was done while the experiment was being conducted. Measurement of the angles was done with ImageJ software A scale must be defined in order to measure the cracking orientation. Depending on the scale used, the roughness and the tortuosity of the crack faces can largely modify the crack orientation. The five different models discussed in this work aim at predicting the crack orientation at crack formation and early crack growth. However, no results were included in the original papers correlating experimental observations with model predictions in terms of crack orientation The differences between the crack nucleation angle predicted by the different models and the angle measured experimentally are shown in For proportional loading the overall best predictions are made by SWT and Liu I model, as indicated by the average error, standard and mean deviations in The failure plane observed experimentally in all non-proportional cases was 0°, that is normal to the longitudinal axis of the specimen. This same behaviour was also observed in other steels FS predictions from this work are in very good agreement with previous results Fatigue life was also studied with the different models. The fatigue life was estimated with equations The results under proportional loading according to Liu I model are on the safe side and partially outside the bound of factor two and follow a trend similar to WB and SWT. Under non-proportional loading, Liu I results are very scattered and mostly within the bounds, but both on the safe and the unsafe area. Liu II results under proportional and non-proportional loading are on the unsafe area and partially outside the bounds. The best fatigue life predictions were obtained with FS model, both under proportional and non-proportional loading. While under proportional loading, WB, FS, SWT and Liu I predict similar results, large differences are observed between these models under non-proportional loading. Even though critical plane models were proposed to predict both the fracture plane and the fatigue life Under proportional loads, the best predictions in terms of crack orientation are given by SWT and Liu I. In terms of fatigue life, all models yield similar estimations on the safe side with the exception of Liu II that produces non-conservative predictions. It is noteworthy that estimation of crack orientation and fatigue life rely on slightly different principles. Estimation of crack orientation is based on evaluating the angle at which the damage parameter is maximum and estimation of fatigue life involves not only the damage parameter but also a number of material properties and parameters. This difference explains why both predictions for any given critical plane model do not always agree. Under non-proportional loads FS gives the best predictions both in terms of crack orientation and fatigue life. The poor performance of SWT for fatigue life estimation under non-proportional loading with large torsional component is probably due to SWT model not including any torsional term. Similar results were observed previously under similar non-proportional loading conditions It is interesting to note that FS and WB produce very similar fatigue life results under proportional loading ( The fatigue behaviour of St52-3N steel subjected to biaxial load has been characterised, both in the initiation and propagation stages. The methodology for studying short cracks described in this work can be easily reproduced and applied to the study of other materials. Typical oscillations of short cracks in crack growth rate were observed and related to the microstructure. The biaxial behaviour of St52-3N steel has also been studied with the help of five critical plane models (WB, FS, SWT, Liu I and Liu II) under proportional and non-proportional loads. The performance of the models has been evaluated in terms of crack orientation and fatigue life. Under proportional loading, SWT and Liu I provided the best results, followed by WB, FS and Liu II. Under non-proportional loading, the best crack orientation predictions were by FS and Liu II, followed by WB, SWT and Liu I. Regarding the fatigue life, the best predictions under proportional loading were obtained by FS followed by Liu II, WB, SWT and Liu I. Under non-proportional loading, FS predicted the life most accurately, followed by Liu I, WB, SWT and Liu II. Consequently the FS model is recommended overall for St52-3N steel under loading conditions shown in this work. Authors would like to acknowledge financial support by the