Previous researchers have rationalized the thiosulfate oxidation by ammoniacal copper(II) on the basis of the rate equation −d[Cu(II)]/dt = k[Cu(II)][S2O3
                     2−]/[NH3] for the decomposition of the reaction intermediate Cu(NH3)3(S2O3)0, but no such detailed analysis has been made in the case of gold. This work revisits literature data to show that the oxidation of thiosulfate takes place via mixed complexes Cu(NH3)2(S2O3)
                        n
                     
                     −(2n−2) (n = 1 or 2). The oxidation can be considered as a first-order decomposition of these complexes, with a rate constant k
                     Cu(1) = 4×10−4 s−1, to produce S2O3
                     − which undergoes dimerization to S4O6
                     2−. It can also be treated as a second-order decomposition of Cu(NH3)3(S2O3)0 or Cu(NH3)2(S2O3)0 with rate constants k
                     Cu(2) = 0.2 and 0.1 L mol−1 s−1, respectively, which produce S4O6
                     2− in one step.
                  The literature data reported for gold dissolution in the copper(II)–ammonia–thiosulfate system show first-order dependence with respect to copper(II) and thiosulfate concentration, but it is relatively less affected by ammonia and hydroxide concentrations. At higher concentrations of copper(II) and thiosulfate, the rate becomes zero order with respect to these reagents. The leaching data obey a shrinking core model for both gold powder and carbonaceous or roasted ore with an apparent rate constant k
                     sc≈10−5 s−1, but the k
                     sc also shows a first-order dependence with respect to the measured copper(II) concentration in solution. The copper(II) sepeciation analysis shows Cu(NH3)2(S2O3)2
                     2−, Cu(NH3)2(S2O3)0 and Cu(NH3)3(S2O3)0 as the predominant species in ammoniacal copper(II)–thiosulfate solutions. Thus, gold oxidation can be represented by a sequence of equations representing adsorption and redox reactions.Recent research papers by Fundamental studies on thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of the dissolution of gold and oxidation of thiosulfate in copper(II)–ammonia–thiosulfate solutions based on species distribution, Eh–pH diagrams and kinetic models pave the way to rationalize the complex chemistry involved in leaching and provide information which can be used to optimize the leaching and recovery processes. This paper highlights the recent progress with respect to some of these aspects related to thiosulfate and gold oxidation, and demonstrates the use of concurrent thermodynamic and kinetic analysis to establish the rate determining chemical reaction(s) and mechanism(s) of oxidation of thiosulfate and gold in the copper(II)–ammonia–thiosulfate system.   Equilibrium data presented in the form of an Eh–pH diagram for sulfur species shows that tetrathionate ion is unstable at pH > 6 compared to thiosulfate ion which appears in a larger pH range of 4–14 ( The recently published Eh–pH diagrams (  Although the oxidation of gold and thiosulfate by molecular oxygen [Eq. For example, the recently reported rate data by The major role of O  Knowledge of thermodynamic data for the formation of metal–ligand complex species and relevant species ditribution and Eh–pH diagrams play an important role in the rationalization of complex leach chemistry of hydrometallurgical processes (   A further decrease in reagent concentrations to 0.01 M ammonia and 0.01 M thiosulfate makes Cu(S In the case of thiosulfate oxidation by ammoniacal copper(II), the reaction order (    A recent study showed that the oxidation of thiosulfate by copper(II) in nonammoniacal acidic media takes place via a mixed aquo–thiosulfato complex according to the mechanism described in The terms However, the rate of copper(II) reduction ( Eq. A decrease in ammonia concentration will favour the mixed complex Cu(NH First-order decomposition of the mixed complex is represented by the rate determining step [RDS-Cu(1)] in Eq.  A second order reaction with respect to [Cu(II)  Having established approximate values for stability constants of mixed copper(II)–ammonia–thiosulfate complexes, In solutions of pH range 9.5–11 the order of predominance in  One of the experimental difficulties associated with the kinetic studies related to the dissolution of gold in copper(II)–ammonia–thiosulfate system is the reaction between copper(II) and thiosulfate, which decreases the concentration of both reagents. The use of a large molar concentration ratio of [S A recent review ( The apparent rate constants in the two cases were  A recent review showed that a combined adsorption/electrochemical kinetic model can be used to rationalise the reaction orders of gold oxidation with respect to initial concentrations of copper(II) and thiosulfate (  For example, the rate of gold oxidation according to Eq. At low reagent concentrations,  Rate equations developed with generic reactant order parameters from published kinetic data can rationalize the oxidation of thiosulfate and gold to rationalize the mechanisms on the basis of mixed complexes of Cu(II)–NH The degradation of thiosulfate can be considered to occur via the disproportionation of mixed copper(II)–ammonia–thiosulfate complexes with rate determining steps that are either first order ( The formation constants of mixed-complexes of the type Cu(NH Rate constants for oxidation of thiosulfate are of the order 10 The rate of gold dissolution can be rationalized on the basis of adsorption of thiosulfate and copper(II) onto gold surface as a mixed complex followed by redox reaction. The overall dissolution of gold (powder or ore) exhibits shrinking core kinetics indicating the build up of a surface product film and/or adsorption layer. The author gratefully acknowledges the continuous support from Prof. Mike Nicol (Murdoch University) and the A.J. Parker Research Centre for Hydrometallurgy. Adj. Prof. David Muir (CSIRO Minerals, Perth) is also thanked for providing useful advice and comments.