This work was initiated to examine the effects of pulse frequency and treatment temperature on the formation of nitrided layers and surface characteristics during plasma nitriding. Plasma nitriding experiments were performed with 316L austenitic stainless steel at the temperatures of 400 and 500°C using a pulsed d.c. plasma with various frequencies in an atmosphere of N2–H2 gas mixture. The microstructure and thickness of the nitrided layers and morphology of the nitrided surfaces were investigated using optical microscopy (OM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). XRD patterns revealed that the surface layer formed at 400°C consisted of S-phase only and CrN+Fe4N nitrides at 500°C, and no change of phase composition with frequency was observed. The compound layer thickened slightly with increased frequency. In addition, the surface roughness also increased as the frequency of the pulsed plasma was increased from 50 to 5000 Hz.Stainless steels have good corrosion resistance because of the dense adherent Cr Recent work, however, has shown that if nitriding is performed at temperatures between 320 and 500°C, then it is possible to improve the wear properties of the surface while maintaining the corrosion resistance The nitrides that can be formed in plasma nitriding of stainless steels are CrN, Cr In this study, effects of the pulse plasma frequency and the treatment temperature on the composition of the nitride and the production of the layer were examined. In addition, surface characteristics and formation behavior of the S-phase during lower temperature nitriding were also investigated. A commercial AISI 316L austenitic stainless steel (0.028 wt.% C, 0.53 wt.% Si, 1.78 wt.% Mn, 0.03 wt.% P, 0.004 wt.% S, 16.4 wt.% Cr, 9.2 wt.% Ni, 2.07 wt.% Mo) plate with thickness of 3 mm was used in the present experiment. The substrate surface was ground and polished using a 1-μm diamond paste and then cleaned with acetone in an ultrasonic cleaner. Before nitriding treatment, 90 vol.% Ar+10 vol.% H The pulsed plasma nitriding unit was of laboratory size (300-mm diameter×400-mm height) with a unipolar power supply. The chamber has an auxiliary heater composed of Mo rods. After nitriding, the specimens were cooled in an evacuated furnace and analyzed by optical microscopy (OM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Cu Kα radiation, energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). The variation of the XRD pattern with treatment temperature is shown in These results can be explained by the diffusion mechanisms of nitrogen and chromium. That is, at 400°C, the diffusion of nitrogen (an interstitial element) to the iron lattice is largely encouraged whilst the diffusion of chromium (a substitutional element) is prohibited. The high nitrogen concentration in the iron lattice results in production of high compressive stresses. Also, the chromium does not precipitate as nitrides (mainly CrN or Cr It is generally considered that the formation of S-phase is the principal microstructural change. Angelini et al. It is noteworthy that, in the case of this study, the S-phase and M  The cross-sectional microstructures obtained at the two treatment temperatures are shown in  In order to investigate the plasma nitrided surface properties, two-dimensional surface morphology was studied by AFM images for different treatment temperatures and the results are shown in The peak-to-valley height difference between The variation of the surface roughness with pulse frequency is shown in In order to investigate the effect of the frequency on the surface roughness, three-dimensional AFM images were analyzed for different treatment temperatures. The results are shown in In order to investigate the effects of pulse frequency and treatment temperature on the surface characteristics and nitride formation, plasma nitriding has been examined. The results obtained by plasma nitrided AISI 316L austenitic stainless steel with temperature and pulse frequency can be summarized as follows: Thickness of the nitride layer increased with increasing pulse frequency from 50 to 5000 Hz. The range of the layer thicknesses produced at treatment temperatures of 400 and 500°C is 5–11 μm and 60–70 μm, respectively. In the case of surface roughness, the The S-phase and the dual phase nitride (CrN and Fe