To determine the resilience of soil organic C and N pools during land degradation processes in a semi-arid landscape of West Africa, we compared the magnitude of soil organic C and N differences in bulk soil and aggregate fractions between contrasting types of land cover (degraded land and native land cover) and soil (Luvisols and Cambisols). We analyzed the following soil key indicators: CEC, soil respiration, C and N contents, and δ13C and δ15N signatures of soil organic C.
                  The average CO2 respired from native land cover was at least 82% higher than its value from degraded land cover and was significantly higher in Luvisols than in Cambisols. Likewise, the soil organic C and N contents in bulk soil were significantly affected by land cover and soil contrasts. The average C loss in bulk soil from degraded land cover was equivalent to 49% in Cambisols and 54% in Luvisols. In both soil types, all aggregate fractions were sensitive to land degradation processes and the C loss decreased from macroaggregates to the clay+silt fraction. Compared to the native land cover, organic C loss from the macroaggregates in degraded land cover was 92% and 84%, respectively, in Cambisols and Luvisols. The soil type affected significantly the C content only in the clay+silt fraction. The C/N ratio of finer fractions (microaggregates and clay+silt) was significantly higher in degraded land cover than in native land cover, indicating greater losses of N than C during land degradation processes. The differences of δ13C signatures throughout C pools between the two types of land cover suggest a relative dominance of C3 derived C in macroaggregates and C4 derived C in the clay+silt fraction in the degraded lands. The reduction of soil respiration and the rapid N loss in degraded land cover slowed down the humification processes of C3 plant derived materials which were effectively dominant in macroaggregates.Sub-Saharan Africa has the highest rate of land degradation ( It is generally recognized that land degradation leads to losses of soil organic C and N stocks ( Yet, soil organic C is heterogeneous and comprised of a gradient of pools that differ in physical and chemical properties, decomposability and turnover ( Stable carbon isotopic analysis may be used for tracing the origin of organic carbon in order to understand the impacts of vegetation change ( The soil C pool dynamics and their determinants in the general context of land degradation are poorly investigated in semi-arid Africa. To determine the resilience of soil organic C pools during land degradation processes, we compared the magnitude of C and N changes in bulk soil and aggregate fractions according to contrasting types of land cover (degraded land and native land cover) and soil (Luvisols and Cambisols). It was hypothesized that soil aggregate fractions are better indicators of land degradation processes than bulk soil. The specific objectives of this study are: (i) to compare the magnitude of soil organic C and N differences in bulk soil and aggregate fractions between degraded land and native land cover, (ii) to test differences in the δ The study area is located in northern Burkina Faso and characterized by semi-arid climatic conditions with an average annual precipitation ranging from 450 to 500 We selected two sites characterized by different soil types and land cover (degraded land and native land cover). This selection was based on visual analysis of Spot images (November 2011) and completed by visual observation in the field for the delimitation of areas characterizing each land cover category within each site ( The soils from site 1 are classified as Cambisols (higher proportion of 2:1 clay minerals) with the presence of a The sampling design was based on full factorial design (2 Routine soil descriptions were carried out throughout the soil profile (50 Fine soil particle sizes (5 fractions) were determined for all samples using the Robinson pipette method after the destruction of organic matter with H Aggregate fractionation was used to obtain C pools ( Bulk soil and aggregate samples were analyzed for carbon and nitrogen contents (C %, N %) as well as stable isotope ratio of the two elements, ( All measured variables in relation to C dynamics were examined by factor analysis using maximum likelihood to detect their relationship and pattern following two downsized dimensional factors (land cover and soil type). Pearson's product moment coefficient was generated to test the correlation between these variables. The effects of land cover and soil types as well as their interaction were tested using ANOVA generalized linear models (GLMs) or beta regression models for proportion data. These models allow fitting a response variable by specifying a family of error distribution and a particular link function. The model's goodness-of-fit was evaluated by model deviances and diagnostics of residual plots. In further analysis, the Tukey's multiple comparisons ( The Cambisols and Luvisols were characterized by diagnostic properties of the subsurface layers. The proportion of soil fractions, soil particle size, available phosphorus and pH (H All soil variables used in factorial analysis explained 60% of their total variance. The first axis accounted for 42 % and clearly contrasted degraded land cover from native land cover ( The test of correlation between soil parameters revealed that soil organic C content was strongly and positively correlated to that of N in bulk soil as well as in soil aggregates (r The soil respiration was significantly affected by land cover (t The soil organic C and N contents in bulk soil were significantly affected by land cover and soil contrasts, and were 2 times lower in degraded land cover than in native land cover ( The N content in bulk soil which was closely correlated to C content, showed higher values in native land cover. The difference in N content between native and degraded land cover varied from 0.20 to 0.63 The effect of land cover on C content in the different soil aggregates (macroaggregates, microaggregates and clay The C content in all aggregate fractions was significantly lower in degraded than in native land cover in both soil types ( The C content in all soil aggregates (expressed in g The N content in soil aggregates was very close to that of soil organic C. The N content of all soil aggregates was significantly lower in degraded land cover than in native land cover ( The C/N ratio of microaggregates and the clay The effects of land cover and soil type on δ Focusing on the main effect of land cover, the δ Moreover, the δ Excluding the clay The degradation processes caused a significant reduction of organic C input consecutive to an important loss of native vegetation. The degraded land cover exhibits less than 5 % of vegetation contrasting with the native land cover where vegetation covers at least 75 %. Many experimental studies demonstrated the close positive relationship between plant C input and soil organic C content up to the saturation level of soils ( As expected from our hypothesis, the sensitivity of aggregate fractions to land degradation processes decreased from macroaggregates to the clay While the C content of macroaggregates and microaggregates did not show any significant difference in both soils, we found that the soil type significantly affected the C dynamics in the clay Conversely to the C/N ratio, the δ Despite the complexity of the N cycle and the multiple sources of variation in soil δ Land cover degradation in semi-arid West Africa decreased significantly the soil organic C in all C pools. Compared to the native vegetation cover, the degraded land cover exhibited a 49–54 % reduction of soil organic C in bulk soil. The sensitivity of C pools to land degradation processes decreased with decreasing aggregate sizes. The C depletion is higher in macroaggregates and lower in the clay Restoring a vegetation with a substantial grass cover is needed to reactivate the organic matter humification and improve C levels in all aggregate fractions. We suggest the introduction of N rich biomass (e.g. N fixing plants) to counterbalance the greater depletion of N than C in degraded soils. We are grateful to the Ministère des Enseignements Secondaire et Superieur (Burkina Faso) for funding a study trip for the first author, the