Coracoid fractures are rare injuries, which may occur in isolation or in association with other shoulder pathology. The mechanism of trauma consists of a strong contraction of the conjoint tendon as a result of direct trauma. The diagnosis is usually difficult and many times overlooked, thereby requiring a high level of suspicion. In many cases, standard trauma series shoulder radiographs are unable to provide a definitive and reliable diagnosis. Therefore, other imaging modalities may be necessary to confirm the diagnosis. Although uncommon, if left untreated, a coracoid fracture will result in chronic pain and shoulder disability. Both conservative and surgical techniques have been previously reported and shown positive outcomes. In regard to the surgical technique, most reports describe the use of screw fixation, which has been associated with full recovery and high patient satisfaction. Nevertheless, the purpose of this Technical Note is to describe our preferred method to treat an isolated type II displaced coracoid process fracture through suture anchor fixation.Coracoid fractures are uncommon injuries and usually seen in the setting of a traffic accident or fall. Although isolated coracoid fractures have been reported in the literature, these injuries are often associated with concomitant soft tissue and/or osseous shoulder injuriess. There are a few classification systems used for coracoid fractures. Eyres et al. The treatment of a coracoid fracture is dependent on: (1) fracture type and (2) overall instability of the fracture. The majority of type I (Ogawa classification) fractures are associated with a disruption of the superior shoulder suspensory complex, which may cause a delay in healing and typically requires definitive surgical fixation. Although there remains debate regarding the optimal treatment of type II fractures of the acromioclavicular joint, A video overview of this technique with narration is provided ( The patient is placed in the supine position on the operating table and general anesthesia is used for induction. Single shot or catheter infusion regional anesthesia may be used as well. The patient is then brought into the beach chair position with care taken to pad all bony prominences. Moreover, the head and neck positioning should be carefully assessed before starting the procedure. We do not use an arm positioner; rather, the operative extremity is draped free with a well-padded Mayo placed under the elbow. Preoperative evaluation should start with a thorough history and physical examination. Diagnostic imaging should consist of shoulder radiographs to assess for concomitant osseous abnormality, including fracture extension into the glenoid. Computed tomography scan allows for detailed evaluation of fracture displacement, orientation, and possible comminution. Magnetic resonance imaging of the shoulder is useful to evaluate for any concomitant loose bodies, labral, chondral, or other soft tissue injuries. General endotracheal anesthesia may be combined with regional nerve blocks to maximize postoperative pain control. Perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis is administered intravenously before incision. A diagnostic arthroscopy is usually conducted first to directly visualize the chondral surfaces, glenoid labrum, biceps tendon, and rotator cuff. An extensive debridement of the rotator interval, as well as posterosuperior and anterosuperior synovitis, is conducted with a 4.0-mm shaver and radiofrequency device (Coblator Wand, Smith & Nephew, Andover, MA) through a 5-mm cannula (Low Profile Cannula, Arthrex, Naples, FL). Any concomitant arthroscopic procedures are carried out at this time. The open coracoid fracture fixation is begun with a deltopectoral approach using an approximately 5-cm skin incision ( Next, a musculocutaneous nerve neurolysis is conducted with Metzenbaum scissors to free up the nerve from the adjacent scar tissue surrounding the subscapularis, pectoralis minor, and conjoint tendon. Thereafter, a suture anchor (6.5-mm SwiveLock double-loaded with FiberTape, Arthrex) is placed in line with the intramedullary canal of the coracoid. The 2 suture tapes are then whipstitched through the fracture fragment and conjoined tendon and secured using a zip tie technique ( The patient is placed in a padded abduction shoulder sling at the end of the procedure. The sling, along with limits to 30° external rotation, 60° abduction, and 90° forward flexion, is continued for 6 weeks postoperatively. No resisted elbow flexion or weight bearing is allowed for 6 weeks postoperatively. After 6 weeks, the patient may begin progressive active range of motion without limitations and strengthening. A return to full activity is allowed at 3 to 4 months postoperatively. Postoperative radiographs are taken at 3 to 4 months after surgery to ensure a successful surgical outcome ( Coracoid fractures are rare and seen mainly in males; ultimately, these fractures account for roughly 3% to 13% of all scapula fractures and only 2% of all isolated scapula fractures. Both conservative treatment and surgical treatment have been previously described in the setting of a coracoid injury with each treatment type showing positive outcomes. Martin-Herrero et al. The described technique is based on the use of suture anchor fixation instead of screw fixation to successfully complete the reattachment of the displaced coracoid fragment. Although we recommend the above technique, future long-term studies involving patient-reported outcome measures after surgery are necessary for the assessment and validation of the technique. 