The flotation process is a particle-hydrophobic surface-based separation technique. To improve the essential flotation steps of collision and attachment probabilities, and reduce the step of detachment probabilities between air bubbles and hydrophobic particles, a selectively designed cavitation venturi tube combined with a static mixer can be used to generate very high numbers of pico and nano bubbles in a flotation column. Fully embraced by those high numbers of tiny bubbles, hydrophobic particles readily attract the tiny bubbles to their surfaces. The results of column flotation of Pittsburgh No. 8 seam coal are obtained in a 5.08cm ID and 162cm height flotation column equipped with a static mixer and cavitation venturi tube, using kerosene as collector and MIBC as frother. Design of the experimental procedure is combined with a statistical two-stepwise analysis to determine the optimal operating conditions for maximum recovery at a specified grade. The effect of independent variables on the responses has been explained. Combustible material recovery of 85–90% at clean coal product of 10–11% ash is obtained from feed of 29.6% ash, with a much-reduced amount of frother and collector than that used in conventional column flotation. The column flotation process utilizing pico and nano bubbles can also be extended to the lower limit and upper limit of particle size ranges, minus 75μm and 300–600μm, respectively, for better recovery.The separation efficiency of column flotation is determined by fine coal feed characteristics and the operating parameters associated with feed slurry-reagent conditioning, air bubble–hydrophobic coal particle contact, attachment and detachment, and size of air bubbles In this study, the systematic determination of the optimal operating performance for a flotation column with a combination of static mixer for micro bubble generation and a cavitation venturi tube for pico and nano bubble generation, is established based on empirical models obtained from test results. Initially, a six factors three levels center composite design of experimental procedure is used. Coefficient values for the parameters and interaction effects are determined. The three most significant key parameters are collector dosage, feed solid concentration and volumetric feed rate. Further, the experiment for a three factors three levels central composite design of experiment is conducted. Response surface methodology is applied to analyze the experimental data. The study of the effects of pico and nano bubbles on flotation performance and optimized operating conditions on combustible material recovery and clean coal ash content, as functions of three key operating parameters is presented and discussed. A bituminous coal sample from the Pittsburgh No. 8 seam was acquired from Greene County, Pennsylvania, USA, for this study. After three days of air-drying, the coal sample was crushed, grinded, and pulverized through a Holms mill to prepare a minus 700  The cavitation venturi tube is specifically designed for generating pico and nano bubbles The combustible material recovery and separation efficiency are defined as follows: The analysis of column flotation test results is carried out using the statistics software package JMP program (SAS Institute, Inc.). In this study, combustible material recovery and clean coal ash are selected as the response surfaces. In running the JMP program, “Stepwise” regression analysis was selected. The Stepwise platform allows for searching through models with combinations of effects and choosing the desired model by setting the probabilities ( The specific levels of individual variables are given in The main and interaction coefficients are evaluated and tested for significance as shown in Based on the statistical analysis results, the reduced combustible material recovery and clean coal ash models for the six-factor three-levels design of experiment are: In The study of the effects of pico and nano bubbles on flotation performance is carried out using a three-factor three-level central composite experimental design and analyzed by using the JMP program. The levels and variables for the three-factor three-level central composite design of experiment are given in The process parameters include collector dosage, feed solid concentration, and feed rate. Response surface methodology was used to analyze the three-factor three-level central composite design of experiment data. Response surface and contour curves were generated for the combustible material recovery and clean coal ash content as a function of the operating process parameters. The specific levels of individual variables are indicated in  Based on the design of experiment tests and statistical analysis results, the combustible material recovery and ash content models for the three-factor three-level center composite design of experiment are:    The experimental results provide a broad range of clean coal ash values, as shown in  The following conclusions can be drawn from the findings of the factorial three-level central composite design of experiment test results for pico–nano column flotation of Pittsburgh No. 8 coal seam. With the use of pico, nano, and micro bubbles in column flotation, the maximum combustible recovery of 85–90%, and minimum clean coal ash of 10–11% are achieved at solid concentration of 4%, collector dosage of 0.35 All three variables evaluated-feed solid concentration, collector dosage, and feed flow rate are significant in regard to achieving the maximum combustible recovery and producing the range of ash contents of fine clean coal products. At the same combustible recovery, half of the collector dosage and frother dosage can be saved with column flotation in the presence of pico and nano bubbles, compared to the requirements of those reagents in conventional column flotation. Use of a static mixer prior to a cavitation venturi tube in series for pico and nano bubble generation provides better mixing and contact of water, air, bubbles, and particulates from the tailings recirculation, which enhances pico and nano bubble generation. The column flotation performance in the presence of pico, nano and micro bubbles exceeds the capability of conventional column flotation, with larger bubbles or micro bubbles alone, to float as fine as minus 75 Financial supports for this work, provided by