The technical viability of the BRISA process (Biolixiviación Rápida Indirecta con Separación de Acciones: Fast Indirect Bioleaching with Actions Separation) for the copper recovery from chalcopyrite concentrates has been proved. Two copper concentrates (with a copper content of 8.9 and 9.9 wt.%) with chalcopyrite as the dominant copper mineral have been leached with ferric sulphate at 12 g/L of ferric iron and pH 1.25 in agitated reactors using silver as a catalyst. Effects of temperature, amount of catalyst and catalyst addition time have been investigated. Small amounts of catalyst (from 0.5 to 2 mg Ag/g concentrate) were required to achieve high copper extractions (>95%) from concentrates at 70 °C and 8–10 h leaching. Liquors generated in the chemical leaching were biooxidized for ferrous iron oxidation and ferric regeneration with a mixed culture of ferrooxidant bacteria. No inhibition effect inherent in the liquor composition was detected. The silver added as a catalyst remained in the solid residue, and it was never detected in solution. The recovery of silver may be achieved by leaching the leach residue in an acid-brine medium with 200 g/L of NaCl and either hydrochloric or sulphuric acid, provided that elemental sulphur has been previously removed by steam hot filtration. The effect of variables such as temperature, NaCl concentration, type of acid and acidity–pulp density relationship on the silver extraction from an elemental sulphur-free residue has been examined. It is possible to obtain total recovery of the silver added as a catalyst plus 75% of the silver originally present in concentrate B (44 mg/kg) by leaching a leach residue with a 200 g/L NaCl–0.5 M H2SO4 medium at 90 °C and 10 wt.% of pulp density in two stages of 2 h each. The incorporation of silver catalysis to the BRISA process allows a technology based on bioleaching capable of processing chalcopyrite concentrates with rapid kinetics.Copper has mainly been produced by smelting. Low-grade ore deposits of copper are not amenable to conventional pyrometallurgical processing; the pyrometallurgical treatment requires flotation concentrates with a minimum copper grade around 20%. In most low-grade deposits, chalcopyrite is finely dispersed on pyrite and other sulphides, and the pyrometallurgical treatment of these ores would require extensive grinding and flotation of the sulphides to produce finely divided concentrates. The production of these concentrates is not attractive from an economical point of view because of the intensive energy consumption in grinding and the low recovery. An alternative for the treatment of these deposits involves a coarser grind to produce a rougher concentrate yielding low copper concentrates (around 10% of copper) with an important energy saving and a higher metallic recovery. These concentrates, in which chalcopyrite is the major copper-bearing mineral, have to be processed hydrometallurgically. Among other hydrometallurgical processes, the BRISA process has been developed and successfully applied in recent years for the recovery of copper from copper concentrates The rate of this reaction in the range 50–110 °C follows a parabolic law. Most authors agree that the decrease in rate is due to the formation of a film which builds up on the surface of the mineral and opposes the electron transfer from chalcopyrite to the ferric medium, necessary for the redox reaction. With regard to the nature of this passivating layer, there are two basic hypotheses: elemental sulphur The use of silver as a catalyst in the chemical stage of the BRISA process is possible as the silver used for the activation of chalcopyrite remains in the leached residue as Ag  The aim of this work is to establish the technical viability of the treatment of two copper concentrates with chalcopyrite as the dominant copper mineral via the BRISA process. In order to do this, the different stages of the process have been separately studied: ferric sulphate leaching of concentrates with silver as a catalyst; ferrous iron biooxidation of leach liquors; silver extraction from the leach residue. Two copper concentrates have been studied. Both were rougher concentrates: rougher concentrate from Compañı́a Minera del Pacı́fico (Chile); rougher concentrate from Industrial Minera Mejicana Sociedad Anónima (IMMSA) obtained from an ore from Compañı́a Minera Cananea (Mexico). Samples of the two materials were mounted in polished sections for mineralogical study using optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray analyzer (EDX). The mineralogical data are summarized in Samples were also analyzed by wet chemical methods using reagent grade chemicals and distilled water. The chemical analysis of concentrates is shown in Leaching experiments were carried out in two different types of reactors under batch leaching conditions, shake flasks and stirred tanks. In all cases, ferric sulphate solutions were first heated to the desired temperature, and the reaction was initiated by adding a dried mineral sample.   In all tests, the water losses due to evaporation were determined by weight and were taken into account during copper recovery calculations. At the end of the experiment, the slurry was filtered using 0.45-μm Millipore filters and the residue, after being washed with distilled water and dried, was stored in a desiccator for silver recovery. The leach liquor was analyzed for metals and was used for ferrous iron biooxidation tests. Copper extraction was calculated from mass balance and analysis of solids (concentrate and residue). In catalytic tests, the leaching medium consisted of ferric sulphate with silver as silver sulphate. An aliquot of a solution of silver sulphate in aqueous sulphuric acid at pH 1.25 containing 500 mg/L of silver was added to the ferric sulphate solution. The amount of catalyst is expressed as milligram of Ag The culture used for ferrous iron biooxidation was originally isolated from Rio Tinto mine drainage waters, and it consists mainly of The method followed for silver recovery consisted of two stages. The dried sulphur-bearing residue from the ferric sulphate leach of the concentrate was placed on a fritted glass disk connected to a vacuum water pump and to the outlet of a small boiler which produced steam that was reheated to 140 °C. As the steam passed through the filter (30 min), the sulphur content of the solid melted to form molten sulphur droplets which coalesced to form larger drops and finally to form a continuous liquid sulphur phase that flowed and passed through the filter. The residue was weighed before and after the extraction, and the elemental sulphur was determined by difference. After separating the elemental sulphur, the residue thus obtained was subjected to a wide range of NaCl–HCl or H Copper, iron and silver in leaching liquors were determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy. Ferrous iron concentration was determined by standard potassium dichromate solution in an automatic titrator. The solids samples were analyzed by a wet chemical method using aqua regia at the boiling temperature of the mixture followed by atomic absorption spectroscopy for metals (together with a mercury/hydride system for the determination of mercury and hydride-forming elements As, Sb and Bi using 3% NaBH The leaching of concentrates was initially studied at 25 and 70 °C in shaken flasks. For each concentrate, eight shake-flask tests were carried out with different amounts of silver over the range 0–4 mg silver/g of concentrate at 70 °C and 2% (w/v) of pulp density. The leaching results, shown in The effect of temperature on the copper extraction was studied in stirred tanks over the range 60–90 °C at 2% and 1.5% (w/v) pulp density for concentrates A and B, respectively. Concentrates were activated with 0.5 mg/g concentrate A and 2 mg Ag/g concentrate B. The leaching results, shown in It has been demonstrated that the presence of sphalerite and secondary copper sulphides has a negative effect on the catalytic action of silver on chalcopyrite leaching; they act as sequestering agents for the silver solution, thus preventing its catalytic action on chalcopyrite Liquors generated in the chemical leaching of concentrates were biooxidized in order to detect the presence of any inhibitory effect inherent in the liquor composition on the ferrous iron biooxidation and to establish the technical feasibility and effectiveness of this stage. Ferrous iron concentration in those liquors varied from 5 to 7 g/L, copper concentration ranged from 1.3 to 1.8 g/L and silver was never detected. Three media were firstly tested in static conditions: (i) liquor from the ferric sulphate leaching of concentrates, (ii) liquor from the ferric sulphate leaching of concentrates with 5 wt.% of salts of the 9k Silverman and Lundgren nutrient medium and (iii) 9k Silverman and Lundgren nutrient medium (with 9 g/L Fe Afterwards, the continuous ferrous iron biooxidation of leach liquors on a supported biofilm reactor was undertaken. The packed-bed biooxidation reliability was evaluated by switching the inlet from maintenance liquors (tap water containing 9 g/L Fe As mentioned earlier, previous data indicated that virtually all of the silver added as catalyst remained in the leached residue. Also, the conditions of acidity, temperature and ferric sulphate concentration in the ferric sulphate-catalyzed leaching are favorable for the precipitation of silver as argentojarosite The effect of variables such as temperature, NaCl concentration, type of acid and acidity–pulp density relationship on the silver extraction from an elemental sulphur-free residue was examined. For concentrate A, the bulk of the testwork was performed with two S-free residues containing 1369 and 715 mg/kg of silver. For concentrate B, two S-free residues containing 3118 and 2536 mg/kg of silver were used. An increase in silver extraction was observed as temperature increased   Results of the effect of the acidity–pulp density relationship on the silver extraction of leached S-free concentrate B, shown in The results obtained in this work show that chalcopyrite concentrates can be effectively leached by the BRISA process with fast kinetics and a high copper recovery. Two rougher copper concentrates having 8.9 and 9.9 wt.% Cu with chalcopyrite as the dominant copper-bearing mineral and minor contents of others sulphides have been tested. The ferric sulphate leaching was carried out in agitated batch conditions with 12 g/L Fe The authors express their appreciation to Compañı́a Minera del Pacı́fico and Compañı́a Minera Cananea for making available the samples used in this study.