In this work, the flotation performance of separately added Pb2+ ions and benzohydroxamic acid (BHA) was compared with that of Pb2+/BHA (Pb-BHA) complexes, and the possible adsorption mechanism on the ilmenite surface was investigated by conducting single-mineral flotation tests as well as zeta potential, ultraviolet (UV) spectroscopy, microcalorimetry, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses. The results of mineral flotation testing revealed that Pb-BHA complexes exhibited better flotation characteristics as compared to those of their sequentially dosed components, while the collection properties of these complexes depended on their compositions. Thus, the complexes with Pb2+/BHA molar ratios equal to 1:2 and 1:1 exhibited much higher ilmenite collection efficiencies and wider effective pH ranges than those of the complexes with Pb2+/BHA ratios of 2:1 and 3:1. Furthermore, the obtained zeta potentials indicated that the resultant Pb-BHA complexes with a Pb2+/BHA molar ratio of 1:1 were slightly positively charged. After increasing its magnitude, the zeta potential of ilmenite shifted toward positive values. Large amounts of Pb2+ ions in solution were possibly adsorbed on the surface of ilmenite, which suppressed the adsorption of Pb-BHA species. The obtained UV spectra showed that varying the Pb2+/BHA ratio strongly affected the compositions of the produced complexes. The results of microcalorimetry analysis indicated that the adsorption heats (−ΔadsH) of the utilised reagents could be ranked in the order of Pb2+ < BHA < Pb-BHA, suggesting that Pb-BHA species exhibited the highest affinities to the ilmenite surface. Finally, the obtained FTIR and XPS spectra revealed that Pb-BHA complexes were adsorbed on the ilmenite surface more strongly than their individual components.Due to its excellent physical and chemical characteristics, titanium is extensively used in various fields (including aerospace, arms industry, navigation, medical device fabrication, and catalysis) and is considered one of the most economically valuable metals ( Until today, two different approaches to enhancing the flotation recovery of ilmenite have been considered. The first method involves the use of mixed collectors such as anionic–cationic, anionic–nonionic, and cationic–nonionic ones ( In contrast to the separate addition of Pb(II) and BHA species, the use of Pb(II)/BHA mixture can effectively improve the adsorption properties of cassiterite and enhance the selectivity of cassiterite-calcite ore ( However, very little information on the ilmenite flotation behavior of Pb-BHA complexes is available in the literature, and their adsorption on the ilmenite surface has not been investigated in detail. The objective of this study was to examine the flotation performance and possible adsorption mechanism of Pb(II)/BHA complexes on the ilmenite surface by performing flotation tests as well as Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), zeta potential, ultraviolet (UV) spectroscopy, microcalorimetry, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements. Pure ilmenite samples were supplied from Panzhihua (Sichuan province, China). After manual selection, crushing, grounding, and screening, the powder with particle sizes of 38–75 μm for mineral flotation, microcalorimetry and XPS experiments was obtained ( BHA (with a purity of above 98%), terpineol, and lead nitrate reagents were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry, Xilong Chemical Co., Ltd, and Chengdu Kelong Chemical Reagent Industry, respectively. Nitric acid (HNO A flotation device of the XFG type (Changchun, China) with an impeller speed of 1700 rpm was used in flotation experiments. First, 2 g of the mineral sample was placed inside a 40-mL Plexiglas cell containing a certain amount of DI water. After stirring for 2 min, a pH regulator (NaOH or HNO Zeta potentials of the ilmenite samples were determined using a Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern Instruments, England) equipped with a rectangular electrophoresis cell. In each test, 30 mg of the purified mineral sample (below 2 μm) was first conditioned with a certain amount of DI water followed by the addition of 4.0 mL of 10 UV spectroscopy measurements were performed on an Evolution 300 UV–visible spectrophotometer (Thermofisher, USA) in the wavelength range 200–300 nm at ambient temperature (around 25 °C), slit size of 2 nm, and speed of 240 nm/min. The sample cuvettes fabricated from quartz possessed solution capacities of 3 mL and path lengths of 10 mm ( Infrared spectra describing possible interactions between the reagents and minerals were recorded using a Spectrum One (Version BM, Perkin Elmer, USA) FTIR spectrometer. Mineral samples for FTIR analysis were prepared as follows: 2.0 g of the purified sample powder (which was preliminary ground to particle sizes below 2 μm) was introduced to a Plexiglas cell followed by the addition of various reagents in accordance with the used flotation testing sequence. The pH of the obtained mixture was regulated by adding an appropriate amount of HNO Microcalorimetric measurements of the mineral reaction process were performed at a temperature of 30 °C inside the mixing cell of a SETARAM C80 calorimeter (France) ( In order to improve the experimental sensitivity and ensure high accuracy of calorimetry measurements, the same reference cell must be used in all experiments. Hence, the cell utilised in this study was configured in the same way each time, and two membranes were perforated simultaneously, while the upper compartments of the identical reference cells were filled with the same amounts of deionized water. Afterwards, both cells were brought in contact with the bottom of the calorimeter. During experiments, when the measured signal began to stabilize, the membrane was broken by a movable rod to introduce the solution into the container ( The amount of collector adsorbed during each experiment as well as the corresponding adsorption enthalpy change (Δ XPS spectra of the ilmenite samples treated with (a) Pb(II) and BHA species sequentially and (b) Pb(II)/BHA complexes were recorded using a Thermo Fisher Scientific K-Alpha 1063 system. The effect of the solution pH on the floatability of ilmenite in the presence and absence of Pb(II) ions using BHA is illustrated in  As shown in Meanwhile, the Pb-BHA complexes with various compositions exhibited significant differences in the ilmenite collection recovery and effective pH range ( In order to confirm these observations, the ilmenite recovery measured for the Pb-BHA complex with a Pb(II)/BHA ratio of 1:1 was compared with the magnitude obtained after the sequential addition of Pb(II) and BHA species at the optimal conditions. After comparing the results obtained for Pb-BHA complexes and sequential dosing of Pb(II) and BHA species, it was found that the former exhibited much higher collecting capacities ( The effect of pH on the zeta potentials of ilmenite treated with different solutions is described in  In order to investigate possible interactions between the lead ions and BHA in more detail, UV spectroscopy studies were performed. The resulting UV–vis spectra presented in It is well known that the enthalpy change of a reaction is related to the amount of absorbed or released heat ( From the obtained data, the values of Q In order to elucidate a possible mechanism of the interaction of Pb-BHA complexes with the ilmenite surface, FTIR measurements were performed ( As shown in On the other hand, the IR peaks observed after the addition of Pb-BHA complexes were centred at 1629 and 1045 cm According to the results of a previous study, the sequential addition of Pb In order to determine the elemental composition and surface properties of the studied ilmenite samples, their high-resolution XPS spectra were analysed via peak fitting ( According to According to the relative amounts of adsorbed elements listed in The binding energies and chemical shifts of various elements adsorbed on the ilmenite surface are listed in From the obtained experimental results, an adsorption model for Pb-BHA complexes on the ilmenite surface was proposed (its schematic illustration is shown in In the present study, the flotation and adsorption of Pb-BHA complexes on the ilmenite surface was investigated by performing single-mineral flotation tests and microcalorimetry, UV spectroscopy, FTIR, zeta potential, and XPS measurements. The results of single-mineral flotation testing revealed that the Pb-BHA complex collector exhibited better flotation performance as compared to that of its individual components dosed separately. The Pb-BHA complexes with different compositions demonstrated various collection efficiencies and effective ranges of the solution pH. Thus, the complexes with a Pb(II)/BHA ratio of 1:1 exhibited the highest collection efficiencies and widest effective pH ranges. However, when these ratios amounted to 2:1 and 3:1, their magnitudes dramatically decreased. The obtained zeta potentials indicated that the Pb-BHA complexes with a Pb(II)/BHA molar ratio of 1:1 were slightly positively charged. After further increasing its magnitude, the zeta potential of ilmenite exhibited a positive shift. A large amount of lead ions in the solution might be present on the surface of ilmenite, which inhibited the adsorption of Pb-BHA complexes. The obtained UV absorption spectra indicated that varying the Pb(II)/BHA ratio affected the composition of the resulting complex. Furthermore, the results of microcalorimetric measurements revealed that the adsorption heats of the three reagents could be ranked in the order of Pb The authors would like to thank the