A comprehensive numerical investigation is carried out to assess the load distribution mechanism of horizontally curved steel–concrete composite box girder bridges when subjected to loading recommended by Australian Bridge Design Code and American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). In this investigation, the effect of various parameters such as curvature ratio, span length, number of loading lanes and number of cells is considered. In addition, a convergence study is carried out to identify the appropriate bracing system so as to retain the maximum torsional rigidity of these structures. The numerical model is first validated with actual test results so that they can be adopted for an extensive parametric study with good confidence. The results obtained from the parametric study are used to determine load distribution factors for moment and shear of horizontally curved box girder bridges. It is observed that these load distribution factors according to AASHTO loads are considerably higher than those obtained from the loading recommended by Australian Bridge Design Code. Hence, it is not reasonable to use load distribution factor based on AASHTO loading guidelines for the design of these curved bridges subjected to Australian Bridge Design loading.Horizontally curved steel–concrete composite box girders are widely used in construction of highway bridges. This type of structural system consists of a concrete deck connected with a steel box section beam that exhibits a high torsional rigidity which is important in resisting torsional effects produced by the curvature of the structure. They are commonly used in highly populated intersections and elevated highways in urban areas where severe spatial restrictions compromise the motorway alignment, requiring a curved geometry. An accurate analysis of these complex structures is extremely challenging. In order to simplify the analysis, some researchers try to idealize the complex bridge deck structures into a simple structural system such as grillage, equivalent orthotropic plate and some other form Usually, a designer treats such a complex bridge deck structure as a single beam and calculates the stress resultants such as bending moment, shear force and torsion which act on the entire cross section of the bridge decks. This may be a simple task for a simply supported straight beam but this is not so for curved beams as they are always found to be statically indeterminate. Though some researchers In the next step, designers need to know the stresses or stress resultants of the different components or girders so as to design these individual components following the usual design techniques. The load distribution factors are typically used to calculate the stress resultants of the individual components from the total shear force, bending moment and torsion acting on the entire bridge cross section. The availability of load distribution factors can definitely make the analysis and design of these complex structural systems easy, but the determination of these distribution factors is quite challenging. A detailed finite element analysis of these curved bridge deck structures can be used for this purpose. Such attempts are made by some researchers AASHTO In this study, load distribution factors of horizontally curved steel–concrete composite box girder bridges are determined based on the Australian bridge loading From these analyses, the maximum stresses or stress resultants at the individual components or girders are obtained. On the other hand, the closed form analytical solution for the influence line diagram of curved beams which has been developed by the authors Based on the huge amount of data generated from these analyses, a multivariate regression analysis is carried out to develop empirical expressions to determine load distribution factors. A computer code is also developed in MATLAB For the analysis of the statically indeterminate horizontally curved beam, the closed form analytical solution has recently been developed by the authors  It should be noted that, the influence line for shear force has its maximum value at the two ends (supports) of the beam, while the maximum value of the influence line for the bending moment will occur at the middle of the beam The numerical simulation of the horizontally curved box girder bridge systems is conducted by using a commercially available finite element software (ABAQUS) As a part of numerical analysis, convergence studies are conducted on a curved bridge model to find a suitable finite element mesh size and to identify an appropriate brace spacing to prevent any undesirable premature failure due to local and global buckling. Therefore, it is proposed to investigate the sensitivity of finite element models to the mesh sizes and bracing configurations. Different element sizes ranging from 3000 The results obtained from mesh size convergence study are presented in On the other hand, cross bracing systems in curved box girder bridges stiffen the box girder internally to resist rotations of girders about their longitudinal axes which prevent the structure from premature failure due to torsional buckling and distortional warping and retain the maximum torsional rigidity of the structure. The objective of the bracing analysis is to identify an appropriate cross brace spacing to estimate the bracing contribution to the reduction of the deflection while controlling torsional effects, such as distortion and warping of the cross sections. To achieve this goal, the design load configuration of AS 5100.2-2004 According to To ensure the accuracy of the finite element modelling methods, a curved bridge model is developed according to the published experimental work To model the bridge components such as concrete deck, steel web girders, bottom flange and end diaphragms, four node shell elements, type S4R, with six degrees of freedom are used. The end diaphragms are located on each side of the bridge models between the web girders. Top flange and cross bracing systems are modelled as a two node beam element, type B31H ( Material properties of the steel and concrete, such as the modules of elasticity (200 Having been satisfied that the finite element models described in the preceding section yielded accurate results, an extensive parametric study is carried out to determine the stress resultants of the individual components or girders of the horizontally curved bridge structures subjected to Australian bridge load. 180 different curved bridge models are simulated using the finite element modelling technique as described before by varying different parameters consisting of curvature ratio ( To conduct the parametric study, the highway bridge loading as prescribed by AS 5100.2-2004 The self-weight of the curved bridge decks is also included in the finite element models. A uniformly distributed load is applied to concrete deck to account for self-weight of the deck slab by considering the value of 2.4 Moreover, as stated in the AS 5100.2-2004 In the current research, a large amount of results from finite element analysis of curved bridge decks are obtained and these results are collated further to develop the distribution factors for both bending moment and shear force of horizontally curved box girder bridges. The moment distribution factor is defined as The effects of number of loading lanes on moment distribution factors of the horizontally curved bridges are investigated. Based on Curvature ratio and span length also have a significant impact on moment distribution factors. As can be seen from In the current study, the investigation on shear distribution factors revealed that the behaviour of intermediate girders are quite different from outer girders due to position of moving loads as they are located close to supports. According to The effects of curvature ratio and span length on shear distribution factors of the outer left girders (  Based on the results obtained from the parametric study, the design guideline in the form of some expressions is developed using a multivariate regression analysis. The regression analysis is based on the power functions which are implemented by a computer programme code written in MATLAB Expressions for moment distribution factors of curved bridge decks are generated for different girders such as outer right girders, outer left girders and intermediate girders. The outer girders are defined as two far end outside girders, and the intermediate girders are considered as all inner and central girders for the purpose of calculating the moment distribution factors. The moment distribution factor expressions for the outer right girders ( The developed moment distribution factor expression for the intermediate girders ( Different formulas are deduced to account for shear distribution factors of curved box girder bridges by considering the investigated parameters. Due to the variety of distribution factors, five different empirical expressions are developed for various girders, including outer right girders, outer left girders, inner right girders, inner left girders and central girders. It should be noted that the inner girders are located between the outer and the central girders. The two following (shear distribution factor) expressions are derived for the outer left girders ( The next two following expressions are deduced for determination of shear distribution factors at the inner left girders ( The last following formula is derived to determine shear distribution factors at the central girders ( A comparative analysis is conducted on load distribution mechanism of horizontally curved steel–concrete composite box girder bridges subjected to AASHTO This study is performed by considering different horizontally curved box girder bridges subjected to AASHTO, HS20-44 design loading A comparative analysis is also performed on the load distribution mechanism of horizontally curved and straight box girder deck slabs according to AASHTO In the current study, the load distribution factors of horizontally curved steel–concrete composite box girder bridges subjected to Australian bridge load are determined from a large number of results which are generated from detailed finite element analysis of these structures for a large number of cases. These large number of results are obtained by varying different parameters such as curvature ratio, span length, number of loading lanes and number of cells of these structures. The accuracy and reliability of the above mentioned finite element models are confirmed using experimental data available in the literature. The design guideline for load distribution factor is also determined in the form of some expressions which can be used to conveniently calculate bending moment and shear force of different components of these structures in a design office. Based on the observation in the current study the following conclusions can be drawn. The maximum spacing of the cross brace spacing of the horizontally curved box girder bridges should not be more than 5 The curvature ratio and the number of cells are found to have significant effects on load distribution factor for bending moment of horizontally curved bridges. The maximum value of the load distribution factor for bending moment (found in the outer girder) is always reduced with the increase of the number of cells as well as the curvature ratios. The values of load distribution factors for both bending moment and shear force for AASHTO loads The maximum moment found at the mid-span of a curved bridge is always found to be more than that of a straight bridge. Thus, it is not recommended to treat a curved bridge as an equivalent straight bridge in order to avoid unreliable design.