Good prediction of the strength of rocks has many theoretical and practical applications. Analysis, design and construction of underground openings and tunnels, open pit mines and rock-based foundations are some examples of applications in which prediction of the strength of rocks is of great importance. The prediction might be done using mathematical expressions called failure criteria. In most cases, failure criteria of jointed rocks contain the value of strength of intact rock, i.e. the rock without joints and cracks. Therefore, the strength of intact rock can be used directly in applications and indirectly to predict the strength of jointed rock masses. On the other part, genetic programming method is one of the most powerful methods in machine learning field and could be utilized for non-linear regression problems. The derivation of an appropriate equation for evaluating the strength of intact rock is the common objective of many researchers in civil and mining engineering; therefore, mathematical expressions were derived in this paper to predict the strength of the rock using a genetic programming approach. The data of 51 rock types were used and the efficiency of equations obtained was illustrated graphically through figures.Rock materials (both intact and jointed) do not have uniform strength under different confining pressures and as the confining pressure Prediction of the strength under different confining pressures is important from numerous aspects. Quick and simple evaluation of the strength, instead of its direct measurement, is always desired and attracts engineers’ attention especially in the phase of initial investigations and designs of rock projects and the structures related to rocks. On the other hand, in analysis and designs associated with rock slopes, underground excavations, mines, etc, equations are needed to determine the strength of rock continuously for different confining pressures. Such an equation is called “failure criterion”. From one point of view, failure criteria related to rocks can be divided to two categories: “intact rock failure criteria” and “rock mass failure criteria” The mechanical behavior of geotechnical materials, especially rocks, is more complicated rather than those of other materials. Therefore, analytic approaches have not been successful in this field. Griffith's method Several researchers have regarded another group of failure criteria called “empirical criteria” Empirical criterion of Hoek and Brown Methods based on artificial intelligence such as artificial neural networks (ANN) and genetic programming (GP) can also be used to evaluate the strength of rock. Artificial neural networks that are used extensively in this field, actually, do an interpolation on a given set of data. Generally speaking, modeling and identification approaches taxonomy is two fold: firstly, white box models (which use differential equations for modeling) and secondly black box models with no differential equation. ANNs act like a black box. Although GP is also categorized in black box approaches, it gives mathematical expressions, which apparently show the relation between input and output. Therefore, GP is preferred in cases where researchers’ desire is to have a well-form and simple mathematical expression in terms of their target mathematical operations and functions. Despite of ANNs, GP has not been used extensively in rock mechanics and especially in predicting the strength of rocks. Recently in a study by GP, Baykasoğlu et al. In present study strength data of 51 different rock types taken from the literature Conventional triaxial test, the most common approach to measure the compressive strength under different confining pressures, includes two main stages: (1) applying cell pressure, also known as confining pressure ( When no confining pressure is applied ( Protodiakonov Heavily jointed rock cannot withstand tensile stresses. However, intact rock may do it up to a limiting stress called tensile stress ( Triaxial test described formerly may be conducted on similar specimens under different confining pressures and thus a set of Mohr–Coulomb criterion, the simplest failure criterion for rocks (geotechnical materials in general), assumes the relationship between major and minor principal stresses at the instant of failure to be linear. However, the relationship is rarely linear in practice. Mohr–Coulomb has also other shortcomings One of the non-linear forms proposed for above-mentioned relationship is Hoek–Brown failure criterion. This empirical criterion for intact rocks is given below Another one of non-linear criteria is Johnston's criterion The advantage of Johnston's criterion and similar criteria is that the constants are easily determinable without a high experience using given equations. Sheory Genetic programming first proposed by Koza function set terminal set In genetic programming x-over and mutation operators are modified so that they are applicable to the trees. Using x-over and mutation operators, this algorithm evolves trees in order that the best trees will be obtained in the last generation. These best trees are those for which the “fitness function” is optimal. The flowchart of GA and GP algorithms is given in In order to obtain a model for a set of data, two objectives should be achieved: The model should be precise enough. In other words, the error between derived mathematical expression output and actual one must be minimized. The model or equation should be as simple as possible (Occam's Razor principle in machine learning To achieve these objectives, especially when there are few training data available, we should divide data into In present study, GP is used in various ways. Some parameters of used algorithms are the same; these are number of generations Terminal sets used in the algorithms are shown in As shown in Hoek–Brown criterion (Eq. Since the value of output ( Strength of intact rock could be evaluated with these equations and Hoek–Brown criterion. To do this, in the criterion (Eq. As stated before, Hoek and his co-workers proposed the values of In this part, after a review on failure criteria in rock mechanics literature, a failure criterion of the following form was chosen: This is similar to Johnston's criterion to some extent. Therefore, we call it modified Johnston's criterion. One merit of above form is that its parameters ( Moreover, Eq. In Eq. Results of proposed criterion (Eq. We can use GP directly to find equations for predicting It is evident from the discussion given in preceding sections As shown in In this study, three approaches were proposed to predict the strength of intact rocks under different confining pressures using genetic programming. In the first approach, some equations derived to determine the constant of Hoek–Brown criterion, The comparison of the best equations obtained in each method shows that predictions done using the conditional equation of the first method and Hoek–Brown criterion are of higher precision among the other methods. This is due to application of previous experiences in rock classification as well as capabilities of GP algorithm. Moreover, to derive the equations, a proper fitness criterion (information criterion) was used. This criterion utilizes a combination of accuracy and complexity to compute the value of each expression. This causes obtained equations to be simple and precise at the same time. In other words, despite of other intelligent methods, artificial neural networks for example, the relation between input and out put will not be so complicated.