Electrochemical treatment involving a coupled coagulation and floatation was performed in the removal of doxycycline hyclate (DCH) from aqueous solutions. All the experiments were carried out in an electrochemical reactor of 1.5L which contained aluminum electrodes as cathode and anode. The removal of doxycycline hyclate (DCH) species by EC/EF was determined as a function of electrolysis time, pH, current intensity, flow rate and DCH concentration. From the observed results, it was corroborated that the DCH removal through the EC/EF process was excellent. The effective contribution from initial pH (7.03) and current intensity (5.39mAcm−2) was very much remarkable and well apparent from flocs of good buoyancy. The removal of DCH was inversely proportional to spacing between electrodes (SBE) and circulating flow rate in the presence of the supporting NaCl electrolyte of 1gL−1. It was also highly promoted by the addition of NaCl in comparison with NaNO3 and KCl to the electrolytic system. The compliance of four kinetic models was verified with DCH removal system. The free energy values from DKR model suggested the nature of bonding by chemical forces. Characterization by FTIR, SEM and XRD interpreted the assignments of various functional groups, surface morphology and crystalline incorporated amorphous nature, respectively of electro-generated flocs. The current efficiency and specific electrical energy consumption at optimized conditions of the EC/EF system were calculated.In the recent years, the use of pharmaceuticals is of great concern among the researchers ( Keeping in mind the above concerns, the present study was focused on the electro-coagulation coupled electro-flotation removal of doxycycline hyclate. The removal efficiency of doxycycline hyclate as a function of other system variables such as pH, current density, spacing between electrodes (SBE), DCH concentration, circulating flow rate, and supporting electrolytes was also studied and discussed. All the chemicals and reagents used in the study are all of analar grade. Doxycycline hyclate [4S,4aR,5S,5aR,6R,12aR-4-(dimethylamino)-1,5,10,11,12a -pentahydroxy-6-methyl-3,12-dioxo-4a,5,5a,6-tetrahydro-4H-tetracene-2-carboxamidehydrochloride] was supplied by Sigma–Aldrich, Germany, and the structural formula is shown in The experimental setup is as follows: A coupled EC/EF system in a closed reactor through continuous mode was set up. The reactor capacity with the volume of 1.5 In this electro-coagulation coupled electro-flotation (EC/EF) study, aluminum cathode and aluminum anode (11.9 The residual doxycycline hyclate (DCH) concentration was determined by UV–Visible spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-1800, Japan) at a wavelength of 350 In all electrochemical reactions, the reaction rate is controlled by current density and time of electrolysis which determine the coagulant production rate and the total production of coagulant respectively. The percentage removal of DCH as a function of time at different current densities (3.59 The rate of DCH removal was directly proportional to current density because of the increased production of the coagulant (Al The pH of any electrolyte drives the fate of electro-coagulation process ( The main reactions that take place during electro-coagulation at the two electrodes are as follows: Under acidic condition (pH However, the pH affects also the bubble size ( The spacing between electrodes and effective surface area depends on the construction of the electrode assembly. The variation in voltage drop ( The initial concentration provides an important driving force to overcome all mass transfer resistance of solutes between the aqueous and the solid phase ( In order to increase the conductivity of wastewater due to resistance between the electrodes, the addition of sodium chloride is suggested during electro-coagulation process. Researchers used sodium chloride to increase the conductivity of the solution; nevertheless, sodium nitrate and sodium sulfate were also used as electrolytes ( The effect of the circulating flow rate of 52 The percentage of DCH removal increased with respect to the decrease in the flow rate. High removal of DCH can be attributed to the increased residence time of DCH molecules inside the EC column due to the restricted flow rate and hence long reaction time between DCH species and the aluminum flocs ( The study on adsorption kinetics is significant because it provides valuable insight into the reaction pathway and the corresponding sorption mechanism. The sorption mechanism depends on the physical and chemical characteristics of the adsorbent and also on the mass-transfer process. The dynamics of DCH sorption onto Al(OH) Based on pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order models, it is possible to elucidate the mechanism of adsorption and potential rate controlling steps ( Pseudo-first-order model is a simple adsorption kinetic model ( According to pseudo-second-order kinetics ( It is inferred from the Weber–Morris intra-particle diffusion plot ( Elovich model ( The value of 1/ Dubinin–Kaganer–Radushkevich (DKR) isotherm is more general than Langmuir isotherm owing to its disagreement for a homogenous surface or a constant adsorption potential. Using DKR equation with reference to the present system, the constant The material after the EC/EF process was characterized by FTIR, SEM and XRD studies. The assignments of Fourier Transform IR study which occur at different frequencies are shown in The X-ray diffraction patterns ( The scanning electron micrograph ( Energy consumption and sacrificial electrodes are very important economical parameters. In this study, we used an average potential for EC and EF with a current density of 5.39 Current efficiency ( Specific Electrical Energy Consumption (SEEC) is calculated as a function of aluminum electrodes weight consumption during EC in kW  In supporting the obtained results, the consumption of electrical energy ( The electro-coagulation based removal of DCH was optimized at the pH of 7.03 which facilitated almost 90% removal after 80 In completing this modest contribution of research, I would like to thank the Heads of the collaborating educational institutes namely National College of Chemistry, Rennes top (France), Research Department of Chemistry, Pachaiyappa’s College, Chennai, India, and University of Sciences and Technology Houari Boumediene Algiers (Algeria) and P.G.