The breakage characteristics of low rank coals were tested in a laboratory using ECO coal from an Indonesian mine as the feed material. The grinding test results were used to fit the parameters of the breakage functions of an existing continuous hammer mill model. The mill hold-up, specific energy and projection rate to the screen were analyzed to observe the effects of operating conditions. The results indicate that for each underscreen aperture there exists a characteristic threshold point of the feed rate above which over-grinding occurs. This threshold point can be used to determine the optimal operating conditions of the breakage process. Additionally, a scale-up model of the hammer mill is established based on the energy-size relationship to predict the mill capacity as a function of the mill design and the operating parameters. A comparison between the prediction from the model and the manufacturer's data illustrates that the model based on Rittinger's theory fits the breakage characteristics of the hammer mill better than the models based on Bond's and Kick's theories. The established scale-up model agrees well with the manufacturer's test data within an acceptable degree of accuracy.Low-rank coal (LRC) generally refers to brown coal, lignite and, occasionally, sub-bituminous coal. Reservoirs of LRC are well distributed worldwide and the total amount of LRC is comparable to that of bituminous coals. Despite its abundance and distribution of reservoirs, LRC has two major drawbacks as a fuel, i.e., the high water contents and the susceptibility to spontaneous combustion. Because of these drawbacks, LRC is generally recognized as a fuel with no value and is partially used as a base material for some chemical products. However, increases in oil prices are expected to be prolonged over decades and the utilization of LRC is a potential method to cope with the global energy crisis in the long-term. Recently LRC has been regarded as a major source of various clean coal technology processes such as the ultra clean coal (UCC) I, UCC-II, hyper coal and upgraded brown coal (UBC) processes. To meet the requirements for environmental quality and efficiency standards, all of these processes require proper designing of beneficiation or chemical treatments to remove moisture, ash and the functional oxygen group which is a major cause of spontaneous combustion. The first stage of coal beneficiation is comminution, a process of breaking a large mass into fine particles. Comminution is one of the most energy intensive unit operations in coal processing. During crusher or mill operation, only a small fraction of the energy is used for actual breakage and the rest is absorbed into the machine and lost. The total cost of the beneficiation procedure strongly depends on the efficiency of comminution process. Thus, designing an energy efficient comminution process plays an important role in the coal beneficiation process in minimizing cost. Selecting the appropriate grinding machine and establishing the optimal conditions are crucial to increase the efficiency of comminution. A hammer mill, an impact-type crusher, is one of the most extensively used mills for coal crushing, and it provides high-performance breakage. A hammer mill provides a high size reduction ratio, i.e., the ratio of the particle size of the feed to that of the product, by just a single stage of breaking, without having stepwise operations or using different types of grinding equipment for each stage. Another advantage of using a hammer mill is that given the product size it provides, the capacity, i.e., throughput per unit time, is very high. A major drawback of using the hammer mill, the wear and tear of hammers, appears negligible or less important especially for the crushing of LRC, which is generally softer than high-rank coal. To establish the optimal operating conditions of hammer mills, we employed a mathematical modeling approach, which minimizes the need for tests under extensive conditions. A frequently used approach for the breakage modeling is a population balance model (PBM) which is based on the size-mass balance and the kinetic functions of breakage. of spontaneous combustionCompared to the empirical energy-size relationship model, PBM is able to predict the complete size distributions under given operating conditions. The objective of this study was to investigate the breakage characteristics of LRC by swing hammer mills for use in clean coal technology. Generally, the appropriate range of particle size distribution for the brown coal upgrading process is 100–3,000 The mill hold-up, specific energy and projection rate to the screen were analyzed to evaluate the effects of the operating conditions. Next, to scale-up the hammer mill, a model is established to predict the mill capacity depending on mill size, rotational speed, size of the feed materials, and objective product size. The prediction of the mill capacity by the model was compared to manufacturer's technical data sets from three different companies. The continuous hammer mill model by Austin et al. Balancing the mass in each size interval between the mill hold-up and the product for gives Combining Eqs. The functional form of The selectivity function For a known To minimize interference among the parameters and to increase the reliability of the back-calculation, it is necessary to reduce the number of the unknowns. To this end, the parameters related to the underscreen classification were determined not by back calculation but by fitting the experimental results via the comparison between the size distribution of the product and the mill hold-up using Eq. A vertical rotary swing hammer mill was used for the experiment. The configuration and operating conditions of the hammer mill are listed in A vibrating feeder was chosen to put coals into the mill. Because of the inherent difficulty in precisely controlling the feed rate when using vibrating feeders, the feed rate was determined retrospectively by being measured after each test. Underscreens of three different apertures, 3.2, 4.8, and 9.6 To ensure a steady state of milling, the breakage product was sampled after three minutes of operation from the starting, and then the operation was stopped. At the same time with the stopping, the underscreen was sealed to prevent particles in the mill hold-up from passing through the screen. Then, the mill hold up was sampled and its size distribution was measured. The accuracy of the measured mill hold up is not always reliable, especially if the swing hammers take a long time to halt The resultant size distributions of the products and the mean residence time from the measured hold-up and feed rate, i.e., The mean residence time for different feed rates and screen sizes is plotted in As discussed in The resultant selectivity function The The simplex method The term “scale-up model” used in this work refers to the quantitative relationship between the mill production rate and the design/operating parameters, e.g., the rotor diameter, rpm, size of the feed material, and objective product size. The establishment of this mathematical relationship provides a prediction of production capacity under a given mill dimension and operating conditions. In terms of the energy, the production rate of a mill can be described as below. To substitute the variables of energy in Eq. Based on the stress analysis of plastic deformation under the elastic limit, Kick’s theory states that the energy required for grinding is constant for a constant reduction ratio, which is the ratio of the feed particle size to the product particle size Bond's third theory of comminution states that the energy required for grinding is proportional to the length of new cracks formed. The resulting equation is represented as below Although many different sources cite these three as “laws”, the theories have continuously been the subject of controversy. Because of the difference in the fundamental hypotheses for these three models, the validity of these models highly depends on the breakage mechanism and especially the particle size range. As inferred by Hukki Note that The measurement or the prediction of the net grinding power The net power, or net energy used for grinding is proportional to the total energy consumption in a hammer mill. The energy consumption in a mill is proportional to the kinetic energy of the swing hammers. The resultant equation is the relation as below Combining Eq. To reduce the parameters in the equations above, we can assume that Combining Eq. One of the practical difficulties in investigating the physical validity of these models is that there is no well-organized data with varied design/operation parameters. Therefore, such data have to be collected from different industrial sources, which will inevitably have uncontrolled extraneous variables such as the efficiency of the machine itself and the difference in the strength of the feed materials. In this work, we compared the capacity predictions of Eqs.  Breakage tests were carried out using lignite with a laboratory hammer mill. From the back calculation, Additionally, a scale-up model of the hammer mill was established based on the energy relationship to predict the mill capacity as a function of the mill design/operating parameters. The comparison between the models' predictions and manufacturer's data revealed that the model based on Rittinger's theory fits the breakage characteristics of the hammer mill better than Bond's or Kick's theory-based model. The established scale-up model agrees well with the manufacturer's test data within an acceptable degree of accuracy, and it can be utilized as a tool for mill design and capacity prediction.  parameter of cumulative form of weight fraction that appears in size proportional coefficients mill rotor diameter 80% passing size of the product 80% passing size of the feed energy required for unit mass production feed rate weight fraction that appears in size size interval index size interval index coefficient for Rittinger's model in Eq. coefficient for Kick's model in Eq. weight fraction that appears in size mass of hammer exponent in Eq. net power used for grinding weight fraction thatppears in size mill production rate rate of the fraction of mill hold up presented to the screen per unit time size reduction ratio, The specific rate of breakage of size the fraction of size mill hold-up Bond's work function parameter of parameter of screen aperture screen aperture parameter of parameter of parameter of defined in Eq. parameter of parameter of mean residence time rotational speed (rpm) This work was supported by the