The extraction of palladium(II) from hydrochloric acid solutions of various concentrations in the presence of different amounts of sodium chloride with various defined alkylpyridinecarboxamides having one or two alkyl groups in the amide substituents at positions 2, 3 or 4 was studied. The hydrophobicity of the studied reagents was characterized by various parameters, including octanol/water distribution coefficient. It was found that the extraction of palladium(II) with monoalkylpyridinecarboxamides depends upon the number, length and position of the alkylamide group. Higher extractions are observed for the derivatives with the alkylamide group at position 3. The extraction of palladium(II) from aqueous 0.1 M HCl with N-dodecylpyridine-3-carboxamide (3-C12) is rapid and the equilibrium is achieved in 30–60 s. The replacement of HCl with NaCl has only a minor effect on the extraction of palladium(II). During the extraction of palladium(II) from acidic solutions, HCl is also transferred to the organic phase. High transfer of HCl is observed for N-dodecylpyridine-3-carboxamide. A spontaneous transfer of palladium(II) to the organic phase is observed. The Vosburgh and Cooper method and the Job method were used to determine the composition of the complexes formed. Complexes with the molar ratio of palladium(II) to the extractant equal to 1:2 (PdCl2L2) and 1:1 (Pd2Cl4L2) are extracted.Extraction has become an advanced technique to recover and separate noble metals, including palladium(II) The aim of this work was to study the extraction of palladium(II) from hydrochloric acid solutions of various concentrations and various sodium chloride contents by some model individual pyridinecarboxamides of different structures and of different hydrophobicities. The following effects were investigated: the length of alkyl groups in the pyridine ring, the change of the position of the alkylamide group in the pyridine ring, and the number of alkyl substituents. The aim of the work was also to identify the complexes formed. Pure individual monoalkylamides and dialkylamides were used as extractants: Synthesis, purity, structures and analytical data have been described in previous papers Extraction was carried out in a typical way. Five millimolar solutions of Acid transfer to the organic phase by the The Vosburgh and Cooper method and the Job method were used. The mixture of chloroform and methanol (2:1 vol/vol) was used both as a solvent and reference solution. In the Vosburgh and Cooper method, two series of solutions were prepared. In the first one, concentration of palladium(II) chloride was constant at 0.4 mM, while the concentration of the extractant varied from 0 to 2 mM. In the second series, the concentration of the extractant amounted to 1 mM and the concentration of palladium(II) varied from 0 to 0.8 mM. In the Vosburgh and Cooper method, UV-VIS spectra of In the Job method, the sum of extractant and palladium(II) concentration was equal to 5 mM and the mole fraction of the extractant varied from 0.1 to 0.9. Palladium(II) is typically extracted from 3 M HCl The basicity of pyridine derivatives depends strongly upon the substituent type and its position in the pyridine ring. Electron-withdrawing substituents (-COOR,-CONH The effect of electron-donating substituents (NH Carboxamide groups attract electrons and are electron-withdrawing substituents. Thus, the basicity of the studied reagents is significantly lower in comparison to pyridine. However, they can still be protonated in the extraction systems working partly as basic reagents. Such an ion pair may even attract the second HCl molecule as was demonstrated for trialkylamines Higher transfer of HCl is observed for 3-C The protonation of 3-2C Further increase of HCl concentration (up to 2 M) causes the protonation of the ligand to occur, and extraction decreases to 25%. A new type of complex of palladium tetrachloride anion with the protonated ligand starts to be extracted at 2 M HCl and the maximum of its extraction according to the ion exchange mechanism (approx. 47%) is observed at 3 M HCl. When HCl concentration increases above 3 M, the formation of the palladium complex decreases. Similar results were reported for palladium(II) extraction from highly acidic solutions with acetamides Ion pairs [LH] The hydrophobicity of the studied reagents can be characterized by various parameters including octanol/water distribution coefficient As shown in The results shown in Derivatives having an amide substituent at position 2 can form chain complexes proposed for extraction of copper (CuCl Thus, an increase in the chloride concentration should negatively affect extraction. Such a tendency is actually observed in the extraction of palladium(II) from 0.1 M HCl with changing concentrations of NaCl. The equilibrium percentage of Pd(II) extraction (contact time equal to 2 h) with 2-C The extraction of palladium(II) with some extractants, especially (3-C  Reagents having two alkyl groups in the amide group present at position 3 (3-2C A different behaviour of the reagent having a substituent at position 2 (2-C It is interesting that even spontaneous transfer, i.e., without any mixing, to the organic phase containing 3-C In absorption spectra of the chloropalladate(II) complex with  The conclusion was confirmed by the Job method The extraction of two complexes is also confirmed by the extraction data given in The UV/VIS spectrum of the organic phase obtained after extraction of palladium(II) from 0.1 M HCl with 3-C The extraction of palladium(II) with alkylpyridinecarboxamide is different, depending upon extraction conditions and the extractant structure. Pyridinecarboxamides having the substituent at position 3 are better extractants of palladium(II), compared to those with the substituent at position 2. The percentage of palladium extraction at equilibrium is in the range 80–90%. The equilibrium is approached in different ways for various reagents and the differences in the character of kinetics curves are greater when the aqueous feed contains more HCl, or a high concentration of chloride ions is introduced in the form of NaCl. It can be explained by a different hydrophobicity of the studied reagents and their various susceptibility to protonation. During the extraction of palladium from acidic solutions, HCl is also transferred to the organic phase. High transfer of HCl is observed for The work was supported by a grant from the KBN Polish Scientific Committee for the Institute's activity DS. PP No. 32/014/2002.