In this work, the measurement of the axial gas holdup profile and gas residence time distribution (RTD), in a 130m3 self-aerated flotation cell, is presented. For this purpose, a radioactive tracer gas was activated in the Nuclear Reactor of the Chilean Commission of Nuclear Energy.
                  The gas tracer, Freon 13B1, was injected as an impulse signal at the gas (air) inlet point, located at the top of the cell, from which the gas tracer circulates first through the rotor, where the bubble dispersion occurs, and then the gas becomes well distributed over the whole cross-sectional area before leaving the cell.
                  The axial gas holdup profile was estimated from the transient gas concentration measurement at different depths inside the cell. From these experiments it was found that the air entering the cell was preferentially distributed in the upper half of the cell, while the gas entrainment into tailings was negligible. The mean gas holdup was 8.8%, and consequently the effective pulp volume of collection zone was 91.2%.
                  The gas concentration on top of froth was recorded for RTD measurement of the gas leaving the cell. It was found that the mean gas residence time was around 42s and the mixing condition for gas and pulp was similar.The dramatic increase in size of industrial flotation cells, over the last few years, poses new challenges related to equipment design in terms of mixing, gas dispersion and pulp circulation, which need to be addressed. In flotation processes, the gas flowrate (typically air) is a key variable which provides the gas surface required for selective mineral particles capture and transport. For this purpose, the gas flowrate must be firstly dispersed into small bubbles and the bubble swarm contacted with the pulp (mineral suspension) in order to collect the mineral particles of interest. As a result, particle–bubble aggregates are generated, which are less dense than the medium, thus allowing the separation of collected minerals by true flotation. For these reasons, the gas dispersion (bubble size and gas holdup) is relevant and must be evaluated. In this sense, the gas residence time distribution (RTD) measurement is a powerful tool because it allows the evaluation of the mean gas residence time as well as the effective gas holdup in the cell. Also, the presence of gas recirculation through the rotor and gas entrainment into tailings can be identified. Several studies have been reported on the gas dispersion in laboratory, pilot and plant flotation cells, using gas–liquid and gas-pulp systems (e.g. RTD measurements in large flotation cells have been reported mainly in terms of pulp properties, liquid and solids mixing characteristics and gas dispersion ( Theoretical efforts have been made to characterize the liquid and solid dispersion in mechanical flotation cells using CFD ( In summary, there is a lack of data reported on gas RTD, as well as gas recycling and entrainment, in large industrial flotation cells. In this study, a suitable technique to measure the actual gas RTD, as well as to estimate the gas holdup, gas circulation and entrainment, in large size industrial flotation cells is presented. The experimental work was developed at El Teniente Division, Codelco-Chile, in the rougher flotation circuit consisting of four parallel banks. Each bank consists of seven Wemco 130 Bromine Tri-Fluoro-Methane (CF The gas was stored in a stainless steel tank, and then activated by direct irradiation in a 5 The injection system, shown in The radioactive tracer technique consists of the injection of a gas impulse signal through the gas (air) inlet, consisting of a 25.4  The tracer concentration inside the cell, as well as the presence of tracer leaving the cell at the concentrate (on top of froth) and tailings streams, was recorded on-line by non-invasive sensors, provided with scintillating crystal sensors of NaI(Tl) of 1 After the gas impulse injection, the tracer concentration inside the cell was measured by means of three sensors: S1, S2 and S3, located at 70, 220 and 370 The local gas concentration (gas holdup) is proportional to the total radiation of the gas tracer calculated by integration of the transient response curve obtained from each internal sensor. The ratio between the area under the curve (integral) obtained from two sensors (e.g., S2/S1) represents the relative local gas holdup. For this purpose, these sensors were previously calibrated in the laboratory, by a standard radioactive source, and installed inside the cell, under similar geometrical conditions, to measure the aerated pulp radiation in their surroundings. The actual gas holdup was directly measured at the level of sensor S1 (as reference), and the gas holdup at the level of sensors S2 and S3 was scaled from sensor S1. From the point of view of the collection process, the effective collection zone can be related to the aerated volume fraction, and more specifically to the impeller zone and surroundings, where the highest energy dissipation occurs favouring the gas dispersion as well as the bubble–particle aggregates formation ( Local gas holdup measurement was performed using a manual device, shown in   These observations confirm that the gas bubbles did not recycle through the false bottom into the riser tube, as in the case of pulp recycling ( The three sensors installed inside the cell were equally collimated to observe a similar pulp volume at different levels. Measurement of local radiation intensity (cps) was then proportional to the relative amount of tracer in the surroundings of the scintillating crystal sensors. Thus, the integration of the total radiation intensity observed at each local sensor, during the tracer impulse tests, allowed the estimation of the relative presence of gaseous tracer at a certain level in the cell, which was proportional to the local gas concentration.   The total gas radiation intensity measured by sensor S4, located on the tailing discharge pipe (see  In order to characterize the gas mixing, a tank in series model, Eq. Numerical results for the three gaseous tracer tests, developed in the 130 For comparison purposes, the dimensionless gas and liquid RTD (liquid reported into tailings) are presented in The radioactive tracer technique provides an effective way to evaluate the gas RTD where other techniques, such as thermal conductivity, gas spectrometry, and FID-gas chromatography, typically used at laboratory scale, are less suitable for industrial scale measurements in large size equipment. Once obtained the mean gas residence time, the effective gas volume The following was observed from direct measurements of gas residence time distribution and gas concentration measurements in a 130 the mean gas residence time was around 42 s, the gas bubbles preferentially concentrate in the upper half of the cell, the gas bubbles recycling through the false bottom into the riser tube was nil, the amount of gas reported to the tailings by entrainment was nil, the gas mixing characteristic was similar to that of the pulp, an effective pulp volume of about 91% of the total cell volume was determined using gaseous tracer measurements, which was in good agreement with previous measurements using liquid tracer. The authors are grateful to El Teniente Division CODELCO-Chile for providing access to their plant and for valuable assistance in the experimental work. Funding for process modelling and control research is provided by CONICYT, Project Fondecyt 1070106, ICM-NEIM, Santa Maria University, Project 270522, and the Chilean Commission of Nuclear Energy.