A series of methyl-substituted bis(2-(hydroxyphenyl)benzothiazolate)zinc derivatives [Zn(n-MeBTZ)2, n
                     =3 (1a), 4 (1b), 5 (1c)] were synthesized to investigate the correlation between molecular structures and optical properties. The results indicate that the blue-emitting (λ
                     max
                     =470nm) complex 1b is monomer with a higher PL quantum efficiency than complexes 1, 1a, 1c. Two green-emitting (λ
                     max
                     =507nm and 499nm) complexes 1a and 1c have special bi-molecular structures. The molecular structure for Zn(BTZ)2 (complex 1) is dimer. Bilayer organic light-emitting devices were fabricated by using these complexes as emitting layer. The maximum emission wavelengths of the devices are in the range of 501–553nm. The devices show turn-on voltages at 9.2, 12.7, 2.3 and 10.7V for complex 1, 1a, 1b, and 1c, respectively. In particular, the device with complex 1b shows a higher brightness than the other complexes under the same conditions.Organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) are primarily prepared with either small molecules or polymer It is well known that Zn(BTZ) Although blue-emitting materials have been an active research field, blue-light-emitting metal complexes with excellent performance are still rare. It has been shown that some d All materials were purified by high-vacuum gradient-temperature sublimation before analysis. C, H, and N microanalysis were carried out with an Elemental Vario EL Elemental analyzer. Quantum efficiency measurements were carried out at room temperature in THF solution. Zn(BTZ) Cyclic voltammetry was performed with Autolab/PG STAT302 in a one-compartment electrolysis cell consisting of a platinum wire as working electrode, a platinum electrode as counter, and a calomel electrode as reference. The solution of 0.1 All the calculations were performed using the density functional theory (DFT) with the Dmol3 program The OLED structures employed in this study were double layer. Organic layer was fabricated by high-vacuum (10 The single crystals of complexes BTZ was synthesized by the reaction of 2-aminobenzenethiol and salicylic acid. The methyl-substituted ligands were obtained from the reaction between 2-aminobenzenethiol and corresponding n-methyl salicylic acid in toluene solution. At last, the final products were purified by vacuum sublimation, and product yields were 75–85%.         The crystal data, collection information and refinement data for complexes Though the zinc ions in complex The Zn–N bond lengths are remarkably different, ranging from 1.996(3) Packing in the solid state depends on the molecular structures of the complexes. Close π–π stacking interactions between adjacent ligands facilitate carrier transport. The π–π stacking of complexes To confirm that the single crystal structures are representative of the entire sample, a global optimization method by Rietveld refinement for powder diffraction spectra were carried out. Complex The solid-state PL spectra of all complexes can be seen from The results suggest the different substitutional positions of methyl on phenoxide ring can produce different effect on absorption spectra. The meta-position substitution to the hydrogen (complex To investigate the electronic effects caused by the addition of methyl group, cyclic voltammetry experiments were carried out for all complexes in THF solution. For the electrochemical behavior of all complexes, it has been proposed that the oxidative and reductive processes involve the Zn-phenoxide and -benzothiazolyl moiety. Based on the DFT calculations on monomeric complexes HOMO for complex The electroluminescent properties of complexes The ability of the emissive layer to trap charges is considered to be the most important factors which determine the operating voltage. The device operating voltage (at a fixed current) increases in the order A group of methyl-substituted [Zn(BTZ) This work was financially supported by