The aim of this work was to study the test conditions for the determination of the biochemical acidogenic potential (BAP) of wastewater, which should be useful to predict the performance of enhanced biological phosphorus removal (EBPR). Proposed operating conditions for a simple and reproducible BAP test in 250ml serum bottles (equipped with black butyl stoppers and magnetic bars) are: use of either frozen or fresh water, no inoculum addition, fermentation carried out in the dark during 15 days, addition of 1mM bromo-ethane sulfonate (BES) and 2mM barium chloride (BaCl2), stirring speed strong enough to maintain vortex conditions, no pH control and controlled temperature of 20°C.The potential of any wastewater to produce volatile fatty acids (VFAs), which are the main substrates of phosphorus accumulating organisms (PAOs), can be determined by a simple test Lie et al. However, the operating conditions of the BAP test were not fully examined. The objective of this work was to study the effect of the main variables influencing the determination of the BAP, and to propose a simple and reproducible protocol. Wastewater was fermented under anaerobic conditions. VFAs (acetic, propionic and butyric acids) concentrations were measured once a day until a maximum level was reached. The wastewater used for the experiments came from four different municipal wastewater treatment plants ( Fermentations were carried out in parallel in two different types of bioreactors: 4 250 Grab samples of raw wastewater were taken, after grit and grease removal ( VFA analyses were performed with a Trace 2000 (ThermoQuest) gas chromatograph equipped with a DB-FFAP column (l=30 The influence of the following parameters on the BAP test was studied: sample conservation by freezing, inhibition of VFA consuming anaerobic reactions, stirring speed, pH, alkalinity and temperature. The operating conditions are summarized in As suggested by Lie and Welander (a) One set of experiments was performed, where wastewater previously frozen during one week at –20°C was compared to fresh wastewater. (b) BES: inhibitor of methanogenesis 1 Molybdate and barium: inhibitor of sulfate reduction The efficiency of sodium molybdate as an inhibitor of sulfate reduction was tested by comparing the addition of 0.2 and 1 (c) Three fermenters were used to control the stirring speed at 150, 300 and 450 (d) Three simultaneous BAP tests were performed in fermenters: at pH 6.5 (close to the optimum reported by Andrews and Pearson (e) Although experiments had showed that the wastewater alkalinity was sufficient to self-regulate the pH, two BAP tests were carried out with and without the addition of NaHCO (f) Experiments were carried out at three temperatures on three wastewater samples. Two fermenters and two sets of serum bottles were placed in temperature controlled rooms at 14°C and 20°C, respectively. A third water jacketed fermenter was maintained at 30°C. With serum bottles, this temperature was controlled by using an incubator. In all experiments, fermentation started after a few hours, once anaerobic conditions (ORP <−200 The BAP/total COD ratios varied between 0.17 and 0.40 indicating that the COD fermentable fraction was quite variable between the studied wastewaters. (a) The possibility of freezing samples without modification of the VFA production was proposed by Lie and Welander (b) The VFAs produced during acidogenesis can be consumed by competing reactions under anaerobic conditions, reducing the BAP. BES: inhibition of methanogenesis Methanogenesis by acetoclastic bacteria, which uses acetic acid as a substrate, is the main reaction to be inhibited. During BAP tests carried out on fresh wastewater without BES, significant methane concentrations (up to 10 Molybdate and barium: inhibition of sulfate reduction Sulfate reduction is another important anaerobic process to be taken into account, as the sulfate concentration in sewage is frequently over 100 Sulfate consumption was sometimes observed in the presence of 1 Lie et al. (c) In the fermenters, VFAs production was not complete at stirring speeds lower than 300 (d) The non pH-regulated fermenter evolved naturally from pH 8 to a stable neutral pH during the first 5 days of fermentation, in spite of the low alkalinity/COD ratio of the wastewater tested ( (e) Experiments carried out with wastewater from La Pinière (170 The buffering capacity of the municipal wastewaters tested naturally controlled the pH reduction due to VFA production, even in cases of low alkalinity and of low alkalinity/COD ratios. Greater loading proportions of carbon-rich industrial wastewaters could, however, result in insufficient buffering capacity. (f) Temperature strongly influenced the BAP value for the three wastewaters tested, in the range of 14–30°C ( A standard incubation temperature of 20°C is recommended for the BAP test. The reproducibility of the results ( After investigating the effect of the most significant factors on acidogenesis, standard operating conditions for the BAP test are proposed as follows: 250 Fresh wastewater, that can be frozen if sample conservation is necessary. Addition of 1 Addition of 2 Stirring speed strong enough to maintain vortex conditions in the serum bottles. Fermentations carried out in the dark. No need for pH control as self-regulation should be induced by the wastewater buffering capacity. Controlled temperature of 20°C. Test duration: 15 days (BAP 15). Sampling frequency: bottles sampled only once at the end of the test, but daily anaerobic sampling may be performed to monitor the evolution of VFA production.