Recent work from Meleti, Shapiro, and Adams, Much of our thinking about mineral is based on how many of us read scientific literature: left to right and top to bottom. Thus, the classic model of how tissues become mineralized is the growth plate of the epiphysis. We have learned other lessons from the growth plate as well. Many of the growth plate chondrocytes, although not all, become apoptotic. Because growth plate chondrocytes are conveniently aligned in columns, we envision mineralization as a linear process. Each series of steps in the endochondral developmental cascade leads to the next step. We tend not to envision information working in reverse, from the bottom up, or from the mineral to the cells. And we tend not to consider that the constituent ions of the mineral phase may themselves contribute to the physiology of the chondrocytes as they mature. While the concept that Ca The Meleti et al. paper in this volume of The mineralizing osteoblast culture model has been described by a number of authors in numerous permutations. It is based on the original observations of Howard Tenenbaum at the University of Toronto showing that supplementation of culture medium with dexamethasone and βGP would result in mineralized bone formation within a folded periosteal flap over a reasonably short period of time. But the connection between the increase in alkaline phosphatase, the release of inorganic phosphate (Pi) from βGP due to the activity of the enzyme, and the fact that von Kossa stains phosphate, not calcium phosphate, has not always been made. Many of the so-called mineralized nodules described in the literature reflect high local levels of Pi due to the action of alkaline phosphatase, not calcification. Moreover, many von Kossa-positive deposits indicate the presence of dystrophic mineral as the locally high levels of Pi formed precipitates with the Ca Regardless of mechanism or whether the cells die via apoptosis or necrosis, this paper shows that increased inorganic phosphate, as would be found in culture by the action of alkaline phosphatase on βGP, plays an important role in osteoblast physiology in addition to its traditional role in apatite crystal formation. Thus, it is not surprising that after differentiation, osteoblasts become apoptotic in culture. The authors wish to acknowledge the support of U.S. Public Health Service grants DE-08603, DE-05937, and AR-37661.