The surface core level shifts have been measured and interpreted for cleaved FeS2{100}. A new feature has been observed at about 2.0 eV from the S2p bulk line on its low binding energy side. This small peak is the most surface sensitive component. The origin of this feature is thought to be the breakage of sulphur–sulphur bonds. The strongest surface peak is ascribed to the fracture of the Fe–S bond. An estimate for the effective attenuation lengths of photoelectrons in pyrite at kinetic energies 40, 180 and 610 eV supports the interpretation of the features.Pyrite (FeS Pyrite has a rock salt like crystal structure where the Fe ion replaces the cation and the S X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy has revealed that for surface and bulk atoms of a single crystal the binding energies of the core level spectra can deviate from each other. In semiconducting materials the surface peak of the cation has usually been shifted to somewhat higher binding energies and for anions to lower binding energies, respectively, in comparison with the bulk spectra. The SCLSs, which give the binding energy differences between the surface and the bulk features, can be used for discussion of the possible reconstruction of the surfaces. Recently, the cleaved pyrite has received considerable attention The core level XPS experiments were carried out at MAX II synchrotron source (Lund, Sweden) at beam line I411 equipped with an SX-700 monochromator (Zeiss) and an SES-200 electron analyzer (Scienta) operated at pass energy of 10–20 eV. The photoelectrons were collected at an approximate take-off angle of 45°. The energy resolution of the instrument for the S One of the greatest advantages of the synchrotron radiation is that one can control the exciting photon energy in the spectrometer. The surface sensitivity of the XPS measurement can be improved by decreasing the inelastic mean free path of the photoelectrons. To obtain the smallest inelastic mean free path, the excitation energy should be chosen in such away that the kinetic energy of the photoelectron would not be too far from 50 eV, which usually is close to the position of that minimum value. In this case the intensity ratio between the surface and bulk component of the spectrum is largest. The next weakest component is described by a having an energy separation of 1.3 eV from the main line. Its relative intensity is only about 15.8% suggesting that the S The effective attenuation length ( Surface structure of cleaved single crystal pyrite is shown to induce three surface core level shifted (SCLS) components in S In this work, there was introduced the third SCLS component in S The authors are grateful to Dr. W. Paszkowicz for X-ray diffraction measurements.