Presently there are about 160 installations of automated mineralogy instruments such as QEM∗SCAN, MLA, TIMA, MINERALOGIC and INCAMineral. These instruments determine mineral quantities, and perform mineral liberation and mineral association analyses. Since the late 1990’s the scientific community of applied mineralogy and automated mineralogy has expressed the need of determining the variability in the measurements of mineral quantities and mineral liberation analyses through inter laboratory testing of suitable reference materials to improve confidence in the quantitative mineralogy measurements. A sample representing the −28+65 mesh size fraction of a sulphide flotation rougher concentrate from the Clarabelle mill in Copper Cliff, Vale (Sudbury, Ontario) was prepared for this testing. This rougher concentrate contains chalcopyrite, pyrrhotite, pentlandite, pyrite, quartz and feldspars as the dominant minerals. A 10-gram sub-sample was sent to the participating laboratories of the round robin. The sub-samples were analyzed by the participating laboratories to determine the mineral quantities, the liberation of chalcopyrite and the mineral association analysis for chalcopyrite. The findings indicate that there is a good agreement in the mineral quantities. The liberation analysis results also indicate a good agreement with the exception of two participants. These results indicate that correct mineral quantities do not necessarily imply correct mineral liberation. The testing also revealed that there was no consensus on how the mineral associations are treated and reported. We recommend that the modal analysis by liberation classes should be the preferred approach in reporting the mineral associations because it is more relevant to understand the mineral concentration operations.Presently there are about 160 systems for automated image analysis. Since the late 1990’s the scientific community of automated mineralogy has expressed the need of performing round robin testing that would help to check the variability that may arise from the use of different systems. Such a need was clearly expressed during a workshop held on September 6, 2008 in Brisbane, Australia in conjunction with the 9th International Congress for Applied Mineralogy ( In 1997, CanmetMINING entered in an agreement with McGill University to produce synthetic particles with determined liberation classes. McGill University produced binary particles of glass and leaded glass. The particle size was 425–600 Iron ore mines require high grade ores to be commercially attractive. Thus, iron ores commonly have high content of hematite and magnetite. However, identification and separation of magnetite from hematite in most automated mineralogy systems (QEM∗SCAN and MLA) is not simple. Thus, a sample of an iron ore would not be appropriate for round robin testing. The feeds to mineral processing plants concentrating sulphide minerals are commonly low grade. For example, it is common that the feed to a copper concentrator has less than 1% Cu. In this case, the amount of ore mineral would be too low and its liberation at moderate grinds is likely to be too high. In addition, the amount of the ore mineral in the lower liberation classes would be too low. Another characteristic is that ore bodies that are presently being exploited can reach high liberation at acceptable grinds to allow attractive return on investment. Therefore, the feed to a sulphide concentration plant cannot be used for round robin testing. The ore bodies that have complex liberation problems are not being exploited such as the massive sulphide deposits in the Iberian Pyritic Belt (e.g. In 2011, as part of a collaborative research project with the Polytechnic University of Madrid, we performed an automated quantitative mineralogy investigation of a polished section of the re-cleaner copper concentrate of the Kansanshi flotation plant (Zambia). This sample contained chalcopyrite, secondary copper sulphides such as digenite, chalcocite, bornite and covellite, copper oxide minerals such as malachite, delafossite, chrysocolla and abswurmbachite, pyrite, pyrrhotite, hematite, quartz, calcite, dolomite, albite, micas, and rutile. The concentrator aimed to recover copper minerals. Thus, if the copper minerals are considered as a group, then the mineral liberation of this ore does not present problems. However, this ore displays highly complex mineralogical textures among the copper minerals, thus the liberation analysis by particle composition would be different than the liberation analysis by particle surface ( In 2012, we obtained ∼1000 The whole amount in the +200 mesh (+75 The −28+65 mesh (−589+208 Nine polished sections were prepared from randomly selected sub-samples. The polished sections were examined with an MLA instrument using the GXMAP mode. It was observed that some agglomerations remained in the samples. In addition, some very rounded particles were observed which appear to be recycled materials from a smelter dust. The agglomerations could be easily “broken” using the particle separation routine of the MLA. Also, many of the rounded smelter particles could be “broken” using the particle separation routine of the MLA. The MLA was instructed to remove any particles that were too small to be in this size fraction (i.e. <212 Following the initial examination, it was decided that the sample was appropriate for the round robin testing. In total, 17 laboratories accepted our invitation to participate in the round robin testing. Each participating laboratory was provided with a sub-sample. The results are listed by sample numbers by which the participating laboratories can identify their results. Two of the sub-samples were further split into three and assayed as three separate samples. The results of the assays are given in The round robin participants reported the quantities of >30 minerals present. Listing all those minerals in this paper is not practical and in fact, there are discrepancies in the reported minor and trace minerals. These discrepancies would be distracting; therefore, only the quantities of the major minerals reported by the participants are given (  There are various methods to report mineral liberation. Some of the participants reported the cumulative liberation, whereas others reported the discrete values in each liberation class. To facilitate the comparison, the data were converted to cumulative liberation. Several of the systems reported the amount of chalcopyrite that is totally free, whereas others provided the amount of chalcopyrite in the sample that is in particles with >90% chalcopyrite. We consider the latter an appropriate method of reporting the liberation because the totally liberated class is the one with the most stereological error. In addition, it is neither physically possible nor economically profitable to operate a concentrator plant recovering only the totally free particles. For the sake of comparison, the totally free class was grouped with the >90% liberation class for all the participants. There are several methods of reporting the mineral associations. The participants were requested to report mineral association using the modal analysis by liberation classes. However, most of the participants reported the mineral association by other more common methods. It is clear that there is no consensus on how to report mineral association. Some participants reported the mineral association as a function of binary and ternary particles. This method is quite common and has been in use even before automated mineralogy instruments became widely used. Other participants reported the mineral association analysis for chalcopyrite in binary particles and in multi-mineral particles where one mineral dominates the assembly of associated minerals. Other participants reported the absolute or raw mineral association. This association gives the percentage of chalcopyrite that is associated to another mineral for all types of particles. Only eight participants reported the mineral association of chalcopyrite using the modal analysis by liberation classes.  The sample for this round robin was selected from a coarse size fraction. This was done in an attempt to have a wide spread liberation. However, the analysis of coarse particle samples requires special care. The tendency to yield polished sections that are not completely representative of the sample is more pronounced for coarse size fractions (>150  Agglomerated particles affect the results of mineral liberation, because they are considered as one particle. For liberation analysis, it is important to remove agglomerated particles. Samples of dry flotation concentrates commonly have agglomerated particles. A treatment is often necessary to de-agglomerate particles before separating the sample into size fractions. The sample PTC-1b −28+65 mesh was subjected to a strong attrition treatment to remove the agglomerated material. This resulted in the removal of agglomerations but some remained. The presence of some agglomerated fine particles in this sample is a realistic situation. It allows testing the efficiency of the image analysis routines used for de-agglomeration. We informed the participants about the presence of agglomerated fine particles and that the agglomerations could be easily “broken” using the particle separation routine that is part of many automated systems and removing particles that are smaller than ∼200 μm, simply because such particles are too small to be in the −28+65 mesh size fraction. However, only a few participants followed this recommendation. It should be noted that removal of particles abnormally small to be in a size fraction is a form of stereological correction (  As mentioned earlier, a standard material for automated mineralogy should ideally have a wide-spread liberation. Unfortunately, despite of selecting the coarse size fraction, this is not the case for the sample studied in this round robin. This is an additional characteristic to argue that this sample is not ideal as a standard for automated mineralogy. Nevertheless, The results from sub-samples 2-2-2 and 3-5-4 stipulate an interesting point in that while the modal analysis is correct, the liberation analysis may not necessarily be accurate. Thus, verification of the modal analysis results with the assay data does not necessarily indicate that the liberation analysis is correct. This is logical considering that the modal analysis involves different measuring algorithms than the liberation analysis. There are several methods of reporting mineral associations ( The method of reporting the mineral association by binary, ternary and multi-mineral particles has a practical limitation in that the information cannot be applied to concentration plants. For example, flotation cannot be made selective to binary or tertiary particles. Flotation collects particles based on the surface of the mineral exposed to the flotation reagents. Gravimetric concentration cannot be made selective to binary or tertiary particles. Gravimetric concentration collects particles based on their average specific gravity. Similarly, magnetic concentration cannot be made selective to binary or tertiary particles. Magnetic concentration collects based on the mass of the magnetic susceptibility of the particle. Thus reporting the mineral association by binary or tertiary particles has limited applicability to the concentration processes.    Although PTC-1b −28+65 mesh is not an ideal sample because it is a coarse size fraction of a sulphide flotation concentrate that has recycled and agglomerated materials, there is a general agreement with the modal and liberation analysis results of the round robin testing. We are confident that the sample along with the uncertainty values derived from this round robin testing can be used to assess the reproducibility and relative accuracy of the measurements in routine quantitative mineralogy investigations. The sample can also be used for testing sample preparation procedures, such as de-agglomeration techniques and preparing representative polished sections, testing the various analytical modes of the automated mineralogy systems, and testing reproducibility, which may arise from user/operator interactions. There is no consensus on how to report the mineral association. We recommend that the modal analysis by liberation classes should be the preferred approach to reporting the mineral associations because it is more relevant for understanding the mineral concentration operations. We would like acknowledge IMA-CAM (International Mineralogical Association, Commission on Applied Mineralogy) for its support of this initiative. The round robin participants are not listed to protect their anonymity. Nevertheless, we would like to acknowledge them for their collective efforts in this exercise. The authors also acknowledge the participation of the following staff from CANMETMINING: Mr. John Chaulk for the preparation of the samples (i.e. sieving, blending, splitting and bottling) and the Analytical Services Group for the chemical analyses of the samples.