Purpose
                  The objective of this study is to asset the efficiency of the use of the Tightrope® device to treat isolated tibial spine fractures in adults.
               
                  Methods
                  All patients treated for isolated tibial spine fracture between November 2007 and February 2011 have been retrospectively included. The main judgment criteria was the post-operative knee laxity measured by Rolimeter® (Aircast) and the secondary criteria were the IKDC scores, the knee mobility, the Lachman test and the bone union. 8 patients have been included. The mean age was 34.2years (±12.5). The classification of Meyers and McKeever identified 5 types II, 2 types IIIa and 1 type IIIb. The mean follow-up period was 10months.
               
                  Results
                  The mean post-operative anterior knee laxity was 6±2.14mm for the operated side and 5.6±1.85mm for the opposite side. No significant difference was found (P
                     =0.73). According to the IKDC classification 3 patients were normal (A), 2 were nearly normal (B), 1 was abnormal (C) and 1 was very abnormal (D). The mean IKDC subjective score was 70.71±17.56. All 8 fractures achieved union without elevation. 3 patients developed motion complications and 2 required an arthroscopic arthrolysis. No other significant complication was noted. The outcome was compared to the different series published during the last 10years.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The use of the Tightrope® device is a simple technique occurring a rigid fixation, allowing early rehabilitation with a high rate of arthrofibrosis.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV, case series.Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) avulsion from the tibial eminence has been widely described in the literature and is more common in children and adolescents The goal of the treatment is to restore the length and the tension of the ACL, avoiding further knee laxity. Several arthroscopic fixation techniques have been reported such as percutaneous K-wire fixation To facilitate the osteosynthesis of tibial eminence fractures, we have developed a new procedure allowing stable fixation of the fracture. This technique has been made possible by the use of the TightRope® (Arthrex, Naples, Florida). TightRope® is a device originally designed for the reduction and stabilization of the tibiofibular syndesmosis of the ankle From November 2007 to February 2011, all patients with type II or III acute intercondylar eminence fractures were included. The exclusion criteria were as follows: tibial plateau fracture, nerve or vessel damage, multi-ligament injury or knee dislocation. Eight patients treated arthroscopically with a Tightrope device were included. The mean age was 34.2 The arthroscopic procedure was performed under general anesthesia. The patients were placed in the supine position and a pneumatic tourniquet was inflated. An anteromedial, an anterolateral parapatellar and a third trans-patellar portal (Guillquist) were used. Initially, a diagnostic arthroscopy was performed to confirm the nature of the tibial spine fracture and the associated injuries. The tibial eminence fracture was cleared of all adherent tissue by the use of OPES® (Orthopaedic Procedure Electrosurgical System, Arthrex) to avoid interposition of soft tissue. The anterior patellar fad pad was removed. The anterior transverse intermeniscal ligament, being an obstacle to reduction, was most of the time removed ( The fracture was reduced and compressed by the hook introduced through a transpatellar portal (Guillquist). The point of the C-ring drill guide was placed on the base of the ACL through the anteromedial portal ( By pulling independently on each of the traction sutures, the rectangular button was flipped and placed over the tibial eminence. The traction sutures were then tied on the extra-articular round button over the anteromedial tibial cortex allowing reduction and retightening of the ACL ( All patients underwent the same rehabilitation program. Knee motion exercises to prevent flexion deformity were started immediately without any limitation. A brace was used for the first month and the patients were encouraged to bear weight as tolerated. The mean Rolimeter® was 6 The use of a Tightrope device to treat intercondylar eminence fracture is safe and reproducible. Our results are similar to the literature. Since McLennan We believe that curettage of the fracture bed is a main point of the technique to slightly overreduce the fracture. Some authors believe that during the trauma leading to a tibial spine fracture, the intersubstance of the anterior cruciate ligament undergoes a stretching responsible for further anteroposterior instability. Noyes et al. In our series, three patients (37.5%) developed motion complications despite an early rehabilitation, leading us to perform two arthroscopic arthrolysis. At final review, one of the two patients had a 10° deficit in flexion and 5° deficit in extension, and the other one recovered a full range of motion. These three patients were rated with the worst IKDC scores, respectively grades B, C and D. Arthrofibrosis was defined as lack of 10° from full extension and/or less than 90° of knee flexion compared to the contralateral side (uninjured) three Bong and al. This is the first clinical study assessing Tightrope® in this indication and it should certainly be supported by a larger series which is currently being carried out in the unit. Acknowledged limitations of this study are the lack of a control group, the small number of patients and the short observation period. The use of the Tightrope device to treat arthroscopically tibial spines fracture appears to be safe and effective on knee laxity. The technique is straightforward, technically low in demand and provides a stable and rigid fixation, allowing an early mobilization. Despite the early rehabilitation a high rate of arthrofibrosis is reported in this series. Declaration of conflicting interests: Philippe Hardy, consultant for Arthrex.