The effect of diethylenetriamine (DETA) on the formation of Cu2+–, Ni2+– and Fe3+–amyl xanthate ion (AX−) complexes was studied by UV spectroscopy. The absorption spectra of solutions containing metal ions (M
                        n+) and AX− or M
                        n+ and DETA were studied to determine the λ
                     max and, when possible, the molar absorptivities of the species in solution. In the Cu2+ and Ni2+ systems, the change in the absorption bands of the M2+–AX− complex and/or AX− when DETA was added to solutions of fixed M2+/AX− ratios was used to propose a reaction scheme. DETA was shown (1) to dissolve M(OH)2 and (2) to suppress the formation of M(AX)2 depending on the M2+/AX− ratio. DETA dissolves Cu(OH)2 instantaneously and quantitatively whereas the dissolution of Ni(OH)2 by DETA is very slow. While the formation of Ni(AX)2 is dependent on the M2+/AX−/DETA ratio, the formation of Cu(AX)2 was not affected significantly by the solution composition. The M(AX)2 self-reduction products, CuAX and NiAX isolated from solutions containing M2+, AX−and DETA were characterized using atomic absorption and FT-IR spectroscopy. Fe3+ behaves differently than Cu2+ and Ni2+ with AX− and/or DETA. Even in the presence of a large excess of AX− and/or DETA, Fe3+ exists almost exclusively as Fe(OH)3 at a pH of 9.3. DETA decreases the amount of Fe3+–AX− complex in solution.The objective of this study was to determine the effect of diethylenetriamine (DETA) on the various components present in the flotation process at INCO Ltd., i.e., the copper, nickel and iron ores, xanthate ion (AX Stock solutions (0.015 M) of Cu The stock solutions described above were used to prepare the solutions needed to study the interaction of M The self-reduction product, CuAX or NiAX was isolated from several solutions with different M A weighed sample of the precipitate was digested by adding 10 ml of concentrated HCl and heating to a light boil for 20 min. Next, 10 ml of concentrated HNO Standard solutions of Cu Samples of the precipitates isolated from reaction mixtures with a M Four solutions containing 19.3 mg of Cu(OH) The absorption band found at 249 nm in the UV spectra of solutions with a Cu Cu The [Cu(DETA)] The The formation constant for [Cu(DETA) While the A solution of AX The effect of DETA on AX  When a solution containing an excess of Cu The rate of decomposition of Cu(AX) The conversion of Cu(AX) Because the conversion of Cu(AX) Solutions containing DETA, Cu When DETA was added, rows 2–5, the [Cu(AX) To test this hypothesis, four solutions containing DETA, Cu(OH) In another series of experiments, five solutions containing DETA, Cu The data for the Cu To test Ni  Three bands were detected in the UV spectrum upon addition of Ni The To determine how DETA affects Ni(AX) The Ni(AX) The rate DETA converts Ni(OH) The equilibrium constant (K) for the formation of [Ni(DETA) In the experiments with a [AX The average [AX Both Cu The greatest difference between the Cu The differences observed in Ni(AX) Only the absorption band for DETA at 206 nm was observed when solutions 2.0 The UV spectrum of a solution 3.0 In order to prove that a Fe DETA reacts with copper and nickel hydroxides providing an additional source of free M Only a small amount (between 14% and 4%) of the AX The percent metal in precipitates recovered from the M The precipitates collected in the Ni When equimolar concentrations of Fe When DETA was added, the percent iron was 47.7. There are two differences between this experiment and the experiment where the Fe The precipitates from solutions 4.0 The FT-IR spectrum of the precipitate isolated from the Ni The IR spectrum of the precipitate recovered from the Fe The the formation constants for the Cu the formation of Cu(OH) Ni(AX) the reaction of Cu the reaction of Ni Fe The surprising and important result of this study is that the chemistry and the reactions of AX The recovery of chalcopyrite is only enhanced at some DETA concentrations at a pH of 9.3. In this study, DETA increases the amount of Cu The [Ni(AX)  Chalcopyrite floats faster than pentlandite. This study suggests this happens because Cu(OH)  identical shifts in the IR bands are observed when Cu that the sulfur atoms attached to the metal ions in the minerals do not change the basic chemistry of the metal ions significantly. This is important because it suggests that one can predict what will happen in the complex flotation system by studying simpler system, and that since the minerals have sulfur atoms on the metal ion whereas the metal ions used in this study did not, that AX The support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) is gratefully acknowledged.