This chapter presents a review of the solution chemistry of reagent or mineral systems. Physico–chemical interactions in aqueous solutions play a governing role in determining the attachment of air bubbles or oil droplets to particles and hence their behavior in processes such as flotation. Relevant major interactions include self association, dissociation and precipitation of surfactants, dissolution of minerals, hydrolysis/complexation/precipitation of different species, and the reactions of surfactants with other species in the solution. In addition to the adsorption of various species, several reactions similar to the above bulk reactions can occur also at the solid/liquid interface and they will have a predominant role in determining the ultimate surfactant adsorption and thus flotation, flocculation and other colloidal behavior. Flotation process has become a cost effective and highly efficient industrial technology. Flotation theories were also developed along with the commercialization of the flotation process. These theories expounded by researchers were based on the application of fundamental chemical knowledge to explain the interactions between minerals and reagents involved in flotation.Physico-chemical interactions in aqueous solutions play a governing role in determining the attachment of air bubbles or oil droplets to particles and hence their behavior in processes such as flotation. These interactions are in turn determined by the properties of a number of system components including surface active flotation reagents such as collectors, frothers and other inorganic/organic/polymeric additives and constituent minerals/solids particles/and air bubbles/oil droplets. Most of these components bring about their own characteristic chemical interactions which often become exceedingly complex in the presence of one another. Relevant major interactions include self association, dissociation and precipitation of surfactants, dissolution of minerals, hydrolysis/complexation/precipitation of different species and the reactions of surfactants with other species in the solution. In addition to the adsorption of various species, several reactions similar to the above bulk reactions can occur also at the solid/liquid interface and they will have a predominant role in determining the ultimate surfactant adsorption and thus flotation, flocculation and other colloidal behavior. Specifically, chemical alterations at the particle surface resulting from adsorption or surface precipitation of surfactants and the orientation of these species at the solid/liquid interface, will determine the hydrophobicity or otherwise of the particles. Attachment of hydrophobic particles to air bubbles, on the other hand, will depend additionally upon the orientation and dynamics of the species adsorbed at the liquid–air interface, which is also governed by the solution chemistry of the reagents. Thus, the solution chemistry as well as mineral surface chemistry plays a fundamental role in the processes such as flotation and flocculation. Since the 1920's, a great number of water-soluble synthetic surfactants have been developed and commercially used in the mineral processing industry over the years. Flotation process has become a cost effective and highly efficient industrial technology. Flotation theories were also developed along with the commercialization of the flotation process. These theories expounded by researchers were based (mostly) on the application of fundamental chemical knowledge to explain the interactions between minerals and reagents involved in flotation. It was A significant development in this regard was the correlation of the solubility products of a series of heavy metal-ethyl xanthate salts with the floatability of corresponding sulfide minerals by ( However, In the case of long chain surfactants used as collectors, a significant correlation between their adsorption in the form of aggregates and flotation of minerals with them was established in the 1960's by Flotation of sparingly soluble minerals such as calcite has not been well understood. Recently, It can be concluded from the above discussion that chemical equilibria in solutions play a critical role in determining the surface chemical properties of minerals and the behavior of flotation systems. More and more emphasis has been laid by researchers on the solution chemistry of flotation in recent years ( Following four aspects of the Solution chemistry of flotation are considered: Solution equilibria of flotation reagents. Solution equilibria of various surfactants such as collectors, frothers, modifiers, and flocculants, encompass acid–base equilibria, dissociation equilibria, association equilibria and polymer equilibria. Using these equilibria and also various parameters such as the pH of the solutions and the critical pH of the dissolution of insoluble flotagents, p Mineral–solution equilibria. Mineral–solution equilibria describe the dissolution of minerals, and exert a critical role in relevant phenomena such as hydration of dissolved mineral species, formation of precipitates and their electrokinetic behavior. Important parameters like concentration of various dissolved mineral species/pH/onset of precipitation and point of zero charge can be calculated from mineral–solution equilibria. All these factors are helpful for determining optimum conditions for flotation. Mineral-surfactant equilibria. Mineral–surfactant equilibria determine adsorption of various surfactants on minerals, hemimicellization, interactions among dissolved mineral species and reagents and electrochemical interactions. The optimum conditions for mineral-surfactant interactions as well as flotation can be calculated from data for such parameters as the solubility product and complex formation constants and species distribution diagrams with the helps of plots of Structure-property relationship of surfactants. Flotation reagents are essentially of three groups: hydrophilic, mineralophilic and hydrophobic. The properties of flotation reagents such as collectors, frothers, depressants and flocculants depend mainly upon the structure of functional groups in the reagent molecule. Data on a number of structural effects (induction, conjugation and steric factor) and quantitative criteria (group electronegativity, HLB and solubility) can be used to determine the structure–property relationships for various reagents. Such information can in turn be used to develop molecular design of useful flotation reagents for given mineral systems.