Binary and ternary blends of fossil diesel fuel, conventional biodiesel and hydrotreated vegetable oil (HVO), both derived from soybean oil, have been proposed as a means to increase the fraction of renewable energy in automotive fuels and to boost the blending possibilities depending on the desired fuel characteristics. Biofuels can be obtained in a specialized bio-refinery for a combined production of biodiesel and HVO or in a conventional refinery (with savings of costs as a consequence of the already existing installations). Two examples of these scenarios have been set out, and the most important physical and chemical properties of the final fuel blends measured and compared. The results proved that fuel properties depend greatly on the scenario considered, and consequently the biofuel production path must be carefully decided if the fuel potential is to be fully exploited. While a simultaneous production of HVO-diesel and a later blend with biodiesel fuels produced a neutral fuel in terms of cetane number and sooting tendency, the combined production of HVO-biodiesel to be afterwards blended with fossil diesel fuel is able to change the cetane number from 45 to 65, approximately, and reduce soot by roughly 30%.Biofuels have been promoted during the last decade by governments as a mean to reduce oil dependence and greenhouse emissions. Mandatory targets for 2020 have been set worldwide The alternative to the conventional transesterification of vegetable oils is to remove the oxygen from the structure and hydrogenate the double bonds in the triglyceride chain, through conventional hydrotreating catalysis, where the degree of isomerization can be adjusted by modifying the reactor conditions The search for blend proportions under two approaches (to obtain: (i) optimized fuels which maximize any improvement in performance/emissions; or (ii) neutral fuels which eliminate any deterioration) has been the main objective of some previous studies. In the first approach, Theinnoi et al. In the second approach, McCormick et al. The European Normalization Committee (CEN) developed a CEN Workshop Agreement (TS 15940:2012) specifying requirements and test methods for marketed and delivered paraffinic diesel fuels for use in diesel vehicles, either coming from FT synthesis (XTL) or from hydrotreating (HVO) The present manuscript focuses on these HVO-biodiesel-diesel blends, with special attention on the ternary blends. The study presents some of the most important physical and chemical properties included in fuel quality standards (density, viscosity, cetane number, cold flow and lubricity). The fuel heating value and the smoke point, which are not included in such standards but play a significant role in the engine performance and emissions, were also measured. In order to compare their characteristics when used for blending, both the HVO and biodiesel fuels were blended at volume fractions of 10, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, and 75% with ULSD. These two collections of binary blends correspond to two different scenarios of biofuel penetration in the diesel fuel market. Although biodiesel blending is much more prevalent than HVO blending, depending on the feedstock availability, both scenarios could either compete in the future to fulfil the mandatory fractions of renewable fuel required by European and US directives or become complementary rather than competitive by means of ternary blending. With this aim, two additional scenarios, (a) and (b), have been determined as future production and commercial supply systems: (a) an oil refinery which injects a certain amount of vegetable oil in its own petroleum hydroprocessing installations, and (b) a biofuel plant that uses a vegetable oil feedstock for a combined production through both transesterification and hydroprocessing. In case (a), the produced fuel could then be blended with biodiesel fuels from the conventional biodiesel industry, leading to ternary blends. In case (b) the produced biofuel could also be blended with conventional diesel fuel from refineries, also leading to ternary blends. From a previous work focused on HVO-diesel binary blends (the former being derived from soybean oil) The fuel compositions were identified by gas chromatography with mass spectrometry detection (GC–MS) and quantified by GC-FID (flame ionization detection). GC–MS was performed on a Shimadzu GC-17A equipped with a QP-5000 mass selective detector with an ion source of electron impact at 70 eV. Compounds were identified by comparing their mass spectra with the NIST library. The quantification was performed on a Varian CP-3800 GC with FID. The column was a Restek Rxi-5SilMS, 30 m × 0.25 mm i.d. × 0.25 μm film thickness. The injector temperature and interface temperature was 290 °C. The oven temperature was programmed to hold at 40 °C for 4 min; ramp at 4 °C min The derived cetane numbers (DCN) were measured, in accordance with the ASTM D6890-08 standard, in an Ignition Quality Tester. The ignition delay (ID) is measured as the time from when fuel enters a constant volume chamber (determined by fuel injector needle lift) to a pressure spike from the combustion process. From the ID value, the software calculates the derived cetane number, or DCN The lubricity tests were carried out in a High Frequency Reciprocating Rig (HFRR) from PCS Instruments. These tests provide the wear scar in μm for a particular fuel, following either the European EN ISO 12156-1:2006 standard or the ASTM D 6079 standard. Prior to each test, all the components of the HFRR in contact with the tested fuels were cleaned by immersions in an ultrasonic bath with toluene and with acetone. All tests were replicated twice and if differences in the wear scar were higher than 20 μm then they were repeated once more. Afterwards, the size of the wear scar was measured with a stereoscopic microscope Optika SZ-CTV, equipped with a 100× magnification lens. The mean diameter of the scar observed in the HFRR ball (MWSD) was obtained from maximum and minimum values as prescribed in the standards. Tests were made at 60 °C, as required by EN ISO 12156-1 standard, and the resulting scar size was corrected to normalize the humidity vapour pressure to 1.4 kPa (WS 1.4). Distillation curves were obtained with a distillation system equipped with a 0.5 L heated flask, equipped with two platinum RTD (100 Ω) sensors and a digital temperature controller. Diesel and HVO fuels were distilled at atmospheric pressure following EN-3405 standard, but in the case of biodiesel fuel reduced pressure was necessary to reach complete distillation, and therefore the experimental procedure established in standard ASTM D1160 was followed. Since this method was designed for petroleum products, the conversion to atmospheric equivalent temperatures from those measured at reduced pressure was made following the method proposed in Densities were measured by means of calibrated pycnometers and a high precision scale, both located in a climatic chamber under controlled temperature and humidity. Viscosities were measured with modified-Ostwald, Cannon-Fenske type viscometers submerged in a thermostatic bath (Tamson TV2000). Heating values were measured in an isoperibolic calorimeter Parr 1351. Cold filter plugging points (CFPP) were measured in an ISL model FPP 5Gs instrument. Cloud Points were visually determined after submerging the samples in a Lawler MFG Cloud Point bath, model 549. The elemental analysis of the fuels was made in a CHNS analyser Leco EA 3022. All measurements were carried out following European and American standards. Finally, a standard smoke point lamp for liquid fuels was used for smoke point measurements as specified by ASTM D1322-97. The smoke points (SP) for each blend were measured 3 times and averaged. The results were calibrated using two standard reference blends of 10% and 20% toluene with 90 and 80% iso-octane (all volume fractions) respectively, and were then converted into threshold sooting index (TSI) following the correlation proposed by Calcote and Manos The constants used in Equation The HVO was manufactured from pure soybean oil (considered today as the most widely used feedstock among vegetable oils) by UOP (Universal Oil Products). Biodiesel fuel was provided by Peter Cremer North America and was produced also from soybean oil and fulfils standard EN-14214 The main physical and thermo-chemical properties of all three pure fuels are shown in The biodiesel fuel is much heavier and less volatile than both the diesel and HVO fuels. HVO has higher molecular weight than diesel fuel, although lower initial and final boiling points. However, in the intermediate range (from 20 to 80%, volume fractions), distillation temperatures of diesel fuel are the lowest, as observed in The characteristics shown here for both the HVO and biodiesel fuels correspond to one of the most typical feedstocks (soybean oil) and also to hydrotreating and transesterification reaction conditions within the typical ranges Densities are shown in Viscosities are shown in Heating values are not specified in the standards for automotive fuels. The higher heating value (HHV), directly obtained from the calorimeter, is a constant-volume heating value, whereas that used for the determination of the engine efficiency is the lower heating value at constant pressure (LHV). Both are presented in The fuel lubricity is expressed in As shown in Cold flow properties, cloud point (CP) and cold filter plugging point (CFPP), are shown in Mean values for the smoke points are shown in As expected, fuel density ( The viscosity, shown in An analysis of the lower heating values of ternary blends ( The same type of analysis in the case of derived cetane number ( In the case of cold flow properties, both proposed scenarios have quite similar limitations. However, in a temperate winter, the introduction of biodiesel into the fuel produced in refineries from blended feedstock would be more constrained (blends could never reach volume concentrations up to 50%) than the direct blending of the biorefinery product with diesel fuel, which would enable blending to even more than half volume. Both cloud point and cold filter plugging point show parallel increases in both scenarios ( The smoke point results ( The lubricity test results are depicted in Ambitious targets have been set with regard to the renewable fraction of automotive fuels. In the future, these will be achieved through a major market penetration of lignocellulose-derived biofuels, such as biomass-to-liquid fuels through FT processes. However, presently this technology is not cost competitive yet. In the present and near future, approaching the renewable fuel usage targets implies a renewable fuel model based on vegetable oils and animal fats. To expand the blending alternatives, these feedstocks can be used in the form of conventional biodiesel or as hydroprocessed oil, HVO). Two possible scenarios have been explored for market use of HVO-biodiesel-diesel ternary blends: (a) a conventional refinery which injects 25% vegetable oil and 75% petroleum oil in its hydrotreatment reactors, to be afterwards blended with minor contents of biodiesel and (b) a bio-refinery which produces a fuel composed of 50% biodiesel and 50% HVO, to be blended with base fossil diesel fuel. In the context of low blending ratios of the minor component (more likely in the future), both scenarios showed a marked increased in the fuel lubricity and thus no need of additional additive blending at the cost of a tolerable deterioration in cold flow properties and heating value. Scenario (b) showed larger potential to reduce engine PM emissions (in terms of the threshold sooting index), but this could be counteracted by the reduction in the cetane number. When higher blending ratios are considered, it was observed that scenario (a) provides fuel blends that possess cetane numbers close to the values of current diesel fuels, therefore avoiding an engine recalibration to re-establish the combustion phasing at the desired timing. But at the same time, these blends could be out of density/viscosity specifications, behave worse in cold conditions and not exploit at all the potential of renewable oils to reduce PM emissions. The last considerations are all advantages for scenario (b). Moreover, the large increase of cetane number in this scenario may be used for enhancing the engine performance and further reducing the emissions if automatic engine re-adjustment depending of fuel was considered by the automotive industry. The authors gratefully acknowledge the