The influence of acid surface dissolution as a pretreatment method on the improvement of ilmenite selective flotation from olivine-pyroxene was studied by carrying out the flotation experiments in micro and laboratory (flotation cell) scales. The microflotation experiments show that after surface dissolution, the flotation recovery of ilmenite improves from 73.5% to 92.1% at a pH of 6.3, while that of olivine-pyroxene decreases from 59.6% to 44.6%. The improvement of ilmenite floatability is in good accordance with the relative content of Fe3+ in ilmenite surface which increases from 48.5% to 59.8% after surface dissolution as evidenced by XPS analysis. This conversion increases the formation of an insoluble layer of ferric iron oleate, and enhances ilmenite hydrophobicity. FTIR spectra and zeta potential measurements indicated that the adsorption of oleate ions on the surface of olivine-pyroxene decreases significantly after surface dissolution. As evidenced by ICP analysis, this can be due to the dissolution of Fe cations as the active sites from the olivine-pyroxene surface. The cell flotation experiments show that before surface dissolution, an optimal concentrate with 21.2% TiO2 and 78.3% recovery is achieved using 1000g/t sodium oleate, 100g/t Pb(NO3)2 (activator) and 80g/t quebracho (depressant). After surface dissolution, the best concentrate containing 25.6% TiO2 and 80.6% recovery is obtained in the presence of 1000g/t collector and 100g/t activator without any depressant agent. As a general result, the acid surface dissolution pretreatment enhances the selectivity of ilmenite flotation and its separation efficiency.Nowadays, natural rutile is becoming scarcer, and ilmenite as a titanate of ferrous iron mineral (Fe The surface dissolution changes the distribution and states of the elements on the mineral's surface which affects the surface properties of the mineral. It also changes the solution chemistry of the flotation system by entering various ions to the liquid ( Torem et al. showed that after superficial leaching with cold HCl and the mixture of HCl and HF, the floatability of beryl using sodium dodecyl sulphate and sodium petroleum sulphonate collectors improves. This is due to the depletion of silicon sites from the beryl surface and the interaction of collector ions with Be In this work, the effect of acid surface dissolution on the flotation of ilmenite from Qara-aghaj (hard rock deposit located 36 The ilmenite ore sample and purified samples of ilmenite (IL) and olivine-pyroxene (Ol-Px) from Qara-aghaj hard rock deposit were used in this work. The purified samples were used in microflotation experiments before and after acid surface dissolution. In order to prepare the purified samples, the hand-picked samples taken from the deposit were crushed and ground under 150 X-ray fluorescence (Philips X Unique II) was used to determine the chemical composition of the pure and ore samples. The XRD pattern of the minerals was prepared using XPERT MPD diffractometer with Cu K The surface dissolution pretreatment on the pure and ore samples was carried out by mechanical stirring in a 10% sulfuric acid solution for 15 Microflotation experiments were performed on purified samples in a 300 In ore flotation experiments, after grinding and desliming to the − In order to prepare the collector solution, 0.333 The XPS analysis was carried out using a Specs EA 10 X-ray photoelectron spectroscope on the ilmenite surface, before and after acid surface dissolution pretreatment. This analysis was performed to determine the relative content of Fe To determine the nature of the interaction between the collector and the minerals, the FT-IR analysis was performed by NEXU670 FT-IR (Nicolet Corporation, USA). The mineral sample was ground under 0.015 The zeta potential measurements on pure samples before and after acid surface dissolution were conducted using a Malvern instrument (UK). The suspension was prepared by adding 50 In order to investigate the extent of elements dissolution in the acid solution, the elemental analysis was carried out using inductively coupled Plasma mass spectrometry (ICP). 6   As seen from Based on results presented in the previous studies ( However, the acid surface dissolution decreases the floatability of olivine-pyroxene but its flotation recovery is relatively high; and the use of a suitable depressant agent is unavoidable. For this reason, some depressant agents including sodium hexametaphosphate (SHM), acidified sodium silicate (SS) with sulfuric acid (SA) at ratios of 1:1 and 1:2 and quebracho were used at a pH of 6.3 before and after surface dissolution. The results are presented in After removing the magnetite from the Qara-aghaj ore sample by the magnetic separation method, the feed material composed mainly by ilmenite, olivine, pyroxene, tremolite and clinochlore minerals (with the chemical composition presented in Before acid surface dissolution, an ilmenite concentrate with 21.1% TiO In order to determine the relative content of Fe After surface dissolution of ilmenite and olivine-pyroxene, the liquid phases were analyzed by the ICP method. The results presented in  In the case of the olivine-pyroxene sample, the acid surface dissolution does not change the structure of olivine and pyroxene as the main component of this sample. While after surface dissolution some of the apatite peaks have disappeared, some new peaks related to the gypsum phase have been detected. These can be due to the dissolution of Ca   The morphology of ilmenite and olivine-pyroxene grains before and after acid surface dissolution was studied by SEM. The results are shown in The distribution of oleate species as a function of pH ( As shown in Through the surface dissolution pretreatment, Ti ions are not dissolved in the ilmenite surface; and they continue their role in ilmenite flotation at strong acidic pHs. The improvement of ilmenite floatability after surface dissolution is attributed to the surface conversion of Fe In the case of olivine-pyroxene, the Fe In the strong alkaline aqueous solution, the stopping of floatability of non-treated and pretreated ilmenite and olivine-pyroxene is due to the occupation of most of the active sites on the minerals surface by OH At a pH of 6.3 as a desired pH for ilmenite flotation, the use of Pb(NO However, after surface dissolution, the optimal concentrate of ilmenite is achieved in the absence of depressant agent but acidified sodium silicate and quebracho act as effective depressant agents for non-treated and acid-pretreated olivine-pyroxene at some conditions. By acidifying the aqueous solution of sodium silicate the supersaturated solution of monomeric silicic acid (Si(OH) Quebracho containing phenol and carboxylic groups belongs to the tannins. The adsorption of quebracho on the surface of minerals takes place through some mechanisms including hydrogen bonding, complex formation between OH groups and cations, and electrostatic attraction between negatively charged quebracho micelles and positively charged mineral surfaces ( As a pretreatment method, the acid surface dissolution improves ilmenite floatability while it decreases the flotation recovery of olivine-pyroxene. Thus, the selective flotation of ilmenite from iron containing gangue minerals can be achievable after surface dissolution. Three events result in the improvement of ilmenite selective flotation from the accompanying iron containing gangue minerals. The first one is the washing and dissolving of some ions from the ilmenite surface which results in the exposure of more Ti and Fe cations as active sites in contact with oleate ions in strong acidic solutions and weak acidic or weak alkaline solutions, respectively. The second event is the electro-chemical oxidation of some Fe Before pretreatment, the use of depressant is unavoidable while after surface dissolution, an ilmenite concentrate with higher grade and recovery is achieved without consumption of any depressant agent. Lead nitrate as activator agent is needed in both cases.