Mixtures of scheelite and carbon black, with different CaWO4:C weight ratios were prepared using either planetary ball milling (PBM) or ball milling in a custom made milling jar (BM). Three milling conditions were employed: 120h ball milling (BM-120), 8h planetary ball milling (PBM-8) and 24h PBM (PBM-24). SEM and XRD were used to estimate qualitatively the intensity of milling conditions. The most intense milling conditions were attained after 24h planetary ball milling (PBM-24). Powder mixtures prepared by 120h ball milling (BM-120) or 8h planetary ball milling (PBM-8) showed similar results.
                  All mixtures were studied by thermal analysis (TGA–DTA), isothermal annealing at 1200°C (1h), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and electron microscopy techniques to determine the combined effect of different amounts of carbon stoichiometric excess and different intensities of milling conditions on the phase purity of tungsten carbide formed by carbothermic reduction of scheelite (CaWO4
                     +4C→CaO+WC+3CO). This reaction occurs through several steps, where the Ca:O atomic ratio goes from 1:4 to 1:1 according to the sequence: CaWO4
                     →Ca3WO6
                     →CaO, and concomitant development of CO. Finally, reduced tungsten bearing phases (W2C and/or W) are carburized to give nanostructured WC.
                  The intensity of milling and the presence of a carbon excess do not influence significantly the reduction of scheelite to CaO, which goes to completion at temperatures lower than 1200°C.
                  However, only more intense milling conditions (PBM-24) allow one to achieve an almost quantitative yield of WC, independent of the presence of a carbon excess in the initial CaWO4:C mixture.
                  Therefore, milling conditions are of crucial importance in order to avoid the use of an excess of carbon in the carbothermal reduction of scheelite.Cobalt cemented tungsten carbides (WC–Co, also called hard metals) are among the most common hard materials in use today for cutting tools, industrial machinery, abrasives, wear parts and other instruments. The production of cemented carbides for metal cutting and rock drilling is a fast growing segment in industry. Actually, more than 60% of the world's consumption of tungsten is in the form of tungsten carbide There are two important ores of tungsten, namely wolframite, (Fe,Mn)WO About 70% of world tungsten reserves are in the form of scheelite mineral. Scheelite becomes more important since CaWO The abovementioned multistep industrial process to produce high purity WC powders from tungsten ores involves energy and environmental costs. In fact, toxic and hazardous chemicals are required in the complex processing and purification sequences involved in the production of pure APT For these reasons, there is a renewed interest in methods which can convert ore directly into WC by minimal treatment such as the carbothermal reduction of tungstates and, in particular, of scheelite In their pioneering work on reduction–carburization of pure CaWO They could not attain complete conversion to WC and CO even after 20 Welham Singh and Pandey More recently, we have performed thermodynamic and kinetic studies of the carbothermal reduction of scheelite The positive role of high-energy ball milling has been reported also for the carbothermal reduction of wolframite The high-energy ball milling described in papers published previously For the above reasons, the aim of the present work is to compare PBM to jar-milling (BM) with lower ball:powder ratios, namely 10:1 and 5:1 respectively. In fact, jar-milling is a cheaper and easily scalable process. Moreover, we wish to investigate the role of the amount of carbon excess on the reduction of scheelite and the yield of WC when more or less intense milling conditions are used. We show that both PBM and BM in a simple milling jar can produce an intimate mixing of reagents, which ensures complete reduction of scheelite, with concurrent formation of nanostructured WC powders. However, the milling conditions are of crucial importance to attain an almost quantitative WC yield and to avoid the use of an excess of carbon in the carbothermal reduction of scheelite. The pure scheelite used in this study was supplied by Sigma-Aldrich. The carbon source was carbon black obtained by thermal decomposition of natural gas (Thermax N990 by Cancarb). Mixtures were prepared with different CaWO In that reaction, 1 In this work, we prepared CaWO The detailed milling conditions are reported in the following. Planetary ball milling (PBM, Retsch PM 400): 100 Ball milling (BM, custom made milling jars): 250  Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and simultaneous differential thermal analysis (DTA) were performed on milled powders using samples of approximately 25–30 About 4–5 As-milled and heat treated powders were analyzed by θ/2θ X-ray diffraction (XRD) with a Philips X'Pert Pro diffractometer, equipped with a plane monochromator using Cu Kα radiation (λ Pure CaWO  SEM micrographs in After milling, all powders show much finer CaWO After 24 Less intense milling conditions (namely 8 The different intensity of milling conditions has influenced the broadening of X-ray diffraction peaks of scheelite (see Supplementary Fig. S1). XRD line broadening is attributable to microstrain and/or a decrease of crystallite size. Therefore, a larger FWHM could be due to either a larger amount of defects (e.g. non-uniform lattice distortions, dislocations, antiphase domain boundaries, stacking faults), or a larger fraction of very small particles, or both. In our case, the trend of FWHM values correlates well with FEG SEM observations. In fact, powders subjected to 24 We observed no new XRD peaks, indicating that neither in situ mechanochemical reaction nor contamination of wear products from balls and mill walls took place, at least in the detection limit of the XRD technique. EDS spectra of mixtures prepared by BM in the stainless steel jar did not show peaks of Fe, Cr or Ni. In a thermogravimetric study published previously  The weight loss expected from reaction CaWO Other mixtures studied in the present work showed similar TGA–DTA traces with two endothermic peaks, and complete reduction before reaching 1200 These findings point out that the intensity of milling, at least in the framework of milling conditions employed in the present study, and the liquid medium (Carbsyn 110 or 2-propanol), do not influence significantly the reduction of scheelite to Ca Samples of mixtures listed in In particular, XRD data show that 24 In order to evaluate the influence of both the excess of carbon and the intensity of the milling conditions on WC yield, a semi-quantitative estimation of the fraction of WC, W  Within experimental errors of ±  The results indicate that a different scenario arises and, in particular, that mixtures with CaWO the use of less intense milling conditions caused a progressive decrease of WC yield when the carbon excess was below 5.8%. Let's recall that the different milling conditions here employed did not cause any meaningful effect on the two-step reduction of scheelite, which goes to completion at around 1100–1110 In the direct synthesis of WC (Eq. Tricalcium tungstate then reacts with either 50% (reaction Finally, the carbon diffusion in W and W TGA data ( We infer that, when the initial milling conditions are not sufficiently intense, an excess of carbon in the starting CaWO Conversely, more intense milling conditions (PBM-24) of the parent phases (scheelite and carbon black) seem to guarantee that a proper interface area between “final” reactants (carbon and W/W In other words, when less intense grinding conditions are employed, an excess of carbon partly compensates the non-optimal mixing of carbon black and scheelite particles.  Panels a and c refer to mixtures with the largest (99.8%) and the smallest (0.24%) excess of stoichiometric carbon, respectively, and subjected to the most intense milling conditions employed in this study (PBM-24). Panels b and d show the mixtures with the largest (99.8%) and the smallest (0.24%) excess of carbon, respectively, and subjected to less intense milling conditions (PBM-8 and BM-120). Images were acquired by mixing the signals of secondary electrons (SEs) and backscattered electrons (BSEs). This way, the strong compositional contrast (Z-contrast) supplied by BSEs sums up to the morphological contrast of SEs and, therefore, WC appears brighter in the electron micrographs. All powders subjected to isothermal annealing exhibit micrometer sized CaO particles and submicrometer sized WC aggregates consisting of very small grains, with sizes ranging between 20 and 200 Therefore, all milling conditions here employed did cause a mixing of scheelite and carbon black powders so intimate that it ensures similar nucleation conditions of reduced tungsten phases and, as demonstrated by TGA–DTA experiments (  Particles visible in The carbothermal reduction of scheelite is an apparently simple reaction: we mix CaWO Therefore, the reduction of scheelite can be schematized as a two-step reaction sequence (CaWO The reduction goes to completion using more or less intense milling conditions. In fact, planetary ball millings for 8 or 24 However, W must react with carbon which survived the reduction sequence. In fact, three-fourths (75%) of the carbon required by the reaction: CaWO More intense milling conditions of the starting CaWO Therefore, milling conditions are of crucial importance to avoid the use of an excess of carbon in the carbothermal reduction of scheelite. Both planetary ball milling and jar-milling can produce an intimate mixing of CaWO R. Polini and E. Palmieri wish to thank Dr. Patrizia Cafarelli (Istituto di Struttura della Materia, ISM, CNR, Roma, Italy) for giving technical assistance.