This paper describes an Infrared (IR) thermography based technique for sorting of iron ores consisting of alumina-rich particles of relatively low thermal absorptivity as compared to iron-rich particles in the ores. The technique primarily consists of selection of iron ores with Fe compositions ranging from 59 to 69wt.% and alumina (Al2O3) from 0.35 to 8.85wt.%, crushing the ores up to the particle size range around 10mm. The iron ore fines are uniformly heated using heat source of wavelength ranging from 10−2 to 10−6
                     m for a period of time sufficient to create a difference in infrared emission between the ore particles. The thermal image of the heated ores is captured by IR thermography. The alumina-rich iron ore particles are heated up less as the thermal absorptivity of these ores is less than the ores with high iron content. Thus, the alumina-rich iron ore particles can be identified by observing the temperature profile and/or thermal image of these ores. This technique of ore recognition can be useful in improving the feed quality of iron ore to the blast furnace in iron and steel industries by rejecting the alumina-rich ores through modification in the presently existing processes.India has abundant reserves of iron ore which can meet the growing demand of iron and steel industry in the country and also sustain considerable trade. Indian iron ores are rich in iron but usually contain high alumina which reduces the productivity of blast furnace. For an efficient operation of blast furnace, alumina/silica ratio in the feed ore should be less than 1 and alumina present in the ore should be less than 2%. But most of the Indian hematitic iron ores do not satisfy these conditions. The reduction of alumina in blast furnace feed not only increases the productivity but also reduces the rate of coke consumption, slag flowability and increases the digestion of the metal in the blast furnace. For the blast furnace slag to flow freely, it should be above its liquidus temperature. The basicity of the slag expressed as (CaO Indian iron ores, in general, contain more than 2% alumina ( Ore sorting has been used in mineral processing since the ancient age, with hand sorting being one of the earliest methods of minerals processing. Automatic sensor-based ore sorting ( Most of the sorter applications in the mineral industry are the ones with the optical cameras. In general, optical cameras are useful in ore classification only when there is a significant difference in reflection, colour, shape or texture of the ores ( Infrared thermal imaging technique converts the invisible radiation pattern of an object into visible images for feature extraction and analysis. The system consists of a thermal camera with detectors, a signal processing unit and an image acquisition system. The thermal imaging technique is being widely used in various fields such as predictive maintenance, non-destructive evaluation, military reconnaissance, medical imaging ( All objects that have surface temperatures above absolute zero emit electromagnetic radiation. When radiation is incident on an object, portion of it is transmitted, some portion absorbed, and some reflected. For thermal equilibrium the total flux (measured in watts) must be constant and is defined as, For real surfaces, during thermal equilibrium the transmissivity of solid surfaces is equal to zero, therefore (1) can be rewritten as In case of ores and minerals in unpolished condition, the amount of heat reflected is very low; hence most of the heat incident on the ores is absorbed by them. The heat radiated by the uniformly heated ores is captured and displayed as thermal image through IR thermography. The ores having low thermal absorptivity are heated up less and can be identified from the thermal images of the ore specimens ( The process for rapid identification and rejection of high alumina iron ore fines consists of selection of iron ores with Fe compositions ranging from 59 to 69 Infrared thermography (make FLIR Agema 550) with 0.1 In the first phase, set of seven iron ore specimens of 10 Alumina content in each of the ores has been determined through chemical analysis. The variation in peak temperature of iron ore specimens with different percentage of alumina content shown in To study the feasibility of this process for larger number of ore particles, another set of 38 iron ore specimens of approx. 10 On the basis of ore sorting criteria given in It is quite apparent from The IR thermography based sorting can be a new non-invasive technique for rejection of alumina-rich iron ore lumps/fines. By rejection of alumina-rich ores, not only the alumina content in the useful iron ore shall be reduced significantly but also the alumina/silica ratio can be maintained <1 which is suitable for blast furnace feed. Further exploration of this technique in combination with processes for detecting and discharging particles, an efficiently operating sorting system could be realized. In actual practice the ores would be heated while moving on the conveyor using some other mode of heating such as IR heating or furnace heating. The thermal image would be captured immediately thereafter by means of IR camera kept hanging from the top focused towards the ore during free fall from the belt. Implementation of this technique would help in monitoring as well as maintaining uniform and quality feed material in blast furnace which in turn would enhance the productivity of steel plants significantly. The present development opens a new horizon in non-destructive testing application in iron ore purification. The authors thank the Director, CSIR – National Metallurgical Laboratory, for his constant support and encouragement in this work and for providing infrastructural support to carry out this investigation.