The determination of the elastic modulus of thin films by indentation at nano or micrometric scale is possible by applying different models allowing the separation of the substrate influence from the indentation measurement. However, for an accurate determination of the elastic modulus, the indentation depth and/or the contact area must be corrected by taking into consideration the frame compliance of the instrument and the blunted tip effect of the indenter. In nanoindentation, these two corrections are performed prior to the indentation experiments. However, in microindentation, some works showed that the compliance term does not have a constant value. As a result, a more consistent modeling must necessarily consider this compliance term as an unfixed parameter, at least for this range of loading. In addition, a discussion about the calculation of the contact area according to the methodologies of Oliver and Pharr (1992) [13] and of Hochstetter et al. (1999) [14] is also proposed to consider the sinking-in or piling-up effects, respectively, which can take place during the indentation process, depending on the mechanical behavior of the material. Finally, different weight functions and the model of Tricoteaux et al. (2010) [12] are applied to the raw and corrected data. This methodology is applied in microindentation and validated by nanoindentation for the determination of the elastic modulus of a TiHfCN thin film. A convergence of the results is observed only if the two corrections are taken into account. Accordingly, the elastic modulus of the TiHfCN film is found to be close to ~500GPa.To improve the mechanical resistance of materials subjected to surface damage, coatings with higher mechanical properties are usually deposited on the substrate surface. Among the different techniques of coating, physical and chemical vapor depositions provide very hard thin films with a low thickness, with a value at approximately 1 This mechanical property can be determined using instrumented indentation, but its direct determination for a film deposited onto a substrate is not often possible due to the influence of the latter. Indeed, Chudoba et al. The models proposed by Doerner and Nix In this paper, the influence of the different corrections applied to the indentation depth and to the contact area obtained from microindentation experiments, on the elastic modulus determination of a thin film, is discussed. In nanoindentation experiments the calibration of the equipment is performed using a fused silica sample, which leads to consistent results. However, this method cannot be extended to the microindentation domain due to the brittleness of the fused silica. The corrections, which are taken into account are: By analyzing the unloading part of a load–depth curve obtained by instrumented indentation, Oliver and Pharr However, the value of C is deduced from the total compliance, C To avoid possible artifacts at the two extremities of the unloading curve, i.e. at the beginning of the unloading at the maximum load and just before the complete unloading; only data ranging between 40% and 98% of the maximum load, recommended by CSM (Switzerland), is generally used. Finally, C Then, for an accurate determination of the reduced modulus by applying Eqs. The correction factor β is linked to the indenter geometry As a result, by applying Eq. In addition, a second depth correction is necessary mainly when considering the data points at the beginning of a load–depth curve. Indeed, it is admitted that the rounded indenter tip has a significant influence on the determination of the contact area, especially for the lowest indentation depth values, particularly for nanoindentation experiments. In this sense, Thurn and Cook In 2010, Berla and co-workers In the present work, based on the use of microindentation techniques, the correction suggested by Gong et al. Taking Eq. It is important to observe that, in practice, the value of h Finally, the corrected indentation depth here, h Although Oliver and Pharr's method is very precise and refined, the determination of the area function involves a complex iteration procedure and, as pointed out by Sawa and Tanaka Depending on the mechanical properties of the material, additional considerations for the contact indentation depth calculation must be taken into account. Indeed, in the presence of sinking-in generally observed for hard materials, h In the above relationship, ε is a factor depending on the geometry of the indenter shape. ε Contrarily, when piling-up is generated around the indent, the methodology of Oliver and Pharr underestimates the actual indentation depth. For this reason, Hochstetter et al. Finally, for determining the reduced modulus from instrumented indentation tests, Eq. For the elastic modulus determination of a film deposited onto a given substrate, the latter interferes with the indentation measurement as soon as the indentation depth reaches ~ When the indentation depth increases, the measured reduced modulus, assumed as a composite reduced modulus, E The different models propose the representation of the composite modulus as a combination of those of the substrate and film in relation to the contact indentation depth, h It should be noted that in the above models, E For a massive material, the representation of Eq. To represent such typical variation, Tricoteaux et al. By replacing the different total compliances of Eq. It is noticeable that this model can be applied even when the reduced modulus of the substrate is unknown. On the basis of the improvement of the mechanical behavior of TiCN films as compared to TiN films and the higher thermal stability of HfC and HfN, TiHfCN appears as a promising material Instrumented indentation experiments were performed employing a micro-hardness tester CSM 2-107 equipped with a Vickers indenter. The load range of the instrument varies from 0.05 to 30 Nanoindentation experiments have been performed employing a Nano Indenter XP™ (MTS Nano Instruments) with a Berkovich indenter. 30 indentation tests have been conducted randomly at the surface of the coated system by applying the same indentation testing conditions. Considering the main parameters used, the maximum indentation depth reached by the indenter was fixed at 800 The elastic modulus has been determined by indentation on the M2 substrate and on the TiHfCN–M2 coated system. The instrumented indentation experiments were performed on the substrate ( To compute the actual indentation depth into the material, the frame compliance corresponding to the indentation tests performed onto the substrate was determined by means of Eq. Under this condition, For the analysis of the elastic behavior of the coated system, the frame compliance is also considered as a free parameter. Indeed, as indicated above, the frame compliance cannot be determined prior to the indentation experiments since its value varies as a function of various parameters such as the testing conditions, supporting sample system, nature and shape of the tested sample. In these conditions, the models presented in Finally, Eq. To compute the reduced modulus of the thin film, the total compliance was fitted by applying Eq. To study the consistency of the weight functions presented in  The calculation of the mean values leads to 210 To validate the methodology proposed in microindentation, the elastic modulus of the film is further determined by nanoindentation experiments. It is noticeable that in nanoindentation the corrections on the frame compliance and of the contact area are performed on fused silica prior to the experiments. For this reason, it has been suggested that the results should be considered carefully. Indeed, if the correction of the contact area is only linked to the blunted tip of the indenter, the frame compliance term depends on the testing system including the sample. As a consequence, the slope of the straight line representing the elastic modulus as a function of the indenter displacement can be slightly modified.  On the other hand, As shown in To conclude, it is noticeable that similar values for the elastic modulus of this film have been given in literature. Indeed, the TiHfCN target supplier has certified an elastic modulus of 425 A methodology to calculate the elastic modulus of thin films from instrumented indentation using microindentation loads has been proposed. The work has been focused on the requirement of the corrections for obtaining an accurate determination of the elastic modulus of the film. It has been shown that it is very important to consider the frame compliance as a free parameter since two different values, one for the substrate and another for the coated system analysis have been obtained. The blunted tip effect is also considered, but its importance is predominant for the lowest indentation depths corresponding to the lowest indentation loads. In addition, the contact area must be calculated using the methodologies of Oliver and Pharr or Hochstetter, if sinking-in or piling-up occurs during the indentation process, respectively. When the corrections are appropriately performed for the elastic modulus calculation, application of the different weight functions expressed in terms of the indentation depth to thickness ratio or its reciprocal and of the weight parameter leads to a good estimation of the elastic modulus of the film and of the substrate. However, this accurate determination is possible by knowing the compliance term which is only accessible by applying the model proposed by Tricoteaux et al. [ However, the methodology proposed has some restrictions or limitations. In nanoindentation, for applying different models which include a fitting parameter, the indentation data must be chosen such that the indentation displacement to thickness ratio is less than 1. Moreover, depending on the quality of the area calibration, the nanoindentation data which correspond to indenter displacements less than approximately 100