The depression performance and mechanism of the zinc sulfate (ZnSO4) and sodium dimethyl dithiocarbamate (SDD) combined depressant with butyl xanthate (BX) as collector in a mixed Cu-Zn sulfide floation system were fully investigated using micro-flotation experiments, zeta-potential determination, and local electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (LEIS) analysis. The micro-flotation experimental results indicated that the combined depressant has a significant selective depression effect on sphalerite but has slight effect on chalcopyrite. The depression performance of the combined depressant strictly depends on the dosage of ZnSO4 + SDD and flotation pH. However, excessive SDD is detrimental to chalcopyrite flotation. The optimum conditions for flotation separation of chalcopyrite from the Cu-Zn sulfide were as follows: combined depressant dosage of 10−4 mol/L (ZnSO4: SDD = 3:1), BX dosage of 10−5 mol/L, and flotation pH of 10. Under such conditions, a copper concentrate assaying 30.21% Cu with 86.79% recovery was achieved from the Cu-Zn sulfide flotation system, and this concentrate had a very low Zn grade of 4.20% with 5.48% recovery. Both the zeta-potential and LEIS results confirmed that the presence of the combined depressant can significantly prevent the adsorption of BX onto the sphalerite surface, especially for an alkaline pH range of 9–12; however, the adsorption of BX onto the chalcopyrite surface is not affected. The LEIS provides a powerful tool for observing the adsorption of flotation reagents on mineral surface.As the most important minerals of copper and zinc, sphalerite (ZnS) and chalcopyrite (CuFeS Normally, cyanide is the most effective depressant for the selective depression of sphalerite from chalcopyrite during the froth flotation process; however, the use of cyanide is strictly restricted due to its potentially disastrous environmental consequences ( In this work, the depression performance of the ZnSO The materials used for the present study were natural pure sphalerite and chalcopyrite. They were obtained from Yunnan Province, China. They were soaked in 1% concentration of hydrochloric acid solution for 1 h, cleaned by ultrasonication, and then air-dried. After that, they were hand-ground with a mortar and pestle and sieved to obtain a fraction with particle size of 40–75 μm. The chemical compositions of the materials are shown in According to In addition, X-ray diffraction (XRD) (D/Max 2200, Rigaku, Japan) was used to further analyze the composition and crystal structure of the materials, with the result shown in The microflotation was carried out in a XFG flotation cell with an effective volume of approximately 40 mL in an open air condition. First, the sphalerite and chalcopyrite were mixed with a proportion of 1:1, and then 2.0 g of mixed sample was cleaned by ultrasonic treatment prior to the flotation test. Afterward, the sample was mixed with 40 mL of distilled water. Conditioning was performed in the following order, depending on the number of reagents added: pH regulator, depressant, and collector. For each reagent addition, the conditioning time was set as 2 min. When a flotation experiment was completed, the products, i.e., the concentrates and tailings, were collected from the flotation. The collected flotation products were filtered, dried, and weighed. Finally, the contents of Cu and Zn in the concentrates and tailings were assayed by atomic absorption spectrometry. The recovery of Cu and Zn was calculated based on their contents in the concentrates and tailings. All the chemicals used in the experiments were chemically pure and purchased from Kunming Chemical Reagents Company. Cupric nitrate was used as activator. Hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide were used for pH adjustment of acidic and alkaline solutions, respectively. Purely deionized water with a resistivity of 18 MΩ was produced with the Milli-Q5O system (USA) and used throughout the experiments. The zeta potential was determined using a Malvern Zetasizer (Nano-ZS900, Malvern Inc, UK) instrument, which requires a particle size less than 6 μm for the tested mineral. For each zeta-potential measurement, a mineral suspension (0.01% mass fraction) with appointed pH was added to a 50 mL glass reactor and followed by magnetically stirred (500 rpm) for the desired time in the presence of the desired reagent concentrations. Then, a moderate amount of mineral suspension was transferred to the measurement vessel to determine the zeta-potential value at room temperature. The measurements were repeated three times with the maximum standard deviation of ±2.0 mV, and the average value was recorded. The blocky sphalerite and chalcopyrite were cut and polished by hand with wet silicon carbide paper in the sequence of 220, 400, 600, 800, and 1000 grit. Then, they were further polished with 5 μm of alumina powder suspensions. The freshly polished sphalerite and chalcopyrite substrates were ultrasonically washed in ethanol and Milli-Q water for 5 min, respectively. The cleaned substrates were dried by using highly pure N The LEIS experiments were performed on a scanning electrochemical workstation (Versa SCAN, AMETEK Inc, USA). A Pt dual-element probe with 5 μm radius was used as the LEIS tip. The tip was polished using a micro-polishing cloth with 0.05 μm alumina powder suspension and rinsed thoroughly with ethanol and Milli-Q water before use. A freshly prepared substrate was mounted at the bottom of a LEIS cell with its surface exposed to the electrolyte solution. A Pt wire was used as a counter electrode, and an Ag/AgCl electrode was used as a reference electrode. It should be noted that in LEIS measurements, the substrate does not need to be electrically connected to an external circuit, as required in traditional electro analytical techniques. LEIS measurements were made from the ratio of the applied AC voltage to the local AC current density. The applied voltage ( For local electrochemical impedance mapping, the probe was fixed to approximately 50 μm above the sample surface, and stepped across a designated surface area of 0.4 × 0.4 mm with a step size of 20 μm in the X and Y directions. In the case of the combined use of ZnSO As shown in As seen from Combining the results of After determining the optimal dosage of ZnSO As shown in To illuminate the depression mechanism of ZnSO As shown in As shown in The surface conductivity of Cu-Zn sulfide has a significant influence on the adsorption of various flotation reagents on its surface. This is due to the fact that such an activation and adsorption are electrochemical reaction processes, and the increase in the surface conductivity of the metal sulfides improves the surface reactivity and floatation response ( As shown in In order to contrast with the sphalerite, the adsorption of BX onto the chalcopyrite in the presence of ZnSO It can be seen from the results and discussion above that: The ZnSO The optimum conditions for separating chalcopyrite from the mixed Cu-Zn sulfide were as follows: combined depressant dosage of 10 The zeta-potential of sphalerite and chalcopyrite shows that the adsorption of ZnSO The LEIS results show that the adsorption of ZnSO The present study contributes to the knowledge of efficiently separating chalcopyrite from mixed Cu-Zn sulfide ore and provides a new method for investigating the adsorption of flotation reagents on the mineral surface. Financial supports from the