The processes of direct recycling heavy metal turnings by oxidation–reduction technique have been investigated in details. The average particle size of recycled alloy powders was about 1.5 μm, and the shape of powder particle was regular when the final reduction temperature was 850 °C. The average size of the particle increased to 5 and 8 μm when increasing the reduction temperature to 900 and 950 °C, respectively. However, if the reduction temperature was above 900 °C, the surface of powder was complicated. Increasing reduction temperature from 900 to 950 °C, the particle of recycled powder grew slightly, and the content of oxygen decreased from 0.2314% to 0.1700%. It has been also found that the chemical composition of the recycled alloy powder is the same as the primary heavy metal turnings.Tungsten heavy metal alloys, based on W–Ni–Fe and W–Ni–Cu, are characterized by a high density and a excellent combination of strength and ductility. It is not only of high strength, good plasticity, machinability and weldability but also of good corrosion-resistance, oxidation-resistance, electric and heat conduction, good ability to being electroplated and absorb radioactive ray In recent years, stringent environmental controls and resources conservation policies have led to a high interest in developing W-recycling techniques that are not only economically viable but also ecologically acceptable The primary materials used in this experiment are turnings of W–Ni–Fe heavy metal alloys, which were obtained from production line. Its chemical composition tested by chemical solubilization method is listed in It became pure oxides by the static air oxidation process at temperature of 850, 900 and 950 °C, respectively for 2 h in a furnace in the shape of well. The stainless steel vessel is cylindrical (the size is of The reduction experiments were performed in a pusher furnace. The oxide powder which layer height is 2.5 cm was reduced in a constant hydrogen flow (flow rate: 3–4 l/min) at the temperature of 850, 900 and 950 °C, respectively for 2 h. After reduction, the vessel was directly pushed into a cooling zone. The phase analyses of both oxidized and reduced powders were carried out on a D/MAX-RA X-ray diffract-meter. The microscopic characteristics of the reduced powder were examined by a JSM-5600LV scanning electron microscopy. A MICRO-PLUS laser diffraction size gauge and TC-436 oxygen–nitrogen analyzer were used to measure the size and oxygen content of the reduced powder, respectively. After oxidation, the heavy metal turnings become loose fragile oxide and are lightly yellow in color. The heavy metal turnings can be also completely oxidized at different oxidation temperature if the temperature is above 850 °C and the phases of formed oxides are the same, as shown in The dry ball milling is adopted to grind the oxide. The ball material is the heavy metal alloy and its diameter is about 10 mm. The weight ratio of ball to oxide is 10–1. After ball milling for 2 h, the powder formed by the heavy metal turnings can easily pass through the sifter hole of 200 meshes in diameter. Obviously, it is of good fragility. After reduction by hydrogen, the powder is comprised of single substances of W, Ni and Fe, as shown in From    In addition, if the chemical composition of recycled alloy powder needs to be changed, FeWO  The oxide formed by the heavy metal alloys consists of WO The reduced powder particle consists of W, Ni and Fe. After reduction Fe, Ni and Co form the Fe–Ni–Co solid solution phase which homogeneously distributes in the grain boundary of tungsten. The surface shape of the reduced powder particles is irregular and complicated at high temperature. As the reduction temperature increases, the powder particle becomes larger and the whiskers become more and thicker directionally growth, resulting in more complicated surface shape of the powder particle. Decreasing the temperature of reduction can produce fine and regular alloy powder particle.