Finite element analysis is a powerful tool for the design of bioresorbable medical implants made of aliphatic polyesters such as bioresorbable vascular scaffolds. However polymer erosion has been traditionally modelled using empirical rules rather than differential equations. The rule-based models are difficult to implement in a finite element analysis. Consequently, these models have been limited to simple geometries such as plates or spheres. This paper presents a set of differential equations that govern the hydrolytic chain scission and bulk erosion of bioresorbable implants where polymer erosion is modelled using a differential equation instead of empirical rules. These differential equations can be conveniently solved using a commercial finite element package to calculate the molecular weight and mass loss as functions of time for bioresorbable implant made of aliphatic polyesters. A case study of Absorb bioresorbable vascular scaffolds (BVSs) is presented using data obtained from the literature, where 98 Absorb BVSs were implanted in 40 porcine coronary arteries. It is demonstrated that the finite element model can fit the data of both molecular weight and mass loss as functions of time to an accuracy of approximately 5%. The finite element model and the back-calculated model parameters can be used to design future implants that degrade in a controlled pattern with required mechanical performance.A bioresorbable implant can combine the functions of structural support and drug delivery and break down when no longer required without leaving any permanent material behind after a period of time. Bioresorbable pins and screws made of polyglycolides (PGAs) and polylactides (PLAs) have been used in orthopaedics for internal fixations. Following the orthopaedic applications, a huge effort was made over the last decade to develop bioresorbable drug-eluting stent to treat blocked coronary arteries. Metal stents coated with a thin layer of polymer containing anti-restenotic drugs such as taxus or sirolimus are being widely used clinically. However the drugs also inhibit arterial re-endothelialisation as a side effect to its beneficial effects on restenosis. As a result of the reduced re-endothelialisation, stent remains exposed leading to increased risk of stent thrombosis. To attenuate this risk, bioresorbable stents, often named as bioresorbable vascular scaffolds (BVS), have been developed. BVSs are made of biodegradable polymers such as PLAs. The polymer chains start to break down through hydrolysis reaction as soon as water penetrates the device. There is no permanent implant left behind after 3–5 years, hence removing the risk of further device thrombosis. Unfortunately several large randomised trials indicated a significant increased risk of very late scaffold thrombosis ( Mathematical models for hydrolytic chain scissions of aliphatic polyesters have been developed by various authors. Early models vary from simple analytical expressions of molecular weight as a function of time ( In the hydrolytic degradation model by Pan and his co-workers ( In equation The degree of crystallization, The concentration of the short chains, The first term on the right-hand side of the equation represents the production rate of the short chains due to polymer chain scission. The second terms of Eqn. In the current paper, in order to model bulk erosion an erosion index In ruled-based models, eroded elements are simply removed leaving empty cells filled up with liquid. In fact the eroded polymer chains still need to diffuse out of the device although this is a rather fast process. Another diffusion equation for the eroded polymer chains can be added to the model. However the erosion only occurs at the later stage of the degradation process by which time the mass loss by the short chain diffusion is overwhelmed by the diffusion of the eroded polymer chains. For the sake of simplicity, it is proposed to modify Eqn. To complete the model, the following expression for The leaving of the short chains and eroded polymers from a device leads to mass loss which can be calculated by the following volume integration: which is over the entire device at any given time. Finally, the number-averaged molecular weight of the polymer is calculated using Eqns. The model contains a set of material parameters that need to be obtained experimentally. The initial molecular weight     These five kinetic parameters can be measured independently using degradation experiment for a given polymer. Alternatively, they can be obtained by best-fitting the model prediction with experimental data for a given implant, i.e. back calculation for the parameter identification. In practice the back calculation is more realistic considering that the degradation experiment for PLAs used in these implants can take up to five years. This approach also naturally takes into account of any in-vivo effect on the degradation when in-vivo data are used. In the next section this approach is used for a case study of the Absorb BVS. Otsuka et al. ( The poly (L-lactide) that was used to make the Absorb BVS was semi-crystalline. This polymer might experience significant recrystallization induced by polymer chain cleavage. However no information was provided for the change in degree of crystallinity by Otsuka et al. ( The best fit between the model prediction and the experimental data are shown in  No information was provided for the change in degree of crystallinity by Otsuka et al. (  In order to obtain the kinetic parameters in the model using independent experiment, one could imagine to implant a set of cylindrical tubes of different wall thicknesses in animal coronary arteries and measure the molecular weight and mass loss by scarifying the animals at different time intervals over the degradation period (42 months in the case study of this paper). This approach has obvious difficulties in multiple dimensions, such as the time and cost required. Development of the next generation of bioresorbable implants can benefit by learning from the existing degradation data such as those obtained in the animal trials for bioresorbable coronary stents ( The porcine data used in section It is shown that the bulk polymer erosion can be modelled using a differential equation replacing empirical rules. The differential equation can be conveniently implemented in a commercial finite element package together with the governing equations developed previously by Pan and his co-workers. The finite element model takes into account of the full interplay between hydrolytic chains scission, autocatalytic effect, short chain diffusion, chain-cleavage induced crystallization and bulk erosion. It is further shown that the finite element model is able to fit the porcine data ( Using the same finite element method, these parameters can be used to virtually design new coronary stents or any other bioresorbable implants of any geometry made of the same or similar poly (L-lactide). Furthermore, using the relationship between the mechanical properties and degradation state of these polymers developed in previous work (  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. COMSOL Multiphysics (license number 7074366) was used in the finite element analysis. WJ Niu gratefully acknowledges the finical support for her work by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at