Aluminium matrix composites have become popular for new age applications mainly because of their light weight and high specific strength and find applications in the field of aerospace, automobile and defence. In the present study, aluminium matrix composites consisting of aluminium as the matrix and certain iron fillers added as reinforcement were prepared by powder metallurgy processing. The effect of iron addition on the microstructure and mechanical properties of aluminium matrix composites were studied. Aluminium powders (70 µm) and iron powders (60 µm) were mixed properly to prepare 5 wt%, 10 wt% and 15 wt% Fe-Al composites (weight fraction). Unlike Al-5 wt% and 10 wt%. Fe the addition of 15 wt% Fe on Al matrix composite showed the presence of Al13Fe4 intermetallic phase in XRD analysis, which was responsible for enhanced properties of the composite. The hardness was found to increase with increasing iron content and the highest value of HV 51.03 was found in Al-15 wt% Fe composites. The electrical conductivity decreased with increasing value of Fe content in the composite.The properties of advanced materials need to be continuously improved to meet the safety and operational standards for different applications, as they play a very important role in selecting the materials with desired properties Among the several types of MMCs, Aluminium Matrix Composites (AMCs) have particularly captured the attention of many scientists and designers because of their light weight combined with their mechanical and biological properties. AMCs are commonly used in aircraft, aerospace industry, automobile industry etc. AMCs are produced by different routes such as casting, powder metallurgy (sintering), foil and fiber pressing, stir casting etc. From all the above-mentioned methods of production, powder metallurgy method has gained quite a bit of popularity because of its ability to produce intricate shapes with a complex geometry involving low processing costs Powder metallurgy technique mainly consists of three important steps such as mixing the powders to form a homogenous mixture, compaction of the powder mixture to form green pellets and sintering of the green pellets to form the final sintered product AMCs are mostly incorporated with reinforcements such as Silicon Carbide (SiC), Aluminum Oxide (Al Fathy et al. studied the effect of addition of Fe on microstructure, mechanical and magnetic properties of the Al-(5 wt%, 10 wt%, 15 wt%) Fe composites with fine particles of Al and Fe powders Commercially produced powders of Al and Fe with particle sizes of 70 µm and 60 µm respectively, were obtained for the production of Al-(5 wt%, 10 wt% and 15 wt%) Fe composites. The first step of the composite preparation was mixing. The approximate amount of Al with three different compositions of Fe powder were mixed properly using mortar and pestle for 30 minutes to achieve a homogenized mixture. No lubricants or binders were used during mixing the powders of Fe and Al. The mixed powders were then dried for 30 minutes in a temperature of 80 °C to get rid of the moisture before compaction. The second step during composite preparation was compaction. The dried powders received after mixing were compacted at room temperature. Cold compaction was performed using uniaxial press at 500 MPa for 2 minutes to form green pellets. These green pellets were then dried for 30 minutes at 200 °C to remove any contamination such as moisture, external effluents, inherent reaction products or other contaminations. The final step of the composite formation involved sintering of the green compacts in a tubular furnace at 630 °C with a holding time of 60 minutes. The sintering was performed in vacuum to reduce the chances of oxidation and heating rate was maintained at 10 °C/minute. The sintered sample was then prepared for further characterization. The sintered samples were polished using 400, 600, 800, 1200, 2500, 5000 grits of SiC paper and cloth polished using 3 µm and 1 µm diamond paste for optical and SEM analysis. The fine polished samples were observed under optical microscope to analyze the surface properties such as pores and precipitates. The polished samples were then processed for the SEM analysis to observe the distribution of powders and intermetallic (if any) present in the sample. After the characterization process, the sintered pellets were processed for XRD analysis to observe the constituent phases in the sintered samples. Archimedes method was used to measure the density of the sintered samples. The sintered density was then compared with green density to observe the change in density during sintering. The density of sintered samples was also compared with the theoretical density to observe the percentage increase in densification. Electrical conductivity of the sintered samples was measured with the help of an electrical conductivity meter. The hardness of the sintered samples was measured using Vickers indentation technique with an applied load of 3 kg and a dwelling time of 10 s. All the observations were recorded for each sample and were analyzed further to study the effect of Fe on Al matrix composites. The green density of the pellets after compaction was calculated. According to results seen in The metallographic analysis of the samples was carried out under optical microscope.   The electrical conductivity of the composites was determined using a conductivity meter. Using the values obtained from the experiment, a graph was plotted to see the change in the trend of electrical conductivity with composition. From From The XRD analysis was performed on all the samples with increasing Fe content (5 wt%, 10 wt% and 15 wt%) in the composite. This can be clearly seen in Powder metallurgy route was followed to produce the desired Al-(5 wt%, 10 wt%, 15 wt%) Fe composites. The microstructural and some mechanical tests such as densification, hardness, and electrical conductivity were also successfully carried out. The XRD analysis confirmed the presence of Al  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are grateful to Dr. Mayadhar Debata for allowing to use his lab facility under his supervision for some of the processing measurements. The authors are thankful to NIT Rourkela for permitting to use their lab facilities for SEM, Optical microscopy and hardness tests. Finally, the authors acknowledge IGIT, Sarang for their financial support and lab facilities.