A hydrometallurgical calcification‑carbonation method is proposed to change the structure of the red mud of Bayer alumina production for clean utilization of low-grade bauxite resources. The utilization process consists of the flowing steps: i) silicon containing phases in bauxite are transformed into hydrogarnet; ii) hydrogarnet subsequently changed into Al(OH)3, CaO·SiO2 and CaCO3 through the carbonation process by CO2; and iii) Al(OH)3 is digested by alkali when the digestion temperature is below 100°C. The thermodynamics of the calcification and carbonation processes were elucidated, and the effects of the saturation coefficient of SiO2 in hydrogarnet on the new process were investigated. The results show that the silicon saturation coefficient rapidly increases with temperature. The digestion ratio of alumina from hydrogarnet exceeds 50% when the saturation coefficient is either higher than 0.79 or <0.3. After a low-grade bauxite treatment, the alkali content in the new red mud decreases to 0.49wt% and the A/S (ratio of alumina and silicon) decreases to below 0.5%. Furthermore, the recovery ratio of alumina increases by 15% compared to the traditional Bayer process. The new modified red mud can be used directly in the cement industry, and efficient and clean use of low-grade bauxite can be realized by this method.In 2014, the global alumina production was approximately 120 For alumina digestion: For silica containing phase: The structure of the red mud produced by the Bayer method is Na The lack of high-quality bauxite has become a critical issue for the sustainable development of the alumina industry. In China, > The “calcification-carbonation method” was proposed ( This technology can solve the key problem of the Bayer process. First, the method changes the structure of the original red mud. The new structure of red mud does not theoretically contain alkali and alumina, which can be completely used as a new raw material for cement. Second, the method adopts wet tandem approaches to realize harmless use of red mud and to extract the alumina. Compared to the traditional sintering treatment method, the energy consumption of the new method can be reduced by approximately 400 There are two key processes in the “calcification-carbonation method”, and the generation and decomposition of hydrogarnet are their primary reactions. The general chemical formula for silicate hydrogarnet is {A} In the hydrogarnet phase, the saturation coefficient In the “calcification-carbonation method”, differences in the SiO The reagents for studying saturation coefficient effects on the calcification and carbonation process are as follows: CO Experiments of bauxite were performed using bauxite from Indonesia. The bauxite ores were first milled to lower than 74 In regard to mineralogical characterization, the X-ray diffraction patterns ( The calcification and carbonation experiments were performed in a WHFS-1 autoclave (Weihai, China). The original liquid (prepared by NaOH and Al(OH) All the calcification experiments were performed with an initial Na In carbonation experiments, we investigated the effect of reaction temperature (60–140 The digestion experiments of carbonated slag were performed in a HH-501 constant temperature water bath. The NaOH (100 The XRD test was performed by D8 Advance (Bruker, German) using a Cu target with a step size of 0.0095° for a scanning range of 10°–90°. The molecular volume and the cell edge length (shown in The alumina, CaO and SiO The primary reactions of the process are as follows: For the calcification process: For the carbonation process: The relationship between hydrogarnet (3CaO·Al In the heat capacity formula, The calculated results shown in The Gibbs free energy change of the total carbonation reaction at different temperatures, shown in The reaction temperature is the most important determinant of the SiO When the temperature is below 60 The silicon saturation coefficient of hydrogarnet can be strongly influenced by the reaction temperature, and it increases with temperature. In the early stage (below 150 To investigate the effect of In addition, when C/S exceeds 4.69:1, the calcium aluminate hydrate phase appears in the products. This phenomenon coincides with the hydrogarnet generation principle. First, calcium hydroxide is generated by calcium oxide and water, and then 3CaO·Al The effect of Na The results in The results in A series of carbonation experiments are performed to study the decomposition characteristics of hydrogarnet at different calcification temperatures under the optimal carbonation conditions of 120 XRD patterns of carbonated slag shown in Digestion experiments of carbonated slag with different saturation coefficients are tested at a reaction temperature of 60 Results in The synthesis temperature of calcium hydroaluminocarbonate is approximately 60–70 The digestion results of alumina (shown in For low saturation coefficient hydrogarnet ( Low saturation coefficient hydrogarnet is easily decomposed through the carbonation process, and CaCO For medium saturation coefficient hydrogarnet (0.3 The hydroaluminocarbonate crystal in digested slag is better than the others, and it is difficult to extract. For high saturation coefficient hydrogarnet ( The silica content is higher than the others, so it can combine the free Ca(OH) To study the effects of the saturation coefficient on alumina and alkali recovery efficiency, typical experiments of bauxite were performed using bauxite. Under the Bayer process conditions, the digestion temperature is 140 The main phase of the new modified red mud is unreacted hydrogarnet (shown in Thermodynamic calculations showed that the formation of hydrogarnet becomes difficult with an increase of temperature. The carbonation decomposition process was much more facile at a low silicon saturation coefficient and carbon dioxide partial pressure had a small effect on it, compared with the results at a high silicon saturation. Temperature greatly influenced the silicon saturation coefficient of hydrogarnet. The silicon saturation coefficient increased with temperature. The calcium silicon saturation formula was approximately 3:1; calcium aluminate hydrate dominated. The digestion ratio of alumina, which exceeded 50% when the saturation coefficient was higher than 0.79 or < For low-grade bauxite treatment, the alkali content in the new red mud decreased to 0.49 We acknowledge the support from the