In 2008, the global production of milk was about 700 million metric tonnes. It has been estimated that nearly half of this amount is converted to forms for use as food ingredients. Prior to 1950, the major products for ingredient use were dried whole milk, dried skim milk, and dried churned buttermilk. The major uses of these ingredients were for bakery products and confections.In 2008, the global production of milk was about 700 million metric tonnes. It has been estimated that nearly half of this amount is converted to forms for use as food ingredients. Prior to 1950, the major products for ingredient use were dried whole milk, dried skim milk, and dried churned buttermilk. The major uses of these ingredients were for bakery products and confections. New developments in concentration, fractionation, isolation, and preservation techniques in the dairy industry have allowed the manufacture of additional high-quality and safe dairy ingredients. Information on the composition and functionality of these ingredients increased their utilization in a large range of food products. Applications also appear in specific fields such as nutrition, pharmacy, and medicine, and as support for the functional properties of food products. In this article, a survey will be given of the current fractionation and isolation processes of milk and the composition of the recovered dairy ingredients. Subsequently, attention is focused on the utilization of these ingredients in a number of nondairy food products and pharmaceutical applications. Desired ingredients may be recovered systematically from milk according to a number of separation techniques ( Usually, whole milk is heated to 65–76 Skim milk may be subjected to different preheating processes before drying, depending on the intended application. The bakery industry usually requires a high-heat milk powder, obtained by a preheat treatment of at least 5 Coprecipitate is recovered after heat treatment of skim milk at 90 Ultrafiltration is commonly used for the production of milk protein concentrates (MPCs). A typical membrane for ultrafiltration of milk is permeable to any substance with a molecular weight of less than 10 The general process for casein manufacture is to add a coagulant such as rennet or a culture of lactic acid bacteria or food-grade acids such as hydrochloric acid or sulfuric acid. Rennet casein is produced by enzymatic coagulation from skim milk at pH 6.7. The enzymes traditionally used, referred to as rennet, are preparations of gastric proteinases of young calves. Current rennet extracts are produced by fermentation. In the traditional method of rennet casein manufacture, the skim milk is set with rennet in a manner similar to that used in cheesemaking. After coagulation, the gel is pumped to a cooking pipe where the curd is separated from the whey, washed, and dried. Rennet casein is a well-known ingredient in processed cheese and cheese analogues. Acid casein is produced by acidification to pH 4.5. Then the casein is cooked, dewatered, washed, and dried with a ring dryer. Most casein is converted to caseinates by neutralization (to pH 7.0) with Ca(OH) Caseinates are used as functional ingredients in various food products. Different caseinates are used in different applications. Sodium caseinate is generally found in beverage powders, retorted or aseptic liquids, whipped toppings, coffee whitener, and nutrition bars. In addition to some of these uses, calcium caseinate is used in soups, bakery, confectionery coatings, and desserts. Most of the whey is recovered as cheese whey, the liquid remaining during the production of cheese. Less than 10% of the whey is produced as a by-product from skimmed milk during the production of casein ( The principles of industrial recovery processes of ingredients from whey before evaporation and/or spray drying are shown schematically in Removal of lactose ( Demineralization involves the removal of minerals and some organic acids by nanofiltration, ionic exchange, or electrodialysis. The most complete demineralization is achieved by using ionic exchange ( Electrodialysis ( Specific separation of whey proteins by ionic exchange may be achieved by mixing whey at pH 3.2 with porous, cross-linked, negatively charged, viscose particles in the so-called stirred-bed ionic exchange process ( Another ionic exchange method for the production of whey protein isolates is performed in columns according to a fixed-bed process ( By-products arising from the fractionation of milk and whey products are increasingly used as food ingredients. Examples are milk salts, which have the same salt sensation as table salt. Sources of milk salt production are delactosed whey and ultrafiltration permeates, and the minerals from electrodialysis. Hydrolysis of milk proteins is carried out to improve their nutritional characteristics, increase their solubility, and improve their foaming properties. Milk protein hydrolysis may be accomplished with preparations of enzymes that usually occur in the intestinal tract. After the desired degree of hydrolysis, the enzymes are inactivated by heat treatment or separated by membrane filtration. The resulting protein hydrolysates are used for specific nutritional applications. While limited in application at the present time, fractionation of both caseins and whey proteins has received much attention in recent years. These include α The main components present in the dairy ingredients discussed so far are indicated in Whole milk or skim milk may be preserved by adding sugar (60%) to milk that has been pasteurized and concentrated (2.5:1) previously. This so-called sweetened condensed (skim) milk has an osmotic pressure high enough to inhibit the growth of bacteria. Sweetened condensed milk is a well-known ingredient in the confectionery industry. Rennet casein has a slightly different protein composition compared to acid casein, caused by the absence of a peptide released from one of the casein molecules. This enzymatic modification results in (rennet) casein products with quite different properties than those of acid casein. Whey still contains about 50% of the nutrients present in whole milk, comprising lactose, whey proteins, minerals, a small amount of fat, and most of the minor water-soluble nutrients from milk, such as vitamins and growth factors. The protein content is calculated from the total nitrogen content multiplied by a factor 6.38 (so-called Kjeldahl factor). This implies that both protein nitrogen and nonprotein nitrogen (NPN) are included, which should be taken into account, particularly for milk, skim milk, and whey. In cheese whey, 20% of total protein is NPN, which is nearly twice the amount present in (acid) casein whey. Electrodialysis of whey results in a partial desalting because multivalent ions such as calcium, magnesium, phosphates, and citrates are not or only slightly removed. The protein, lactose, fat, and mineral content of delactosed whey, demineralized by electrodialysis, is nearly identical to that of skim milk and is often indicated as ‘skim milk equivalent’. This whey (by)product is a well-known extender for skim milk in ice cream and baby food. Milk and dairy products are used by the food industry in many different types of food products on the basis of their excellent nutritional and functional properties. Dairy-based ingredients are manufactured globally, and their functionality in food products frequently varies for the same type of product from different manufacturers. Other factors that influence the final characteristics of a food product include type of food product being made – different foods require different functionalities as illustrated in type of nondairy ingredients being used, causing interactions and modification of the characteristics of the food (protein/fat, protein/gum, etc.), difference in the processing methods for manufacturing the dairy ingredient, and differences in the processing methods for making the food product. The main areas of application are summarized in The flavor of whey, especially that of acid whey, is most compatible with that of citrus fruits in beverages. However, utilization of whey as a refreshing drink is hampered by the presence of whey proteins and fatty components. After World War II, this problem has been solved by using deproteinated and defatted whey. A well-known example of such a refreshing drink is ‘Rivella’, produced in Switzerland since 1950 and nowadays still consumed in Canada and The Netherlands. Rivella is a carbonated, clear whey beverage with a bittersweet fruit flavor and a pH of 3.7. Nutritional whey drinks based on pasteurized (desalted) whey mixed with fruit juices at pH 4.0 were developed in the 1970s. Whey or desalted whey was mixed with concentrated fruit juice and sugar. Pasteurization and aseptic packaging guaranteed a shelf life of 6 months without refrigeration. The good solubility and bland taste of undenatured whey proteins over a broad pH range are important attributes for soft drinks. In the 1970s, the Coca-Cola Company selected whey protein concentrates (WPCs) as a nutrient to improve the nutritional quality of their drinks. The drinks could be fortified up to 1% whey proteins, without detectable changes in flavor and appearance. These WPC beverages retained their bland flavor and solubility after in-bottle pasteurization at around pH 3.0. However, the cost of these products appeared to be too high to continue their production on an industrial scale. Dairy ingredients are well-known components in a large number of confectionery products because of their contribution to the characteristic texture, flavor, and color. Some of these products will be discussed with respect to their main functional demands. Candy-type products, such as toffees, caramels, and fudges, are cooked syrups; they were originally textured and flavored by using sweetened condensed milk. The palatability of confectionery products is often improved by the incorporation of air, supported by whipping proteins. Lactose contributes to the color and flavor of these products, in particular during cooking. Milk fat serves as a source of several significant flavor compounds. Moreover, milk fat improves the mouthfeel of candies due to its disposition in the candy product. Milk proteins enhance the miscibility of formula ingredients because of their emulsifying properties, and contribute to the lightness during whipping and the texture of the candy during cooking. Milk ingredients are also valuable components in chocolate products, especially in milk chocolate, owing to their contributions to flavor, sweetness, and protein profile. According to the regulations of the European Community, milk chocolate should contain at least 14% dry milk solids and not less than 3.5% milk fat. A basic step in chocolate manufacture is ‘conching’, a heating process with aeration for some hours, which creates typical chocolate flavors. In order to maintain the chocolate flavor during an extended storage period, milk crumb has been introduced as an ingredient for the chocolate industry. Milk crumb is prepared from sweetened condensed milk, sugar, chocolate liquor, and cocoa mass. This mixture is usually drum-dried and subsequently crushed into grains, which may be stored for several months without loss of flavor when packed into closed sacks. Not all products that have the appearance of chocolate meet the official standards and by regulation these products may not be labeled as chocolate. Such products are generally referred to as confectionery coatings or compound coatings and are developed for specific uses, for example, as coatings on the centers of ice cream bars, enrobed candy bars, and baked goods. In these recipes, sweetened condensed milk whey, various sugars, and optimal additions of fats and emulsifiers may replace part or all of the sweetened condensed milk. Most aerated confectionery products are protein-type foams, which are highly sensitive to fatty components; examples are frappé and meringue. Frappé is a highly aerated sucrose–glucose solution, prepared with egg white, which is carefully folded into viscous candy fillings for confectionery products such as caramels, toffees, and nougats. Meringue is a whipped (egg white) protein/sugar preparation that is dried at 110–125 Whole milk powder is a well-known dairy ingredient in bread; it improves the flavor and color and retards staling of bread during storage. A requisite is that the milk should be heat-treated intensively before use, in order to prevent loaf depression of the bread during baking. High-heat milk powder meets this requirement through inactivation (denaturation) of a loaf-depressing protein. Whole milk powder may be replaced by a combination of high-heat skim milk powder and butter, depending on legal regulations. Butter and fractionated milk fat, prepared as described previously, are important ingredients in the bakery industry. Since butter is quite expensive relative to other fats, its use is restricted to those products in which flavor makes a significant contribution. High-melting milk fat fractions are functional ingredients in the preparation of puff pastry, providing the crisp texture in dough coatings of almond bread, pies, sausage rolls, or apple dumplings. The low-melting milk fat fractions may be used in the production of recombined milk powder from skim milk and milk fat; it appears that the reconstitutability of milk powder is significantly improved. Whey powder is a well-known ingredient in the bakery industry because of its flavor-enhancing and tenderizing qualities. Volume, texture, crust, and retention of freshness in wheat bread are improved by the incorporation of a combination of emulsifiers and whey powder in the flour. Usually, 1–2% of whey solids (on the basis of flour) are added, depending on the type and structure of the bread. In the 1970s, there was an increasing interest in the production of milk protein-enriched biscuits as nutritional food for children in developing countries. A mixture of delactosed whey and buttermilk added to wheat flour resulted in tasty biscuits containing 20% milk proteins. Hens’ eggs are widely used in the baking industry because of their unique properties. Whey proteins have a number of properties in common with egg (white) proteins, and many attempts have been made to substitute WPC for egg white proteins in bakery products. For economical reasons, there has been much interest in replacing whole eggs in Madeira-type cakes, consisting of whole eggs, sugar, flour, and (butter) fat. The main function of egg yolk in this cake is the emulsification of fat, a function that cannot easily be performed by other proteins. Preparing a pre-emulsion of fat and whey proteins has solved the lack of fat binding, allowing complete substitution of whole eggs by WPC-80 as shown in A number of milk products are used as functional ingredients or extenders in meat products. Two functional demands of comminuted meat products are of particular importance, that is, the water-holding capacity and the fat-binding ability. More than 70% of the water present in lean meat is ‘free water’, which is important for the tenderness and juiciness of whole meat products. After the animal is slaughtered, part of the free water is expelled and this can be restored with the help of salts and milk proteins such as caseinates and WPCs. Luncheon meat is a comminuted (fine-particle) meat product enriched with pork fat and flavoring additives. Fine-particle meat products are prepared by comminution of the muscle tissue in a grinder/mincer. Pork fat is usually dispersed as pre-emulsion stabilized by caseinates in a bowl chopper and then mixed with the minced meat slurry. WPCs may be used as an emulsifier for patés, which contain a greater amount of fatty tissues than luncheon meat. Concomitant protein fortification of whole meat and recombined products (such as hams) is achieved by injecting a whey protein solution into the meat, using a multineedle system. The product is then tumbled to achieve mixing and binding. To achieve the desired elasticity and slicing characteristic of the final product, especially in recombined hams and other recombined meat products, a gelling whey protein is needed. Numerous species of fish are caught annually throughout the world. The introduction of gel-type seafood products such as surimi on Western markets has opened a profitable outlet for deboned fish flesh. Surimi can be described as a myofibrillar protein concentrate, which is used primarily in the manufacture of various types of Japanese heat-gelled products, such as kamaboko. Egg white and WPCs are well-known texturizers for fish products. However, the gel-forming characteristics of pollock ( Finely comminuted fish products are usually prepared in bowl choppers and sometimes in a grinder. Examples of comminuted fish products are fish sticks, fish nuggets, and Japanese-style fish pastes such as kamaboko and tempura. Water binding capacity (and in turn juiciness) is improved in comminuted nuggets when both whey protein products and starch are present during chopping. Dietetic foods may be defined as food products designed for special dietary requirements. These include infant formulae, foods for the elderly, slimming foods, clinical or medical foods, and sports nutritional foods. Infant formulae are mainly designed on the basis of cows’ milk as a substitute for human milk. When in the early 1970s it became apparent that whey-based infant formulae can simulate human milk, attention was turned to the development of formulae containing whey or whey proteins. This was the start for formulae prepared by mixing equal amounts of skim milk and demineralized whey. Specific whey-predominant formulae, using WPC, have been developed for preterm low-weight infants, to support a more appropriate balance of amino acids for growth and metabolism. As age advances, physical activity tends to decline and so less dietary energy is required. Food intake also declines with age, but information on the specific nutrient needs of elderly people is scarce. MPC with additional nutrients coming from fruits, vegetables, or cereal products meets the requirements of food for the elderly. Both high-quality proteins and bioavailable calcium present in MPC are important nutrients for (elderly) people. Slimming foods are introduced to prevent or control obesity, the most prevalent nutritional disorder in prosperous communities. Obesity arises as a consequence of taking in more energy in food than is expended in the activities of daily life, leading to a positive energy balance, which is mainly stored as fat. Whey products fit well in slimming foods, owing to their excellent amino acid composition and low fat content. Clinical or medical foods are designed to provide complete or supplemented nutritional support to persons who are unable to digest adequate amounts of food in a conventional form. Whey products have nutritional advances in medical diets because most whey nutrients are present in a bioavailable form. Some patients having defects in their (enzymatic) digestion system require a diet that contains previously ( Sports nutritional foods developed to meet the needs of athletes have shown a growth of 5–9% in the past decade. These include supplements, beverages, and nutrition bars. In 2008, the sports nutrition market had grown to about US$25 billions. Lactose is quantitatively the most significant excipient (substance other than the active drug) in pharmaceutical applications. Tablets, capsules, and inhalers are the most widespread and convenient forms for administering drugs to patients. Refined lactose is well known as an inert carrier of drugs because of its purity and consistent chemical and physical stability. One of the most important physical properties in the manufacture of tablets is its capability for direct compression. A lubricant (e.g., magnesium stearate) is essential for almost all tablet formulations, which forms a thin film around the particles, necessary for the disintegration of the tablets in water. Another category of medicines is the inhalers. The majority of inhalers contain the active drug bound to small homogeneously sized lactose particles. The drug particles must be in the size range 0.5–5 μm for optimal delivery to the deepest parts of the lungs. The small particles of the active drug are coated on the somewhat larger lactose particles, acting as carriers. These lactose particles are trapped in the respiratory tract, moved upward by the action of cilia, and then swallowed. The versatility of lactose is demonstrated by the range of derivatives that can be obtained through chemical and biochemical reactions, as shown in Recently, lactose has been fermented to produce polylactic acid, a biodegradable polymer that is finding use in a number of different applications, including implants and new packaging applications. Functional foods (or nutraceuticals) are food products or food ingredients that provide a physiological function other than nutrition and they have medical or health benefits, including the prevention and treatment of diseases. Examples of functional foods are bioactive proteins, bioactive peptides, probiotics, and prebiotics. A group of specific bioactive milk proteins include lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, lysozyme, and a number of growth factors present in milk and whey. Lactoferrin is credited with several beneficial health-promoting effects, including antibacterial activity in the intestinal tract, acting as a carrier for iron absorption, and regulation of the immune system. Lactoperoxidase and lysozyme are natural antimicrobial milk proteins, which have been described as prospective additives to protect milk and milk products against microbial deterioration. Probiotics may be defined as, health-promoting live bacteria that beneficially affect the microbial intestinal balance of the host. Prebiotics may be defined as nondigestible food ingredients of the diet that reach the colon intact and beneficially affect the host by selectively stimulating the growth and/or activity of probiotic bacteria in the colon. Lactulose (and oligosaccharides) are not absorbed in the small intestine, but migrate to the large intestine. In the large intestine, they appear to be utilized predominantly by all species of In 2008, the global use of dairy ingredients reached 82 million metric tonnes, with an estimated growth of 3% per year. Growth is projected to continue into the future. The interest in the use of dairy ingredients in nutritional and functional foods continues to grow. A greater knowledge on the relation between nutrition and health can be expected to stimulate the consumption of functional foods significantly. New product development will be important to the continued growth of dairy ingredients, since 50% of the growth of sales over the past decade has come from the development of new products. Health and welfare concerns appear to be the driving force for future development of dairy ingredients. Market research suggests that the consumer wants appetizing products that will help control weight gain rather than just calorie restrictions. Major growth areas will be in functional foods of all types. Most of the current knowledge of functionality has been gained through cellular and animal studies. There is a need for more and better clinical trials to confirm the value of these products in human health. 