The sodium oleate collector used in malachite flotation usually exhibits low selectivity. By partially replacing sodium oleate with alcohols, this study presents a method for increasing the selectivity of sodium oleate-based collectors in malachite flotation. By combining 3 × 10−5 mol/L alcohols, such as 1-octanol, 2-ethylhexanol, and α-terpineol, with 1 × 10−5 mol/L sodium oleate, malachite floatability values higher than 98% are achieved. Contact angle and zeta potential measurements reveal that the co-adsorption of alcohols with sodium oleate may be resulted from the hydrophobic interactions between their hydrocarbon chains. The co-adsorption of methyl isobutyl carbinol, along with its shorter hydrocarbon chain, makes it more difficult to render the malachite surface highly hydrophobic. However, the co-adsorption of straight-chain and branched-chain alcohols with sodium oleate shows the ability consistently to induce high malachite floatability.Malachite, which usually results from the weathering of copper ores, is a typical carbonate copper mineral that is employed in the mineral processing industry. The flotation of malachite has attracted much attention ( There have been studies to develop a collector mixture that can be manufactured economically for oxide flotations. Alcohols combined with collectors have been reported to co-adsorb on the mineral surface through the interaction of the hydrocarbon chain ( The usage of mixtures of alcohols and collectors in oxide flotations may have the following advantages. First, the mixture of collectors and alcohols is more economical compared to the single oxhydryl collector with a high molecular weight (e.g., fatty acid and sodium oleate). The unit price of the alcohols is usually lower than that of the collectors ( In the present work, the flotation of malachite was studied with a fatty acid type collector (sodium oleate) partially replaced by four types of alcohols, namely 1-octanol, 2-ethylhexanol, α-terpineol, and methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC). These alcohols are different with respect to the length and branching of their chain structures. The work was aimed at illustrating the effect of the chain structure of alcohols on the replacement of the sodium oleate collector in malachite flotation. A natural malachite sample was obtained from the Lupe mine, Puebla, Mexico. The sample was crushed, hand-sorted and dry-ground to obtain different fractions for different applications, namely, lumps for contact angle measurements, particles of −75 + 38 µm for micro-flotation tests, and fine particles for zeta potential measurements. The size distribution of the fine particles fraction was measured using a Shimadzu SALD-1100 laser diffraction analyser (Japan) with A 150 mL Hallimond tube equipped with a 20 μm frit and a magnetic stirrer was used to test the malachite floatability with different reagent mixtures. In each flotation, 3 g of the malachite sample (−75 + 38 µm) or mixed mineral (malachite : calcite = 1:1) was conditioned for 2 min in 130 mL of distilled water, and the solution was adjusted to the desired pH by using HCl or NaOH. Then, a given amount of reagents was added and conditioned for 3 min. After that, the conditioned slurry was transferred to the Hallimond tube, and the flotation was performed for 10 min with nitrogen gas at a flow rate of 20 mL/min. The floated (concentrate) and unfloated (tailing) products were separately collected, dried and weighed, and the recovery was calculated based on the percentage of floated product/(mass of floated product + unfloated product). In the micro-flotation tests, the variables used were the pH of the slurry, concentration of sodium oleate and alcohols from 0 to 6 × 10 The contact angle of the malachite sample was measured by a goniometer (DSA-25, Kruss, Germany) The DSA-25 goniometer was equipped with a CM4210 optics module with a zoom lens, and was operated using the sessile drop method in the software ADVANCE. In the measurements, lumps of the prepared mineral samples were loaded on the goniometer stage and 1.5 μL of distilled water was dropped on them. The advancing and receding contact angles were then reported. When the difference was less than 1% of the receding contact angle, the average value of these two angles was reported as the contact angle. For each condition (e.g., sodium oleate concentration: 1 × 10 A ZetaProbe Analyzer (Colloidal Dynamics, Australia) with electroacoustic technology was used to determine the zeta potential of the malachite particles in aqueous solutions for various pH values and reagent concentrations. The zeta potential was calculated from the stimulated electro-acoustic sonic amplitude (ESA) values from the malachite particles using the O’Brien equation (    The mixture may provide a better selectivity for the sodium oleate-based collector. Contact angle and zeta potential measurements were performed to study the adsorption of sodium oleate and alcohols on the malachite surface.   For the flotation tests, This work studies the partial replacement of sodium oleate using alcohols with different chain structures in malachite flotation. The results are as follows: The malachite floatability was found to be higher than 95% using sodium oleate collectors at pH 6–12, while alcohols could not render the malachite surface hydrophobic; meanwhile, its floatability reached approximately 15% owing to the entrainment caused by the fine particle size and long flotation time. However, the malachite floatability exceeded 98% when using 1 × 10 Zeta potential and contact angle measurements indicate that the co-adsorption of alcohols with oleate species on the malachite surface takes place owing to the hydrophobic interaction between their hydrocarbon chains. Of the 1-octanol, 2-ethylhexanol, α-terpineol, and MIBC, MIBC has a shorter chain, which makes it more difficult to increase the floatability of malachite. Of the three alcohols 1-octanol, 2-ethylhexanol and α-terpineol, the latter two have branched chains. However, they have a similar capability as that of 1-octanol with respect to rendering the malachite surface hydrophobic and increasing its floatability. This study was financially supported by the