Fly ash (FA) disposal in landfills has a significant economic and environmental burden. A promising approach for FA valorisation aside from building purposes is the recovery of valuable elements since FA has a huge potential role as a source of valuable metals. In most cases, reported work in this area has been of theoretical research and further development work is needed. Germanium and gallium occur in relatively high proportions and mainly as water soluble and oxide species, respectively in the Puertollano Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC) fly ash. Both the speciation and concentrations of Ge and Ga in this IGCC FA allowed starting research for developing extraction methods. High but not regular extraction yields were achieved in previous investigations. The aim of this research work is focused on the optimisation of Ge and Ga extraction conditions from IGCC FA for its feasible industrial application regardless the operational conditions of the IGCC plant. To this aim, first the daily, monthly, and yearly variability of Ge and Ga concentrations in IGCC fly ashes were determined. Samples were taken during almost 10years. Then a number of extraction tests were carried out using different extractants to cover a wide range of extraction conditions (acid, alkaline, complexant, reducing and oxidising), on IGCC FA samples produced under different operating conditions. High and regular Ge extraction yields (up to 83% after 2h leaching period) may be achieved using a weak acid solution. Gallium yielded up to 70 and 64% extraction after a 24h leaching period using a weak acid and alkaline solution, respectively.The most common applications of coal fly ash (e.g. building industry), have low added value and there is high and increasing economic and environmental burden to landfill disposal. There are some approaches nowadays for FA valorisation aside from building purposes with high added value (e.g. synthesis of zeolites, synthesis of geopolymers, fire resistant materials, ceramic manufacture, foam glass, recovery of valuable metals, and agricultural applications). In most cases reported work to date in this area has been of theoretical research or laboratory scale and further development work is needed. The recovery of valuable metals from FA is a promising approach for FA valorisation especially the FA produced in by the Integrated Coal Gasification Combined Cycle technology (IGCC). Germanium and gallium occur in relatively high contents in the fly ash (FA) produced in the Puertollano (Spain) Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC) power plant Highly water soluble Ge species (hexagonal-GeO The above Ge and Ga recovery processes allowed the production of 90–93% purity of hexagonal-GeO These promising results promoted research for the up-scaling of the recovery process. However, the potential limitation for the immediate industrial application of the process is the relatively wide variability of water Ge extraction yields among Puertollano IGCC FA produced in different operational conditions. In this regard, limestone dosage is the most important operational parameter controlling Ge water extraction yields from IGCC FA. Generally Ge attained lower water extraction yields (40–50%) at high limestone dosages (4%) than those (53–91%) reached at low (2%) dosages Based on this background the aim of this research work is focused on the optimisation of Ge and Ga extraction conditions from IGCC FA for its feasible industrial application. For this purpose, extraction experiments were addressed to obtain high and regular Ge and/or Ga extraction yields regardless of the operational conditions of the IGCC plant (that means variability of fly ash composition). Several extractants covering a wide range of extraction conditions were applied on a number of historical and new IGCC FA samples from the Puertollano IGCC plant produced under different operational conditions for the Ge and Ga extraction tests. A sampling of FA was carried out in the Puertollano IGCC plant to check the potential weekly and monthly variability on the Ge and Ga concentrations in FA. Furthermore, and simultaneously with sampling of FA, samples of feed coal were undertaken to determine potential changes on the concentrations of Ge and Ga in the feed coal. Additionally, coal stockpiles at the Puertollano IGCC power plant were sampled to check the Ge and Ga contents and ensure regular high inputs of these elements in the Puertollano IGCC plant in the next years, mandatory for the industrial application of the recovery process of these valuable elements. In 2008, around 800,000 The sampling of feed fuel and gasification by-products was carried out from 30th June to 4th July 2008, to obtain samples produced during a whole week to check the variability on Ge and Ga contents in this operational period of the plant. A daily sample of 15 On the other hand, four historical (stored for years) and four “fresh” IGCC FA samples (FA produced during the sampling period, To achieve high and regular Ge and/or Ga extractable yields regardless of the operational conditions of the Puertollano IGCC plant, 8 extractants were selected (H Based on the optimal conditions prompted in previous studies on extraction and recovery process for Ge Germanium and Ga extraction tests were carried out on Puertollano IGCC fly ash. The whole extraction conditions selected ( The coal from stockpiles and feed fuel samples were first air dried and then rifted and milled. The moisture was determined at 105 The pH and conductivity of the leachates from the extraction tests were determined by conventional methods while the contents of major and trace elements were determined by ICP-AES and ICP-MS, respectively. The coal stockpiles built in 1999 and 2003 show similar and relatively constant contents ( The Ge and Ga contents in the feed coal collected in the Puertollano IGCC plant from 30th June to 4th July 2008 ( The Ge and Ga contents in the historical IGCC FA samples selected range from 244 to 356 Since the IGCC plant operated under relatively steady conditions during the sampling period and the mean life of the feed coal stockpile of the Puertollano IGCC plant is around 2–3 The water Ge extraction yields obtained from leaching tests carried out on historical Puertollano IGCC FA were compared with that obtained in previous leaching tests carried out shortly after FA generation, to check the effect of ageing on the Ge extractable yields. Gallium is not water soluble in Puertollano IGCC FA and consequently only the Ge extraction was studied. The Puertollano IGCC FA is made up of a high proportion of Al–Si glassy matrix (97%) with minor proportions of fine reduced species The Ge extraction yields at 50 Extraction tests in acid conditions revealed different Ge and Ga extractable yields when H Similarly, Ga reached relatively high extraction yields (66%) with 0.5 The highest Ge extraction yields (80–82%) in acid conditions were reached with 0.1 Similar to Ge, but not simultaneous with Ge extraction, relatively high Ga extraction yields (59–66%) among IGCC fly ash samples were observed with H It may be concluded that moderately high and similar Ge extraction yields (62.9–81.7%) may be achieved for IGCC FA produced at different operational conditions with a relatively weak H It has to be pointed out that the extraction of Ge and Ga with H At the light of the result, the very low Ge and Ga extraction yields reached using HCl as extractant from historical IGCC FA discourage the use of HCl for the Ge and/or Ga extraction from IGCC FA. The extraction of Ge and Ga using alkaline extractants (NaOH and CaO) generally results in low yields, ranging from 9 to 51% for NaOH extraction and from 0.1 to 14 for CaO extraction ( Unlike conventional combustion plants, the conditions inside the gasification reactor in Puertollano IGCC are reducing. Therefore an oxidising reagent such as hydrogen peroxide was studied as a leaching reagent for the IGCC fly ash. The results carried out using hydrogen peroxide as extracting agent show that Ge and Ga extraction yields are very similar to those obtained using pure water ( However, unlike the extraction carried out in acid conditions, the oxidising conditions decrease significantly the release of other metals and metalloids, mainly As, Sb, and Ni. This fact was already observed during the aqueous leaching of IGCC fly ashes conducted in oxidising atmospheres As shown in Apart from the fast, regular and relatively high Ge extraction, oxalic acid is highly selective for this valuable element and the leachates are characterized by low levels of impurities (results not shown). In view of these results, the use of a low concentrated oxalic acid aqueous solution seems to be highly appropriate for the extraction of Ge from IGCC fly ash. It should be noted that the Ge extraction yields reached with oxalic acid after a 2 The results obtained on the Ge and Ga extraction from Puertollano IGCC FA in a wide range of extraction conditions is summarised below: The Ge extraction from IGCC FA is highly sensitive to the extractant used. The effect of the extractants selected in this study on the Ge extraction is detailed below Oxalic acid: fast and relatively high and regular Ge extraction yields with a high selectivity for Ge. Water: relatively high and selective Ge extraction yields but irregular among Puertollano IGCC FA. Sulphuric acid: high and regular Ge extraction yields but applying long extraction periods (24 HCl, NaOH and CaO: low Ge extraction yields for all the extraction conditions tested. ii) The Ga extraction from IGCC FA is less sensitive to the extraction conditions selected in this study than that of Ge. Low and relatively low Ga extraction yields were achieved with sulphuric acid and NaOH. Likewise, as expected, Ga is not extracted with water or oxalic acid as extractant. These results discourage a potential simultaneous extraction of Ge and Ga from Puertollano IGCC FA. In view of the above results water and oxalic acid are selected as extractants carried out for the Ge extraction tests on current IGCC FA and check the reproducibility of the high Ge extraction yields obtained on historical IGCC FA. At the light of the above described results, the Ge extraction tests on “fresh” IGCC FA samples were carried out with water and 0.16 The extraction of Ge from IGCC fly ash immediately after their production with weak oxalic acid solutions provides even higher yields than historical IGCC fly ash, reaching yields higher than 90% in a short period of time. The Ge and Ga contents in the Puertollano IGCC FA have shown differences over 40–60 The results of the Ge and Ga extraction tests carried out on Puertollano IGCC FA samples revealed that fast (1–2 The extraction of Ga from Puertollano IGCC FA is not as feasible as that of Ge, since relatively high yields (71% and 64%) may be achieved using H The different speciation and chemistry between Ge (highly soluble hexagonal oxides and sulphides) and Ga (oxides and in Al–Si framework structure) species in the IGCC fly ash resulted in different optimal extraction conditions, discouraging a potential simultaneous extraction of these valuable elements. The results also suggest that the ageing of IGCC fly ash results in reducing the Ga extraction when HCl or NaOH is used. The amorphous Al–Si matrix may partially crystallize during fly ash ageing. The partial crystallization may reduce the reactivity of Al–Si fly ash matrix, and consequently the leachable potential of amorphous Al–Si-bearing elements, such as Ga. Research is now focused to corroborate the potential suitability of these reagents for extracting Ga from this gasification fly ash. An extraction process for Ge based on an extraction with 0.16 This study was carried out within the framework of the GeWEP (extraction of germanium and gallium from IGCC fly ash) project with a grant from To Hubert Zeegers, in memoriam.