In this study, inspired by nacre-like structural natural shells, novel three-dimensional (3D) nanocomposites based on natural nanoplatelets of montmorillonite (MMT) and polysaccharide of chitosan (CS) were prepared with solution intercalation and self-assembly process. The CS-intercalated-MMT nanoplatelets units acted as “bricks” and CS molecules acted as “mortar”, arranging in fairly well-ordered layered structure. With addition of glutaraldehyde (GA) and Pd2+ cations, synergistic toughening and strengthening effects of covalent and ionic bonds could be achieved. The best mechanical properties of the prepared 3D nanocomposites were observed as 5.6 KJ/m2 (impact strength), 3.3 GPa (flexural modulus), and 65.8 MPa (flexural strength), respectively, which showed higher toughness but lower flexural properties than natural pearl mussel shells. Nevertheless, both the impact and flexural properties of the prepared 3D nanocomposite were much higher than the other natural shell, i.e. green grab shell. Besides conventional methods characterizations, the nacre-like structure of the artificial 3D nanocomposite was further evidenced with positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy characterizations. This work might facilitate a versatile platform for developing green 3D bionanocomposites with fairly good mechanical properties.Natural biological materials, for example the nacre in mollusk shells, are well known for their outstanding combination properties of super strength, toughness, and stiffness [ Among the nano inorganic platelets and polymers, montmorillonite (MMT) and CS, the kinds of natural abundant clay and polysaccharide respectively, have been used as the most promising building components of bionanocomposites [ Herein, we introduce a novel approach to artificial nacre-like MMT/CS three-dimensional (3D) nanocomposites by combined solution intercalation of CS molecules into MMT layers and vacuum-filtration-induced self-assembly of CS-intercalated-MMT hybrid building blocks. In acidic aqueous media, properly proportioned CS to MMT mixture can form saturated intercalation, and the result CS-intercalated-MMT hybrid building block can well disperse in the solution. Such CS-intercalated-MMT hybrid building blocks then aligned to a nacre-like lamella microstructure by vacuum-filtration-induced self-assembly, which is attributed to the roles that the orientation of MMT nanoplatelets and linking of the CS molecules play. Besides the traditional methods of characterization, the unique nacre-like microstructure in sub-nano level of the 3D nanocomposites has been further elucidated by positron annihilation lifetime spectrum (PALS) measurements. The mechanical properties of such artificial MMT/CS 3D nanocomposites were compared with natural pearl mussel shell and green crab shell. The used Na MMT suspension was prepared as follows: about 6 g of MMT was dispersed in 600 mL of deionized water and magnetically stirred for 4 h at 60 °C with water bath heating to form homogeneous suspension (pH ~8). CS solution was prepared as follows: 1.5 g of CS was dissolved in 150 mL of 2 wt% acetic acid solution under magnetically stirring for 2 h (pH ~4). Then the CS solution was drop wisely added to the MMT suspension, and kept meganically stirring at 60 °C for 10 h (pH ~5). Then, certain amounts of 50 wt% GA solution (0, 0.5, 1, and 1.5 mL) and/or Pd Before mechanical properties tests, all the prepared 3D nanocomposites were cut into the size of length×width×thickness as about 40 mm × 8 mm × 4 mm. Flexural tests of the 3D nanocomposites samples were performed with a universal materials testing machine (SANS Testing Machine Co. Ltd., Shenzheng, China) according to GB/T 9341-2008 (similar to ISO 178-2010) standard procedure of China. The span length was set as 30 mm. Impact tests of the 3D nanocomposites samples were performed with a cantilever beam impact testing machine (XJU-22, Chengde Zongchi Testing Machine Co., China) according to GB/T 1843–2008 (similar to ISO 180-2000) standard procedure of China. Five specimens of each group for flexural and impact testing were prepared and tested. Morphology of the flexural and impact fracture surface of the prepared 3D nanocomposites was examined with a ZEISS Sigma 300 (Germany) field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM). All of the scanned samples were pretreated with an ultrathin coating of electrically-conducting gold to improve FESEM imaging. The morphologies of prepared 3D nanocomposites samples were further observed with a JEM-2100FHR-TEM (JEOL Ltd. Japan) high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM). The samples were pre-embedded in epoxy resin and microtomed for HR-TEM observation. Positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS) of the prepared 3D nanocomposites was measured with an EG&G ORTEC fast-slow system (US) (testing condition: at 25 °C, with a time resolution of 190–220 ps). Recent studies showed that about 80: 20 of MMT: CS was a proper ratio to form saturated intercalation of two layer CS molecules into the MMT interplatelets spaces [  Since previously self-assembled nacre-mimetic polymer/clay nanocomposites only existed as 2D films, impact and flexure tests are hardly used to evaluate performance. In this study, the prepared Bio3Dmat bulk nanocomposites were 4 mm in thickness. Their impact and flexural performances were directly compared with natural pearl mussel shell and green grab shell. Pearl mussel shell as shown in The impact and flexural fracture surface morphologies were characterized by FESEM and shown in For the artificial nacre-like Bio3Dmat-0-0 and Bio3Dmat-0.5-3 (as shown in As discussed above, for the artificial nacre-like Bio3Dmat, CS chains serve as glues between the MMT nanoplatelets and the interface interactions are further improved with the addition of GA and Pd As we know, the interplatelets spaces of CS-intercalated-MMT is not empty but occupied with intercalated CS chains. In summary, novel nacre-like 3D nanocomposites have been prepared by using MMT sheets as bricks and CS as motar by combined solution intercalation and vacuum-induced self-assembly methods. The bricks of randomly-shaped MMT sheets was in thickness of about 25 nm, consisting 10–20 pieces of CS-intercalated-MMT nanoplates. And they were arranged in a bit less ordered layers than natural pearl mussel shell and/or green grab shell. Covalent bonding with GA and ionic bonding with Pd  The authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the