Mineral liberation analyser (MLA) was applied to quantitatively analyze the rare earth ore from Weishan in Shandong. Mineralogy parameters, such as mineral composition, occurrence states of rare earth elements (REEs) and valuable elements, mineral embedded grain size distribution, mineral association and liberation, are obtained. Results show that the contents of REEs and other valuable elements mainly contained in the ore were La 1.02 wt%, Ce 4.29 wt%, Pr 0.34 wt%, Nd 0.84 wt%, Sr 3.4 wt% and Ba 26.53 wt%, respectively. The REEs mainly occur in bastnaesite and carbocernaite in the form of independent mineral and the contents of bastnaesite and carbocernaite in the ore were 5.96 wt% and 12.30 wt%, respectively. 67.34% of strontium occurs in carbocernaite and the rest occurs in celestobarite and strontianite mineral. 92.71% of barium occurs in barite. Liberation of main rare-earth minerals such as bastnaesite and carbocernaite is more than 80% when the grinding fineness is 78.42% passing 74 μm. The research results could be employed to provide detailed basic theoretical data for further improvement of the beneficiation process flow and the processing index of rare earth ore, the recycling of other valuable minerals and the comprehensive utilization of tailings.REEs are usually known as “industrial vitamins”, which are widely employed in the fields of alloy and metal, the optical glass and ceramic, magnetic materials, chemical catalysis, the hydrogen storage cell, medical industry and so on. Although there have been many research works on the beneficiation reagent, Methods of detection of rare earth mineral are constantly being improved with the emergence of new technology and new updated equipment. Mineral Liberation Analyser (MLA), an automated mineralogy tool developed by the University of Queensland combines BSE image analysis with X-ray mineral identification. It quantitatively analyzes the mineralogy parameters and provides rapid and reliable mineralogical measurements. Epoxy resin (C105-B), graphite (G67500), curing agent (C205-B) and polishing solution (C40-6633) are analytically pure products and were purchased from Fisher Scientific Company in Canada. A Type-250 automatic MLA, equipped with back-scattered scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDXA) and MLA software, came from FEI Company in Australia. The S60AAW-6118 grinder was purchased from LOUIS Company in America. And the METPOL 2 V ore sample polisher was obtained from MetLab Company in Canada. The ore samples were sourced from a mine lot at Weishan in Shandong, and were smashed to −4 mm mineral powders in advance. Then twelve 20 g rare earth ore samples were taken and placed in a ball mill for wet grinding. The ore grinding time respectively was 15, 30, 45, 60, 75, 90, 105, 120, 135, 150, 165 and 180 s. Then 1.0 g dried mineral powder dried after grinding was respectively mixed with epoxy resin and curing agent. It was added to a plastic mold for mixing, heating and a 24 h placement, curing to get the MLA resin sample. Assumed polishing strength of the polisher was 30 N, the revolving speed was 200 r/min, and the abrasive paper grit was 300, 600, 800 and 1200 grit. Polishing solution was adopted successively to make further polishing treatment to the sample surface. The polished samples were cleaned, dried and covered with carbon and analyzed by MLA. Automated SEM-based image analysis was carried out on a FEI MLA 250 system. The instrument and image acquisition was controlled by the MLA software. The samples were analyzed with a grain X-ray mapping measurement mode (extended BSE liberation analysis, XBSE) at a magnification of 500 times. The analytical working distance during the measurement was 11.6 mm. The frame resolution was 500 pixels, the probe current was 10 nA and the overall electron beam accelerating voltage was 25 kV. Back scattered electron (BSE) image grey level calibration was set with epoxy resin as background (BSE grey value < 25) and gold metal as upper limit (BSE grey value > 250). The average values of multi-element analysis on the 12 ore samples are listed in Mineral composition and contents in the ore are presented in REEs in the ore mainly occurred in bastnaesite, carbocernaite, parisite and monazite in the form of independent minerals. Lanthanum occurred mainly in bastnaesite and parisite, with 73.73 wt% and 24.53 wt% respectively but minute quantities occurred in monazite. The cerium element mainly occurred in bastnaesite (at 47.86 wt%) and carbocernaite (at 44.04 wt%), but also occurred in parisite in a small amount. Cerium occurred in monazite in a minute quantity. Nearly all praseodymium and neodymium elements occurred in bastnaesite, and the specific distribution is listed in The distribution of barium and strontium in the ore is listed in After coarse grinding, the grain size of several main minerals was relatively big (shown in The association of main rare earth minerals in ore is presented in BSE images of Weishan rare earth ore are shown in Liberation curves of bastnaesite and carbocernaite were calculated according to the free surface area of grain as shown in Rare earth ore samples from Weishan mainly contain four light REEs with the total content being 6.49%. The REEs occur mainly in bastnaesite and carbocernaite in the form of independent mineral, and the contents of bastnaesite and carbocernaite are 5.96% and 12.30%, respectively. 73.73% of lanthanum occurs in bastnaesite and 24.53% in parisite; 47.86% of cerium occurs in bastnaesite and 44.04% in carbocernaite. Nearly all praseodymium and neodymium elements occur in bastnaesite. Except for REEs, valuable elements include strontium and barium with a content being 3.40% and 26.53%, respectively. And 67.34% of strontium occurs in carbocernaite, the rest of which occurs in celestobarite and strontianite. 92.71% of barium elements mainly occurs in barite, and slightly in carbocernaite and celestobarite. When grinding fineness is 78.42% passing 74 μm, the degree of liberation of bastnaesite and carbocernaite was 82.32% and 86.38%, respectively. The mineralogy parameters obtained by MLA have good theory guidance and reference value for further improvement of the beneficiation process and the recycling of other valuable minerals. The authors would like to thank Dr. Zhenghe Xu and Ms. Ni Yang of the Chemical and Materials Engineering Department of the University of Alberta for their assistance in the project.