The dissolution of synthetic brannerite in aqueous media at 40 and 90 °C under atmospheric redox conditions has been studied. At 40 °C, the presence of phthalate as a buffer component in the pH range of 2–6 has little effect on uranium release from brannerite. Bicarbonate increases uranium release and enhances the dissolution of brannerite. Compared to UO2, brannerite is more resistant to dissolution in bicarbonate solutions. In under-saturated conditions at 90 °C, the dissolution of brannerite is incongruent (preferential release of uranium) at pH 2 and nearly congruent at pH 11. TEM examinations reveal a polymorph of TiO2 (pH 2 specimen) and a fibrous Ti-rich material (pH 11 specimen) as secondary phases. XPS analyses indicate the existence of U(V) and U(VI) species on the surfaces of specimens both before and after leaching, and U(VI) was the dominant component on the specimen leached in the pH 11 solution.Brannerite (UTi Previously we have reported some experimental studies on the dissolution of synthetic and natural brannerite Synthetic brannerite was prepared by the alkoxide/nitrate route The powdered sample for the dissolution tests was prepared by crushing a monolithic sample to particle sizes between 75 and 150 μm diameter and washing with acetone to remove fines from the surfaces. The surface area was measured by the BET method as 0.08 m The IBT TEM specimens were prepared in the conventional manner, whereby a thin wafer, ∼0.5 mm thick, was sectioned from the bulk specimen using a sectioning saw. A disc (∼3.0 mm in diameter) was then cored from the wafer using an ultrasonic coring drill. The disc was further processed by mechanical thinning techniques down to a thickness of ∼80 μm and both sides polished to ∼0.25 μm. The disc was then dimpled on one side. This process introduced a polished concave surface in the disk, ∼15 μm thick at the centre, minimising the time required for ion milling, while still maintaining specimen integrity at the outer rim. The dimpled specimen was ion milled using a Gatan Precision Ion Polishing System (PIPS). The parameters set for milling were 4.5 keV Ar TEM was carried out with a JEOL 2010F equipped with a Link-ISIS Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) system, operated at 200 kV and calibrated for quantitative thin-film analyses using an extensive set of natural and synthetic reference materials The IBT TEM specimens were also analysed by XPS both before and after leach testing. XPS measurements were performed in ultra-high vacuum with a VG ESCALAB 220i-XL system employing a monochromatic Al K Batch equilibrium tests were carried out in polystyrene containers on a shaking bench (once per second) within an oven at 40 °C. A series of phthalate or bicarbonate solutions with concentrations ranging from 10 Dynamic dissolution tests for IBT specimens, described elsewhere The initial uranium release rate (at 10 min) is weakly dependent on phthalate concentration with the reaction order of 0.19 Over the experimental time period (20 days), uranium concentrations in solutions do not seem to reach saturation. However, titanium reaches apparent equilibrium after 7 days ( Uranium concentrations in solutions do not reach saturation ( Titanium releases, however, show no dependence on bicarbonate concentration at pH 8, either in release rate or equilibrium concentration (∼3 ppb), indicating that unlike phthalate at pH 4, bicarbonate does not interact strongly with titanium, either on the solid surface or in solution. For pH 2 solution, the cumulative elemental releases show linear relationships versus time ( In the case of pH 11 solution, the less linear and lower release of uranium than titanium ( The IBT specimen exposed to pH 11 solution at 90 °C for 4 weeks shows large areas of a fibrous secondary phase associated with the original brannerite ( Compared to the pH 11 specimen, the IBT specimen leached in pH 2 solution at 90 °C for 4 weeks shows large areas of apparently unaltered brannerite as well as a relatively small amount of secondary phase. The primary rutile grains appear to have been partially etched ( The two leached IBT specimens (in the pH 11 and pH 2 solutions respectively), as well as an unleached IBT specimen, were examined by XPS. C was the only impurity detected on the unleached specimen. The carbon signal was due to ubiquitous hydrocarbons present on all solid surfaces exposed to ambient air. The specimen leached in the pH 11 solution was found to contain U, Ti, O, C and a small amount of K and Ca on the surface. The source of K was from the leach solution (KOH) not having been rinsed off completely, while Ca was a minor contaminant in the leach solution (see above). The detection of Ca on the specimen surface (pH 11) is consistent with the results of TEM and solution analyses. The only impurities detected on the specimen surface leached in the pH 2 solution were C and a small amount of N; the presence of N was the result of HNO The binding energy of the U 4f As seen in The current and previous studies on the dissolution of synthetic brannerite in acidic solutions under atmospheric redox conditions revealed preferential release of uranium over titanium and polymorphous TiO Although phthalate can increase the solubility of titanium, it has no significant effect on the dissolution of brannerite in a pH 4 buffer solution under atmospheric condition since the dissolution of uranium is dominant and generally over 100 times higher than that of Ti. Bicarbonate at pH of 8 increases the uranium release rate and therefore enhances the dissolution of brannerite. The dissolution of IBT specimens in under-saturated conditions in pH 2 (HNO We thank M. Carter for fabricating synthetic brannerite and E.R. Vance for valuable comments on the manuscript.