Waste crab shells from sea food industrial processing, containing chitin and protein, showed a promising potential for metal binding. A binary biosorption system of chromate and vanadate with Acid Washed Crab Shells (AWCS) was studied at pH 2.5 and 0.1 M NaCl. AWCS showed a higher affinity for vanadate than for chromate at the concentration ratio of vanadium to chromium from 0 to 1.5 in the solution. The presence of chromate did not affect the vanadate uptake within the concentration range examined. However, the chromium uptake was reduced down to 40% in the presence of vanadate. The results indicated that vanadate could be selectively separated from the vanadate–chromate mixture with the AWCS material. Based on the model parameters regressed from the respective mono-metal systems, the developed multi-component Langmuir model reasonably predicted the interference of vanadate on chromate uptake. In addition, the mono-vanadium Langmuir model very well predicted the vanadium uptake in the chromium and vanadium binary system.Earlier work ( Biosorption of cationic metals in binary systems was quantitatively described by a multi-component Langmuir-type equation ( Raw crab shells: Waste crab-shells ( Acid-washed Crab Shells (AWCS): Raw crab-shell material was washed with 1 N HCl for 6 h to remove CaCO Solutions of chromium and vanadium were prepared by respectively dissolving analytical grade solid CrO 40 Equilibrium metal uptake (mmol/g). Metal initially loaded on the biosorbent (mmol/g). However, neither of the selected acid washed biosorbents in this study initially contained the selected metals such as chromium and vanadium ( Initial metal concentration (mM). Equilibrium metal concentration (mM). The dry net biosorbent weight (g). The working volume of the adsorption sample (L). Metal concentration: the total metal concentration in solution was determined with a sequential inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometer (ICP-AES, Thermo Jarrell Ash, Trace Scan). Protein in Under the experimental conditions whereby the solution pH was 2.5, the predominant forms of vanadate were colloid V As it has been demonstrated that either the total vanadium or chromium equilibrium uptakes with AWCS could be reasonably well described by the Langmuir-based isotherm ( The chromium uptake in a binary system is described as: The interference of vanadium with chromium binding is described as: The constant Then the mass balance for chromium binding sites will be: [ Chromium uptake Similarly, for vanadium uptake, Then vanadium binding constant Where [ The interference of chromium on vanadium binding is described as: Then the constant The mass balance of vanadium binding site is: The vanadium uptake When the interfering metal concentration is zero, the above Eqs. The developed multi-component Langmuir model is different from the multi-component Langmuir model used to describe biosorption of cations in binary systems ( The total chromium binding capacity [ The optimal combination of parameter sets was obtained by minimizing the objective function error: The experimental data of chromium and vanadium biosorption equilibrium in mono-metal systems were reported in an earlier study ( Furthermore, the total binding sites for chromium or vanadium as determined do not quantitatively correlate with the total protein nitrogen (1.9 mmol/g), chitin amide nitrogen 2.0 mmol/g or chitin amine nitrogen (0.6 mmol/g) in AWCS. In crab shells, chitin is cross-linked with protein at the interface which makes the shell structure very dense ( The biosorption of vanadate and chromate in a binary system was examined at pH 2.5 with 0.1 M NaCl present. The multi-component Langmuir model developed in this work was applied to this system. For prediction of the chromium uptake in the binary system, the model parameters of the total chromium binding capacity [ Similarly, to predict the vanadium uptake, the values of the total vanadium binding capacity [ It is difficult to experimentally obtain one-metal isotherms as affected by the presence of another interfering metal at a controlled specific equilibrium concentration. The correct and most illustrative way of quantitatively representing the biosorption equilibrium of a two-metal system is to construct a three-dimensional (3-D) sorption isotherm plot whereby the (one) metal uptake is plotted as a function of equilibrium concentrations of the two metals. In order to make an appropriate quantitative assessment of mutual metal interferences, experimental 3-D sorption isotherm surface plots need to be mathematically represented. The sorption model used for smoothing of the sorption isotherm surface makes it possible to eventually derive two-dimensional sorption isotherm curves from the complex 3-D image by cutting through it with a series of parallel “iso-concentration” planes for selected metal concentrations of one or the other metal, respectively ( To quantitatively describe the interference of vanadate in the uptake of chromate, the multi-component Langmuir Eq. A colloidal particle can develop erratic localized charges all over its surface from interactions with other ions in the solution ( Colloidal particles trapped inside the porous shell structure could prevent penetration of chromium species into AWCS and they cannot access the binding site. Colloidal particle retained chromate in the solution. Anionic V Cationic VO Similarly as in the As discussed in the A binary biosorption system of vanadate and chromate was studied by performing the adsorption experiments at pH 2.5 and 0.1 M NaCl. The results showed a higher vanadate affinity for AWCS than that observed for chromate. The presence of chromate did not affect the vanadate uptake when both metals were present. However, chromium uptake was severely reduced in the presence of vanadate. The results indicated that vanadate could be selectively separated from the vanadate–chromate mixture with AWCS. The suggested mono-vanadium Langmuir model very well predicted the vanadium uptake in the Cr–V binary anionic system. The developed multi-component Langmuir model for chromium uptake reasonably well predicted the chromium uptake in the Cr–V binary anionic system. The interferences of chromium and vanadium with each other's uptakes were quantitatively presented with the aid of the extended multi-component Langmuir model. Special thanks to Michael Sinclair, Sebastian Chabot and Elisa Navarro-Florez for their invaluable contribution in the experimental work, and to Dr. R.H.S.F. Vieira for the crab-shell material.