Purpose
                  To evaluate the quality of reduction, clinical outcomes and complications of associated both column acetabular fractures with posterior wall involvement that are treated through single ilioinguinal approach and fixation of posterior wall by lag screws only.
               
                  Methods
                  We conducted a retrospective review involving ninety-nine consecutive patients with associated both column fractures of acetabulum treated through single ilioinguinal approach. Patients were divided into two groups. The first group consisted of 35 patients presented with both column fractures with posterior wall involvement that fixation performed with lag screws. This group was compared to a second group of 64 patients with both column fractures without posterior wall involvement. The quality of reduction was assessed using criteria described by Matta. The size of posterior wall fragment was measured. Functional outcome was evaluated using Modified Postel Merle D’Aubigne score. Radiographs at the latest follow up were analyzed for arthritis (Kellgren-Lawrence classification), and femoral head avascular necrosis (Ficat/Arlet classification).
               
                  Results
                  The study showed no significant differences in all preoperative variables (P>0.05). While intraoperative blood loss and operative time in group 1 were increased compared to group 2, the difference was not statistically significant (P>0.05). The height, relative depth and peripheral length of posterior wall respectively were 27.8±2.5mm (range: 24–35mm), 71.5±5.4% (range: 65–88%), 23.0±2.3mm (range: 17–28mm). The mean posterior wall fracture displacement is 5.0±3.2mm (range: 0–11mm). There was no difference regarding the quality of reduction between the two groups (P>0.05). The excellent to good clinical outcome was around 71.4% in the group 1 versus 73.4% in the group 2 at the final follow-up, this difference was not statistically significant (P>0.05). There was no difference in rate of complications between the two groups (P>0.05).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Lag screws fixation of posterior wall through single ilioinguinal approach in associated both column fractures of acetabulum is a safe and effective method. Our results shown that the presence of posterior wall fracture in cases of associated both column fractures does not compromise the clinical outcomes.Fractures of the posterior wall of the acetabulum may be isolated or associated with injuries to other local anatomical structures. These associated injuries might be acetabular fractures, the most common being posterior column, transverse, or T-shape patterns. Because the femoral head directly strike on the posterior wall of acetabulum, and the posterior wall fracture frequently is multi-fragmentary and involves marginal impaction, or lesions of the femoral head Because of posterior wall involvement, some authors suggest that simultaneous Ilioinguinal and Kocher-Langenbeck approaches for the treatment of associated both column fractures The purpose of this study was to evaluate the quality of reduction, clinical outcomes and complications of associated both column acetabular fractures with posterior wall involvement that are treated through single ilioinguinal approach and fixation of posterior wall by lag screws only. Associated both column fractures with posterior wall fractures were compared to the ones without posterior wall involvement in a consecutive series. Approval from the ethics committee of the hospital was obtained prior to initiation of the study. Inclusion criteria were: acute fractures (<21 All operations were performed by one senior surgeon (Yan Zhuang,MD) who was experienced in acetabular surgery. Patients were positioned supine on a radiolucent table. General anesthesia was induced and antibiotics were administered within 30 Postoperatively, all patients received intravenously administered antibiotics for 24 Pre-operative and post-operative roentgenograms including anterior–posterior pelvis and Judet views were obtained along with computed tomography (CT) to assess fracture pattern, plan for surgery and evaluate the quality of reduction. Follow-up examinations were done systematically at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, 1 Clinical results were evaluated by the Modified Merle d’Aubigné score Radiographic results, including fracture pattern, quality of reduction, redisplacement of fracture and long term outcomes, were reviewed by one senior surgeon which is not involved in surgical care. Quality of reduction was estimated on AP pelvis and Judet views that taken immediately after surgery by Matta’s criteria For thirty-five cases with posterior wall involvement, pre-operative CT scan imaging was used to measure the height, depth, displacement, and peripheral length of posterior wall fracture fragment ( Complications including the development of heterotopic ossification, infection, postoperative nerve palsy, pulmonary embolism, hip arthritis, avascular necrosis of the femoral head, and loss of reduction were documented. Heterotopic ossification was classified according to Brooker et al. A radiological failure of joint was defined as the presence of post-traumatic osteoarthritis grade 4 and/or the presence of post-traumatic femoral head necrosis grade 3 or 4 and/or total hip replacement. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version 19.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois). Descriptive statistics were used to describe the clinical characteristics. Depending on the characteristics of the data, comparisons were performed using Mann–Whitney tests, or the chi-square test. A statistical significant difference was accepted for p-values of <0.05 Preoperative data from the 2 groups were compared, and the study showed no significant differences in all measured preoperative variables between 2 groups (all P In all cases with the hip congruency were restored. Nine (25.7%) reductions were graded as excellent, nineteen (54.3%) as good, and seven (20.0%) as poor in the PW+ group. Twenty (31.3%) reductions were graded as excellent, thirty-three (51.6%) as good, and eleven (17.2%) as poor in the PW- group. Anatomical reductions were more frequent in the PW- Group. However, the difference between the two groups was not statistically significant (X The average Modified Merle d’Aubigné score was 15.9 (12–18): categorized as excellent in 8 (22.9%), good in 17 (48.6%), fair in 9 (25.7%), and poor in 1 (2.9%) in the PW+ group. The average Modified Merle d’Aubigné score was 15.7 (10–18): categorized as excellent in 10 (15.6%), good in 37 (57.8%), fair in 14 (21.9%), and poor in 3(4.7%) in the PW- group. The excellent and good outcome was 71.4% in the PW+ group versus 73.4% in the PW- group. This difference was not statistically significant (X The size of posterior walls that fixation by lag screws. The height, depth, and peripheral length of posterior wall fracture fragment were respectively 27.8 Three patients (3%) had wound complications. One case in the PW+ group and two cases in the PW- group were presented with early postoperative wound infection. They are treated with debridement and irrigation and six weeks of intravenous antibiotic therapy according to culture and sensitivity. At the final follow-up, there was no recurrence of infection. Four patients developed deep vein thrombosis in the lower limb in the PW+ group (11.4%) and six patients in the PW- group (9.4%) and chemical prophylaxis was extended for 3 months. This difference was not significant (X Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve palsy was reported in four cases in the PW+ group and six cases in the PW- group, the difference between the two groups was not statistically significant (X At the final follow-up, three patients with severe post-traumatic arthritis according to Kellgren-Lawrence osteoarthritis classification system, one patient in PW+ group and two patients in PW- group. Two patients were on celecoxib when clinical outcome scores were assessed and require a total hip arthroplasty. The other patient in the PW- group refused any further surgical procedures. The difference between two groups was not significant (X Two patients in PW+ group, and three patients in PW- group had joint failure, this difference was not significant (X In addition, three patients (8.6%) in PW+ group, and two patients (3.1%) in PW- group had heterotopic ossification, but all were grade I. The difference was not significant (X All patients achieved radiological evidence of fracture union at 12 weeks of follow-up. None of the patients had loss of reduction at the final follow-up. In this study we reviewed the results of associated both column fractures with posterior wall involvement that are treated through single ilioinguinal approach. The posterior wall reduction was performed through additional dissection on the outer table of the ilium and fixation by lag screws placed from just lateral to the pelvic brim and directed posteriorly toward the superior iliac extension of the posterior wall fragment. We compared the results of patients with posterior wall involvement in associated both column fractures with those without posterior wall involvement in a consecutive series. Both column fractures typically occur in high energy trauma and most of these patients had associated injuries. Gansslen et al. Our results showed that there was no significant difference in rate of anatomical reductions between the two groups (PW+ and PW−). The rate of poor reduction in the PW+ and PW- groups were respectively 20.0% and 17.2%. This was mostly due to a gap between the anterior column and low posterior column, and not due to the residual displacement of posterior wall fragment. Gansslen et al. Our results also showed that the excellent to good clinical outcome was 71.4% in the PW+ group versus 73.4% in the PW- group at the final follow-up, and a joint failure was diagnosed in 5.1% of the patients, this difference was not statistically significant. Gansslen et al. Because of posterior wall involvement, reduction and fixation was performed, and then the stability of posterior wall was checked under fluoroscopy. It is expected that when posterior wall is involved in an associated both column fracture, it will require more operative time and will result in more intraoperative blood loss. This is consistent with findings the current study, but there is no significant differences compared to patients without posterior wall involvement. Iselin et al. Although determination of hip stability can be challenging in patients with posterior wall acetabular fractures, it is more stable when remaining wall size is large enough to maintain the femoral head within the acetabulum In this case series we observed that high rates of lateral femoral cutaneous nerve palsy postoperatively with both column treated through single ilioinguinal approach, this is possibly due to excessive traction intra-operatively, but there was no significant difference between the two groups. Limitations of our study are certainly the retrospective nature of the register study and its limited statistical power due to the rather small number of cases which drawn from a database containing not only patients presenting to our institution in the context of major trauma, but also those referred in from other institutions to us as a tertiary pelvic and acetabular center. This may explain why the time to surgery was long in the cohort. This study also had relatively short length of follow-up to evaluate progression of osteoarthritis. Although our results showed that both column fractures that treated through single ilioinguinal approach have equivalent outcomes whether or not the posterior wall is involved. It should be noted that the posterior wall fragment was large and amenable to treatment through the single ilioinguinal approach. If perfect reduction not achieved by this technique, dual surgical approach remains as an option for reduction and fixation of posterior wall fragment. Each author certifies that he has no commercial or any other associations that might pose a conflict of interest in connection with the submitted article.