In this paper, a two-step acid leach process for the extraction of aluminium from coal fly ash has been conducted using an acid leach-sinter-acid leach technique. The technique was formulated based on the dissimilar response characteristics of the amorphous and mullite alumina phases present in coal fly ash. The amorphous phase is reactive and soluble in inorganic acids while the mullite phase is refractory, not amenable to inorganic acids, and requires phase transformation before leaching. Sintering of the coal fly ash residue from the first leaching stage was carried out using a mixture of CFA with calcium carbonate. Results presented in this paper show that, sintering of coal fly ash residue from the first leaching stage successfully transformed most of the mullite phase alumina into a leachable plagioclase phase which completely dissolved in sulphuric acid during the second leaching stage. The results further show that the two dissimilar alumina phases can be processed separately by a novel acid leach-sinter-acid leach technique for alumina extraction from coal fly ash as investigated in this work. This study has also revealed that by employing this technique, coal fly ash can be optimally leached. The implications of the findings are that this could provide an alternative economic process for recovering alumina from readily available secondary resources such as coal fly ash.Coal fly ash as received from the thermal power plant. Coal fly ash solid remains separated by filtration from the leached slurry mixture. Heat-treated residue-CFA at high temperature (1150 The global demand for metals ( For the extraction of aluminium from non-bauxitic high silica materials such as CFA, acid leaching is generally preferred because acid routes have the advantage of silica being substantially insoluble in acid ( It is important to note that CFA contains two dissimilar phases, amorphous and mullite, which play a key role in alumina dissolution kinetics ( Although the acidic and alkaline single-step leaching of CFA and other alumina bearing materials has been a subject of much study in recent years, information on the separate leaching of the amorphous and mullite alumina phases in CFA is limited. This study is based on the concept that the two dissimilar alumina phases present in CFA when leached separately, using sulphuric acid in an acid leach-sinter-acid leach process, will improve aluminium extraction efficiency from both phases. The CFA material used in this study was provided by Kendal Power Plant, a division of Eskom, South Africa. The CFA sample contained 30.52 The CFA was characterized by investigating the surface morphology, phase mineralogy, particle size and chemical analysis. The particle size analysis was done by physically screening the samples using test sieves (Fritsch, Germany) of various screen sizes within the range of 38 All reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. Sulphuric acid (98% Coal used in this study was obtained from Matla Collieries, South Africa. It was crushed and finely ground to 100% passing 212 moisture, 20.25% volatiles, 68.20% fixed carbon, 7.23% ash and 1.05% Al. The Thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) was used to determine the contents of the coal. In order to identify and optimize significant factors influencing the aluminium extraction process, leaching using a statistical design of experiments (DOE) and optimization tests using the response surface methodology (RSM) were carried out. A detailed experimental procedure, the subsequent results obtained and analysis and discussion of the results have been documented in a previous study ( The sulphuric acid leaching experiment consisted of a 500 This experimental procedure was used for both the first and second leaching stages using the conditions mentioned in Raw CFA (as obtained from the power station) was leached without any pyrometallurgical pretreatment and according to the acid leaching procedure described in The CFA-residue from the first leaching stage, fine coal (100% passing 212 Approximately 100 The sintered pellet powder was leached as per the acid leaching procedure described in Mineralogy analysis shows that CFA contains two alumina phases, amorphous and mullite. A computation of phase distribution using a combination of XRD and XRF techniques revealed that Eskom CFA contains 27.8% alumina in the amorphous phase and 72.2% in the mullite phase. Chemical composition, mineralogical phases, morphology and particle size distribution (PSD) of the Eskom CFA are presented in In the preliminary screening experiments ( The first leaching stage extraction profile of raw CFA is presented in The effect of sintering on the phase mineralogy of CFA-residue is presented in The amorphous phase is a composition of some non-crystalline alumina and non-alumina constituents. The decrease in the amorphous phase from 45.79% to 23.03% may have been mainly due to some of the unleached amorphous alumina phase reacting with CaO and quartz to form plagioclase. In addition, the decomposition and consequent loss of some volatile non-alumina constituents during sintering could have contributed to the decrease in the amorphous phase. The decrease in the mullite phase from 32.53% to 8.02% is mainly attributed to the reaction between mullite (3Al The decrease in quartz from 14.31% to 6.6% is mainly attributed to the formation of plagioclase and cristobalite, a high temperature polymorph of silica which has the same chemical formula, SiO The decrease in both the hydrous and non-hydrous calcium sulphate (gypsum) is possibly due to the reaction between calcium sulphate and calcium aluminate to form calcium aluminosulphate which may have reported to the amorphous phase. When used as an addition to limestone in the pelletization mixture, CaSO The effect of leaching on post-sinter CFA material was analyzed by examining the extraction profile and mineralogy changes. Aluminium extraction results from the second leaching stage are presented in Further tests need to be conducted to look at the optimum parameter levels for the second acid leaching stage. Due to the high acid levels in the leach liquor arising from the first leaching stage, test works were conducted to see if the first leach stage liquor (leachate) could be used to leach out some of the aluminium from the sintered CFA material (second leaching stage). The efficient utilization of the acid in the process would help cut down on reagent costs. The results are presented in The effect of second leaching stage on the phase mineralogy of the sintered residue-CFA is shown in The increase in the amorphous content from 23.03% to 52.9% is most likely due to insoluble non-crystalline phases produced from the plagioclase phase reporting to the amorphous phase. The fractional increase in mullite after the second leaching stage may be attributed to other insoluble substances reporting to the residue. However, the actual mullite content before and after leaching is expected to remain the same because mullite is insoluble in inorganic acids. Results, presented in The complete disappearance of the plagioclase phase (CaO·Al The actual quartz content before and after leaching is expected to remain the same because quartz is substantially insoluble in inorganic acids. The increase in calcium sulphate precipitate is possibly arising from the reaction between sulphate and calcium ions from the plagioclase and other phases. The combined aluminium extraction from the first and second leaching stages was calculated and results are given in  The purpose for the study was to investigate CFA sintering and leaching response characteristics using a two-stage acid leach technique so as to propose and develop an alternative process technology for the production of smelter grade alumina. The purpose of the first leaching stage was to extract the easily accessible aluminium from the acid-soluble amorphous phase before CFA pre-treatment. The objective for the CFA pre-treatment was to transform the un-extracted alumina in the mullite phase into a leachable phase. The aim for second leaching stage was to extract aluminium from the transformed mullite phase (plagioclase). The results from the experimental work revealed the following: The sintering of residue-CFA successfully transformed most of the mullite phase into a leachable plagioclase phase all of which underwent dissolution during second leaching stage. This shows that the sintering of residue-CFA is vital to mullite transformation and subsequent alumina extraction. The plagioclase phase formed from mullite transformation has high solubilization characteristics indicating that this is the key driving factor in the second stage alumina extraction process. An overall aluminium extraction of 88.2% was achieved from leaching CFA using combined first and second leaching stages at an acid concentration of 6 The first leaching stage lasted for 10.2 The acid leach-sinter-acid leach technique achieved relatively higher aluminium extraction of 88.2% from CFA compared to 85% obtained from the conventional lime-sinter method. Leach liquor from stage one could not effectively leach sintered residue-CFA in the second leaching stage indicating that the leach liquor may not have been sufficiently strong to achieve effective extraction. The recycled leach liquor may have been weakened by leaching other metals other than Al. Kendal Power Plant, a division of Eskom (RSA), and Matla Collieries (RSA) are gratefully acknowledged for the coal fly ash and the coal used in this study. Birkenmayer (Pty) Ltd. is gratefully acknowledged for the assistance rendered with the pelletization of coal fly ash. The National Research Foundation of South Africa and the Carnegie Foundation are gratefully acknowledged for their financial contribution to the research.