Composting has been identified as a viable means of reducing the environmental impact of antibiotics in manure. The focus of the present study is the potential use of composting on the degradation of salinomycin in manure prior to its field application. Manure contaminated with salinomycin was collected from a poultry farm and adjusted to a C:N ratio of 25:1 with hay material. The manure was composted in three identical 120L plastic containers, 0.95m height×0.40m in diameter. The degradation potential for salinomycin was also ascertained under open heap conditions for comparison (control). Salinomycin was quantified on HPLC with a Charged Aerosol Detector, at an interval of every 3days. The salinomycin level in the compost treatment decreased from 22mgkg−1 to 2×10−5
                     μgkg−1 over 38days. The corresponding decrease in the control was from 27.5mgkg−1 to 24μgkg−1. The changes in pH, EC (dSm−1), temperature, total kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN), total potassium (TK), total phosphorus (TP) and carbon content in both the composting and the control samples were monitored and found to be different in compost as compared to the control. During the composting process, the loss of TKN was 36%, which was substantially lower than corresponding loss of 60% in the control. The loss of carbon was 10% during composting, whereas the loss in the control was 2%. In composting, the temperature modulated from 27°C (initially) to a high of 62.8°C (after 4days), and then declined to 27.8°C at the end of 38days. On the basis of the results obtained in this study, it appears that the composting technique is effective in reducing salinomycin in manure.The use of antibiotics in the veterinarian sector can be divided in two main categories: therapeutic and prophylactic or as growth promoters. It is estimated that in the United States alone more than 12.0 thousand tonnes of antibiotics were sold for animal use in 2006, 4.6% of which was used for growth promotion ( In the United States, land application is the most common method for manure disposal following its storage in lagoons or pits ( Ionophores are the single, most widely-used group of antibiotics for veterinary purposes. According to a survey in 2001, 3520 metric tonnes of ionophoric compounds were administered to animals in the United States ( Due to hydrophobic inclination, salinomycin is likely to persist in environmental solid phases. In one study, the concentration of salinomycin was found to be approximately 500 times higher in sediment than in the water column ( It has been reported that for manures kept in lagoons, the concentrations of some antibiotics can be stable for up to 150 Instead of developing technologies to enhance the degradation of antibiotics in soil and to prevent them from contaminating surface and ground water, a more effective and practical solution might be found to reduce environmental contamination from veterinary antibiotics. It might be more effective to eliminate the antibiotics in the manure before it is applied to agricultural land as fertilizer ( Salinomycin (98% pure) was obtained from Sigma Aldrich Company. The characteristics of salinomycin are presented in To avoid contamination, all glassware were prewashed with acetone, baked at 250 The tests were conducted under laboratory conditions using three identical 120 The poultry manure was collected from a commercial poultry farm in Saint Sophie, Quebec. The manure was analyzed for moisture, carbon and nitrogen content from which a C:N ratio was calculated ( Five grams of the homogenized sample were placed into a 250 The extraction efficiency of salinomycin was determined with three matrices (water, manure and straw). A one gram mixture of dried manure and straw (triplicates) was weighed and spiked with the salinomycin 0.5, 1 and 5 All compost materials were analyzed using standard methods ( Using the extraction and HPLC–CAD procedure, the retention time for salinomycin was 3.4 The initial concentration of salinomycin in the compost sample was 22 The removal of salinomycin was modeled using a first-order equation In the context of this paper, half-life calculation includes microbial and chemical degradation as well as intra-particle diffusion. Antibiotic removal appears to follow the first-order decay function ( Temperature evolution in the composting bins and the control is shown in In compost, the initial value of pH was 6.71. It increased to a maximum value of 8.74 on day 12, and then gradually declined in value to 8.15, recorded on day 38 ( Electrical conductivity values increased from 5.5 to 8.2 The total N in composting decreased from 12.98 to 8.32 The total C decreased from 46.84% to 42.23% (loss 10% of initial amount) ( The degradation of salinomycin was observed under open (control) and composting conditions. Different factors (pH, temperature, microbial enzymes, and microorganism) thought to be involved in the composting process resulted in a 99% reduction of salinomycin concentration over 38