Archaeobotany, ethnographic observation, and laboratory experimentation are brought together to build model sequences of grape processing parallel to the better studied and reported sequences in existence for cereal processing. A set of such model sequences is developed and presented, and explored in the context of rich archaeobotanical assemblages from the Hellenistic farmstead at Komboloi in Southern Macedonia. We conclude that the remains of pressed grapes are reasonably distinctive, whereas whole grapes and raisins can leave similar material in charred state, requiring close scrutiny for secure separation. Our model sequences are further considered in the light of other sites in which Vitis remains have been variously interpreted, and our own reinterpretations offered.Ethnographic studies on crop processing have proven a valuable source of models for the interpretation of archaeobotanical material. They have demonstrated how cereals are commonly processed according to a certain rational and ordered sequence A few areas in Greece where non-mechanised agricultural practices are still in use also provide an opportunity to look at major perennial fruit crops such as the grape vine and elucidate the processing sequence from harvest to the consumption of the fruits or wine. In this paper, we bring together archaeobotanical data, ethnographic studies and laboratory experiments to develop model pathways for grape processing and wine production with special reference to Hellenistic Greece. The archaeobotanical focus of this paper relates to excavations at the site of Komboloi, at the area of Pieria Southern Macedonia ( The rooms to the south and west were probably workrooms and residential rooms for the ancillary staff, and perhaps also for animals. The main rooms of the house seem to have been in the north and east wings. A robustly built cellar was excavated in the east wing of the house. The storage area was attached to the living quarters to the west and contained only storage vessels ( Samples (90%) comprise varying quantities of charred grape pips. Fragments of whole fruits were also found but only in a limited number of samples. Vine wood charcoal was also recovered in large quantities in different areas of the farmhouse. Although the archaeobotanical data strongly suggest grape processing, no installations have been found at the excavated area to support that interpretation of the farmhouse. Such installations may be situated in the unexcavated area of the site or in the surrounding ‘ The first of these samples was taken from a very large The second sample came from the area between and around The third sample derives from the immediate vicinity of the second sample. The plant remains are sparse but still interesting. Two parts of two whole grapes ( The large number of Different early sources of information are available on production, storage and consumption of wine. Winemaking installations have been discovered on many prehistoric and classical sites in Greece and there is rich evidence of ceramic vessels specifically connected with wine storage. The installations are of diverse types but they share a common feature: a raised pressing vat or pressing bed having a spout or angle which would lead the flow of the must to a lower vessel or catchment area ( The Linear B tablets offer detailed information about the way the Mycenaean palaces dealt with wine Ancient writers, both Greek and Roman, also provide information about the winemaking procedures and the cultivation of the vine. In the texts, numerous instructions are given on how to make good wine and how to add the right flavourings. They specify the best way to store products and characterize different wines in relation to their place of production, variety of grapes, colour, taste and ways of being processed Analysis of organic residues from the inside of ceramic vessels has indicated that Minoans and Mycenaeans were storing wine in Increasing information on the production of wine is today coming from archaeobotanical data on A different approach towards the study and understanding of ‘wine culture’ is the study of agricultural practices in the last century (50–80 years ago). Different ethnographic studies describe in great detail the installations and equipment used, the harvest of the grapes and the winemaking sequence from different rural areas of Greece Ideally, ethnographic work is based on practices observed in areas not too distant from the sites to which the models are to be applied. Following this principle turned out to be quite a challenge as there are now only few places in Greece where wine is being made using non-mechanised methods. Even in rather isolated villages mechanised equipment has been introduced to assist farmers in the cultivation and processing of their products. Visible evidence of this rather recent development is evident from the frequent finds of grape processing installations in ruins and utensils abounded in the middle of the fields. It is possible to get an impression of the former social and economic importance of local wine production in the area of Rethymno on Crete where almost every house in now deserted villages had permanent winemaking installations in their courtyards. Foot treading of grapes to extract the must was documented in a household in the small village of Asi Gonia, where non-mechanised methods are still used in food production. The procedure recorded in late September, from the harvest onwards was quite simple. The owner's family and friends, both women and men, harvest bunches of grapes the same day, using knives comparable to ancient ones found in Hellenistic sites To return to the present ethnographic work, in the village of Asi Gonia, the grape harvest was loaded into the ‘ The must is then transported in the plastic vat to the next-door cold cellar and poured without further sieving into a The procedures for making white and red wine are shown schematically in In addition to making detailed records and notes on these observed contemporary procedures and associated equipment, samples of grape remains were taken from each processing stage – from the initial treading by feet until the grape must was left to ferment. The composition of the collected samples is shown at The samples deriving from the modern plastic container (equivalent to the ancient It provided an interesting lesson that one person's account could not necessarily be generalised across their own society, let alone applied to the past. Along with the collected samples, whole grapes were obtained from the vineyard in Asi Gonia and raisins from the Mesoxorio village. During transport to England, the samples were kept in a cooling bag and later in a cold room to keep them fresh and moist before the experimental charring at the laboratory in Cambridge. Different studies on charred remains of cultivated and wild vine have demonstrated that the moisture content in the plant and fruit and the oxygen level during charring could influence the dimensions and morphology of the grape seeds as well as their preservation Our own work suggests that grape remains react differently according to temperature and length of exposure to heating. Moisture content and atmosphere conditions play an important role since grape remains may enter a cultural deposit in both fresh and dry state depending on the type of activity in which they are involved. Also, charring may take place in a building or ceramic vessel where oxygen would be deficient. With these points in mind, we submitted a range of plant parts to experimental carbonisation: pressed grapes, pips, ( The variables considered were as follows. A portion of the pressed grape remains was heated overnight at 55 Some samples were charred in open containers (recorded as ‘oxidised’) while others were loosely wrapped in aluminium foil to simulate an oxygen deficient atmosphere during charring, (recorded as ‘reduced’). Grape remains were heated in a Lenton furnace as long as needed for the majority to be completely charred, when they had turned black (7.5 YR 2.5/1). The minimum temperature is 250 The temperature and the duration of the charring are given in The experimental work described was done in order to observe the effect of temperature, time, moisture content and oxygen exposure on the plant remains under charring. The aim was not to observe the alterations in shape, size or volume but simply to record the preservation and destruction of botanical components under different combinations of these variables. Some general trends are presented in The higher the temperature, the greater the impact on morphology in both reduced and oxidised conditions. The high moisture content of the ‘wet’ samples in combination with insufficient duration of exposure to heating and the reduced atmosphere resulted in some cases in resistance to charring. Only moist samples in reducing conditions are more resistant to charring than oxidised and ‘dry’ samples. However, it was always possible to identify individual patterns. The case of exposed endosperms is interesting. In some occasions, the archaeobotanical samples had a very dark brown colour (Munsell 7.5 YR 2.5/3) and when the outer coat of the pip was partly missing, this difference was distinct. For this reason, grape pips of the experimental samples were artificially broken revealing that the endosperms had a very dark brown colour in pips charred in reduced conditions at low temperatures (250–300 The most substantial thermal transformations were seen on grapes and raisins, at both reduced and normal oxygen levels. The temperature and the duration of the charring are given in Again, some general trends can be noted. In an oxygen deficient atmosphere, the grapes shrink and attain an appearance similar to fresh raisins and in most cases their skin is charred. The juice evaporates but solid residues are deposited as a thin charred crust, which occasionally has patches of a dark brown/‘caramel’ colour ( This is difficult to identify archaeobotanically and can be misinterpreted or even overlooked. In oxidised conditions, grape size is a significant factor affecting preservation. For this experiment, mostly large grapes were used (16 Less frequently, the pulp is released from the breaks in the ruptured skin and subsequently charred and is very fragile, but also some pulp stays attached to the skin. The pips are not always charred when the skin breaks but they attain a dark brown colour (Munsell 7.5 YR 3/3–3/4). Occasionally, pips are released as well, after which they are separately carbonised. The oxygen and temperature levels in combination with the duration of heating alter the preservation stage of the grapes. Therefore, in reduced conditions, even in high temperatures the grapes did not char at all owing to the limited time of exposure to heating. In reduced conditions some grapes release their juice, which gets carbonised, shrink and imitate fresh raisins ( Both wrinkled ( However, the distinction between charred grapes and raisins is problematic (cf. Nevertheless, self-inflated raisins could be differentiated from large fresh grapes since the later tend to rupture and expose their ‘pulp’ whereas this tendency has not been observed in the raisins. It is, however, very difficult to distinguish them from charred, fresh and small grapes. Some characteristic features may help to distinguish between them. The skin of self-inflated raisins is generally tough and smooth with a ‘shiny’ outer shell while the skin of charred fresh grapes tends to be more fragile, covered with thin lines ( The pulp of raisins has a different structure from fresh grapes: the pores are smaller and more compact ( In order to determine the taphonomical impact of flotation the experimental samples were exposed to flotation processing. A range of experimentally charred samples including robust as well as more fragile looking remains was selected. The charred remains were mixed with soil and gravel to an approximate volume of 12 Flot 1 grapes survived intact and only the charred pulp in the form of a ‘caramelised crust’ was broken in considerably smaller pieces. But, the split and extremely fragile fragments floated and could be retrieved and identified. Only a very small piece did not float but was recovered and identified from the heavy residues. Fruits from Flot 2 preserved their morphology and did not crack. In some of the grapes, however, a small part of skin with attached charred pulp (porous acellular mass) was detached but it was not destroyed and could be identified separately. In Flot 3, one of the self-inflated raisins broke during mixing with the soil before it was placed in the flotation equipment. The retrieved pieces were well preserved and identifiable. The pips too were intact and the stalks were undamaged. Only the skin was in some cases partly damaged or missing, leaving exposed the porous charred pulp. However, the ruptured raisins did not float, possibly indicating incomplete carbonisation. However, when the outer coat of a charred plant component ruptures, it is possible for water to enter the pores of the remains during flotation. As a result, it becomes waterlogged and may not float (Jane Renfrew, personal communication). The remains from Flot 4 were expected to be more fragile. However, they survived without damage to their original morphology apart from some parts where the outer skin was missing. In Flot 5, stalks and skins survive very well but some of the pips did not float and were recovered instead from the heavy residues. Even in one case that a pip was attached with a piece of skin, they were at the same condition after the treatment. Alternatively, some skins broke to very small pieces that were not easily identifiable. The results from Flot 6 are similar. Pips and stalks survive intact and some of the skins are very fragile and break to unidentifiable tiny pieces while others did not loose their morphology. Although an effort was made to replicate the impact of excavation and post-excavation analysis procedures on plant remains, the influence of these factors is thought to be far greater than indicated during these experiments. Various attempts have been made to relate archaeological The ethnographic and experimental results discussed in this paper lead to the following interpretations of various finds of If numerous grape pips with moderate presence of pressed skins and pedicels are found there are three interpretations that can be put forward depending on the archaeological context of the find: If found in These remains from a If found in a different archaeological context from a If a mixture of numerous pips, large peduncles, rachis, pedicels and pressed skins is found it may be argued that these archaeobotanical remains correspond to: by-products of grapes pressed for any kind of wine kept to be used as a fertilizer. by-products of must of rose/red wine. Sparse evidence of small immature whole grapes can be also found in this archaeobotanical assemblage. The experiments taken for this study showed that charred skins have a tendency to break up during flotation and possibly are expected to be found in minor quantities that one would expect to find. If this archaeobotanical mixture is found in storage vessels, they can represent: by-products of must for the production of rose/red wine before the cleaning of the storage vessel. by-products of must of rose/red wine stored to be used for the distillation of a stronger alcoholic drink, such as When this archaeobotanical mixture is found in other, possibly open areas they can also be interpreted as by-products, kept to be used for fertilizer and fuel. If small quantities of grape pips are found loose, they probably represent the by-products of eating whole grapes or raisins. If embedded whole fruits are found, occasionally with attached or loose pedicles, the interpretation depends on the stage of survival of the plant remains. Entire intact fruits may derive from either inflated raisins or whole relatively small grapes. If whole burst fruits found, they are most likely represent whole grapes and not raisins. A carbonised and preserved ‘wrinkled’ whole grape could either be a raisin charred in low temperatures in both reduced or oxidised conditions or a grape in its original fresh state, charred in reduced conditions and limited period of time. Caramelised crust is also a good indicator of the heating of fresh grapes. The experimental work demonstrated that the remains of pressed grapes could be identified relatively easily in the archaeobotanical record as they can be compared with the modern samples derived from the ethnographic work. On the other hand, the distinction between grapes and raisins is more complicated and it can become even more problematic when only fragmentary material is recovered. Consequently, more work needs to be done on these elements in order to discover further characteristics useful for interpretation. Turning to the archaeobotanical remains from Komboloi, the sample derived from the huge It could represent the by-products of must of white wine. The must would have been sieved from the pressed grapes to remove the vast majority of peduncles, rachis and pedicels along with the pressed skins, traces of pulp and grape pips. However, in a Alternatively, the A third possibility may also be put forward. If a red wine was to be produced the must would have been kept together with the stalks, pips and skins for an initial fermentation. Afterwards, skins, stalks and pips are removed and the must is then transferred to a vessel to continue the fermentation. After the fermentation is over, the vessel is sealed and the product is a red wine. The plant remains from Komboloi could then represent the by-products of a sieved must for the production of red wine or wine dregs, with the grape pips representing ‘escapes’ from the sieving. The presence of resin could indicate resinated wine. It is possible since resinated wine has been identified from the Mycenaean and Minoan period For the whole grapes, three explanations can be put forward: Self-inflated raisins, which were kept in the cellar, in a container made of an organic material that did not survive archaeologically, and subsequently mixed with the Crushed raisins intentionally mixed with the wine, a practice recorded from the ancient sources as a means to increase the sweetness of the wine Whole fresh grapes, possibly hanging from the ceiling and later mixed with the Scanning Electric Microscope examination of skin and pulp provide information that allows us to analyse and classify different characteristics within a functional model or framework. Skin and porous mass of broken modern charred grapes and raisins were compared to the archaeological finds from Komboloi. The archaeological specimens have more compact structure with small holes while the skin is smoother and lacks the fine lines that can be seen on the grape skin ( In addition, whole grapes cannot be stored for long and large quantities are more probably stored as raisins. Raisins are more prone than fresh grapes to enter the archaeological record, as they can be stored over longer periods in dry form A number of published interpretations of archaeological We would like to thank Mrs E. Poulaki-Pandermali, currently Director of the Ephorate of Palaeoanthropology and Speleology of Northern Greece, for giving permission to study the material from Komboloi and for using the excavation plan. We are grateful to the families of Giorgos Psixoundakis and Giorgos Plimakis at Asi Gonia and Klinakis at Mesoxorio in Crete, who provided the information for the ethnographic work and Dr. L. Janik for her help during the experimental work. We would like to thank Dr. Jane Renfrew, Dr. A. Clapham and Dr. M. Madella for their comments on a previous draft of this paper. We are indebted to Gates Cambridge Trust for the financial support of the project.