The Kamoa resource, located in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, contains an array of copper sulphide minerals which are present as small grains, averaging 10–27μm. An initial flowsheet was developed in 2011/12 for the prefeasibility study that was robust enough to handle flotation of all the copper sulphide minerals. Copper recoveries of the flowsheet were 85.4% for the hypogene ore and 83.4% for the supergene ore. Further work on the flowsheet required reduction of the SiO2 grade of the concentrate, which at 19.1% negatively affected the downstream smelter processing, and also required improvement to copper grades and recoveries given the high grade of the ore. When new sample material became available as part of the Phase 6 drilling program, a fundamental reassessment of the ore and its flotation behaviour was conducted. Although mineralogical characterisation of the ore and liberation of the sulphides was quantified in previous phases of work, there was little understanding of the kinetics of each of the copper sulphide minerals and how they performed in the flowsheet. Comprehensive flotation kinetic tests at various primary grind sizes were performed. The corresponding timed concentrates of the three best performing grinds were characterised by QEMSCAN on a size-by-size basis to fully understand the flotation kinetics and liberation characteristics of the various copper sulphides. A simple and practical recovery model using minerals, particle size and liberation and association was developed from these data, and various flowsheet configurations were simulated. These simulations led to some robust process implications completely rearranging the flowsheet from the previous iteration into a more simple and economic configuration with better performance. The modelled data was confirmed with practically achieved data, extending the use of process mineralogy as a valid, predictive tool in process design. Additionally, the simulations using mineralogical, reduced empirical flotation testing needed to develop the new flowsheet.The utilisation of process mineralogy has been widely accepted and reviewed as an almost essential requirement in a range of scales of today’s ore characterisation, projects, and operations improvement programs ( It is widely known that flotation kinetics of sulphide minerals are affected by their particle size. The particle size distribution presented to the flotation circuit by the grinding and classification circuit, influences flotation performance to a large extent ( The Kamoa resource is located 25 An initial flowsheet was developed that processed both hypogene and supergene ores and has been described by The fine grained nature of the Cu sulphides led to the development of an MF2 (mill float mill float) based flowsheet with 75 Three items were identified for further work at this point: The grade of SiO Given the high grade of the ore, averaging 3.3% Cu, better metal recoveries should be expected. The most significant Cu losses are reported in the scavenger tailings at 11.7% of the mill head for hypogene ore and 14.7% of the mill head for supergene ore Mineralogical characterisation shows almost 60% of these losses are locked in coarse particles >25 The extensive grinding required to achieve the recoveries described implies significant capital and operating expenditure. A conventional approach to achieving satisfactory liberation be taken in primary grinding, would have led to uneconomic grinding costs. Instead, an approach was taken of partial liberation at the primary grind together with the use of a mixed collector system to more effectively float the middling and liberated particles. In view of this, a new phase of work was undertaken with the goal of producing a new, simpler and more economic flowsheet. The objectives of the new flowsheet included: Process both hypogene and supergene ore to final concentrate, improving upon Cu grades and recoveries produced by the initial flowsheet of 28% Cu grade and Cu recovery >83%. Dilution by SiO Improve scavenger tailings grade to 0.4% Cu (targeting % Cu loss). To address these objectives a flowsheet program was set up to answer the following questions: Are there sufficient liberated Cu sulphides recovered in the early stages of rougher flotation to warrant a separate cleaner circuit that does not require regrinding? Could a single-stage grind and modified rougher float effectively replace the more complex and expensive MF2 arrangement? What primary grind would be suitable? The presence of coarse locked Cu sulphide losses are known to occur in the scavenger tailings. What strategy can be employed to minimise these and to maximise recovery? New drill core material was available for this program that represented the first 5 The blended composite was baselined against the original flowsheet shown in Rougher flotation tests were completed at primary grind d80 sizes of 150  The 38 Full size-by-size mineralogical analysis was completed upon the six rougher concentrates and the rougher tailings of the kinetic tests performed at 106 There is textural association between the various Cu sulphide minerals, all of which are targeted for recovery to the same concentrate. Consequently, the kinetic data were reviewed with a combined Cu sulphide mineral grouping that disregarded the liberation of Cu sulphides from each other. The Cu sulphide recovery was assessed on the basis of liberation class (calculated as area percent of Cu sulphide within a particle) as per XPS Consulting & Testwork Services standard liberation criteria. The liberation of Cu sulphides in the recalculated feed is shown in The cumulative recovery of Cu sulphides at 10  Grade and recovery data of the kinetic tests show losses to the rougher tailing between 8.3% and 17.1% depending upon primary grind. The Cu sulphides reporting to this stream showed an average grain size of 8 The mineralogical kinetic data shows that sufficient liberated Cu sulphides are available early in rougher flotation and that a bypass circuit that does not require regrinding would be the first stage in simplifying the complex MF2 flowsheet arrangement. Locked Cu sulphides reporting to the rougher tailing in coarse particle sizes represent significant recovery opportunity that should be captured by the new flowsheet. For the revised flowsheet, the set points for primary grind and rougher retention time were simulated using three potential flowsheet arrangements ( On the basis of the kinetic test mineralogical data, a rougher by-pass concentrate that would have sufficient liberation to be upgraded in cleaning without the need for regrind is possible. Most liberated Cu sulphides are recovered following 10 The majority of the Cu values in the rougher tailings are associated with particles greater than 25 The 3 The rougher tailing Cu grade and % Cu loss following 10 The undersize discard fraction exceeds the target Cu grade of 0.4% when a middlings or scavenger flotation stage is omitted. A satisfactory discard stream that is at or near target Cu grade is anticipated only after a scavenger float and a fine particle separation. Based on the flowsheet simulations using the mineralogical data, a flowsheet configuration incorporating the following is recommended: A 3 Scavenger flotation to a total float time of 40 Rougher/scavenger tailing be scalped at 38 With mineralogy forming the basis of flowsheet design, experimental implementation centred on variation of the rougher float time for the by-pass cleaning circuit and the rougher middling circuit. Other experimental parameters included lower density flotation, reagent optimisation and combined versus separate regrinding of the rougher middlings concentrate with the coarse particles from the scavenger scalping circuit. The flowsheet in Performance of the revised flowsheet upon the blended composite is summarised in Process mineralogy through simple flotation kinetic testing in conjunction with comprehensive size-by-size automated mineralogical data has played a significant role in advancing the Kamoa flowsheet. This practical approach was able to provide a complete mineralogical dataset that could be simulated and modelled to guide the direction of flotation testing. The mineralogical data allowed the simulation of ore performance through various flowsheet configurations prior to the commencement of laboratory testwork. The confirmation of the modelled data against the practically achieved grades and recoveries through a similar flowsheet configuration, extends the use of process mineralogy as a valid predictive tool into process design. Obtaining mineralogical data to understand flotation kinetics by mineral liberation and particle size for modelling and simulation, can potentially be more cost effective than empirical testing for the first stages of flowsheet design. The new Kamoa flowsheet reached with this methodology incorporates a single primary grind and a single regrind to replace the former MF2 arrangement and thereby reducing projections for both capital and operating costs. The Cu recovery is improved by addressing losses of fine Cu sulphide locked in coarse particles to the tailing. Final concentrate Cu grade exceeds the target of 28% and the SiO Further work on the Kamoa flowsheet is currently investigating sacrificing the recovery gain on the rougher tailing scalp for a gain in competency of the tailings for backfill purposes. This further simplifies the flowsheet. Associated variability testing is also being performed. The authors would like to express their appreciation and thanks to the management of XPS Consulting & Testwork Services and of Ivanhoe Mines Ltd. for permission to publish this work. Rougher kinetic flotation tests were performed by M. Burns.