Geothermal Heat Pumps, or Ground Coupled Heat Pumps (GCHP), are systems combining a heat pump with a ground heat exchanger (closed loop systems), or fed by ground water from a well (open loop systems). They use the earth as a heat source when operating in heating mode, with a fluid (usually water or a water–antifreeze mixture) as the medium that transfers the heat from the earth to the evaporator of the heat pump, thus utilising geothermal energy. In cooling mode, they use the earth as a heat sink. With Borehole Heat Exchangers (BHE), geothermal heat pumps can offer both heating and cooling at virtually any location, with great flexibility to meet any demands. More than 20 years of R&D focusing on BHE in Europe has resulted in a well-established concept of sustainability for this technology, as well as sound design and installation criteria. Recent developments are the Thermal Response Test, which allows in-situ-determination of ground thermal properties for design purposes, and thermally enhanced grouting materials to reduce borehole thermal resistance. For cooling purposes, but also for the storage of solar or waste heat, the concept of underground thermal energy storage (UTES) could prove successful. Systems can be either open (aquifer storage) or can use BHE (borehole storage). Whereas cold storage is already established on the market, heat storage, and, in particular, high temperature heat storage (> 50 °C) is still in the demonstration phase. Despite the fact that geothermal heat pumps have been in use for over 50 years now (the first were in the USA), market penetration of this technology is still in its infancy, with fossil fuels dominating the space heating market and air-to-air heat pumps that of space cooling. In Germany, Switzerland, Austria, Sweden, Denmark, Norway, France and the USA, large numbers of geothermal heat pumps are already operational, and installation guidelines, quality control and contractor certification are now major issues of debate.First, some clarification is needed on abbreviations that will be used frequently throughout the text: GSHP Ground Source Heat Pump BHE Borehole Heat Exchanger (in the USA, the term Vertical Loop is common) UTES Underground Thermal Energy Storage Most European countries cannot boast abundant hydrothermal resources that could be tapped for direct use (with the exception of, e.g., Iceland, Hungary, and France). The utilization of low-enthalpy aquifers to supply district heating to a large number of customers is limited so far to regions with specific geological settings. In this situation utilizing the ubiquitous shallow geothermal resources in de-centralized GSHP systems is an obvious option. Correspondingly, a rapidly growing field of applications is emerging and developing in various European countries. The outcome is a rapid market penetration of such systems; the number of commercial companies operating in this field is on the increase and their products have reached the “yellow pages” stage. The climatic conditions in central and northern Europe, where most of this market development took place, are such that by far the greatest demand is for space heating; air conditioning is rarely requested. Therefore, unlike “geothermal heat pumps” in the USA, the heat pumps in Europe usually operate mainly in the heating mode. Installation of GSHPs in southern Europe, in particular in Greece and Western Turkey, has only very recently gone beyond the demonstration stage; the first GSHP pilot plant with BHE was installed in Greece, with Swiss technical support, in 1993 ( Ground Source Heat Pumps (GSHP), or Geothermal Heat Pumps, are essentially a combination of a heat pump and a system for exchanging heat with the ground ( groundwater wells (“open” systems) borehole heat exchangers (BHE) horizontal heat exchanger pipes (including compact systems with trenches, spirals etc.) “geostructures” (foundation piles equipped with heat exchangers) Experimental and theoretical investigations (field measurements and numerical model simulations) have been conducted over several years to elaborate a solid base for the design and performance evaluation of BHE systems (see A typical BHE-installation is shown in The ratio of useful energy to electricity consumption of a heat pump at given operating conditions is defined as the “Coefficient of Performance” or the COP. The COP depends on the temperature of the input water from the ground circuit, which depends on geological conditions (thermal and hydraulic parameters of the underground, climatic setting) and technical parameters (length and type of ground heat exchanger, material, type and quality of grouting, etc.). Other factors that affect the COP of a heat pump are the heating/cooling load, the type of building heating/cooling system and the relevant supply temperatures. Since, at depths below about 10 m, the ground temperature is constant throughout the year (depending on prevailing weather conditions or ambient temperature) and increases slightly with depth beneath the ground surface, BHEs show better performance and energy efficiency than horizontal ground heat exchangers. In the USA, the Water-Source Heat Pump Engineering Committee conducted laboratory tests comparing efficiency ratings under the different standards for a variety of models. These results, which correspond to units with rated power of less than 40 kW, indicate that the existing ARI standards specify minimum COPs for ground loop heat pumps of 2.5 for heating and 2.9 for cooling. The Committee's recommended adjustment to the minimum efficiency requirements proposed for water-source heat pumps under ASHRAE 90.1, as of 2001, are 3.1 for heating and 3.9 for cooling for ground loop systems. Values from similar measurements in Europe, mainly in the Swiss heat pump test centre in Töss, already show substantially higher ratings. For a source temperature of 0 °C, COP values close to five can be achieved for a 35 °C heating supply temperature, and COP values of 3.5 for a 50 °C supply temperature (see Although the maximum COP of existing ground source heat pumps is around 4.5, their mean COP during operation is lower. This mean COP, usually called “Seasonal Performance Factor” (SPF), is defined as the mean COP during operation and varies at around SPF=3.0–3.8. Where high quality standards are applied for all components of a geothermal heat pump system and also an optimum building heating system exists, values of SPF=4.0 can be achieved; in these cases no domestic hot water can usually be provided by the heat pump. When using BHEs, the length required for a given power output greatly depends on soil characteristics, including temperature, moisture content, particle size and shape, and heat transfer coefficients. Correct sizing of the BHEs is, as always, a cause for design concern, and special attention is also paid to minimising interference between neighbouring BHEs. Key points are building load, borehole spacing, borehole fill material and site characterisation. Due to the high capital costs involved, over-sizing carries a much higher penalty than in conventional applications. Two important technical developments of recent years should be mentioned in this respect: the Thermal Response Test, which determines the thermal parameters of the underground in situ; the use of grouting material with enhanced thermal conductivity. In a thermal response test ( Thermally-enhanced grouting material has been available in the USA for approximately 10 years and can now also be purchased in Europe. Its use can lead to a significant reduction in borehole thermal resistance ( The problems often encountered with BHE design include inadequate address of flow, pressure drop and control parameters, leaks associated with corrosion of fittings, poor workmanship, as well as the selection of pipe materials and of the crculated heat transfer fluid. All of the above require the expertise of an engineer and contractor qualified in the installation of ground source heat pumps, which represents a significant barrier to their market penetration. In countries with higher sales of geothermal heat pumps (e.g. Sweden, Switzerland and Germany), technical guidelines, contractor certifications, quality awards, etc. are beginning to be set into force to protect the industry and the consumers against poor quality and insufficient longevity of geothermal heat pump systems. Existing geothermal heat pump features make them suitable only for operation with low-temperature heating systems, which more or less limits their application to new buildings, as they are not designed to meet the high supply–temperature demands of the older heating systems installed in many buildings all over Europe. The heat pumps that provide hot water to feed fan-coils, floor heating, or low-temperature radiators usually heat a water flow from 40 to 45 °C, which circulates within the heating system of the buildings with a maximum temperature of 50 °C. The higher the temperature of the supply water, the lower the COP of the heat pumps. The standard and maximum temperature test values for liquid entering the indoor side of water-to-water systems are 40 and 50 °C, respectively, as per ISO 13256-2, and a maximum of 55 °C in some European guidelines. The above upper temperature limits in commercial heat pumps limit their application to low-temperature heating systems such as fan-coils, low-temperature radiators or floor heating. The traditional heating systems installed in many buildings all over Europe, however, generally comprise a fossil-fuel boiler and standard radiators, i.e. a high-temperature heating system. These radiator systems were designed to use hot water of 80–90 °C with a temperature drop of 10–20 °C. As commercial heat pumps are designed to provide water up to 50 or 60 °C with a temperature drop of 5–6 °C, their installation in existing buildings entails total replacement of the high-temperature heating system with a low-temperature heating system, including substituting the radiators with fan coils or other advanced systems and installing larger-diameter pipes. A heat pump capable of delivering 65 °C water has recently been developed in Switzerland (SATAG/Viessmann; It is rather difficult to find reliable numbers for installed heat pumps in Europe, and in particular for the individual heat sources.