 There are two broad classifications for hydraulic transportation depending on whether the particles in the slurry can settle under the influence of the gravitational field or whether they are held more or less permanently in the suspension because of the rheological properties of the slurry itself. Slurries in these two classes are referred to as settling or heterogeneous and non-settling or homogeneous respectively. Non-settling slurries usually exhibit non-Newtonian behavior while settling slurries reflect the rheological properties of the pure carrier fluid. When a settling slurry is transported significant gradients in the solids concentration develop under the influence of gravity. The solid particles that are present in the slurry generate additional momentum transfer processes that must be considered when developing models for the transfer of momentum from the slurry to the pipe wall. The presence of solid particles increases the rate at which momentum is transferred between the fluid and the containing walls of the conduit. The transported particles frequently strike the walls and in so doing transfer momentum to the wall and dissipate some of their kinetic energy. The particles also transfer some of their momentum to the fluid if they are moving faster than the fluid in their neighborhood and receive momentum from the fluid when moving slower than the fluid in their neighborhood. These processes ensure a continuous exchange of momentum between the fluid and the walls, between the fluid and the particles and between the particles and the wall. This is illustrated in The net result of this model is the existence of an additional path through which momentum can be transferred from the fluid to the solid wall and that is the indirect path from fluid to particles and from particles to the wall. This path acts in parallel with the direct transfer path from the fluid to the walls. This additional transfer mechanism leads to an increase in the pressure drop This is expressed quantitatively in terms of the dimensionless group A friction factor for the slurry can be defined analogously to The frictional dissipation of energy is given by The value of The tendency that the solid particles have to settle under the influence of gravity has a significant effect on the behavior of a slurry that is transported in a horizontal pipeline. The settling tendency leads to a significant gradation in the concentration of solids in the slurry. The concentration of solids is higher in the lower sections of the horizontal pipe. The extent of the accumulation of solids in the lower section depends strongly on the velocity of the slurry in the pipeline. The higher the velocity the higher the turbulence level and the greater the ability of the carrier-fluid to keep the particles in suspension. It is the upward motion of eddy currents transverse to the main direction of flow of the slurry that is responsible for maintaining the particles in suspension. At very high turbulence levels the suspension is almost homogeneous with very good dispersion of the solids while at low turbulence levels the particles settle towards the floor of the channel and can in fact remain in contact with the flow and are transported as a sliding bed under the influence of the pressure gradient in the fluid. Between these two extremes of behavior, two other more-or-less clearly defined flow regimes can be identified. When the turbulence level is not high enough to maintain a homogenous suspense but is still sufficiently high to prevent any deposition of particles on the floor of the channel, the flow regime is described as being heterogeneous suspension. As the velocity of the slurry is reduced further a distinct mode of transport known as saltation develops. In the saltation regime, there is a visible layer of particles on the floor of the channel and these are being continually picked up by turbulent eddies and dropped to the floor again further down the pipeline. The solids therefore spend some of their time on the floor and the rest in suspension in the flowing fluid. Under saltation conditions the concentration of solids is strongly non-uniform. The flow regime depends strongly on the size and density of the particles that make up the slurry. For example, a higher level of turbulence is required to keep larger and heavier particles in suspension than is required for smaller and less dense particles. The four regimes of flow are illustrated in The relationship between frictional pressure gradient and the slurry velocity varies from regime to regime and they can be delineated approximately in the particle size – slurry velocity space as shown in The saltation and heterogeneous suspension regimes have been studied most widely and the best known correlation for the excess pressure gradient due to the presence of solid particles in the slurry is due to Durand, Condolios and Worster. The pipe Froude number is a dimensionless group that indicates the relative strengths of the suspension and settling tendencies of the particles in the slurry.  The Durand–Condolios–Worster correlation for the excess pressure gradient is  Use the Durand–Condolios–Worster correlation to calculate the pressure gradient due to friction when a slurry made from 1-mm silica particles is pumped through a horizontal 5-cm diameter pipeline at 3.5 m/s. The slurry contains 30 per cent silica by volume. The density of silica is 2700 kg/m  Use the toolbox to get the drag coefficient at terminal settling velocity as shown in Use the toolbox to get the value of the friction factor  The occurrence of this minimum in the pressure drop vs velocity curve has significance for slurry pipeline design. Clearly there is no merit in operating a pipeline at a velocity below the minimum because that would incur more energy loss at lower capacity. A rule of thumb that can be used is to choose the velocity to be approximately 20 per cent larger than the velocity at minimum pressure drop. The velocity at minimum pressure drop is easy to calculate by finding the point on the curve that has zero slope. The variation of In practice it is more usual to choose the diameter of the pipe that will transport a given quantity of slurry at minimum pressure drop. In this case, the solution is slightly different and is obtained by substituting for Setting the derivative with respect to  Calculate the diameter of the pipeline that is required to transport, at minimum pressure gradient, 120 tonnes/hr of silica sand as a slurry at 30 per cent  The average velocity in the pipeline is While the Durand–Candolios–Worster correlation is useful in the heterogeneous suspension flow regime, it deviates more and more from actual conditions in the other regimes of flow. Experimental observations have shown that different correlations should be used in each of the identifiable flow regimes. Although this is a logical approach it is not straightforward to apply. The main difficulty arises because it is not easy to define the boundaries between the flow regimes. These boundaries are poorly defined because they are based on visual observations of particle motions in small laboratory pipelines. Many researchers have attempted to establish correlations among the relevant experimental variables that can be used to define the boundaries of the flow regimes. These attempts have met with only limited success and an approach developed by Using the experimental data, Turian and Yuan established that the excess pressure gradient in each flow regime can be correlated using an equation of the form  Saltation (Regime 1) Heterogeneous suspension (Regime 2) Homogeneous suspension (Regime 3) Turian and Yuan designate regime 0 as stationary bed but do not make a distinction between the condition in which the bed remains stationary and does not slide and that in which the bed slides along the lower inner surface of the pipe wall under the influence of the pressure gradient. Both conditions are included in regime 0. The distinction between the stationary bed and the sliding bed is strongly emphasized in the stratified flow model that is discussed in Fairly consistent trends in the variation of the correlating parameters can be seen in the four correlations. The influence of the Froude number becomes less pronounced as the flow changes from the sliding bed regime through saltation and heterogeneous suspension to homogeneous suspension. This reflects the decreasing influence of the particle settling process on the momentum transfer, and hence frictional dissipation, as the suspension becomes more homogeneous. Notice that the exponent on the Froude number is always negative. The exponent on The boundaries of the flow regimes are defined in a self-consistent manner by noting that any two regimes are contiguous at their common boundary and therefore each of the two correlation equations must be satisfied simultaneously. For example, the boundary between the sliding bed regime (Regime 0) and the saltation regime (Regime 1) must lie along the solution locus of the equation  The regime transition number for transitions between regime 0 and regime 1 is defined by These numbers define the boundaries between any two flow regimes It is usual to define the regime boundaries on a plot of particle size against slurry velocity. Leaving aside the problem of constructing the regime boundaries for the moment, it is possible to identify the regime that applies to a particular set of physical conditions quite simply from a knowledge of the transitions numbers These inequalities must be tested for the combinations of The applicable flow regime can be identified quickly and easily using  Use the Turian–Yuan correlation to calculate the pressure gradient due to friction when a slurry made from 1-mm silica particles is pumped through a horizontal 5-cm diameter pipeline at 3.5 m/s. The slurry contains 30 per cent silica by volume.  The first step is to determine the flow regime. Use the toolbox to get the drag coefficient at terminal settling velocity. Use the toolbox to get the friction factor for water. Calculate the transition numbers. Using  These calculations are tedious and the FLUIDS toolbox provides a alternative for evaluating the transitions numbers and the friction factor (see Compare this result with that obtained in illustrative example 4.1, which is based on the Durand–Condolios–Worster correlation. Sometimes it is necessary to have an accurate picture of the entire flow regime diagram for a given slurry in a particular pipeline. This type of plot is illustrated generically in  Display the flow regime plot for a 30 per cent by volume silica sand slurry that is pumped in a 12.3 cm diameter pipe.  The inner surface of pipes that carry slurries wear smooth very quickly so the pipe wall roughness is taken to be zero. Notice how the flow regime plot as shown in Although the correlations that are described in the previous sections provide a self consistent approach to the calculation of the excess pressure gradient due to the presence of the solid particles, it is by no means certain that the correlations for the individual flow regimes are satisfactory under the full range of conditions that are of interest in industrial applications. The boundaries of the four flow regimes that are well defined in terms of the defining empirical equations for the relative excess pressure loss, do not have corresponding sharp transitions in real slurry pipelines. An alternative approach is based on a continuous transition from fully stratified flow at low velocities to fully suspended or heterogeneous flow at higher velocities. This approach is described in When the particles in the suspension are comparatively large and the velocity not too large, most of the particles settle to the bottom of the pipe and are transported as a sliding bed. Most of the solids are supported on the bottom of the pipe as contact load. The movement of this bed is resisted by the mechanical friction between the particles in the bed that are up against the pipe wall and the pipe wall. The resisting force can be calculated as Two forces act to move the bed along the wall: the frictional drag caused by the carrier fluid moving above the bed and the body force that acts on the bed caused by the pressure gradient in the direction of flow. The pressure gradient acts on the cross-sectional area of the bed as shown in Fully stratified flow is not usually encountered in practice although it may be an advantageous mode of transport under some circumstances. An analysis of the sliding bed behavior provides information on an important design constraint called the limit of stationary deposition. This is the velocity below which the bed ceases to slide and is thus clearly a lower limit for the slurry It is convenient to define the solid concentration relative to the solid volume fraction in a loosely packed bed of particles, Particles that are monosize and approximately spherical in shape have The volumetric concentration of solids that has the maximum deposition velocity can be calculated from (Wilson  The locus of stationary deposit velocities for two typical situations are shown in The excess pressure drop due to the energy dissipation between the solids in the bed and the pipe wall can be conveniently related to the pressure gradient that would be measured in a horizontal pipe filled with slurry at the loosely packed concentration The relative excess pressure gradient is defined by  The asymptotic limit of ζ at high velocities ζ The relative excess pressure gradient is shown as a function of The PGDTF for fully stratified flow can be conveniently calculated from these relationships The application of this method is demonstrated in illustrative example 4.6.  This example is based on Case Study 5.2 in When dredging cohesive clays, the cutter head shaves off slices of clay which emerge from the pump discharge as fist-sized lumps, roughly spherical in shape, and about 100 mm in diameter. These lumps are transported as a slurry through a steel pipeline of 0.70 m internal diameter from the dredger to a disposal area. Calculate the pressure gradient in the horizontal pipeline and the energy dissipation due to friction. Data:  Calculate the critical concentration and velocity: Because Compare this with the slurry velocity in the pipeline, This is well above The relative velocity is The relative excess pressure drop can now be calculated. The plug flow pressure gradient is These calculations are straightforward but tedious, and they can be avoided by using the stratified flow feature in the FLUIDS toolbox as shown in the The friction factor of water flowing in the pipe is The pressure gradient when transporting the dredger output is Heterogenous flow conditions exist when most of the particles are supported by the fluid and the contact load between settled solids on the pipe wall is negligible. The particles are suspended only when the average velocity is high. At high fluid velocities the particles can be distributed more or less uniformly across the pipe cross-section and the slurry behaves as a homogenous fluid. Between the condition of fully stratified flow that was described in the previous section and homogeneous flow there is a more or less continuous transition through conditions when the slurry is heterogeneous or partially stratified with the particles concentrating in the lower regions of the pipe. The solid particles contribute a steadily decreasing fraction of a total energy dissipation as the slurry becomes more homogenous. In this section, The method is based on the fractional increase in pressure gradient due to the presence of the solid Φ decreases as the average velocity of the slurry in the pipe increases. Suspended solids are transported more efficiently than contact load and this causes the decrease in the excess frictional energy dissipation as velocity increases. An empirical correlation that has been proposed by  The terminal settling velocities are calculated using any of the methods that are described in  Two typical cases are shown in The method is demonstrated in illustrative example 4.7.  Calculate the pressure gradient due to friction when a slurry of sand in water having Use the FLUIDS toolbox to get the terminal settling velocities for particles of size 0.63 mm and 0.74 mm, respectively. Use the FLUIDS toolbox to get the friction factor for the carrier fluid. The FLUIDS toolbox can be used to obviate the need for all the calculation that is associated with these empirical expressions. The data input screen is shown When the flow is vertical, the solids settle in a direction parallel to the average direction of motion of the slurry. As a result the collisions between particles and wall are very much less frequent than in horizontal pipelines. Thus the additional momentum transfer paths shown in The energy dissipated per unit mass of slurry in a segment of vertical pipe is calculated as follows. Consider a segment of the pipe that contains Since   Here ρ The water flows through the interstices of the slurry and the frictional drag on the wall is due to the liquid alone. Because the solid settles relative to the water at the local settling velocity, the velocity of the water is greater than that of the solid and greater than the mean velocity of the slurry in segments of the pipeline where the flow is upward. This greater velocity of the water must be used in assessing the pressure drop of the liquid. In the following, it is assumed that the local settling velocity is equal to the terminal settling velocity. This assumption may severely restrict the validity of the method when flow is turbulent but the assumption is ameliorated somewhat by the use of only average velocities rather than the local turbulent eddy velocity. The volume fraction of solids in the vertical section, Let Consider any cross-section of a vertical segment: Water volumetric flowrate Solid volumetric flowrate  The volume fraction of solids leaving the system is given by Any two of the four variables can be calculated from Once The effective density of the slurry in the vertical pipe segment is The following cases are important in practice:    Substituting for Note that   From The required pipe diameter and the frictional dissipation of energy can be calculated using The particle population will exhibit a distribution of particle sizes and particle density. The principle to be adopted under these conditions is that each particle type has its own terminal settling velocity Volumetric flowrate of the water = The total volumetric flowrate is influenced by the settling velocities of all the particles and using The volumetric fraction of solid particles of type The two important types of problem are solved as follows.   From  From which The volumetric fraction for species A convenient iterative solution starts with an estimate of At convergence the velocity of the water can be recovered from  When  By a process similar to that used to develop This equation can be used in place of At convergence the average slurry velocity can be calculated from Use the FLUIDS toolbox to implement these solution methods.  Calculate the flowrate of slurry through 200 m of smooth horizontal pipe, having internal diameter 13 cm, under a pressure drop of 5.4 bar. The friction factor for water can be calculated from Data: Particle size 100 µm. Particle density 2670 kg/m Density of water 1000 kg/m Viscosity of water 0.001 kg/ms Slurry is 30 per cent by volume 1 bar = 10 Use the FLUIDS toolbox to calculate the flowrate using the Turian–Yuan correlations. The following expressions have been found to apply for calculating the pressure drop when a wood-chip slurry is pumped through a horizontal pipeline. Calculate the power required per meter of pipe length to pump The slurry contains 20 per cent wood by volume and has density 980 kg/m The New Zealand Steel iron sand slurry pipeline has the following design specifications: Operating velocity = 3.9m/s Concentration = 48.5 wt per cent solids Solid specific gravity = 4.76 Mean particle size = 120 µm Pipeline inside diameter = 187.4 mm The pipeline is constructed in two sections of 9.2 km and 8.8 km respectively. Calculate the design tonnage for solids delivered by the pipeline. Calculate the pressure gradient due to friction and the power consumption required to overcome friction when the pipeline operates at the design capacity. Use the following values for the properties of water Density of water = 1000 kg/m Viscosity of water = 0.001 kg/ms 4410 t/h of sand are to transported as a slurry in a 25.6 inch ID pipeline at a concentration of 20 by volume. Calculate the required slurry velocity and the pressure gradient due to friction. Data: Density of the sand = 2700kg/m Density of water = 996 kg/m Viscosity of water = 0.798 cP.   Your company wishes to design a hydraulic transport system for waste metal stampings in the form of small metal platelets. Two shapes are made in the ratio 33 to 67 by mass. These are identified as types A and B respectively. Terminal settling velocities for the two shapes were measured and are 199mm/s and 227mm/s respectively. A 47 per cent by volume slurry of the stampings is pumped upward through a vertical Pipe diameter is 2.5 cms Density of water = 1000 kg/m Viscosity of water = 0.001 kg/ms Choose a suitable pump for this application and specify the pump motor power required if the stampings must be lifted through 11m. What quantity of stampings can be transported? Calculate the rate of energy dissipation due to friction when 800 m Data: Density of water = 1000kg/m Viscosity of water = 0.001 kg/ms. A pump having generalized pump characteristic constants At what speed must the pump run to deliver 800 m What power does the pump draw when running under the conditions specified in section 5(c) above? Repeat questions 5(a)–5(d) but the fluid is now a settling slurry containing 43 per cent by mass of spherical silica particles of size 0.5 mm. In part (a) the pipe may be considered to be horizontal over its whole length. In part (c) the pipe consists of 77 m of horizontal and 23 m of vertical pipe. The density of silica is 2700 kg/m All possible regime boundaries calculated for a slurry in a horizontal pipeline are shown in The two vertical sections in laboratory pumping loop are 294 cm long. The fluid under test flows upward in one leg and downward in the other. Pressure gauges are installed at the top and bottom of each leg. Calculate the difference in pressure registered by the pressure gauges across each leg when water flows in the loop at 2.19 m/s. The internal diameter of the pipe is 2.60 cm. Repeat the calculation of section 8(a) when a limestone slurry flows through the loop. The slurry contains 42 per cent by mass limestone which has a density of 2730 kg/m  Cross-sectional area of pipe m Volume fraction of solids in slurry. This is the concentration that is discharged from the pipeline. Concentrations in individual segments of the pipe may be different. Volume fraction. Drag coefficient at terminal settling velocity. Solid concentration relative to Critical deposit concentration relative to Critical deposit concentration. Volume fraction of solids for loosely packed bed. Pipe diameter m. Energy dissipated by friction J/kg. Frictional force between settled bed and pipe wall Normal force exerted by settled bed on pipe wall Froude number. Friction factor for the slurry. Friction factor for the carrier fluid. Acceleration due to gravity m/s Slurry pressure gradient (hydraulic gradient) m water/m pipe. Slurry pressure gradient when flowing as a plug at concentration Slurry pressure gradient m slurry/m of pipe. Pipe length m. Concentration of slurry in a vertical segment of the pipe. Volume fraction. Volumetric flowrate of slurry m Transition number between regimes Specific gravity of solid. Average velocity of slurry in pipe m/s. Limiting velocity for stationary deposition in a horizontal pipe m/s. Maximum value of Average water velocity in vertical pipe segment m/s Terminal settling velocity m/s. Pressure drop due to friction for carrier fluid alone Pa. Excess pressure gradient relative to Coefficient of friction between settled bed and pipe wall. Viscosity of carrier fluid Pa s. Density of solid kg/m Density of slurry kg/m Density of carrier fluid kg/m Fractional increase in frictional pressure drop due to presence of particles. Constant in Durand–Condolios–Worster correlation.  The analysis using separate correlations for the four flow regimes is due to The stratified flow model is based on the work of The treatment of flow of settling slurries in vertical pipes is based on