Ore breakage characterisation plays an essential role in the design and optimization of comminution circuits. Recently, the JKMRC comminution research team has developed a Rotary Breakage Tester (JKRBT) for rapid particle breakage characterisation tests. The JKRBT uses a rotor–stator impacting system, in which particles gain a controlled kinetic energy while they are spun in the rotor and are then ejected and impacted against the stator, causing particle breakage. The first industrialised JKRBT was installed at Anglo Research in Johannesburg in March 2007, and six more JKRBTs were deployed in 2008 around the world. This paper discusses the major design and calibration issues encountered in the JKRBT development and findings from detailed experimental studies.Mining companies have long recognized that the performance of a comminution machine such as a crusher or an autogenous/semi-autogenous grinding (AG/SAG) mill depends not only on the machine operating conditions, but also on the “hardness” of the feed material to be broken. This is very much exemplified at the OK Tedi Mine in Papua New Guinea, where the SAG mill throughput varied from 700 Particle breakage characterisation aims to quantify the product size distribution which results from the application of energy to a selected feed size via a specific breakage mechanism. Specifically it aims to establish the relationship between specific energy input and resultant product through some type of laboratory test on a given ore ( Recently, the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC) comminution research team has developed a Rotary Breakage Tester (JKRBT) for rapid particle breakage characterisation tests. The major issues encountered in design, calibration and development of this breakage characterisation machine are discussed in this paper. The laboratory breakage characterisation tests can be roughly classified in two broad groups based on their primary breakage modes: tumbling and impact/compression. The Bond ball/rod mill tests ( A number of impact breakage testing devices have been developed at the JKMRC for comminution research and commercial service: Twin pendulum ( Drop Weight Tester (DWT) ( Automated Linear Impact Comminution Evaluator (ALICE) ( Mini-Drop Weight Tester ( Short Impact Load Cell (SILC) ( Since all tests using the Twin pendulum, DWT, Mini-Drop Weight Tester, ALICE, or SILC are conducted on single rock specimens positioned manually on the anvil or flat surface, they are both time-consuming and expensive. For the test to remain practical the rock samples being tested are limited to 10–30 pieces for each size fraction, which inevitably throws into question the statistical validity of the derived ore characteristics. This was a significant limitation in meeting the emerging needs of comminution research. DEM simulations of the impact energy distribution pattern in an AG mill operation have revealed that small energy impacts occur much more frequently than high energy impacts ( The concept of using kinetic energy to crush rocks seemed like a viable alternative for rapid breakage characterisation, since it no longer requires the positioning of rock specimens manually on the anvil. Industrial applications of this concept are found in Vertical Shaft Impact (VSI) crushers and laboratory pulverizers, which employ a rotor–stator impacting system. However, both of these devices are employed merely for particle size reduction, not for breakage characterisation, as the exact amount of energy applied in the process is not well controlled or measured. In the past it was often regarded as difficult to impact particles at predetermined conditions using kinetic energy. Questions were raised regarding the influences of the rotor–stator design on the actual impact velocity, the influence of particle properties on impact energy determination, the effect of secondary breakage of particle fragments, etc. So it was suggested that any machines using the kinetic energy concept may work in a chaotic way and may generate uncertain results ( Work in modelling hammer mills ( A paper published by The SynchroCrusher development, also based on the kinetic energy concept ( In response to the body of evidence supporting the use of kinetic energy, the JKMRC research team led by Shi and Kojovic decided to investigate in detail the feasibility of using the kinetic energy concept for particle impact breakage characterisation. The investigations were focused on: What factors affect the particle impact velocity in the device? How to precisely control impact energy using the kinetic energy concept? Can the breakage device be used for rapid ore characterisation? How reproducible are the breakage characterisation results? This paper highlights the investigations and analysis undertaken to address these questions. In 2005 a prototype JKRBT ( The operating system consists of a vibrating feeder, a rotor–stator impacting device with its drive system, and an operation control unit. In the rotor there are four guiding radial channels. Particles of the selected size are fed into the rotor–stator impacting system via a vibrating feeder, and are randomly distributed into one of the guiding channels. The particles are accelerated in the channel and ejected from the circumference of the rotor. The particles impact the surrounding anvils with a velocity which combines the tangential and radial velocity components. After impact breakage, the product is collected from a container underneath the rotor. Twelve months of detailed investigation were undertaken using a high speed video camera to study the prototype JKRBT under various operational conditions and treating different ore samples. The findings confirmed that the JKRBT kinetic energy approach may be applied for rapid particle breakage characterisation. The outcomes of the prototype JKRBT study was reported to the sponsors of AMIRA (Australia Mining Industry Research Association) P9N project in June 2006. The positive feedback received from mining companies has prompted the JKMRC to validate the device and a new breakage model ( The industrialised JKRBT employs a rotor 450 The base frame incorporates several proximity switches to ensure that the machine cannot be operated unless all sub-systems are ‘control healthy’ and the lid is securely latched. A spring-loaded safety rail is mounted to the Base Frame and surrounds the Anvil. Any foreign objects which may prevent the lid from closing correctly or present a hazard to the operator will depress this safety rail and cause the lid to reopen. This unit can treat particles up to a size of 45 A couple of teething problems were encountered during the commissioning of the first industrialised JKRBT, related to the vibrating feeder jamming and a small leak in the hydraulic fluid system. No safety concerns were reported by Anglo Research. The operating issues were evaluated by RME resulting in some design changes in the March 2008 release. These changes include the: hydraulic fluid re-circulation system, particle feeding system, and number of rotor guide channels.  Six units of the V2 design JKRBT were deployed around the world, including: Anglo Platinum (Mogalakwena, formerly PPL Mine, South Africa). Barrick Gold (installed at JKMRC for one year until final site selected). BHP Billiton (Newcastle, Australia). JKMRC (Brisbane, Australia). Rio Tinto (KUCC Utah, USA). Teck Cominco (ART Trail, Canada). The validation project is expected to be completed in June 2009, with commercial release expected in the second half of 2009. The developing journey from the concept to the industrialised JKRBT including its design, testing and validation has taken four years. The positive response from the mining companies reflects their need for rapid ore testing, and confidence in the fundamental research underpinning the JKRBT. The following sections elucidate some of the major findings during this research period. As the JKRBT is used for particle breakage characterisation, rather than size reduction as in the VSI crusher, it was necessary to know exactly the amount of specific energy applied in the breakage of each rock. The specific energy of each impact in the JKRBT, If the two velocity components are equal, as assumed by theory, then the impact velocity can be expressed as: However, due to the frictional losses in the guide channels, the actual impact velocity of a particle is smaller than suggested by the theory (Eq. Therefore the specific energy is determined from: Eq. To achieve a 2.5 The accuracy of the camera clock system and the velocities calculated by the Photron Motion software were carefully examined prior to the detailed test program. To check the camera clock system, the rotor revolutions were manually counted (e.g. to a total of 80 revolutions), and the number of frames observed for the 80 revolutions were noted. Together with the camera recording rate (frame per second), the rotor speed (rpm) could be calculated. This figure was compared with the speed indicated by an electronic revolution counting system installed in the JKRBT. Tests were repeated at various rotor speeds. Results show that the two systems produce almost identical rotor speeds, with an averaged relative difference of only 0.04%, i.e. ±0.8 In order to check if the velocity calculated by the Photron Motion software from the recorded movie scripts was correct, an independent analysis of the frame-by-frame particle trajectory motion was carried out using Excel. This method was used to determine the impact angle from the particle trajectory, which can then be used to calculate the impact velocity given the known tangential velocity. This analysis is different from the calculation by Photron Motion software, in which the impact velocity was directly measured using a pair of reference calibration points in the image. Though the manual tracking of the impact angle was time consuming, it was successful in identifying a problem associated with the initial calibration points in the Photron Motion software calculations. The calibration has since been rectified. Comparison between the manual tracking and the Photron Motion software calculations for eight sets of test data showed that there was only 0.16% difference between the two methods. Statistical analysis based on a Extensive tests to determine the particle impact velocities at various machine operating conditions were conducted using the high speed video camera. The following operating conditions and their ranges were investigated: Rock type – various ore samples were used: gold ore, copper/gold ore, hornfels aggregate, coal and ceramic balls. Particle size – particles in various narrow size fractions were selected for testing: 6.7–9.5 Particle shape: the ratio of particle length to width from 1.0 (spherical balls) to 2.8 (elongated). Particle surface: varied from very smooth (balls) to rough/angular. Particle moisture: comparison of dry particles with moist particles. Solids density: varied from 1.3 (coal) to 4.5 (chromite). Rotor speed: varied from 300 Feed rate: varied from less than one particle per second to more than 10 particles per second. Feed location: gravity dropping particles from the vibrating feeder compared with releasing particles at bottom of the rotor hub using a mechanical holding/releasing tool. This was carried out to investigate the effect of initial velocity on the particle final impact velocity. The recorded movie scripts were processed by the Photron Motion Tools software ( During the 12 The velocity constant Among all variables investigated, the rotor speed exerts the most significant influence on the velocity constant Particle size also exerts an influence on the velocity constant The constant At the current level of the velocity measurement accuracy, the rock properties investigated (other than the particle size) do not exert a statistically significant influence on the velocity constant A relationship to describe the A number of design issues have been carefully examined by means of theoretical calculations, numerical simulation software, Visual Nastran software, and/or experimental testing in the JKRBT development stages. This section summarises some major factors investigated. Particles are fed into the guiding channels one after another via a vertical feeding tube at the centre of the rotor through a vibrating feeder (the prototype and version 1 industrialised JKRBT) or a rotary feeder operated manually (version 2 JKRBT). The particles move at an initial velocity Two major design variables affect the movement of particles in the rotor entry port: the radius of the port and the number of guide channels. The port velocity Increasing the number of the guide channels was expected to eliminate the rock hang-up problem. For example, in the prototype JKRBT where there were four guide channels, no rock hang-up issues were observed. However, the impact loading can be sufficient to cause significant initial breakage at the intersections of the channels during collection. Visual Nastran simulations indicated that for a particle of 45 Decreasing the number of channels will decrease the amount of particles receiving extra pre-breakage energy, but may increase the probability of particles hanging up in the rotor entry port, and vice verse. As a compromise between minimising the rock hang-up and minimising the pre-breakage, three-channel ports were selected for the version 2 JKRBT design. Statistical experiments indicate a rock hang-up event may happen once in every 500 particles tested, a significant reduction from the 3% using the two-channel design in version 1 JKRBT. The extra pre-breakage energy in the three-channel ports may be corrected through the energy calibration constant The rotor hub in the version 2 JKRBT was fitted with a conical plug (see The high speed video camera data consistently demonstrated that higher impact velocity constants Slowly playing back the movie scripts taken by the camera showed that the particle remained in contact with the guide channel until the particle completely emerged from the channel. The implication from this observation is that the effective rotor radius should be increased by at least half of the particle diameter (to the centre of gravity of the particle, refer to The tangential velocity and hence the theoretical impact velocity were re-calculated using the effective rotor radius concept. The velocity constants The measured high speed video camera data and the breakage characterisation results appear to support the effective rotor radius concept. The rotor and anvils are inclined at 30° in the industrialised JKRBT, different from the prototype JKRBT which employed a horizontal rotor–stator arrangement. This design feature allows fragments to move into the product collection bin so as to prevent fragments from building up and interfering with subsequent impacts during the tests, and to allow operator easy access when the lid is opened after testing is complete. Concerns have been raised about the angled rotor suggesting that the particles are preferentially collected at the lower edge of the collection area (refer to The potentially adverse effect of the angled rotor has been taken into account in the JKRBT design stage. For an entrance port of radius 50 The JKRBT employs 12 curved anvils with protruding corners ( The anvils can be supplied in two forms, depending on wear life expectations: (1) fitted with twelve hardened steel plates, or (2) four Bisalloy 400 steel segments (see The protruding corners may cause disturbance when particles impact on the corners. The influence is more significant for large particles. For the top size fraction (37.5–45 Since the standard breakage characterisation uses the same particle size fractions for testing, the influence of the protruding corners would be similar for different ore samples. Hence if different ore samples are characterised at the identical testing conditions, the resultant ore hardness parameters should be consistent and comparable. Therefore the influence of the protruding anvils is mitigated when using the JKRBT for breakage characterisation tests. The principle used in the SynchroCrusher ( Undoubtedly some fragments will rebound and impact the moving rotor surface after collision with the anvils. This is called secondary breakage. Impact marks on the rotor edge give evidence of the rebound of fragments (see The key issue in the secondary breakage is the additional energy imparted to rebound particles after contacting the moving rotor. The initial rebound impact into the rotor is considered to be part of the parent particle energy dissipation and main breakage event. However, the rebound fragment may gain energy from the moving rotor and this constitutes secondary breakage energy. The movie scripts show two types of secondary breakage: The rebound fragments hit the rotating outer rotor surface and receive a glancing blow, causing particle surface chipping. The rebound fragments are directly impacted by the inside surface of the trailing edge of the open guide channels, causing secondary breakage. For the first type of secondary breakage event, the rebound velocity can be calculated from the coefficient of restitution and consideration of radial and tangential impulse on the rock as it rebounds into the moving rotor. Assuming the coefficient of restitution for rock–steel contact is 0.3 ( In high energy breakage tests (e.g. The option to line the outside of the rotor with rubber was considered, but discounted as the analysis suggests this would result in a longer residence time during impact and a greater impulse to the rock leading to the rock having more kinetic energy after impact and more secondary breakage when it strikes the next steel surface. For the second type of the secondary breakage, the trailing edges of the open guide channels act like rotating hammers if they happen to collide with the rebound fragments. This additional energy would result in particle breakage, particularly at high rotational speeds. However, only a small fraction of the fragments would be expected to rebound towards to rotor, say less than 10%. The probability of a rebound particle being caught by a guide channel is only 11.6%, based on the ratio between the total open area of the guide channels and the total rotor circumference area. As a result, less than 1.2% of the rebound particles would be expected to sustain this type of secondary particle breakage in the JKRBT (i.e. 10% rebound towards the rotor The movie scripts recorded by the high speed video camera appear to agree with the above analysis. It also showed evidence that some fragments after impacting the anvil are suspended in the air before dropping into the collection chamber. This is probably due to the air flow directed from the rotor channels towards the anvils counteracting the velocity of the rebound fragments. It is therefore assumed that the influence of rebound fragments does not significantly affect the accuracy of the characterisation tests and the secondary breakage resulting from fragment rebound can be corrected. It should be noted that the airstream in the JKRBT is throttled by the new rotary feeder. In summary, the research team have studied various issues over the last four years to progressively improve the JKRBT design and operation. Aspects such as the rock entry into the guide channels, effect of the angled rotor and protruding anvils, and secondary breakage have been noted and known to contribute to the uncertainty in the breakage data generated, but are minor in the context of the intended application. The use of a high speed video camera provided a powerful tool to understand the mechanisms inside the JKRBT and to calibrate the specific energy required for breakage characterisation tests. The development team is confident that the specific energy can be well controlled in the JKRBT, and results to date support this assertion (refer to the next section). The results from extensive trials using the prototype and ongoing validation project using the industrialised JKRBT machines are summarised below. The JKRBT allows rapid characterisation of particle impact breakage properties. The feedback from Anglo Research indicated that one JKRBT test (equivalent to one standard DWT) can be completed in approximately 1/8th–1/10th of the time it takes to complete a DWT test. The ability to test a large number of particles offers statistically more valid results. For example, the system is able to break 1200 particles in 20 The required specific energy can be accurately and precisely controlled since the impact specific energy in the new system is independent of the particle mass (Eq. High specific energies can be delivered to both small and large rock particles since the specific energy is independent of the particle mass. This enables the characterisation results to cover a wide range of specific energy levels for all particle sizes. This is not currently possible with the DWT, as high specific energy tests on large particles require a heavier drop head and higher drop height than are practically possible (e.g. high SG iron ore samples). Repeatability of the JKRBT tests is higher than the traditional DWT, as illustrated in Comparative breakage tests using the JKRBT and traditional Drop Weight Tester show that the two devices generate similar breakage–energy relationships, after correcting for the applied specific energy and the single versus two point fracture mechanisms. Statistical analysis indicates that the two testing methods can generate statistically similar breakage parameter Axb values, as illustrated in Given the benefits outlined above, the JKRBT may find many prospective applications into the future that are currently either difficult or impossible with existing equipment. One of the niche applications is in geometallurgical testing where the JKRBT device offers a rapid and consistent method for determining the hardness of drill core samples ( The JKMRC recognized that rocks in industrial crushers and mills rarely experience impacts at velocities that were envisaged in the JKRBT device, but the focus was on testing the ore hardness at set specific energies, not necessarily the direct replication of the breakage mode in mills. As the breakage modes in a mill include both single and two point impact breakage, there is no clear choice as to which device is more appropriate. According to Gildemeister and Albers, the comminution of particles may be regarded as a quasi-static process up to impact velocities of 200 A new rapid breakage characterisation testing device, called the JKRBT, has been developed by the JKMRC for rapid impact breakage characterisation. A detailed study using a prototype machine confirmed the concept of using controlled kinetic energy to characterise ore particle breakage, prompting a comprehensive validation using an industrialised JKRBT, designed and fabricated by RME. Seven industrialised JKRBT units have been deployed at various locations around the world, including Australia, North America and South Africa. The JKMRC and some of the world’s major mining companies (Anglo American, Barrick, BHP Billiton, Rio Tinto and Teck), are participating in a formal validation project expected to close in June 2009. A detailed study using a high speed video camera has resulted in better understanding of breakage mechanisms in the JKRBT. This study has recognized that each machine needs to be calibrated to provide accurate control of the breakage energy necessary for characterisation tests. A detailed review of the design looking at the rock entry into the guide channels, effect of the angled rotor and protruding anvils, and secondary breakage has identified areas which contribute to the uncertainty in the breakage data generated, but all were found to be minor in the context of the intended application. Investigations to date have shown that the JKRBT can generate statistically similar breakage parameters to the traditional DWT, but with significant advantages over its predecessor. The limitations of the DWT, specifically its lack of precision in the energy input, the lengthy time required to run individual tests and the challenges encountered in testing small particles have all been overcome by the JKRBT. Despite the uncertainties in the impact energy and possible secondary breakage (described and partially quantified above), the JKRBT provides outstandingly consistent results. This consistency is both between identical samples and between the JKRBT and the DWT. The uncertainties appear to be adequately accommodated in the single calibration constant and to be overshadowed by the natural variability in rocks, and any bias appears to be sufficiently small to not be detected in the progeny size distribution that is used to measure the response of the rocks to impact. Feedback from Anglo Research has indicated higher productivity and better repeatability of the first industrialised JKRBT unit compared with the Drop Weight Tester. This bodes well for the JKRBT as a powerful tool for rapid breakage characterisation in the mining industry. The research and development of the JKRBT has been funded by The University of Queensland, the AMIRA/P9N Project, and the Centre for Sustainable Resource Processing (CSRP). Kind support from Anglo Platinum, Kennecott Utah and Teck Cominco during the commissioning of their JKRBT units is greatly appreciated.