The comparative studies of reverse cationic/anionic flotation routes were conducted using Vale iron ore in batch scale flotation tests. The effect of slimes on the performance of the two flotation routes was also studied. After desliming, the overall Fe recovery in reverse anionic flotation is significantly higher than reverse cationic flotation at the same concentrate grade. For ultrafine particles (<10μm), the metal loss in reverse cationic flotation is over 92% due to the entrainment of hematite ultrafine particles. However, in reverse anionic flotation, metal loss is as low as 42% in the particle size range of 5 to 10μm, while rejecting almost all the quartz ultrafine particles at the same time. In the coarse particle size range (>210μm), the performance of reverse cationic flotation is slightly better than reverse anionic flotation, with more quartz coarse particles rejected. The major advantage of reverse anionic flotation over reverse cationic flotation was found to be its excellent capability to selectively separate ultrafine particles of quartz and hematite.Reverse cationic flotation is currently the most widely used flotation route in the iron ore industry. The metal loss at the de-sliming stage, which is essential in reverse cationic flotation, and the high cost of amine collectors are the common issues/problems of reverse cationic flotation. Reverse anionic flotation rejects quartz by first activating it with the use of lime, and then floating it using fatty acids as collectors. The advantages of reverse anionic flotation, in comparison to reverse cationic flotation, include its relatively lower sensitivity to the presence of slimes and lower reagent cost because fatty acids are the main components of the waste from the paper industry (  Since the investigation of reverse anionic flotation by U.S. Bureau of Mines ( In this work, the flotation performance of reverse anionic flotation and reverse cationic flotation using isononyl ether amines was closely compared. The tolerance of the two flotation routes to slimes was also studied. The Vale iron ore samples used in this work include the feed and underflow of a cyclone. The samples were characterized with XRF (X-ray fluorescence) and the content of the major components is shown in Particle size analysis was conducted using standard laboratory wet and dry screening methods. Subsieve sizing was performed using a modified CSIRO cyclosizing technique ( Sodium oleate was obtained from Sigma. Isononyl ether amines (EDA C and EDA 3C) were provided by Clariant. Fresh solutions of these reagents were prepared each day as a 1% solution. Corn starch was obtained from Wintersun, USA. Starch was gelatinized using sodium hydroxide at room temperature to a 2% solution. Calcium oxide and sodium hydroxide are ACS-certified chemicals from Ajax Finechem. Flotation tests were conducted in a 3L laboratory Denver cell using 2.5 The cumulative recovery of quartz and iron as a function of flotation time in reverse cationic/anionic flotation is shown in The extent to which concentration occurs can be gaged by calculating the size-by-size recoveries of elements. The recovery-size curves in In contrast, in the coarse particle size range (> The grade-recovery curves for the flotation tests using sodium oleate, EDA C and EDA 3C as collectors are presented in According to The presence of slimes was found to cause significant detrimental effects in both flotation routes. The −10 The flotation performance of reverse anionic flotation and reverse cationic flotation is compared in The higher concentrate grade obtained in reverse cationic flotation of the sample without de-sliming seems to be related to the entrainment of ultrafine particles. As demonstrated on the de-slimed sample, the entrainment of ultrafine particles to froth in reverse cationic flotation is significantly higher than that in reverse anionic flotation ( Although In the literature, the importance of electrostatic interactions between mineral particles for flotation involving ultrafine particles is widely recognized ( Reverse anionic flotation is conducted at a higher pH value (pH 11–12), in comparison to reverse cationic flotation (pH 10–10.5). Since the PZC of pure hematite is around pH 9 ( After the addition of lime to flotation pulp, the surface charged of quartz is reversed from negative to positive to accommodate the adsorption of fatty acids. The addition of lime may cause coagulation of quartz particles. However, at this stage, starch molecules already chemically adsorb on hematite surfaces and hence the coagulation caused by lime cannot interfere with the selective adsorption of starch in reverse anionic flotation. Superior performance of reverse anionic flotation was achieved for ultrafine particles (< The authors wish to thank Vale for providing financial support and permitting the publication of this work. The authors also wish to thank Ms C. Edwards and Ms L. Malishev for sample preparation as well as the staff of CSIRO Materials Characterisation. The authors' gratitude is extended to Dr R. Holmes, Mr D. McCallum, Mr K. Davey and Ms L. Smith for their help at various stages of this work.