This work describes a comprehensive characterization of the factors controlling the floatability of free gold from flotation test using reagents (collectors) at plant concentration levels. A relationship between the collectors loadings on gold particles and their surface composition has been established. The findings of this study show that silver activates gold flotation and there is a strong correlation between the surface concentration of silver and the loading of certain collectors. The organic surface analysis was done by ToF-SIMS while the inorganic surface analysis was carried out by time-of-flight laser ionization mass spectrometry (ToF-LIMS). The developed testing protocol based on ToF-LIMS and ToF-SIMS complementary surface analysis allows for optimization of the flotation scheme and hence improved gold recovery.There is a strong interest in the mining industry to analyze organic surface modifiers (also known as collectors and promoters) on mineral surfaces at plant concentration levels. Although mineral composition and liberation are key considerations to mineral processors, it is the surface composition that controls the surface reactivity and consequently plays a more important role in determining flotation behavior of minerals. Gold hydrophobicity is enhanced by the addition of flotation collectors such as xanthates, dithiophosphates and dithiophosphinates, as used in sulphide mineral flotation. The positive effect silver has on gold floatabilty, was first recognized in experiments using plates of pure gold, silver and of gold–silver alloys. In the presence of silver, adsorption of the di- and monothiophosphate (DTPI and MTPI) was indicated by the formation of the corresponding silver complexes (Ag-DTPI and Ag-MTPI), determined by IR spectroscopy The scope of this study was to obtain a first understanding of the factors that control flotation kinetics of gold particles, in order to determine if and how such kinetics can be selectively enhanced. In contrast to previously published findings, this work is based on the study of gold particles from flotation tests products of a pyritic gold ore with reagent addition at plant concentration levels; thereby demonstrating the applicability of this approach to study samples from operating plants. A number of laboratory flotation tests were conducted in order to evaluate factors that control free gold flotation kinetics. Two common organic collectors were used in the tests: potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) and di-isobutyl dithiophosphate (DIBDTP). The collectors were introduced in the ore during the initial ore grinding in the mill (12 The selective adsorption of organic collectors on gold particles and electrum was studied by the ToF-SIMS technique (Physical Electronics, model PHI 7200 instrument). Collector identification is based on detection of unfragmented collector molecular ions in the ToF-SIMS surface spectra The relationship between the inorganic surface composition of the floated gold particles and the relative collector loading was established by complementary surface analysis by ToF-LIMS (Cambridge Mass Spectrometry, upgraded LIMA-2A instrument). This technique allows for analysis of single gold particles with 2 The composition of the gold particles was determined by electron probe microanalyses, EPMA (JEOL 8600 instrument). Four distinctive types of floated gold particles were observed: smaller, more equdimensional gold particles ranging in size from 10 to 100 The surface analysis of grains of each type from seven consecutive concentrates was carried out in two phases: first nondestructive organic surface analysis by static ToF-SIMS and second destructive inorganic surface analysis by ToF-LIMS. The surface ToF-LIMS data showed systematically descending concentrations of silver on the surface of the gold particles (irrespective of type) floated in sequential concentrates suggesting that silver accelerated free gold flotation ( The impact DIBDTP and PAX loading have on the flotation kinetics of shiny and tarnished gold is illustrated in A comprehensive mineralogical analysis of the ore used for flotation tests showed that 35% of the recovered gold is free gold and the rest is associated with other sulphide minerals. Out of these 35%, one-half floated in the first five concentrates and the remainder in the last two concentrates, with free gold in concentrate C6, improve the overall recovery by 16%. This boost in the overall recovery from concentrate C6 is due to the fact that most of the larger gold flakes that need heavier collector loading were recovered in concentrate C6. In order to accelerate free gold kinetics additional flotation tests were carried out with advanced second point of collector addition ahead of the third concentrate. This resulted in gold flakes floating earlier thus minimizing the chances of losing free gold in the flotation process. Another way of optimizing the gold flotation process is to improve collector loadings of gold grains by selective collector adsorption, i.e. by targeting the ore with specific organic collector depending on their composition and surface properties. In This study demonstrates that routine, comprehensive characterization of the factors controlling the floatability of free gold from flotation tests using reagents at plant concentration levels is possible. By determining the factors responsible for free gold flotation one can target these factors more specifically. While the methodology demonstrated in this paper is by no means all-inclusive, it demonstrates the potential of integrating mineralogical data with surface analytical and metallurgical test data in attempt to optimize gold flotation and recovery.