This paper presents a novel device capable of generating three-dimensional vibrations with a single-axis of rotation. The device resembles a vibration motor with an eccentric weight, but the weight is allowed to move up and down in parallel to the axis of rotations. While spinning of the eccentric weight causes lateral vibrations, vertical vibrations are excited by superposing a periodic torque on the rotary shaft. The frequency and magnitude of vertical oscillations can be independently regulated. Since the vertical natural frequency is sensitive to rotational speeds, maximum vertical oscillations can be achieved by properly adjusting the rotational speed according to the excitation frequency. Relations between the excitation torque and the vertical shaking force are examined using the frequency response for the linearized system. Numerical simulations on the original nonlinear system are conducted to verify the performance of vertical oscillations.Vibration generators such as vibration motors or shakers have been found in various applications for the laboratories, the industry, and in commercial products. For example, mobile phones use vibration motors to generate the silent ring tone. In haptic technology, which exploits the sense of touch for tactile feedback, The vibration motor is a simple electric motor with an eccentric weight; when turning it generates circular oscillations. Directional vibrations can be produced by a linear actuator such as a voice-coil motor, which operates around its natural frequency determined by the shaft's inertia and an installed spring This paper presents a novel mechanism that is capable of generating vertical and horizontal oscillations simultaneously. The device resembles a vibration motor with an extra degree of freedom for the eccentric weight, which is allowed to move up and down freely in parallel to the axis of rotations. While lateral vibrations are generated by turning the weight at a desired speed, axial vibrations can be excited by applying a periodically varying torque to the rotary shaft. It is thus possible to produce oscillations of 3-D patterns, such as a spiral, with this single-input device. In addition, both the frequency and amplitude of axial oscillations can be independently controlled by separately setting the frequency and peak-to-peak value of the input signal. The device is inspired by the rotational-pendulum vibration absorber presented in In the next section the 3-D vibration generator will be introduced. The nonlinear dynamic equations are derived using Lagrange's equations. Relationship between the excitation torque and the vertical shaking force is analyzed in  The governing equations for the 3-D vibration generator will be derived using Lagrange's equation. From Let To simplify the analysis, in what follows the arm is assumed to be a solid spherical body connected by a massless link to the spinning shaft. The mass of the solid ball is  The relation between a periodic excitation torque on the shaft and vertical oscillations will be studied by examining the frequency response of the system. For this purpose the nonlinear equations of Eqs.  Substitute Eqs. The nonlinear terms in Eq. Substituting Eqs. For Eq. Substituting Eqs.  From Eq. The axial force exerted on the support (referring to From Eqs. Substituting   From  Define the As a confirmation of the above derivation, the natural frequency can be alternatively obtained from Eqs. If the radius of the solid ball is negligible compared to the link's length, i.e.,      Excitation on the original nonlinear system (Eqs. The parameters of the rotational arm used in the simulations are as follows:  In To observe the damping effects on the time response, It was shown that 3-D vibrations can be generated by applying an input torque to a single axis of rotation. The input signal contains two components: a constant level that maintains the average speed of the eccentric weight at a desired value that results in lateral vibrations, and a fluctuating torque to excite vertical oscillations. From the frequency response it was seen that the magnitude of vertical oscillations is significantly affected by the level of the rotational speed. That is because vertical natural frequencies are dependent on the speed of rotation. This vibration generator may therefore be operable over a wide range of frequencies by varying the rotational speed according to the excitation frequency. The performance was confirmed by numerical simulations on the original nonlinear system. The length of eccentricity (i.e., length of the rotational arm) may be reduced or extended according to the desired frequency range: the higher the frequency, the shorter the length. This mechanism may be used in vibratory feeders for generation of helical vibrations. It may also be used as a haptic feedback device to provide sophisticated vibrotactile signals.