Objective
                  To review the literature concerning articles evaluating the delayed operative treatment of isolated syndesmotic instability.
               
                  Material and methods
                  The main databases Pubmed/Medline, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Cochrane Clinical Trial Register, Current Controlled Trials and Embase were searched from 1988 to September 2008 to identify studies relating to the late reconstruction of the distal tibiofibular syndesmosis after isolated syndesmotic injury. The level of evidence of the included articles was scored.
               
                  Results
                  Fifteen articles were identified, involving 94 ankles with a delayed reconstruction for isolated syndesmotic instability.
               
                  Conclusion
                  In subacute (6 weeks to 6 months) total ruptures the focus is to restore the normal anatomy by repair of the ruptured ligament with placement of a syndesmotic screw. On base of the literature in combination with experience in clinical practice some guidelines are formulated. If inadequate remnants of the anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (AITFL) are present, a tendon graft can be used. The insertion of the AITFL on the tibia can be medialised with a bone block and fixed with a screw. For the treatment of persistent widening and late instability these reconstruction techniques have to be used combined with debridement and placement of a syndesmotic screw to protect the reconstruction. Most adequate treatment for chronic syndesmotic instability (>6 months) is the creation of a synostosis to stabilise the distal tibiofibular joint. Late repairs give satisfactory but less favourable outcome as compared to properly treated acute injuries. It is not easy to regain complete stability by means of these secondary procedures.The distal tibiofibular syndesmosis (derived from the Greek syndesmos and osis, meaning respectively the ligament and condition) is a fibrous articulation in which the opposing surfaces are united by ligaments. Isolated total ruptures of the syndesmosis are relatively infrequent. They have been reported in American football and skiing. Persistent widening and chronic isolated instability of the distal tibiofibular syndesmosis correlate with a poor functional outcome and the development of osteoarthritis. The search of the literature performed in this study was limited to published original studies that primarily focus on delayed reconstruction of the distal tibiofibular syndesmosis. These studies include male and/or female patients with operative treatment of subacute and chronic isolated syndesmotic instability. Subacute is defined as 6 weeks to 6 months post-trauma and chronic is defined as more than 6 months post-trauma. All techniques used for a late operative treatment of chronic distal tibiofibular syndesmotic instability in adult humans were included. Diagnosis of chronic syndesmotic instability was made on base of history, physical examination and/or standard radiography. Articles concerning the treatment of a fibular malunion were not included. The main databases Pubmed/Medline, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Cochrane Clinical Trial Register, Current Controlled Trials and Embase were searched from 1988 to September 2008 to identify studies relating to the delayed reconstruction of the distal tibiofibular syndesmosis after syndesmotic injury. The applied search terms were: ankle injury, fixation, ligament, syndesmotic injury, internal fixation, osteosynthesis, operative procedures, delayed, late, chronic, screw, synostosis, and ligamentoplasties. Furthermore, the lists of references of retrieved publications were manually checked for additional studies potentially meeting the inclusion criteria and not found by the electronic search. The search was restricted to articles written in the English language. It was the initial intention of the authors to use a strict methodology for paper selection, focussing on objectively measurable variables and separate evaluation of different pathologies (syndesmotic injury originally associated with and without a fracture). These standards had to be abandoned however, as almost none of the available papers fulfiled the above-mentioned criteria. Different inclusion criteria (different indications for late syndesmotic reconstruction, different trauma-reconstruction intervals and different post-operative weight bearing protocols) prohibited a statistical evaluation and comparison between the different techniques. The levels of evidence ( Fifteen articles, concerning 17 groups of patients, were identified. These studies involve from 1 to 17 ankles and all together concern 94 ankles with a delayed reconstruction for distal tibiofibular syndesmotic instability. An overview of the included studies is shown in Since the first description by Quenu in 1912, the recognition and management of acute and mainly chronic syndesmotic injuries have been remained controversial. Chronic syndesmotic instability can cause persistent ankle pain after a fracture or a severe sprain. Frequently, patients complain of a sensation of giving way and difficulty with walking on uneven ground. A mortise or AP ankle radiographic view should be used to evaluate the tibiofibular clear space, tibiofibular overlap, and medial clear space. Advance imaging of the syndesmosis has been performed by ultrasound, bone scan and arthrography. The tibiofibular ligaments can be visualised with great anatomical detail with MRI and is highly accurate for the diagnosis of tibiofibular syndesmotic disruption. Chronic syndesmotic instability can be associated with a fibular malunion. Weber B and C fractures, especially those with comminution and syndesmotic disruption, can result in fibular shortening and malrotation unless special attention is paid to preservation of the ligamentous soft tissue envelope and distraction methods to regain length are employed at time of the index surgical reduction. Treatment of an acute complete syndesmotic ligament rupture is surgical distal tibiofibular syndesmotic fixation. Recommendations for clinical practice concerning the indication and the operation techniques of syndesmotic screw placement in acute ruptures associated with an ankle fracture are formulated. In subacute (6 weeks to 6 months) total ruptures the focus is to restore the normal anatomy by repair of the ruptured ligament and placing a syndesmotic screw to protect the reconstruction. If adequate remnants of the AITFL are present, an anatomical surgical reconstruction/suturing of the anterior syndesmosis is possible to aim for a fibrotic union of the ligament remnants. Mullins and Sallis All procedures should be associated with open debridement of the syndesmosis and in case of interposition also the medial clear space of the ankle should be debrided. Katznelson et al. The perception is that the procedure is limiting to the patient due to limited dorsiflexion in the ankle joint. This leads to that some surgeons recommend it only as a salvage procedure. There is a lack of literature concerning the delayed operative treatment of patients with syndesmotic instability. Remarkable is that all authors reported good results after performance of their operation technique. On basis of the existing literature combined with our own clinical experience we come to the following guideline ( The keys to treatment of syndesmotic injury are an early recognition and appropriate treatment. Treatment of a complete isolated syndesmotic rupture in the acute setting is by placing a positioning screw. The prognosis is good. In subacute (6 weeks to 6 months) total ruptures the focus is to restore the normal anatomy by repair of the ruptured ligament with placement of a syndesmotic screw. If inadequate remnants of the AITFL are present, a tendon graft can be used. The insertion of the AITFL on the tibia can be medialised with a bone block and fixed with a screw. For the treatment of persistent widening and late instability these reconstruction techniques have to be used combined with debridement and placement of a syndesmotic screw to protect the reconstruction. After six months patients have to treat with the creation of a distal tibiofibular synostosis will finally stabilise the ankle mortise. The prognosis of these delayed stabilisations for persistent widening and chronic instability are in our experience is good. Late repairs give satisfactory but less favourable outcome as compared to properly treated acute injuries. It is not easy to regain complete stability by means of these secondary procedures. There is a need for well documented prospective studies to evaluate which operative technique should be performed in patients with persistent syndesmotic widening and late syndesmotic instability at different post-traumatic intervals. The authors did not receive any outside funding or grants in support of their research for or preparation of this work. Neither they nor a member of their immediate families received payments or other benefits or a commitment or agreement to provide such benefits from a commercial entity. No commercial entity paid or directed, or agreed to pay or direct, any benefits to any research fund, foundation, division, centre, clinical practice, or other charitable or nonprofit organisation with which the authors, or a member of their immediate families, are affiliated or associated.