Poly(lactic acid) (PLA) is vulnerable to severe thermal degradation when it was processed at high temperature, especially above 200 °C. An undesired molecular weight reduction and weight loss caused by both hydrolysis and depolymerization reactions result in poor mechanical performance of final products. Thus, the aim of this work was to study the effect of chain extenders on the thermal and mechanical properties of PLA processed at high temperatures in a twin screw extruder having four different sets of temperature profiles. Two types of chain extenders, multifunctional epoxide (ECE) and polycarbodiimide (PCD) were used with the constant amount of 0.5 phr. All samples were characterized using GPC, MFI, DSC, TGA, FT-IR tensile and impact tester. The GPC results showed that the molecular weight (Mw) of processed PLA tended to decrease when increasing the processing temperatures and its molecular weight distribution (MWD) shifted towards lower molecular weights whereas Mw of all PLA added chain extenders samples increased and MWD exhibited bimodal distribution and slightly shifted towards higher molecular weight population. The addition of both chain extenders also improved elongation at break and impact strength. For processed PLA samples, these mechanical properties decreased. TGA thermograms of PLA added chain extenders samples showed the increase in onset and deflection temperatures when compared to processed PLA ones. The investigation of PLA based matrix (70%wt of total polymer) was also performed by blending with Polyamide 6 (30%wt of total polymer) with 0.5 phr of ECE or PCD in a twin screw extruder within the temperature profile of 170–250 °C. The blend with chain extenders proved to ease the effect of molecular weight reduction without sacrificing the mechanical properties. Both of PCD and ECE provided the improvement in modulus and tensile strength, especially elongation and impact strength for PLA/PA6/ECE blend. They increased by 92.2% and 65.1% respectively when compared to blend without ECE.Biodegradable polymers are currently materials of considerable interest due to their advantages such as an environmental benign, an origin of renewable resources and comparable mechanical properties with conventional plastics. Despite numerous advantages, thermal properties are considered to be the major drawback, which limits their use for specific products. Among the bio-based and biodegradable polymers, poly(lactic acid) (PLA) is the one of popular choices as it possesses high mechanical strength and modulus and is now available largely in a commercial scale, thus PLA is most likely to replace commodity and even engineering plastics. However, some properties such as brittleness, limited gas barrier properties, low melt strength and low thermal stability Sodergard et al. Therefore, the aim of this work was to study the effect of chain extenders on the thermal and mechanical properties of PLA and chain extenders processed at high temperatures in a twin screw extruder having four different sets of temperature profiles with the die temperature ranged from 220 to 250 °C. Two types of chain extenders, polycarbodiimide (PCD) and multifunctional epoxide chain extender (ECE) were selected for comparison. In addition, the application of PLA blended with high melting temperature plastics was also investigated. Polyamide 6 (PA6) was selected as a model polymer due to high tensile strength, stiffness and hardness, excellent abrasion resistance, good gas barrier properties, good chemical resistance in oils, fats, and petrol Poly(lactic acid) (PLA) 2003D was purchased from NatureWork PLA pellets were first dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 24 h before further use. PLA and 0.5 phr of chain extenders were mixed and then introduced to the twin screw extruder (SHJ-25, China) with length to diameter ratio (L/D) of 40. The barrel temperature was divided to eight zones from feed zone to die. The mixture was mixed under the four temperature profiles from feed zone to die set at: (1) 140/160/190/210/220/220/220/220, (2) 150/170/200/220/230/230/230/230, (3) 160/180/210/230/240/240/240/240 and (4) 170/190/220/240/250/250/250/250 °C. The die temperature 220, 230, 240 and 250 °C was referred to the processing temperature and is used for further discussion. The rotation speed was kept at 50 rpm. The processing of processed PLA was also carried out at the same four conditions. The extrudates were cut, dried at 60 °C for 12 h. Then the moisture content was measured with moisture analyzer (METTLER TOLEDO, HX204) and kept the samples in zip-lock plastic bags to avoid the moisture adsorption. PLA pellets and PA6 resin were first dried in the vacuum oven at 60 °C for 24 h. Then PLA pellets were premixed with PA6 and chain extenders before blending in the twin screw extruder (SHJ-25, China). The processed polymers and blend of PLA/PA6/chain extenders were prepared where the ratio of PLA and PA6 was 70/30 and the amount of chain extender was fixed at 0.5 phr. The blends were prepared in the twin screw extruder under the temperature profile from feed zone to die set at 170/190/220/240/250/250/250/250 °C, the rotation speed was kept at 50 rpm. The extrudate was cooled in the water bath, then granulated and dried at 60 °C for 12 h. The moisture content of samples were measured and kept it in zip-lock plastic bags. Molecular weight and polydispersity index of PLA and modified PLA with chain extenders samples at various process temperatures were measured by gel permeation chromatography (GPC). The sample of 10 mg was dissolved in the tetrahydrofuran (THF) 3 ml for measurement. Gel permeation chromatograph (GPC) analyses were carried out on Waters 2414 refractive index (RI) detector, equipped with Styragel HR5E 7.8 × 300 mm column (molecular weight resolving range of 2000–4,000,000 Da). The GPC columns were eluted using tetrahydrofuran with a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min at 40 °C and calibrated with polystyrene standards. Melt flow index of all samples were performed on a melt flow indexer (Intro D7053, KAYENESS) operating at 190 °C with 2.16 kg load according to ASTM D1238. The thermal stability of processed PLA and PLA added chain extenders samples were analyzed by TGA (PERKIN ELMER, TGA7). The 3–5 mg of sample was heated from 50 °C to 550 °C with heating rate at 10 °C/min under nitrogen atmosphere. The measurements were carried out with METTLER TOLEDO, DSC1 operated with STARe system software. 7–10 mg samples were weighted. The temperature scan was performed with a heating and cooling rate of 10 °C/min under nitrogen atmosphere. The samples were heated from 30 to 200 °C, held for 1 min to erase thermal history effects and cooled to 30 °C, held for 1 min and then heated to 200 °C again for the second scan. The glass transition temperature ( The FT-IR analysis, the extrudate of sample was first dissolved in the dichloromethane. Then the solution was casted onto the petri dish, dried it for an hour in the room temperature to remove solvent. The film samples were analyzed by using FT-IR spectrometer VERTEX70 at a resolution of 4 cm The mechanical test specimens were prepared by injection molding (Battenfeld BA250 CDC). The processed PLA and PLA added chain extenders were injected at 160 °C, injection speed of 60 m/s, pressure of 50 bars, mold temperature at 30 °C and cycle time of 45 s. PLA/PA6 blend specimens were prepared at 200 °C, injection speed of 60 m/s, pressure of 100 bars, mold temperature at 30 °C and cycle time of 45 s. Tensile properties were measured using Universal Testing Machine (Instron 5969, Instron) in accordance with ASTM D638, specimen type I. The specimens were tested at a cross-head speed of 5 mm/min. Impact testing was performed according to ASTM D256 (Zwick B5102.202, Izod type). The drying of PLA samples was essential in this study to ensure that the fluctuation of the residual moisture within the samples will not interfere the experimental results. The processed PLA and PLA added chain extender samples were dried before further work and the moisture content of samples after drying were around 0.02wt%. This value was acceptable and typical for moisture absorption value for PLA pellets. This amount of moisture contents was less than the recommended value in the literature The information of molecular weights (Mw) of processed PLA and PLA added chain extender samples at various processing temperatures were summarized in The melt flow index (MFI) is related to the molecular weight of the polymer. The MFI results of all samples were showed in The reaction of PLA with PCD and PLA with ECE were followed using FT-IR and also compared to the solid mixture of them. The FT-IR spectra of processed PLA, chain extenders, solid mixture of them, PLA/PCD and PLA/ECE under the processing temperature of 250 °C were showed in The thermal properties of processed PLA and PLA added chain extenders at various processing temperature were analyzed by DSC. All data from DSC were summarized in The thermal degradation of all samples was characterized by TGA technique to investigate the effect of chain extenders on the thermal degradation behavior of PLA. The onset and deflection temperature of processed PLA and PLA added chain extenders were concluded in The modulus, tensile strength and elongation at break of processed PLA and PLA added chain extenders were showed in For high processing temperature, Polyamide 6 (PA6) was selected as a blend pair. In general, the large different processing temperature between PLA/PA6 would cause PLA to degrade thermally and severely. Therefore, the blend of this polymer pair was very challenging. To ease this effect, the influence of chain extender PCD or ECE on thermal and mechanical properties was evaluated and discussed. The moisture content in PLA/PA6 blends was controlled by the drying process to eliminate the effect of the surplus moisture, which might accelerate the hydrolysis. The moisture content of PLA/PA6 blend samples was recorded and constant at 0.02wt%. From SEM micrographs of PLA/PA6 blend in The melt flow index of processed PLA and its blends with PA6 were carried out at 190 °C with 2.16 kg, while that of PA6 was performed at 235 °C with 2.16 kg according to ASTM 1238. From The DSC thermograms of samples were showed in The tensile and impact specimens of PLA/PA6 and PLA/PA6 added chain extenders were prepared by injection molding. The tensile strength and elongation at break were showed in The addition of two chain extenders, PCD and ECE, to PLA could prevent the further mechanical deterioration and thermal degradation from the high processing temperature. The molecular weight of PLA for PLA/PCD increased slightly while it increased to 2 folds for PLA/ECE and their MWD curves shifted towards higher molecular weight population and exhibited bimodal distribution for PLA/ECE when compared to processed PLA. This could be due to the multifunctional of ECE which could react with PLA and would be possible to form the long branched structures whereas PCD is bi-functional group, providing the long linear of reconnected PLA chain. Therefore, they exhibited the difference in the improvement of molecular weight and molecular weight distribution. TGA data of PLA added chain extenders samples showed the improvement of thermal stability by an increase in onset and deflection temperatures when compared to processed PLA ones. More reactions and reconnection of chains, larger molecules plus less ester groups led to more thermal stability of molecules. From DSC results, the The authors acknowledge the