Meat and seafood products represent a high proportion of the applications of high-pressure processing (HPP) in the world. Mainly used for decontamination purposes, this innovative process has proved to be a reliable technology for ensuring food safety and extending the shelf life of these perishable and fragile foods. However, meat and seafood may experience quality alterations under pressure. This chapter focuses on the effect of HPP on meat and seafood organoleptic quality (texture, color, aroma, taste…). The physicochemical processes responsible for these changes are also reviewed to provide a better understanding of the mechanisms involved. This chapter ends with an overview of current commercial applications and other potential applications.Meat and seafood currently represent almost 45% of commercial pressurized food products in the world ( Beyond microbiology, HPP induces considerable physicochemical changes in meats and seafood. For example, color, texture, oxidation status, and biological processes have been shown to be significantly disturbed by application of HPP ( There has been extensive research on the microbiological efficiency of HPP on meat products and seafood; therefore, this chapter will mainly focus on physicochemical processes under HPP with regard to meat and seafood pressurization. Because meat and seafood quality is a highly subjective topic, quality indicators, such as texture, water retention, and sensorial traits, will be discussed, as will consumer acceptance. HPP has been repeatedly proven to decrease the microbial load in meat products, but few studies have focused on chemical safety. This important issue will be covered in this chapter, with a view to discussing the presence and production of toxic compounds and allergens. Examples of current commercial applications in meat and seafood products will be presented. The chapter will end with a final overview of what the future could bring in terms of HPP applications in the meat and seafood industry. Texture and water retention are considered to be among the most important quality attributes of muscle-derived foods in general. Although a high tenderness is desired in mammalian meat, seafood and fish meat may not have the same specifications. Indeed, Early works initially focused on The use of pressures higher than 200 In addition, collagen seems to be particularly stable under high pressure, as reported after changes in dermal sheep collagen were evaluated by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) ( Some studies have nevertheless observed an increase in tenderness after HPP of postrigor meat. The application of HPP to fish fillets can produce various textural properties, depending on the processing parameters and the species ( This pressure-induced toughening of postrigor muscle meat is generally accompanied by a decrease in water-binding capacity ( It is clear that the textural and water-binding properties of muscles treated by high pressure are closely linked to the aging state, and to the muscle species. DSC studies of fish myofibrillar proteins revealed that they were more sensible to pressure denaturation than their warm-blooded counterparts ( Processing conditions are also key parameters in the resulting technological quality of meat-based food. For instance, the influence of temperature on pressure-treated meat texture has been extensively studied. It has been shown that combining pressure (up to 800 In conclusion, pressure-treating fresh meat from warm-blooded animals at room temperature at 200 Meat products result from fresh meat that has been modified by several processing methods, including cooking, curing, comminution, dehydration, fermentation, and smoking. The effect of HPP treatment on such products depends on conditions mentioned previously (e.g., processing parameters and muscle species) but also on food composition and formulation. Since each product is unique in its composition and processing, it is impossible to extrapolate the effect of HPP from one product to another. However, some trends have been reported and will be discussed in this chapter. Myofibrillar protein denaturation is certainly one of the key mechanisms implied in food texture and water retention. HPP has been used to affect the gel-forming properties of proteins, thus allowing the development of processed muscle-based comminuted food. Cooking after HPP does not improve textural properties of pressure-treated beef (up to 800 Other studies have shown the relevance of using HPP at high temperatures (300–700 The debate on the effect of higher temperatures remains open. Because HPP induces adiabatic heating during compression, this adiabatic heating could be used to reach higher temperatures. Sometimes called pressure-assisted thermal sterilization (PATS), this process starts at moderate temperatures (60–90 It is obvious from this review that pressure and heat interact in a complex way, in which both the levels of the two parameters and the sequence in which they are applied are important. Treatment by high pressure after other processing, such as smoking or dehydration, has been proved to have less impact on the technological quality of meat products. For example, The texture and water retention of meat products also depend on their composition. Most of the comminuted products studied contained sodium chloride in their formulation to facilitate the formation of the protein gel. The presence of sodium chloride in pressurized comminuted meat products has been shown to benefit their texture and water-holding capacity ( To conclude, high pressure results in varying effects in meat product texture and water retention. These effects depend on numerous factors, such as the product composition or the processing parameters (e.g., pressure/temperature combination). HPP at pasteurization levels (from 500 The biochemical processes which produce the resulting texture are complex. During postrigor aging, Calpains are intracellular endopeptidases requiring calcium to work and regulated by a specific inhibitor: calpastatin. Studies of the impact of pressure on the calpain system have mainly been conducted on prerigor meat. Extensive research has been conducted on cathepsins under high pressure. These enzymes are likely to be released from their lysosomes after HPP at 100 Conversely, extracted catheptic enzymes seem to behave differently under high pressure. Indeed, HPP has been reported to significantly decrease cathepsin activity in crude extracts at 500 The proteasome can also degrade myofibrillar proteins during postmortem storage. The effect of HPP on this enzyme is less well-known, but Such results are in sufficient to reach firm conclusions about the ability of HPP to influence meat texture by modifying enzyme activity. Overall, high pressure may affect the enzyme structure itself and disturb its activity, but it is also speculated that, by denaturating the myofibrillar proteins, pressure indirectly influences proteolytic activity by degrading the substrates of such enzymes ( The organoleptic quality of meat and seafoods includes all the characteristics that make them appetizing. The visual aspect and the flavor are critical parameters in the purchasing and consumption of such products. Although meat color is mainly related to protein integrity, flavor is thought to have a more complex origin, involving proteins and lipids. Because HPP has a significant influence on these food components, sensorial analyses are essential to evaluate the consumers' acceptance of pressurized meat and seafood products. Meat discoloration by high pressure has been observed repeatedly and represents a significant hindrance to the commercialization of fresh meat (particularly red meat) after HPP. An increase in lightness ( Similar trends have been observed in fish meat and other seafoods, with increased lightness and cooked aspect. For example, The appearance of black spots (melanosis) on the flesh of crustaceans is a cause of poor organoleptic quality, and is normally controlled by the addition of sulfites. This blackening is triggered by polyphenoloxidase (PPO), which oxidizes phenols to quinones. In their study on chilled prawns, Concerning white fish, Meat discoloration has been extensively studied, and some hypotheses have been suggested regarding its origin. All the changes previously mentioned can undoubtedly have a negative impact on consumer acceptance. In the previous section, it was emphasized that HPP significantly affects the final texture of meat and seafood products through its impact on the protein conformation and the way proteins interact with each other. It is now obvious that such an effect is also the origin of the strong color modifications that could be a hindrance to Lipid oxidation leads to rancidity and off flavors and therefore contributes to the resulting sensory quality of meats and seafoods. This is particularly the case for food products, such as poultry or fish meat, that contain high levels of unsaturated fatty acids, which are particularly susceptible to lipid oxidation and flavor deterioration. There are an extraordinary number of publications about the impact of HPP on the oxidation status of lipids in meat and seafood. In most of these studies, oxidation was evaluated by measuring secondary lipid oxidation products (thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances (TBArs)) or hexanal content. In addition, lipid oxidation status can also be measured by free fatty acid levels or antioxidant enzyme activities. HPP accelerates lipid oxidation, but final oxidation levels are similar to those found in cooked products at the end of chilled storage ( The prooxidation action of HPP is thought to be caused by the release of iron ions from hemoproteins ( Muscle proteins are also susceptible to oxidative reactions that result in the formation of carbonyl compounds. This phenomenon involves the loss of essential amino acids and decreased protein digestibility, thus affecting the nutritional quality of the meat. Also, the potential impact of the formation of protein carbonyls on quality attributes, such as water-holding capacity, texture, and flavor, has been underlined ( Only few studies have been conducted on protein oxidation after HPP. However, it appears that protein oxidation occurs under the same pressure conditions as those found for lipid oxidation (i.e., from 300 To conclude, it is obvious that HPP compromises the oxidative stability of raw and processed meat. Depending on the working pressure, the treatment duration, and the temperature, lipid oxidation occurs most often during subsequent storage, highlighting the relevance of good storage and packaging conditions. Moreover, evidence of protein oxidation after HPP has been found in pressure-treated meat products. Although this phenomenon is not fully understood, increasing attention has been paid to its role in the resulting quality and the effect of HPP in meat products. Aroma deterioration may be critical for consumer acceptability. The flavor of meat and seafood products is related to numerous chemical reactions involving proteins, lipids, and glucides. Aromatic compounds are generally formed by enzymatic action or chemical reactions, such as lipid oxidation or by Maillard reactions, during heat treatment ( Some studies have been conducted on raw meat to analyze the impact of HPP before any subsequent thermal treatment. For example, Studies conducted on processed meat products generally report a significant modification in aroma after HPP. A significant decrease in sensory attributes has been found, in particular a decrease in the odor of dry-cured ham treated at 600 The presence of volatile trimethylamine (TMA) or dimethylamine (DMA) is due to bacterial enzyme activity and leads to characteristic fishy off flavors in seafood products. The estimation of such compounds in fish flesh is now used as a biochemical index of spoilage and, therefore, indicates the quality of fish meat. A general estimation of total volatile basic nitrogen (TVBN) is also conducted. TVBN is the sum of TMA, DMA, ammonia, and other nitrogen-based compounds that contribute to fish spoilage. Studies conducted on pressurized seafood generally reported a significant delay in the production of TMA and DMA during refrigerated storage ( Nonvolatile compounds also contribute to the sensorial quality of meat and seafood products. Free amino acids and peptides have a major role in meat taste, so HPP may also influence the development of taste. Finally, the development of flavor in meat and meat products can also be linked to its formulation: the presence and the quantity of specific ingredients or spices can affect the perceived flavor. Interestingly, some studies have emphasized that HPP was able to improve the perception of saltiness in dry-cured products ( Consumers' sensorial acceptance of meat and seafood products can be affected by color modifications, lipid and protein oxidation ( For cooked sausages pressure treated (from 500 HPP has a strong impact on the visual appearance of meat products, which could induce rejection by the consumer. High pressure has also been found to have a significant impact on the oxidative stability of such products. However, it has been shown that, despite this negative impact, pressure-treated products are judged acceptable in term of flavor, odor, texture, and juiciness. It is nevertheless important to remember the strong influence of the product itself, preventing any extrapolation from a product to another. The effect of high pressure on the microbiological safety of meat and seafoods has been repeatedly demonstrated, and its capacity to increase their shelf life is now clearly established. Aside from the organoleptic and technological quality of such products, it is also important to investigate any formation of toxic compounds that could be present after HPP. This section will cover the investigations studying the presence and the production of biogenic amines, nitrite-derived substances, the migration of compounds from the packaging, allergens, and prions in pressure-treated meat products. Some amines naturally present in meat products can cause serious food poisoning. They are generally categorized in three groups based on the number of amine groups in their structure: monoamines (phenylethylamine and tyramine), diamines (cadaverine and putrescine), and polyamines (spermidine and spermine) ( Pressure treatment (350 Conversely, in some cases, high levels of biogenic amines have been found in pressurized meat products ( Some amines may be nitrosated or act as mutagenic precursors to form nitrosamines, which are known carcinogens ( The integrity of the packaging under HPP is of primary importance, because substances coming from it may affect the sensory quality (e.g., aroma and taste), the mechanical and physical properties (e.g., strength and barrier properties), and the toxicity of the packed product ( It has been shown for food simulants that HPP (up to 500 Food compounds can also be absorbed by the packaging material after processing. In sum, even if there is extensive research on packaging treated by HPP, few ideas have been applied to meat products. From more general studies, it is probable that HPP at low temperature has less impact on packaging materials than traditional cooking treatments. In addition, any effect of high pressure will be strongly influenced by the material itself and the temperature used. However, in view of the paucity of applied studies, it is hard to extrapolate such results to food products. Prions and other transmissible spongiform encephalopathy agents are highly resistant to temperature, and would require autoclaving conditions to be removed from meat products containing bone or brain parts. Because HPP is able to destabilize protein conformations, it allows the dissociation of oligomers and hence may reduce prion infectivity. Studies reported in the literature generally combine pressure with high temperature (minimum, 60 Meat allergy is a rare, although serious, pathological problem, presumably induced by bovine serum albumin or bovine gamma globuline in beef ( Just a few studies have been conducted on the impact of HPP on the allergenicity of meat and seafoods. Because this process is known to induce conformational changes in proteins, it may alter antigenicity and/or immunological cross-reactivity by changing the binding abilities of their epitopes. In sum, HPP could either reduce allergenicity or reveal new antigenic sites.  According to Studies conducted on fish meat reported no effect of HPP (up to 300 Information relating to the effects of HPP on the chemical safety of meat products is scarce. The few existing studies report that this process does not alter the packaging integrity more than traditional processes, and it displays only a small effect on other toxic compounds. Concerning other substances, The diversity of pressure-treated food products has increased concomitantly with the number of installations. In fact, more than 190 high-pressure installations were counted worldwide in 2012 ( Concerning fish meat, Campofrio started to sell ready-to-eat fish meals treated by HPP in 2004. Also, HPP has been used since 1999 by Motivatit Seafoods Inc. on for oysters. The advantages of treating oysters by HPP are numerous. First, mild pressure processing (up to 350 As previously mentioned, HPP has been successfully used by food companies mainly for pasteurization purposes. However, other possibilities have been suggested. This section will focus on potential uses of HPP technology that are currently under study and not yet used in commercial applications. Sterilization aims at inactivating spore-forming bacteria and bacterial endospores. Traditional processes generally involve high temperatures combined with long processing times, therefore affecting the resulting product quality. Pressure alone does not easily inactivate endospores. An early study of Another strategy has, however, arisen. Some studies proposed the use of lower pressures (50–300 Traditional freezing can significantly impair the quality of meat products. The slow formation of large ice crystals can affect the structure of the muscle and therefore its texture. High pressure can be used to freeze or thaw food samples thanks to its potential to improve both the kinetics of these processes and the characteristics of the crystals formed. Two distinct processes are considered ( Similarly, two pressure processes have been defined as thawing processes: pressure-assisted thawing and pressure-shift thawing. Once again, the difference lies in the way that the phase transition takes place. In pressure-assisted thawing, the phase transition occurs through heat treatment after pressurization, whereas the melting point is passed through an increase in In some studies, HPP combined with subzero temperatures has been applied to frozen meat products. It has been reported that treating beef pieces or carpaccio at pressures up to 650 The application of high pressure freezing/thawing has attracted increased attention in the high pressure community. However, technological hindrances and quality issues remain. The scale-up of high pressure/low temperature processes to industrial levels will require accurate control of the temperature profile in large-scale devices ( The combination of preservation factors or techniques to produce safe, stable, and high-quality food products has been designated by Interestingly, pressure has been shown to act synergistically with some food additives. Nisin and other bacteriocins are certainly the most studied antimicrobial compounds in combination with HPP ( Other combinations have been recently proposed. In summary, the combination of HPP and antimicrobial additives has been reported to act synergistically and to remove the tailing effect observed after HPP, confirming the relevance of hurdle technology. The detailed mechanisms of these synergies are not yet understood; however, researchers have proposed some hypotheses to explore, mainly with respect to pressure-induced disruption and subsequent sensitization to food additives, transient or persistent ( Hurdle technology does not only involve additives but includes other types of barrier that could reduce bacterial growth during storage. Studies on pressurized meat products have revealed the influence of the storage temperature ( The combination of all these hurdles (refrigeration temperature, HPP, and presence of antimicrobial compounds) appears to be a promising approach to ensuring the safety of meat products. However, as far as we know, new strategies, such as active packaging, have not been applied in commercially available meat products. This type of concept has yet to be approved by the safety authorities. Use of these technologies requires detailed safety information supported by toxicological data, proof of efficacy in the product, description of manufacturing process, and knowledge of safe maximum levels ( Because HPP has a significant effect on the native form of the meat proteins and is known to alter their functional properties ( As previously discussed, HPP enables the formation of unique gels (see Section High pressure could also be used to modify food component properties and their interactions to create new textures or to improve them. In particular, extensive research has been done on fish gels (and particularly surimi) and the beneficial potential of HPP has already been discussed (Section Transglutaminase is an enzyme naturally present in animals that participates in the resulting texture of fish and meat products. In fact, this enzyme is capable of forming covalent, nondisulfide cross-links between proteins (myofibrillar proteins), and its activity has been interestingly reported to be enhanced under pressure. Polysaccharides are also commonly used in restructured meat products, and their interaction with proteins under pressure is attracting increased attention. No clear trend has been found on the interaction between HPP and polysaccharides on the texturization of meat and seafood products. It seems that this interaction is variable, depending on the ingredient, the temperature of treatment, the pressure level ( HPP alone has the ability to alter the texture of meat and seafood products. Two strategies are emerging regarding the formulation of pressure-treated products. First, HPP is proposed as a technological tool to produce additive-free products while ensuring acceptable texture attributes, to meet consumer demand for healthier and more natural foods. For instance, reduced HPP is a safe process that is already used at an industrial scale to ensure the microbial safety of various fish and meat products. Pressure levels higher than 400 Aside from the effect of such processes on food products, the precise environmental impact of HPP in the case of meat products needs to be evaluated. Such investigations could help on the development of healthy and sustainable food products.