Rock slope deformation stability for Antaibao open pit coal mine under mining was analyzed using finite difference technique (FLAC3D). Optimal excavated scheme with relatively steeper slope angle of 47° instead of 30° was successfully implemented at the west wall on the geological section 73200 of the mine area, where the three-dimensional (3D) effect of nonlinear large deformation of the slope was taken into account. Physico-mechanical properties of the rock materials were obtained by laboratory tests conducted on samples cored from exploration drilling and rock blocks taken directly from the mine. A nonlinear Mohr–Coulomb material model with a tension cutoff was used in all present simulations. Nonlinear effect on excavated sequence was also discussed. It is demonstrated by dynamical response analysis that the action of earthquake magnitude VII (Richter) upon the relatively steeper excavated slope could not be more than that slope could bear.In the present work, we investigate the stability of rock slope at Antaibao open pit coal mine that situates 145 Prior to the 3D analysis, the excavated scheme (so-called old scheme) of the slope that was with a relatively gentle slope angle of 30° was originally designed on the geological section 73200 by Chen & Associates Currently, there is a well-developed framework for the estimation of slope stability. Developments in the characterization of complex rock slope deformation and failure using numerical modeling techniques were reviewed recently by Stead et al. On the other hand, it is also noted that from the viewpoint of geological mechanics a nonlinear dynamical response of excavated slope is strongly dependent on mechanical properties of rock masses, excavation sequence of rock mass, rock joint pattern and fractured geometry, in situ stress field, underground temperature, and underground water activity as well as their coupling effect An outline of the remainder of the paper is as follows. In Antaibao coal district lies near the northeastern margin of the Ordos crustal block, which has been a stable tectonic feature throughout the Mesozoic and Tertiary. The Ordos crustal block extends about 500 The development pit, for the Antaibao open pit coal mine, covers about 1.5 The general stratigraphy in the Antaibao coal mine area is summarized in The major surficial soil deposits in the development pit are (1) an alluvial sequence associated with Holocene-age erosion and deposition by the Seven Mile River, (2) Late Pleistocene-age loess and alluvial deposits which at one time covered the development pit, and (3) Middle Pleistocene to Pliocene-age alluvium which at one time also covered the development pit Relatively thin deposits of alluvium are present along the Seven Mile River valley floor. The alluvium occurs as modern channel deposits, flood plain deposits and as low alluvial terraces adjacent to the channel and flood plains. These alluvial deposits are composed of interstratified lenses of sand and gravel, silty sand, and silt. The exploratory holes indicate these deposits range from 2 to 12 The uplands bordering the Seven Mile River are underlain by a sequence of Late Pleistocene loess and alluvium. Exploratory holes indicate the sequence is from 5 to 40 The exploratory holes drilled in the uplands encountered a sequence of interstratified red plastic clay lenses and red clayey gravel lenses of Middle Pleistocene to Pliocene age. This sequence is always overlain by the Loess–Alluvium Sequence. The Red Clay–Gravel Sequence was not found in all of the exploratory holes, but when encountered, thicknesses up to 50 Five sedimentary bedrock formations are present in the Antaibao coal mine area. These formations that range in age from Early Permian to Early Ordovician are summarized in The geologic structure in the Antaibao mine area consists of broad open folds complicated by faulting and ring structures. The development pit is located on the southeast limb of the Erpu anticline. The anticline trends about N50°E and the axis is located about 1.2 The sedimentary bedrock is cut by several joint sets. Spacing between the joints averages about 0.3 Several northeast trending faults were encountered during coal exploration drilling along the southeast limb of the Erpu anticline. The faults strike to the northeast and generally parallel the trend of the anticline. Three ring structures were identified during our coal exploration drilling in the mine area and other undetected ring structures may be present. It is believed that the ring structures result from collapse of the Permian and Carboniferous bedrock into large caverns in the upper part of the Ordovician-age Shuoxian Formation. Extensive borehole investigations in the coal mine show that groundwater will be encountered in the development pit excavation. It appears that the portions of the soils, the altered rock in the ring structure, and the sedimentary rock will be saturated. In addition, confined bedrock aquifers will be encountered throughout the development pit during mining. The hydrologic studies previously conducted provide a basic framework for a general understanding of regional groundwater trends. Detailed studies would be necessary to provide a complete understanding of the local hydrodynamics, particularly in the geologically complex parts of the development pit such as the ring structure and fault zones. The hydrologic information suggests that the ring structure may be functioning as an area of groundwater discharge. The discharge areas are indicated by the close depressions in the potentiometric maps for the Shanxi and Taiyuan aquifers. Groundwater from these two aquifers is apparently discharging through the ring structure into the cavernous limestone in the upper part of the Shuoxian Formation. The potentiometric map for the Shanxi aquifer shows the potentiometric surface for this aquifer from 7 to 60 The well was completed in the Red Clay–Gravel Sequence between depths of 61 and 76 The previous hydrologic studies Relatively high excess pore pressures have been found within the limestone in the lower part of the Benxi Formation. The limestone was encountered in drilled holes. The rainy season comes mainly from July to September, but there is almost little rainfall or snow each year in the mining area except for this rainy season. Core from Holes 84-13A, 84-59, 84-60, and 84-61 and representative samples from the in situ of the section 73200 were classified using the geomechanical rock mass rating (RMR) system proposed by Bieniawski The classification system is based on six parameters: (1) the uniaxial compression strength of the intact core, (2) the rock quality designation (RQD), (3) joint or fracture spacing, (4) joint or fracture orientation, (5) joint or fracture condition, and (6) groundwater conditions. Relative weighting factors are allocated to each of the six parameters, which are summed to obtain a RMR on a scale of 0–100. The RMR for Holes 84-13A, 84-59, 84-60, and 84-61, which are outside the ring structure, is generally similar as shown in Hole 84-60 was cored in the ring fault zone. Eighty percent of the hole length cored had very poor (class V) rock. The lower RMR for this hole appears to be caused by alternation of the rock as a result of deep weathering in the ring structure zone. The physico-mechanical properties of the soils, altered rock in the ring structure and sedimentary rock, and backfilling materials used in the numerical simulations were based on evaluation of the exploratory drilling and the laboratory test results. In addition, published data in the literature The principal factors influencing the stability of the development slope is the geology, the physico-mechanical properties of the soil and rock in the slope, and the groundwater hydrology. Other factors also considered in the evaluation of the slope stability are the effects of earthquake accelerations. The stability of the slope on section 73200 of the mine was firstly analyzed by Chen and Associates The 3D computational work presented is carried out by using the 3D finite difference code FLAC The coal mine is located at an elevation of 1190–1470 Undoubtedly, excavating sequence and scheduling of naturally fractured or blasted rocks together with coal under gravity is one of the most critical factors in determination of deformation mechanism for excavated slope. The deformation mechanism is formed under the excavated process of rock mass within the zones subjected to considerable redistribution of the initial stress state. For simplification, we here present three typical deformation analyses of slopes with different excavated processes (discussed as follows), in order to observe that of nonlinear mechanical effect such as energy dissipation and irreversible plastic deformation of rock mass. The model made of only solid rock mass is initially prescribed by a stress field due to gravity and then it is solved until a state of equilibrium is achieved within the iteration limit of equilibrium. Model geometry and meshing refer to physical conditions of the computational zone to be modeled, which is 210 The final geometric profiles of slope section for three cases are of complete consistency, but the corresponding nonlinear mechanical responses are of rather difference indeed. It is shown that the case I (excavated sequence I) holds the largest displacement, 0.213 Another motivation for the present study is to demonstrate the feasibility of excavation scheme with the increase of the excavated slope angle from 30° to 47°, on the geological section 73200 in the coal mine. Under consideration of excavated process step-by-step and steep slope mining, the model that is divided by 52,250 elements and 57,120 nodes consists of 554 Thus, 10 calculation cases that identify with the properties of material and the boundary condition but, respectively, corresponding to different axial length of excavated slope, i.e., 60, 100, 140, 180, 220, 260, 300, 340, 380, and 420 As discussed above, the conventional limit equilibrium methods that do not take care of the material deformation can only be used to describe the strength state of slope material. To excavate slope, nonlinear dynamic process closely relies upon the deformation response of slope under excavating. It is noted that, from the discussions in Different maximum displacements and their corresponding horizontal components ( In order to observe in detail the surface deformation of the steep slope in the final case, the representative displacement curves for 10 monitoring points on the slope surface (these points also marked in It is noted that the running range of the excavator in the in situ mine is at least 69.6 According to the third stipulation in Section 5.1.2 from Code for Seismic Design of Buildings in China (GB50011-2001), the maximum value from input earthquake accelerations for the sleep slope (angle of 47°) must be accommodated by ratio relation, 1:0.85:0.65, being a ratio of three components either among the seismic data of the same group or from that of different group, when time-integration method is applied. To the in situ field condition of the slope and its design earthquake grade and characteristics of seismic wave, the earthquake wave record in Taft of the USA (Taft, in 1952, Since 99% of total energy is constituted by the energy components of low frequency below 10 In the present dynamical response analysis, the earthquake waves in At present, it is believed for many researchers that to estimate for the vibration strength of field by the vibration velocity of a particle is still the best Under the condition of earthquake magnitude VII (Richter), the displacement, the velocity, and the acceleration pointed to the slope face were all differently amplified with the height increase of monitoring point, referred in It is also found that from The peak acceleration approximately appeared at the seventh second of earthquake process and then it approached to decay, referred in Timely proper backfilling for a mine that has been excavated can enhance the stability of this mine. Alternately putting excavation and backfill operation, it is possible to implement an excavated scheme of relatively steep slope angle through considering 3D deformation effect under the conditions of complex geometries and geomaterials at some rock slopes, by using advanced numerical techniques. Accordingly, in rock engineering practice, such valuable 3D effect should be sufficiently utilized to reduce the harmful deformation of slope. We have applied FLAC The combined use of limit equilibrium and numerical modeling technique such as finite difference technique or finite element method is of very importance to maximize the advantage of both and develop an optimal design scheme of excavation slope in rock engineering. Mechanical deformation patterns and plastic states as well as coupling effect of slope due to fluid flow action are globally considered to further help better understanding the rationality of support design scheme of excavation construction. It is noted that the steep slope excavated scheme proposed for the geological section 73200 is in fact feasible under the condition of no rainfall considered. Consequently, the construction period at the mine was limited from October to June of coming year. Support for this research was partially provided by Major Project of National Natural Science Foundation of China (Contract no. 50490270), Innovative Group Project of National Natural Science Foundation of China (Contract no. 50221402), Major Project of Scientific Research of the Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China (Contract no. 10405). J.L. Feng was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant no. 10572008, and the Natural Science Foundation of Beijing under Grant no. 3063019. These supports are gratefully acknowledged.