Wind-disturbed (1986) and undisturbed primary forest areas (controls) on Changbai Mountain (China) were studied to compare levels of soil nitrogen mineralization. Soil samples were collected at 0–10cm (topsoil) and 10–20cm (subsoil) depths from the vegetation zones of a broadleaf Korean pine forest (BKPF), spruce-fir forest (SFF), and an Erman's birch forest (EBF) at different altitudes. Nitrogen status and mineralization characteristics were studied in the soil samples from a wind-disturbed area where vegetation cover has been restored after 30years of regrowth. Soil organic carbon (SOC) and total nitrogen (TN) contents in the topsoil layer of the three vegetation types were significantly higher than in the subsoil layer. SOC and TN contents in the topsoil layer increased, and soil C/N ratio significantly decreased with increasing altitude. No significant differences in SOC, TN or pH were detected in the wind-disturbed and control area soils of BKPF and EBF. SOC and TN levels in the subsoil layer of SFF were significantly higher in wind-disturbed than in control areas. The topsoil C/N ratios of BKPF and SFF were significantly higher in the control area vs. the wind-disturbed area. After 21d incubation, inorganic nitrogen contents (ammonium nitrogen NH4
                     +-N and nitrate nitrogen NO3
                     −-N) in the soils of BKPF, SFF and EBF increased in both the wind-disturbed and control areas. Ammonium nitrogen (NH4
                     +-N) was the primary inorganic form of nitrogen. The changes in the amount of NH4
                     +-N formed from ammonification contributed to the 57.1–76.2% total amount of nitrogen mineralized (net nitrogen mineralization) and the net nitrogen mineralization rate. The nitrogen mineralization process was mainly the result of net ammonification. Correlation analysis on the soil nitrogen mineralization rate and chemical properties showed that the ammonification rate had strong positive correlation with SOC and the C/N ratio. Nitrification rate was highly correlated with SOC and TN contents, as well as soil pH. Net nitrogen mineralization rate was significantly correlated with SOC and TN contents, C/N ratio, and soil pH. Multiple comparisons analysis of variance (ANOVA) demonstrated that soil nitrogen mineralization was greatly influenced by vegetation type, soil depth, and wind disturbance in the forest soils at different altitudes. Net ammonification and net nitrogen mineralization were significantly affected by wind disturbance. The vegetation cover has undergone restoration for nearly 30years in the wind-disturbed area on Changbai Mountain, but our data demonstrate that differences in soil quality between primary forest and wind-disturbed areas remain significant due to the different vegetation types.Nitrogen is one of the most critical elements in the soils of terrestrial ecosystems affecting plant growth and net primary productivity Wind is the most common disturbance agent in forest ecosystems. Many studies have reported detrimental impacts of wind in disturbed areas of forests. These include effects on tree growth and shape, forest regeneration, forest community structure and composition, and diversity of forest species In 1980s, a rare typhoon destroyed the plant communities within the nature reserve on the west and southwest slopes of Changbai Mountain, China. The forests in the wind-disturbed areas were almost completely gone after removal of the damaged trees. The vegetation in the wind-disturbed areas has recovered to great extent after nearly 30 The wind-disturbed area is located within nature reserves on the west and southwest slopes of Changbai Mountain (41°52′40″–42°01′10″ N, 127°53′37″–128°02′00″ E). The area is 15.75 Significant changes have occurred in the vegetation communities of the wind-disturbed area after nearly 30 Three forest types (BKPF, SFF, and EBF) on Changbai Mountain were chosen along an altitudinal gradient as representatives of the vegetated areas. Investigation sites were located in the wind-disturbed and undisturbed primary forest areas. A total of 3–5 replicates were prepared for each site. The distance between any two sites was > Soil pH was measured using a PHS-3C pH meter (Shanghai Leici). SOC was studied using the auto analyzer of a vario MICRO cube (Eelementar, Germany). To measure TN content, soil samples were first treated with the H The level of soil nitrogen mineralization was determined using an indoor soil incubation method under an oxygen supply according to the following procedure: roots and stones in the soil samples were removed and the soils were sieved using a 4 Soil ammonification and nitrification rates were calculated based on the differences in the concentration of NH Excel 2007 and SPSS 19.0 (SPSS Inc., 2004) were used for data processing and statistical analysis. In the BKPF, SFF, and EBF, the SOC and TN contents were higher at the 0–10 C/N ratios declined with increasing altitude at both 0–10 Inorganic nitrogen (ammonium nitrogen and nitrate nitrogen) contents in all BKPF, SFF, and EBF soils increased in both the control and wind-disturbed areas after 21 The net ammonification rates of BKPF and EBF soils were significantly higher at 0–10 Multiple comparisons ANOVA showed the highly significant influence of wind disturbance and soil depth on net ammonification and nitrogen mineralization. The analysis also demonstrated that soil depth and forest type had significant influences on net nitrification. The effects of the interaction between the wind disturbance and forest type on the net ammonification and nitrogen mineralization were significant but not significant on the net nitrification. The impacts of the interaction between the soil depth and forest type on the net ammonification and nitrogen mineralization were significant and highly significant on the net nitrification. The analysis further indicated that the interaction effects between the wind disturbance and forest type and among the wind disturbance, forest type, as well as soil depth on the net ammonification, net nitrification, and net nitrogen mineralization were not significant. Among the factors analyzed, the influences of wind disturbance and soil depth on net ammonification and nitrogen mineralization were much greater than those of forest type. The soil depth, forest type, and the interaction between the two factors had greater effects on the net nitrification than the wind disturbance (see Soil nutrients increased nitrogen conversion in the soils ( After the destructive effects of typhoon exposure, significant changes in the vegetation types and community structure occurred in the wind-disturbed area on Changbai Mountain The carbon-to-nitrogen ratio (C/N) is a key indicator used to identify soil quality change. Reduction in the C/N ratio is a gauge of accelerated organic matter decomposition  The forest types appeared to exert significant effects on the net nitrification, whereas they had no significant impact on net ammonification and TN mineralization. The interactions among the forest type, wind disturbance, and soil depth had great influences on net ammonification, net nitrification, and net TN mineralization. These results suggest that the differences in nitrogen mineralization in the BKPF, SFF, and EBF soils mainly resulted from the forest types, a finding consistent with other studies Comparative studies were performed on the nitrogen mineralization and net nitrogen mineralization rate in the three types of forest soils in both the control and wind-disturbed areas. The net ammonification, net nitrification, and net nitrogen mineralization rates of BKPF and EBF soils were higher in the control area than in the wind-disturbed area (  SOC, TN, and pH in the BKPF and EBF soils were similar in both the control and wind-disturbed areas and this was also true for the SFF topsoil. However, the C/N ratios of BKPF and SFF topsoil in the control area were significantly higher than in the wind-disturbed area, indicating differences in the nutrient supply of available carbon and nitrogen to the forests, due to the changes in vegetation type in the wind-disturbed area. Compared to SOC and TN contents, the C/N ratio is a more sensitive index of the effect of vegetation changes on soil quality. NH Forest type, soil depth, and alterations in vegetation type caused by wind disturbance exerted significant influences on organic nitrogen mineralization in the forest soils at different altitudes. Although vegetation cover in the wind-disturbed area of Changbai Mountain has largely been restored after 30 This study was supported by National Twelfth Five-year Plan Science and Technology Support Program (2012BAD22B04) and Jinlin Science and Technology Development Program (20120413).