This study investigated the effects of binders and glucono-δ-lactone (GdL) on characteristics of pressure-induced (450MPA for 3min) cold-set restructured pork. Isolated soy protein (SP), wheat flour (WF), and κ-carrageenan (CG) were adopted as binders. The addition of binders improved water-binding properties of restructured pork, and the binders diminished the decrease in water binding properties caused by GdL-induced acidification. Pressure-induced restructured pork prepared with binders showed less harder and more cohesive texture than those of the thermal-treated control (TC). The results indicate that pressure-induced cold-set meat restructuring could be achieved when binders and GdL were used in the formulation.Restructured meat has been recognized as an intermediate value product between burgers and intact muscle steak based on the definition of restructured meat, which is made by comminution and reassembly or binding of constituent meat pieces ( Enzymatic protein cross-linking by microbial transglutaminase has the potential to restructure meat pieces without thermal processing ( Protein undergoes a reversible unfolding or irreversible denaturation during pressurization depending on the applied pressure levels, suggesting that meat pieces can be restructured by high pressure processing. However, based on a study by Glucono-δ-lactone (GdL) can form an acid-induced myofibrillar protein gel ( It is hypothesized that the GdL-induced pH decrease affects binding ability of a protein-based binder more than a carbohydrate-based binder, particularly CG. Therefore, we explored the effect of three different binders with and without GdL on meat binding ability of the pressure-induced restructured pork. Porcine The restructured pork (2 All sample mixtures were weighed prior to thermal and pressure treatments. The casings were removed carefully after the treatment. The surface exudate of the sample chubs was softly wiped off using tissue, and the chubs were weighed again. Yield was determined by percentage weight of the chubs over initial weight. Five grams of sample (three chubs) was taken and homogenized at 10,000 Approximately 1 Three slices (20 The microstructure of the restructured pork was determined by the method of Two sliced samples (1 A randomized complete block design was adopted to evaluate the effect of the binder treatments and acidification. The entire experiment was repeated three times on three different days (n The pH of the restructured pork prepared by high pressure (PC) did not differ from that prepared by thermal-treatment (TC) and was pH The preparation methods (pressurization vs. thermal-treatment) for both controls did not affect WHC of the restructured pork, which was 76–83% ( The WHC patterns in the restructured pork were identical when GdL was added, and the CG and WF treatments displayed the highest WHC among treatments (p The yield of restructured pork also showed a similar pattern to that of WHC ( As depicted in The binder treatments exhibited different textural profiles from those of the TC. The binder treatments resulted in a softer and more cohesive texture than that of the TC (p Adding GdL increased hardness and cohesiveness of the TC (p Because the PC did not show acceptable meat-to-meat binding, the microstructure of the binder treatments was compared with that of the TC, as shown in The CG treatment exhibited wider space within the matrix, mainly due to better water binding properties of CG. Furthermore, the three-dimensional matrix was thicker than that of TC. As postulated by The WF treatment had starch granules in the microstructure. According to a study by Adding SP appeared to completely fill the void space within the meat protein network. Regardless of whether GdL was added, the microstructure of the SP treatment was mostly amorphous, reflecting the action of SP as a filler or extender. Spray-drying is a normal process during commercial SP preparation and the preheated SP lost its hydration ability ( The lightness ( Compared to the TC, the redness ( The TC exhibited the greatest color difference with fresh pork loin ( The present study demonstrated the possibility of pressure-induced cold-set meat restructuring using a binder and GdL. High pressure (450 The authors acknowledge Mr. Ye-Chul Choi and Ms. Kyung-Hun Jung for technical assistance and Haejinmoolsan Co., Ltd. for allowing the high pressure equipment application.