Alkali-silica reaction occurs when reactive silica in aggregates chemically reacts with alkaline components of cement, forming alkali-silica gel that has harmful effects on concrete because of high swelling capacity and internal pressure. In this study, alkali-silica gel pressure measuring (ASGPM) tests were carried out on specimens comprising opal, chert, chalcedony, andesite, greywacke, basalt, ignimbrite, granodiorite and quartzite aggregates obtained from field or open quarries of Turkey for examination of effects of reactive aggregate types on pressure measurements. The highest alkali-silica gel pressure was measured on cylindrical mortar that included opal (2.81MPa), the lowest on mortar containing quartzite (0.26MPa). The rate of alkali-silica gel pressure development was calculated by dividing the pressure values by duration of the experiment. By using these rate values, a new deleterious–innocuous aggregate decision chart was suggested. Furthermore, this decision chart’s classification was compared with ASTM C 289 chemical method, ASTM C 227 mortar bar test, and ASTM C 1260 accelerated mortar bar test method.Research on alkali-silica reaction (ASR) was often focused on the silica-rich gels formed between reactive siliceous aggregates, Ca(OH) Many of the current standard tests were developed shortly after the discovery/identification of alkali-silica reactivity (ASR), in the late 1930s and by 1946 most of the test methods, in use today, were developed. These included the mortar bar test which later became standardized as ASTM C 227 Furthermore, many studies and standards, therefore, suggest many threshold limits in order to distinguish innocuous and harmful aggregates Two typical commercial Type I Portland cements (OPC 42.5) that comply with the features of ASTM C 150 Ten crushed aggregates used in this study were obtained from several open quarries and fields in Turkey ( An alkali-silica gel pressure measuring device (ASGPM) which was developed previous study In this study, two cylindrical moulds of 35 Three standard methods and a new suggested method were used for the determination of reactivity of aggregates. Mortar bar expansion tests were carried out in accordance with ASTM C 1260 standard as well as ASTM C 227 standard. ASTM C 289 chemical method was used to determine the solubility of silica in reactive aggregates used in this study. ASGPM test method was used to determine free gel swelling pressure in mortar. Mass gains of samples after ASGPM tests were carried out, for calculation of reduction in water absorption capacity of gel as a result of cracks forming, were determined by a strength test applied before and after ASGPM tests. In addition, thin sections were prepared for fluorescence microscopy studies. These methods are described below, briefly. Cylindrical moulds were filled with mortar in three layers (two layers for prismatic moulds) of approximately equal volume and each layer is compacted with a tamper. After 24 Mortar bars (25 The accelerated mortar bar test utilizes mortar bars made to the specification for the ordinary mortar bar test, but involves demoulding them after 24 In this method, three representative 25 The water absorption ability of gel causes mass gain in mortar samples after ASGPM tests. Several explanations of mass gain after mortar bar test application have been reported by several researchers The optical fluorescent microscopy technique consists of exciting the specimen to fluoresce by absorption of the shorter wavelengths of light, usually ultraviolet light, and observing this fluorescence under the microscope. There are three methods in which observation of fluorescence is applied in concrete petrography to highlight areas of porosity in the fabric: estimate w/c ratio, delineate crack systems and detect alkali-silica gels. In these methods the concrete must be impregnated with a thin epoxy containing the fluorescent dye and, for the observation of porosity and estimation of w/c ratio, thin sections are required where the concrete has been impregnated with a thin epoxy containing 0.8–1.0% of Hudson Yellow or Fluorescent Brilliant Yellow R. These dyes are listed in the colour index under C.I. solvent yellow 43 Thin sections of optical fluorescence for microscopy study were prepared by Jakobsen Stanton Jakobsen and Thaulow In this study, to examine gel developed on mortar bars under the optical fluorescent microscope, cubic samples were cut from top, middle and bottom of mortar bars ( A sieve set, an aggregate proportion in mass (a/c: 2.25) and mixture proportion (w/c: 0.45) which were recommended in previous study Reactive aggregate contents of samples were arranged as to pessimum proportions of aggregates determined by AMBT tests. Moreover, free ASG pressures of mortar specimens including nine distinct reactive aggregates were determined by ASGPM test methods. The highest alkali-silica gel pressure was measured on mortar specimens that included opal. The lowest alkali-silica gel pressure, however, was measured on mortar containing chalcedony ( Mass gain of samples after ASGPM test was calculated by Eq. The amount of water absorbed by gel increases depending on development of gel and mass gain values of samples initial increase; in addition, gel pressure values of samples increase as a result of water intake by gel ( With the exception of magnitude of ASG pressure, mechanical properties of concrete are very important factors in engineering design. Compressive strength tests, therefore, were carried out to find variation in strength before and after ASGPM tests. Specifications of ASTM C 39 The variations of compressive strength of samples were calculated by Eq. The largest variation and the lowest compressive strength were determined on samples containing opal particles as a result of formation of many cracks and a high volume of water absorption compared to other samples. The relationship between mass gains and variation in compressive strengths shows that compressive strength of samples decreases with increasing mass gain ( Grattan-Bellew calculated expansion rates of concrete prisms made with argillite, hornfels and quartzite ASTM C 289 chemical tests and ASTM C 1260 accelerated mortar bar tests were carried out in order to compare them to the results of ASGPM tests. Expansions of mortar bar which included reactive aggregates in pessimum content were compared with alkali-silica gel pressures values of reactive aggregates. The comparison shows that falls in the expansion rates of mortar bar samples, which included highly reactive aggregates, depend on test duration ( If expansion of the mortar bars exceeds 0.05% after 3 months and 0.10% after 6 months, the aggregates are considered reactive according to ASTM C 227. Reactive aggregate determination by ASGPM tests was found to be almost compatible with the classification of ASTM C 227 ( Several researchers reported that the chemical test could not be recommended as an acceptance test for aggregates; however, because of its widespread use in the past, some discussion of the problems with ASTM C 289 test is warranted In ASTM C 289 chemical test applications, basalt aggregate was identified as deleterious and chalcedony aggregate as potentially deleterious ( On the basis of the work reported in this paper, the following conclusions have been drawn: In ASTM C 1260 standard, expansion measurements must be realized in 15 Many researchers reported that AMBT was not qualified for slowly reactive aggregates such as gneiss, basalt, ignimbrite, etc. Low expansion values have been recorded after the 14th day in ASTM C 1260 tests due to irregular crack propagations, prismatic shape, and warping due to a length of sample. Sample length in the ASGPM test is shorter (250 Ignimbrite, basalt, granodiorite and quartzite were classified as innocuous when accepting 100 Eventually, the decision chart of ASGPM test must be tested for many aggregate types. In addition, an application of ASGPM test for concrete specimens must be developed. This work was funded by both Turkish National Scientific Committee (Project No. ICTAG A021) and Hacettepe University Research Funds (Project No. 00.01.602.008).