Professor Schönert was born in Döbeln, Saxony in 1927. After his formative years and military service, he got an apprenticeship as a radio mechanic but started soon after his studies in Physics at the Technical University of Karlsruhe in 1950. After graduating in 1957, he continued with his studies under Professor Rumpf in the newly created Research Institute of Mechanical Processing Technology at TU Karlsruhe as one of the Institute's first PhD students. Professor Schönert specialized in research in particle breakage but was heavily involved in the work building the Institute. He graduated in 1966 with a dissertation “Einzelkorn-Druckzerkleinerung und Zerkleinerungskinetik” (single particle compressive crushing and breakage kinetics). He then joined Professor Fuerstenau's group at the Department of Material Science at University California in Berkeley continuing his studies in particle breakage. After 2 During his career he trained 36 doctorate students, many of them now continuing his legacy in particle process research. He is best remembered by his contribution to the energy efficiency of particle breakage as the inventor of the High Pressure Grinding Roll (HPGR). He demonstrated that the inter-particle crushing process it used required significantly less energy than conventional technology. The first German patent was issued in 1979 and a subsequent US patent in 1982. The HPGR became commercially available in 1984 and has become a major process alternative in the minerals processing industry. Professor Schönert received the SME Antoine M. Gaudin award in 1987 and the first Hans Rumpf gold medal in 1991, established that year by DECHEMA. He was awarded the AIME Frank. F. Aplan award in 1996 and received the IMPC Lifetime Achievement Award at the International Minerals Processing Congress in Aachen in 1997. He was nominated honorary doctor by the Freiberg University of Mining and Technology in 2004. The mineral processing community pays tribute to a great scholar and inventor and a warm personal friend to many of us.