In this work, luminescent bioplastic composite filaments for 3D printing were fabricated from polylactic acid (PLA) and samarium doped magnesium aluminate phosphor (MgAl2O4:Sm3+). The phosphor was prepared by a metal-complex decomposition method. The obtained powder was then modified by 3-aminopropyl triethoxysilane to improve compatibility with PLA matrix. Untreated and treated phosphors exhibited characteristic photoluminescent (PL) peaks of Sm3+ ion. Composite filaments of PLA with different amounts of phosphors (0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 phr) were produced by an extrusion process. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) scans have revealed that the phosphor fillers lowered glass-transition (Tg), crystallization (Tc), and melting (Tm) temperatures of the PLA. PL measurements have shown luminescent properties of 3D printed samples resembling those of phosphor powders. Luminescent intensity was increased with the increasing ratio of phosphors. The phosphors not only developed luminescence but also strengthened mechanical properties of the composites. Furthermore, surface modification was able to improve the mechanical properties of the composite filaments as evident in a series of mechanical tests.In recent years, biodegradable and renewable plastics have gained considerable attention due to a heightened demand in reducing environmental pollutions. Polylactic acid (PLA), a bioplastic produced from renewable resources such as corns and sugarcanes, has been proven to offer a viable solution Many processing techniques are used for PLA fabrication. Remarkably, 3D printing has recently gained significant interest as it offers a higher potential for the manufacturing of complex-shaped products unachievable by conventional polymer processing routes which heavily rely on molds e.g. compression molding and injection molding MgAl Firstly, polylactic acid (PLA) pellets and the fillers were mixed and then extruded into filaments by a twin-screw extruder. The obtained filaments were cut into master-batch pellets. Then, PLA pellets and the master-batch pellets were mixed and extruded by a single-screw extruder to the composites with final compositions of 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 phr. The neat PLA and the composite filaments were printed and grouped into different samples and testing specimens using a commercial 3D printer (Wanhao Duplicator i3 plus). Characterization of the obtained phosphors and the composite filaments were carried out by the following equipment. Fourier-Transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy was performed by Fourier-Transform infrared spectrophotometer (Bruker, Alpha FT-IR spectrometer). Samples were finely ground with KBr and pressed into pellets prior to measurement. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out at room temperature in an X-ray diffractometer (X'PertPRO MPD diffractometer) operating at 40 kV and 30 mA using nickel filtered CuKa radiation. The topography and element analysis of the samples were observed using a Scanning Electron Microscope and Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM/EDS, Quanta 450 FEI) operating at an acceleration voltage of 20 kV. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC, METTLER TOLEDO STARe SYSTEM) was studied from 25 °C to 180 °C at a rate of 10 °C/min. Standard procedures, ASTM FT-IR, XRD and SEM results (  Prepared luminescent composite filaments were printed to a set of designed shapes by the Wanhao Duplicator 3D printer ( Samples with different shapes ( Luminescent bioplastic composite filaments were prepared by mixing PLA and treated/untreated MgAl The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the National Research Council of Thailand (NRCT) and Kasetsart University Research and Development Institute (KURDI). Appreciation is also expressed to the Department of Materials Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Kasetsart University for supporting research facilities. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: