The uncertainty arising from laboratory sampling (sub-sampling) can compromise the accuracy of analytical results in highly inherent heterogeneous materials, such as solid waste. Here, we aim at advancing our fundamental understanding on the possibility for relatively unbiased, yet affordable and practicable sub-sampling, benefiting from state of the art equipment, theoretical calculations by the theory of sampling (ToS) and implementation of best sub-sampling practices. Solid recovered fuel (SRF) was selected as a case of a solid waste sample with intermediate heterogeneity and chlorine (Cl) as an analyte with intermediate variability amongst waste properties. ToS nomographs were constructed for different sample preparation scenarios presenting the trend of uncertainty during sub-sampling. Nomographs showed that primary shredding (final d90 ≤ 0.4 cm) can reduce the uncertainty 11 times compared to an unshredded final sub-sample (d ≈ 3 cm), whereas cryogenic shredding in the final sub-sample can decrease the uncertainty more than three times compared to primary shredding (final d90 ≤ 0.015 cm). Practices that can introduce bias during sub-sampling, such as mass loss, moisture loss and insufficient Cl recovery were negligible. Experimental results indicated a substantial possibility to obtain a representative final sub-sample (uncertainty ≤ 15%) with the established sub-sampling plan (57–93%, with 95% confidence), although this possibility can be considerably improved by drawing two final sub-samples instead (91–98%, with 95% confidence). The applicability of ToS formula in waste-derived materials has to be investigated: theoretical ToS calculations assume a poorer performance of the sub-sampling plan than evidenced by the experimental results.Analysis of variance Bomb calorimetry Mineralogical factor Sampling constant European Committee of Standardization Chlorine Particle size European Commission Shape factor Fundamental error Granulometric factor High density polyethylene Ion chromatography Liberation factor Mechanical treatment Moisture content Mass of sample Mass of lot Municipal solid waste Sodium chloride Near infrared Polyethylene terephthalate Polypropylene Particle size distribution Polyvinyl chloride Recovery Solid recovered fuel Concentration of total chlorine Weight concentration on dry basis Quantifying and harnessing variability remains a major challenge for turning waste materials into secondary resources, and therefore a key barrier to a genuine circular economy ( The relevant theoretical approaches and practical recommendations benefiting from the Theory of Sampling (ToS) ( The selection of sub-sampling techniques and shredding processes constitute the sub-sampling plan. The performance of a variety of sub-sampling techniques, such as riffle splitting, coning and quartering, fractional shovelling, etc. is described elsewhere ( However, incorrect practices induced during sub-sampling, such as human mistakes, loss of mass, contamination, chemical modification, physical and biological alteration of the sample ( The establishment of a sampling and sub-sampling plan able to meet end-users requirements (fitness for purpose) is a critical quality assurance measure ( Herein, we aim at advancing our fundamental understanding on the possibility for relatively un-biased, yet affordable and practicable sub-sampling, benefiting from state of the art equipment (e.g. riffle dividers and cryogenic shredding), theoretical calculations by ToS (nomograms) and careful implementation of best sub-sampling practices, with a view to minimize bias. To this, based on an empirically optimal sub-sampling configuration, we: (i) quantify the effects of alternative shredding options on the obtainment of representative test sub-samples based on ToS; (ii) examine the introduction of bias during sub-sampling; (iii) assess the performance of the selected sub-sampling plan according to experimentally derived results; and iv) establish a fitness for purpose sub-sampling plan for solid waste characterization. We demonstrate these for the case of SRF, chosen as a case of solid waste-derived material with intermediate heterogeneity; and for the analyte of total chlorine (Cl), chosen as the one with intermediate variability for solid waste mixtures. Results complement our previous efforts on sub-sampling uncertainty qunatification ( We used a typical SRF sample (ca. 1 kg) produced from residual MSW in a mechanical treatment (MT) plant in the UK, processing a mixture of residual household MSW and commercial waste (corporate name withheld for confidentiality reasons). The analytical technique for the determination of total Cl concentration (Total [Cl]) (see 2.2.6) involved reagents, 0.2 M KOH as absorption solution, Palintest acidifying and silver nitrate tablets (Sigma-Aldrich, UK). Liquid nitrogen was used for the cryogenic shredding. Reference materials (Sigma-Aldrich, UK) were used to resemble SRF composition and calculate the recovery of Cl: powder microcrystalline cellulose, alkali lignin, xylan from beechwood, high density polyethylene (HDPE), isotactic polypropylene (PP), polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polyvinyl chloride (PVC). We estimated the sub-sampling uncertainty for different sub-sampling scenarios using state of the art equipment and the ToS formula (see 2.2.2) to examine the beneficial role of shredding and establish a sub-sampling protocol that fulfils the fitness for purpose requirements. The design of this protocol focused on the development of a straightforward and affordable sub-sampling process suitable for solid waste materials. During the established sub-sampling process based on practices and equipment proposed by ToS, we monitored incorrect sub-sampling practices to examine the adverse effects of shredding on sub-sampling uncertainty. The selected critical component was Cl, which is the most important technical parameter for SRF applications ( The sub-sampling process consisted of two stages of shredding and multiple stages of mass splitting according to Cutting mill is suitable for primary size reduction of highly heterogeneous materials, such as solid waste including soft, medium-hard, elastic and fibrous materials able to achieve a defined final fineness from the first shredding run ( We used the theoretical model for the calculation of This formula could, also, be used in sub-sampling either for the calculation of minimum sub-sampling uncertainty (FE) for a given sample size or for the calculation of the required sample mass to obtain a specified FE ( The square root of s Sampling constant, C, is the product of four factors related to the characteristics of the sample: The mineralogical factor, c, is defined as follows: The factors required for the calculation of the sampling constant, C (Eq.     Note that the above selected values of sampling factors were used only as estimators based on ToS and SRF characteristics. The precise quantification of these factors is difficult, because a significant amount of information, not available here, is required for the target material ( The FE was calculated based on three sample preparation scenarios: Special attention was paid to cryomill due to its effective shredding ability and confined laboratory application. We examined the effect of several configuration settings provided by the cryomill on the FE so that to select the most suitable shredding program. Specifically, four cryomill programs were selected: i) P2 with 2 grinding cycles, 2 min grinding time, 1 min intermediate cooling and 30 Hz grinding frequency; ii) P4 with 4 grinding cycles, 2 min grinding time, 1 min intermediate cooling and 30 Hz grinding frequency; iii) P5 with 5 grinding cycles, 2 min grinding time, 2 min intermediate cooling and 30 Hz grinding frequency; and iv) P9 P5 with 9 grinding cycles, 2 min grinding time, 2.5 min intermediate cooling and 25 Hz grinding frequency. Common metrics of PSD, such as d Despite the calculation of FE that provides the minimum uncertainty under a perfect sub-sampling process, we monitored practices that may introduce bias and increase the uncertainty arising from sub-sampling. Specifically, three main aspects of incorrect sub-sampling practices mostly related to shredding were checked: (1) Loss of sample mass by weighing individually the sub-samples after each step of sub-sampling; (2) evaporation of moisture during primary and secondary shredding by obtaining 3 test sub-samples of 7 g with riffle splitters from a pre-dried sub-sample of 50 g and taking 6 replicates of residual moisture (see 2.2.6) before and after each shredding process; and (3) analytical error respecting Cl recovery by using reference materials. Synthetic mixtures with known composition and consequently Total [Cl] resembling the composition of SRF were prepared and analysed. Specifically, two mixtures composed of powered biomass polymers, such as cellulose, xylan (common type of hemicellulose) and lignin, and plastic polymers, such as HDPE, PP, PET and PVC with Total [Cl] 0.62% w/w and 1.42% w/w, respectively, were prepared. The presence of Cl in the synthetic mixtures was attributed only to the presence of PVC with Total [Cl] 53.7% w/w. The recovery of Cl ( The analytical results of Total [Cl] in SRF sub-samples were corrected as shown below: Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted to statistically compare: the 4 different cryomill programs with respect to PSD metrics; and the moisture content of sub-samples before and after each shredding process (TIBCO Statistica Graphical illustrations were designed to assess the experimental results derived from the analysis of 16 test sub-samples, in which three test portions obtained for the determination of Total [Cl] and moisture content (MC) in SRF sample. Specifically, 95% confidence interval error bars of mean values for each test sub-sample were designed to assess the precision of analytical measurements. Additionally, boxplots were designed to provide the dispersion of Total [Cl] and MC arising from the average values of test sub-samples and classify the initially obtained SRF sample based on the classification scheme ( We estimated the possibility to obtain a representative test sub-sample following the established sub-sampling plan for determination of Total [Cl] by calculating the confidence interval for binomial proportions with three different methods (normal approximation, exact Clopper-Pearson and Wilson score method). Further details can be found in the Wet laser diffraction analysis was used to determine the PSD of the test sub-samples shredded by cryomill. Measurements performed by Mastersizer (2000E hydro SM, Malvern, UK) and five replicates taken for each cryomill program. The MC in SRF, expressed in % w/w, was determined according to the The Total [Cl] in SRF measured with the standard method BC (  However, the theoretical model of ToS (Eq. From the statistical point of view, the PSD is significantly different amongst the shredding programs. However, this difference (µm-scale) is negligible compared to the difference (cm-scale) between the particle size before (3 cm) and after (0.4 cm) primary shredding. The FE of the final sub-sampling stage is considerably lower than the FE of previous stages, where the particle size is one order of magnitude greater. For example, in the most extended shredding program (P9) the FE arising from the final stage (0.3%) constitutes less than 1% of the overall FE (33.6%). Even in the least extended program (P2) the final stage constitutes less than 10% of the overall FE. We selected P4, as it was the best combination of sample homogeneity (low FE), cost and time savings. Nomographs constructed for the three different shredding scenarios: sub-sampling without shredding (NS), sub-sampling with primary shredding (PS), and current sub-sampling plan (CS) ( For the three scenarios the process from point A to B is identical as shredding took place after the first stage of rifle splitting, while scenarios PS (points A-B-D-E-F) and CS (points A-B-D-E-G-H) are identical from point A (from sample of 850 g) to D (test sub-sample of ca. 7 g) as secondary shredding applied after the obtainment of the test sub-sample. For these two scenarios (PS and CS), the 1st stage of riffle splitting (from A to B) applied before primary shredding introduces the highest uncertainty (FE: 23.9%) compared to the next sub-sampling stages due to the largest particle size (d ≈ 3 cm). This phenomenon indicates the urgent need for primary shredding, which drops the FE in the next stages of rifle splitting. If no primary shredding applied, which is the NS scenario (A-B-C), the uncertainty would be increased logarithmically during sub-sampling (overall FE: 1272.6%). The considerably lower uncertainty observed in the PS scenario (overall FE: 113.7%) indicates that primary shredding applied after the 1st stage of riffle splitting can reduce the overall FE more than 11 times. By comparing the PS with the CS scenario (overall FE: 33.5%), the overall FE decreases more than 3 times if the particle size of the test sub-sample drops from 0.4 cm to 0.015 cm. The beneficial role of cryomill is also revealed by the contribution of the final stage of sub-sampling to the overall FE for the two scenarios: The moisture evaporation during shredding may lead to the miscalculation of residual MC and therefore of Total [Cl] expressed on a dry basis. Based on the ANOVA test, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that shredding processes (primary and secondary) do not affect the MC (see SI.3). Similarly,  The recovery (  Assuming that the average values of 16 measurements represent the actual Total [Cl] and MC in the initially obtained SRF sample, then the potential to over- or under-estimate the critical component in the sample is present by drawing one test sub-sample. For example, the selection of the 4th sub-sample with the highest Total [Cl] (1.38% w/w The difference between the minimum and maximum value leads to a range of 0.48% w/w The determination of Total [Cl] in the 16 sub-samples leads to different classification results amongst the SRF sub-samples: 7 out of 16 sub-samples are designated as class code 3 and 9 out of 16 sub-samples are designated as class code 4 ( In the case of MC, test sub-samples are more representative. For example, the 5th sub-sample with the highest MC (17.1% w/w) would overestimate the MC in the sample by 2.5%, whereas the 16th sub-sample with the lowest MC (16.3% w/w) would underestimate the MC by 2.2%. The difference between these values leads to a range of 0.8% w/w, which is equal with a relative range of 4.6%. The interval estimations for binomial proportion showed that the total number of representative SRF test sub-sample lies between 57 and 93% of total population with 95% confidence following the current sub-sampling plan (see SI.5). Therefore, the possibility to obtain a non-representative test sub-sample for the determination of Total [Cl] is not negligible. However, this possibility can be considerably reduced if we obtain and analyse two test sub-samples instead. By averaging the analytical results of two test sub-samples (see SI.4), we found only 5 pairs out of 120 that were non-representative for the determination of Total [Cl]. Specifically, the total number of representative pairs of test sub-samples lies between 91 and 98% of total population with 95% confidence (see SI.5). The properties of SRF should be expressed as intervals and not as individual values due to high constitutional heterogeneity so that to address the quality assurance in analytical characterization of solid waste ( First, by comparing three different sample preparation scenarios through ToS nomographs, the beneficial role of shredding in the representativeness of test sub-samples for Total [Cl] determination in SRF was quantified. Primary shredding (d Second, practices related to shredding that could introduce bias were assessed as negligible with careful execution of the suggested sub-sampling plan. Specifically, potentially incorrect sub-sampling practices were demonstrated here to be minimised: (1) shredding did not affect the MC, assuring the validity of analyte determination on a dry reporting basis; (2) the loss of sample mass was negligible (0.7% w/w) – but, the operator’s experience is crucial and mass loss could be higher if attention is not paid to best practice; and (3) the recovery of Total [Cl] from cryogenically shredded test portions of artificial SRF comprising a mixture of reference materials reached 98.3% - an acceptable level of analytical error. Third, experimental results showed that the established sub-sampling plan lead to representative analytical results related to the determination of MC (relative range less than 4.6%), an analyte with relatively low variability. However, in the case of Total [Cl], obtaining one test sub-sample entails the risk of incorrect classification of SRF. Less than 20% of total population of test sub-samples were not representative, assessed as exceeding the 15% upper limit suggested by the literature. However, the selection of this limit value is arbitrary as there is no relevant comparative evidence in the solid waste management sector. The possibility of obtaining a non-representative test sub-sample under the current sub-sampling plan lies between 7 and 43% (95% confidence), whereas drawing and averaging two test sub-samples instead, considerably reduces that risk (2–9% with 95% confidence). However, the cost and time of sub-sampling and analysis would be respectively increased. Experimental results showed that the established sub-sampling plan can result in representative sub-samples (13 out of 16) with uncertainty less than 15%, whereas the maximum overestimation observed in the 4th test sub-sample (27.6%) did not exceed the theoretical ToS calculations (FE: 33.5%). These findings support the need for exploring the suitability of the ToS-based formula applied for the determination of analytes with considerably variable concentrations amongst the particles/components of waste-derived materials. The current sub-sampling scheme was conducted by using and adhering to optimal, yet practicable and affordable sampling practices and equipment, which is verified by the ability of such laboratory set up and operational regime to render satisfactory measurements. Therefore, the suggested sub-sampling plan can be used as a fitness for purpose approach to minimise potential bias, and could be incorporated in the relevant SRF sample preparation standards (BS 15413, 2011; None. We are grateful to the lab technician personnel at the Solid Waste Management and Sample Preparation laboratory at the University of Leeds, for training and generic quality assurance support. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. Doctoral researcher S. Gerassimidou was funded by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: