Fort Union lignite coal samples were subjected to a series of aqueous leaching experiments to understand the extraction behavior of the rare earth elements (REE). This testing was aimed at understanding the modes of occurrence of the REE in the lignite coals, as well as to provide foundational data for development of rare earth extraction processes. In a first series of tests, a sequential leaching process was used to investigate modes of occurrence of the REE of select lignite coals. The tests involved sequential exposure to solvents consisting of water, ammonium acetate and dilute hydrochloric acid (HCl). The results indicated that water and ammonium acetate extracted very little of the REE, indicating the REE are not present as water soluble or ion-exchangeable forms. However, the data shows that a large percentage of the REE were extracted with the hydrochloric acid (80–95 wt%), suggesting presence in HCl-soluble mineral forms such as carbonates, and/or presence as organic complexes. A second series of tests was performed involving single-step leaching with dilute acids and various operating parameters, including acid type, acid concentration, acid/coal contact time and coal particle size. For select samples, additional tests were performed to understand the results of leaching, including float-sink density separations and humic acid extraction. The results have shown that the majority of REE in Fort Union lignites appear to be associated weakly with the organic matrix of the coals, most likely as coordination complexes of carboxylic acid groups. The light REE and heavy REE exhibit different behaviors, however. The extractable light REE appear to have association both in acid-soluble mineral forms and as organic complexes, whereas the extractable heavy REE appear to be almost solely associated with the organics. Scandium behavior was notably different than yttrium and the lanthanides, and the data suggests the extractable content is primarily associated as acid-soluble mineral forms.Rare earth elements (REE) include a group of elements with atomic numbers from 57 to 71, making up the lanthanide series of elements consisting of lanthanum (La), cerium (Ce), praseodymium (Pr), neodymium (Nd), promethium (Pm), samarium (Sm), europium (Eu), gadolinium (Gd), terbium (Tb), dysprosium (Dy), holmium (Ho), erbium (Er), thulium (Tm), ytterbium (Yb), and lutetium (Lu). Yttrium (Y) and scandium (Sc) are often included in the group because of their similar properties, and have been included in this study. Groupings into light REE (LREE) and heavy REE (HREE) are generally accepted according to the molecular weight, with this study defining LREE to include La through Sm and HREE to include Eu through Lu as well as Sc and Y. Pm is radioactive and is not found in natural settings. REE have sometimes been known as ‘chemical vitamins’ because combining very small amounts with other materials can result in vastly different properties. According to the In recent years, due to control of the REE markets by China and new (and growing) demand, especially for the less abundant HREE, alternative sources of REE are being considered. Among these are coal and coal byproducts, which can have REE that are concentrated above crustal averages and are often relatively enriched in the HREE compared to traditional mineral deposits ( The U.S. ranks only behind China in total coal production, at about 900,000 thousand short tons in 2015 ( This paper describes the use of acidic leaching experiments both to examine the modes of occurrence of the REE in Forth Union lignites, as well as to examine the ability to extract and recover REE from selected coals. The efficacy of various acid types and acid concentrations is analyzed along with other parameters such as acid/coal contact time and coal particle size. Kinetics evaluations are also discussed. The testing and results shed new light on the modes of occurrence of REE in low-rank coals as well as provide foundational data for REE recovery process development efforts. Development of REE recovery processes must be accompanied by a thorough understanding of the modes of occurrence of the REE in the materials. A number of studies ( syngenetic clastic and pyroclastic minerals or minerals of terrigenous and tuffaceous origin, diagenetic and epigenetic minerals of authigenic origin, and organic compounds.  It is important to note, however, in each of the above Finkelman et al. studies only one lignite sample was analyzed and it had fairly low initial REE content not typical of a REE-rich coal that would (presumably) be targeted for a commercial extraction technology. For example, the lignite coal would have fallen well below the 1000 ppm rare earth oxide (REO) concentration (ash basis) proposed as the economic cutoff by As summarized by As noted in a recent study by As noted above, several studies have undertaken the task of determining the modes of occurrence of REE in LRCs. However, a general consensus is difficult to ascertain. While some previous studies have investigated the REE modes of occurrence in Fort Union lignite coals ( The following sections detail the analytical and experimental methods used in this study. All REE abundance determinations were completed using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), which has been detailed by The sequential extractions ( A 75-g sample of −45 μm (−325-mesh) dried coal is stirred with 160 mL of deionized water to extract water-soluble minerals such as sodium chloride or sodium sulfate. After being stirred for 24 h at room temperature, the water–coal mixture is filtered. The filtered coal is dried, and a portion is removed to be tested by ICP-MS to determine the concentration of each element remaining. The mass of sample removed is such that at least 1 g of ash can be produced after igniting the sample. The residues are then mixed with 160 mL of 1 M ammonium acetate and stirred at 70 °C for 24 h to extract the elements associated with the coal as ion-exchangeable cations present primarily as the salts of organic acids. Ammonium acetate has also been reported to extract some carbonate mineral forms ( The mass balances for the REE in these experiments (and subsequently in the single-step experiments described in The single acid extractions testing was completed in a similar procedure as the chemical fractionation. The dried coal (ground to various particle sizes) was contacted with the acid at 40 °C for the desired contact time (1 to 48 h in this study). All tests with the exception of the 48 h tests involved a single contact period. The 48 h tests were completed with two 24 h periods, with each period using a fresh batch of acid. For all of the tests, the ratio of coal to acid solution was 60 g (dry mass) to 125 mL. Upon completion of the extractions, the slurry was filtered and the solid residue recovered for analysis by ICP-MS. The percentage extraction of the REE was determined in the same fashion as described previously for the sequential extractions. This paper also includes multi-specific gravity float-sink separations data for one sample ( Finally, one set of data involving extraction of humic acid from a coal sample is provided (  The United States Geological Survey has compiled a report that details the geology and stratigraphy of Fort Union coals, which are of Paleocene age ( Based on the sampling and characterization by the authors to date, the Hagel coal samples represent fairly typical REE concentrations for the existing North Dakota mines. Thus, they were chosen for this study for comparative purposes. The Harmon-Hanson samples, however, represent exceptionally high concentrations, exceeding the economic threshold of 1000 ppm (ash basis) proposed by The results of the sequential solvent extraction for four of the samples shown previously in In general, REE extraction with HCl decreases with increasing molecular weight, with the notable exception of scandium for sample 6A (only sample where Sc was measured). For this sample, there is clearly a very different mode of occurrence as compared to the rest of the REE. In general, this would be expected given scandium's lack of f-orbital electrons. Although the sequential solvent extraction method cannot directly distinguish the modes of occurrence of the HCl-soluble phases, the data, combined with previous studies in the literature and the experience of these authors, can provide some useful insight. Unlike high-rank coals, LRCs have high levels of oxygen associated with the organic matrix. The oxygen is in the form of chemical functional groups (i.e., carboxylic acid groups - COOH) that can be bonding sites for inorganic elements such as alkali and alkaline earth metals and multivalent metal ions via cation exchange and coordination complexes ( LRCs contain high levels of natural organic ligands, such as humic acids, that naturally complex (or chelate) multivalent metals such as REE. To confirm the presence of metals bound by these natural ligands, previous studies have used various organic solvents to extract targeted compounds of the organic fraction in the coals and evaluate the partitioning of the metals to determine their modes of occurrence. In efforts not detailed in this paper ( A possible organic form could be organometallic complexes associated with carboxylic acid groups in the lignites. Humic acids also have a suite of other naturally occurring functional groups such as amines, thiols, phosphines and phenols that can also provide inorganic element binding sites. However, because the HCl-leaching can attack some mineral forms (i.e. carbonates), we cannot rule out acid-soluble REE bearing minerals being a significant component. The results for the sequential extraction tests clearly demonstrate that the majority of REE in the lignite coals were leachable with dilute HCl. Additional evaluations with single-step acid leaching were undertaken to understand the impact of various parameters. The data are presented and discussed in the following sections. This information provides foundational data for subsequent REE extraction process development (efforts by these authors currently ongoing), as well as sheds additional light on the REE modes of occurrence in the lignite coals. Two of the samples listed previously in The key results from the data in For the E2B1 sample (Hagel B coal), the low acid concentration tests resulted in fairly low extraction of the REE, ranging from <1 wt% to about 12 wt%. The HCl provided the highest extraction, with the H For the higher acid concentrations for the E2B1 sample, as expected, much higher overall extraction resulted. For the 1 M HCl, the results shown in For the 6A-1 sample (Harmon-Hanson carbonaceous clay), the results are considerably different than the E2B1 sample (shown in The data in Scandium and yttrium can be observed to have some different chemical reactivity trends in In summary, the acid screening leaching tests have provided valuable information regarding the types of acidic leaching solutions that are effective in extracting REE from various Fort Union lignites. Each of the acid types and acid concentrations resulted in markedly different REE leaching behaviors. While pH of the acid solution plays an important role, the chemistry of the solution also dictates the REE extraction behavior. Solubility of extraction products as well as the type of anion(s) associated with the REE in the coal also likely play significant roles in the leaching behavior with a specific acid solution. The testing described previously in The data also show a significant jump in LREE extraction between 8 and 14 h of contact time. This suggests association of a fraction of the LREE content in a mineral form that only became solubilized after 8 h. For this data set, when looking at the step change for lanthanum and cerium observed between 8 and 14 h, it appears that about 20–30 wt% of the LREE are associated as acid-soluble mineral forms, with the remaining 20–30 wt% of the extractable LREE likely associated in weaker bonding forms such as organic complexes. On the contrary, this data suggests that the extractable HREE are almost entirely associated in these weaker bonding forms as indicated by their high extractability under short contact times with the 0.5 M H   The extraction kinetics are especially important for any process development efforts since they determine process throughputs and/or equipment sizes. This data is currently being used by these authors in an ongoing effort to develop an REE extraction process for lignite coals. However, as has been noted in this section, this type of analysis also provides additional information regarding REE modes of occurrence that is not observable at equilibrium conditions. All of the tests detailed in Each of the tests described in As described previously in The data for the high-ash (76 wt% ash yield) sample are particularly interesting. About 40–60% REE extraction resulted, which was unexpectedly high given the high ash yield of the sample and presumably the presence of primarily non-acid-soluble REE-bearing minerals in the inorganic materials (mainly clay minerals) associated with the coal seam. To further investigate this, float-sink separations were performed on the high-ash 6A-1 sample and each of the specific gravity fractions were analyzed for total REE content. The float-sink data are shown in The following data and discussion have been included in this paper because it provides additional evidence of organic association of REE in Fort Union lignite coals. Leonardite is a naturally oxidized lignite coal that is typically associated with surface mines. Leonardite is currently mined commercially at two sites in North Dakota, and due to its very high percentage of humates (significantly higher than non-oxidized lignites), has application in industries such as agriculture and oil & gas operations ( A sample of commercially available leonardite was procured for leaching studies (see In addition to the sulfuric acid leaching tests, the starting leonardite was also subjected to humic acid extraction using the acetone-H Others ( While we believe this type of method can provide useful data and supports association of REE in organic complexes, additional testing is needed on more samples, specifically non-oxidized lignites. Targeted organic extractions accompanied by detailed analysis of the organic structure and chemistry of the extracts, combined with inorganic element analysis can be a valuable tool in better understanding the organic associations of the REE and other non-mineral inorganic elements in low-rank coals. A series of leaching experiments have been performed both to provide information to determine the modes of occurrence of REE in Forth Union lignite coals and to identify acidic solvent types and operating parameters than can be effective for extraction and recovery of the REE from the lignites. This foundational research is currently being used in the development of a novel low-cost REE extraction technology that has exhibited promising technical performance to date. Overall, about 70–90 wt% of the REE are extractable with dilute acids at mild temperature when given sufficient contact time. At short contact time, the data suggest that the REE associated in weak bonding forms such as organic complexes are preferentially extracted over acid-soluble (0.5 M H Combined with a review of the literature and these authors experience, we believe the data discussed in this paper strongly point towards the primary mode of occurrence of REE in Fort Union lignites being organic complexes, most likely associated with carboxylic acid functional groups that are uniquely prevalent in low-rank coals. However, the data also suggest that multiple organic bonding types are likely, such as strong bonding directly to the carbon matrix of the lignite coals. Further, the data suggest that for the LREE, there is likely to be up to about 30 wt% of the total REE associated in acid-soluble mineral forms (i.e. carbonates, sulfates, some oxides). In contrast, the data suggest that little of the HREE are associated in these acid-soluble mineral forms. The HREE appear to have a larger degree of organic association than the LREE. Scandium behavior was notably different than the other REE, and the extractable fraction appears to have a primarily acid-soluble mineral form. We recognize that limited samples have been analyzed in this study, as well as the qualitative nature of some of our conclusions. We also recommend that future work employing this type of leaching analysis approach be accompanied by evaluation of the mineralogy of the coals both before and after the leaching to identify changes in the mineral content and forms and apply that information to the behavior of the REE or other elements of interest. This should help to form more quantitative conclusions. Despite these limitations, we feel that the data presented are a valuable contribution and sheds new light on the modes of occurrence of the REE in lignite coals. This research was supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at