Objectives
                  The aim of the present descriptive study was to record data on maxillofacial trauma in working adults in a 3 year-period in a reference trauma centre in Chile.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A descriptive study was conducted on cases of maxillofacial fractures treated in the Maxillofacial Surgery Unit of the Hospital Clínico Mutual de Seguridad, Santiago de Chile, over a 3-year period. Frequency, type and cause of injury, as well as age and gender distribution were analysed.
               
                  Results
                  The study population consisted of 283 patients, 259 (91.5%) males and 24 (8.5%) females with a mean age of 40.5 (SD: ±20.5) years. In 499 fracture sites zygomatic fractures were the most prevalent location of the 499 fracture sites, in both males and females (48%), followed by orbital fractures (27.2%), and jaw fractures (21.2%). The most common affected part of the face was isolated mid-facial fractures. Traffic-accident-related fractures were the most common cause (39.2%), with the largest proportion of these involving a car accident.
               
                  Discussion
                  The results presented are in line with other studies and the analysis of this report provides important data for the design of plans for injury prevention, especially for measures in road traffic.Maxillofacial fractures are an important cause of morbidity and may lead to both aesthetic and functional consequences. The epidemiology of these injuries varies according to the type, severity and causes depending on the studied population. Geographic area and socio-economic status of the population can affect the results of the different studies. However, recent studies show that damages in the maxillofacial and skull area are usually inflicted by trauma, specifically accidents caused by motorcycle, assaults and falls. The accumulation of maxillofacial fractures data in the long term is important, since it allows the development and assessment of preventive measures. Unluckily, there are no descriptive studies about patients with facial fractures in the Chilean population. Besides, there is few available information regarding the incidences and causes. The aim of this descriptive study is the compilation of information about traumatic facial fractures in adult population within a reference centre of trauma level I. A retrospective study was conducted in cases of facial fracture that were treated by the Maxillofacial Surgery Unit of Hospital Clínico Mutual de Seguridad (Security Mutual Clinical Hospital), Santiago de Chile, in a 3-year period (from January 2009 to December 2011). This information was acquired from the revision of electronic clinical records. The causes of facial trauma were classified in five categories: falls, traffic accidents (motorcycle, vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian impact), violence, a blow with an object (tool or industrial material) and industrial accident. All the patients with maxillofacial fractures that were treated with open or close reduction were included. Facial fractures were classified in anterior wall of the frontal sinus, zygomatic complex (maxillary-zygomatic complex with or without zygomatic arch), mandibular (symphyseal, parasymphyseal, body, angle, branch, coronoid and condylar), orbital (middle wall, floor and roof), extended fractures like type LeFort I/II/III and pan-facial fracture. Nasal fractures were excluded and pan-facial fractures were considered as one for statistical purposes. Frequency variations, type and cause of damage, as well as gender and age were analysed. The comparisons were performed through a Chi square test. This was followed by a logistic regression analysis to determine the impact of the five facial trauma causes. The final regression sample included variations such as age, gender and cause of facial trauma. This study was approved by the ethics committee of the hospital. The population consisted of 283 patients, 259 (91.5%) male and 24 female (8.5%) with a mean age of 40.5 years (SD: ±20.5). The youngest patient was 18 years old and the oldest 76. The most affected age range was from 40 to 49 years, followed by the group of 30–39. These two age groups represented half of the patients ( Within a total amount of 499 fracture features, the most frequent location, in both genders, was the zygomatic fracture (136 patients [48%]) followed by orbital fractures (77 patients [27.2%]) and mandibular fractures (60 patients [21.2%]). More details are displayed in Traumas caused by traffic accidents were seen in 111 patients (39.2%). A great part of this group was due to vehicle accidents (47 patients [16.6%]), followed by the pedestrian impact (25 patients [8.8%]). The second most frequent cause was violent acts (67 patients [23.6%]) followed by blow with an object (44 patients [15.5%]). There were 60 patients (21.2%) with mandibular fractures (55 related to the middle third), among which 90 fracture lines were counted. Twenty-five patients (8.8%) presented a single fracture feature and 11 (3.8%) presented two features. The two major causes of mandibular fractures were violence or assault, followed by vehicle accidents. The most frequent location was the condyle, followed by the parasymphyseal fractures. The assault and traffic accident led to a greater tendency to present body and parasymphyseal fractures, respectively. 364 fracture features were counted among 220 patients with middle third trauma. In this group, 136 patients presented 189 fractures in the zygomatic complex, 88 orbital fractures, 49 extended LeFort-type fractures, 25 mandible fractures and 13 nasal-orbital-ethmoid fractures ( Among these, fractures in the zygomatic body were the most common. The main causes of these fractures were violence, falls, and motorcycle accidents. Even more, 60.5% of the falls and 66.7% of the motorcycle accidents resulted in zygomatic fracture. Orbital fractures were in the second place (77 patients), unleashed mainly by violence. The most common compromised area of them was the lower orbital area (88.6%). The nasal-orbital-ethmoid fractures were present in 13 patients, frequently related in decreasing order to the LeFort-type, pan-facial and zygomatic complex fractures. Fractures type LeFort I and II were found in 16 each, LeFort III were seen in 17 patients, while 12 patients had a combination of fractures in three-thirds of the face (pan-facial). The most common cause of the extended facial fractures was the traffic accident, specifically those caused by vehicles and pedestrian impact. Finally, isolated jaw fractures were seen in 25 patients and one related to the nasal-orbital-ethmoid fractures. In the upper third of the face, 40 patients suffered some type of fracture, 30 of anterior table of frontal sinus and 10 of orbital roof, mainly caused by falls from great high and traffic accidents. In this study, titanium plates and screws were used in an open reduction, except for isolated fractures of zygomatic arch, which were treated with a half-closed reduction through Gillies technique. From the 283 patients, 195 were submitted to a treatment with open reduction. The rest were orthopaedically and/or medically treated. The most common closed treatment was the one of the zygomatic fractures without displacement (42 patients). In second place, orbital fractures without functional compromise (29 patients) with the orbital ground as their most frequent location (71.4%). The third most common location of fractures was the mandibular condyle (18 patients). Chile is a country with high rates of work-related accidents, which has made it necessary to collect evidence during the last 30 years in order to implement insurance for workers in case of an eventual traumatic accident related to work. These insurances created centres of trauma to treat complex severe and chronic illnesses caused by work. This study describes the epidemiology of 283 patients with facial fractures except for nasal fractures. The male–female ratio was 10:1. The predominance of the male gender in this population of patients is a constant finding in most of the studies. However, this proportion was higher than what was indicated in other countries. The zygomatic complex, the orbit and the maxillofacial fractures were the main locations, amounting to 72% of the fracture locations. Previous studies indicate that the most common cause of facial fractures varies from place to place. With the exception of some studies, the most common cause of this injury is the traffic accident. The results in this report show traffic accident, especially vehicle accident, as the principal cause. This was particularly significant in the group from 20 to 29 years old. Unlike other studies, the group from 40 to 49 years old was the most representative group. With the exception of the mandibular fractures, there is scarce knowledge about the relation between the cause of facial fractures and the location in the middle third. Ellis et al. The second most frequent fractures were the orbital fractures, which affected 77 patients with violence as the main factor, followed by vehicle accidents, blows with objects and industrial accidents in equal amount. The epidemiology about this trauma was similar to other studies; As regards the lower third or mandibular area, it was found only in 21.2% of the total amount of patients. Previous studies evidence that the jaw and nasal bones are the two most frequent locations of maxillofacial fractures. This analysis reveals the facial fractures’ pattern in the Chilean working population. Nevertheless, this study presents several restrictions. In Santiago, there are three hospitals that insure workers. They constitute the Asociación Chilena de Seguridad (Chilean Security Association). All the hospitals in Chile (public, private and mutual hospitals) treat patients with facial fractures; however, some of them receive more patients than others. Thus, the other two entities are out of this sample. Wok-related accidents are treated by these mutual insurance companies, while the accidents due to alcohol consumption and traumas not related to work are treated in private and public hospitals. Therefore, it is questionable whether the results of our study could be extrapolated to the whole population of Santiago. For this reason, multi-centre studies are necessary. Besides, like other retrospective studies, this retrospective descriptive study can be subject to biases of information. However, these presented results are in line with other studies. In addition, the analysis of this report brings important information for the design of damage prevention schemes, especially about the measures of the traffic displacement. The authors declare that no experiments were performed on humans or animals for this study. The authors declare that they have followed the protocols of their work center on the publication of patient data. The authors declare that no patient data appear in this article. The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.