This work presents a dynamic model for prediction of flow and output size distribution of cone crushers. The main purpose of the model is for simulation of closed-loop control using the Closed Side Setting (CSS) and the eccentric speed (
                        
                           ω
                        
                     ) as manipulated variables. The idea of modeling crushers as cascaded zones is adopted throughout this work. The capacity, the length, the stroke, and the compression ratio of each zone are taken into consideration. Simulation results are presented in the form of the Crusher Performance Map (CPM) and the dynamic response for production of different size classes to steps input in 
                        
                           ω
                        
                      and CSS. The simulations also include operation with recycling of oversize output, as well as the input of mixed materials. As an example, closed-loop control of the ratio of the large-size output to the total size output was simulated.Cone crushers are a vital stage in the comminution chain in many mineral processing plants, and are used as a secondary, tertiary, and quaternary crushing stage to provide a reduction ratio of maximum 1:10 ( The crushing takes place in a cavity called chamber which is formed between a cone shaped mantle and a concave bowl. The mantle is gyrating in an eccentric path to deliver several strokes to the material passing the chamber, which provides the required breakage until it reaches the size that allows it to pass through the controlled small opening in the end (down) of the chamber, as shown in Changing CSS and The main methods for describing size distribution functions are ( The three main activities that describe the behavior of crushers are: breakage, selection for breakage (or simply selection), and classification. The overall behavior of the crushers is a combination and repetition of these actions, that can be represented as operators if the continuous function approach is adopted, or as matrix multiplication in the case of the discontinuous function approach. In the later case, the matrix is, in most of the cases, the discretized image of the continuous function. The Breakage Matrix The Selection Matrix Finally, the Classification Matrix Most of the modern studies divide the crusher into zones and are first-principle in the sense that they are formulated in the classical selection/breakage/classification framework. Each zone is considered as a single stage that has input and output, and the main actions are applied on the material inside it. The material inside these zones is considered to be well-mixed. One of the earliest works on the modeling of cone crusher was conducted by Whiten presented one of the pioneer studies in modeling cone crushers ( Lynch extended Whiten’s simple model into a dynamic model for comminution processes, that considers the derivative of the material size distribution (  Machado presented a crusher model for continuous flow in his work ( Evertsson conducted a detailed study on cone crushers ( Nikolov presented a general model for Impact Crushers based on matrix analysis (  A model proposed by In the proposed model, we have chosen to consider the classification, selection and breakage actions, the volume capacity limitation, the influence of the eccentric speed on the vertical transport of material, and the effect of mixed materials in the input. To the best of our knowledge none of the above models considers all these factors in one model. Consider partitioning the crusher into Starting from the model developed by In order to describe the actions on the material in each zone, we need to consider the rate of these actions, which is governed by the eccentric speed ( After the classification, the material will move to the next zone as an input. The transport of the particles is analyzed by Since the machine normally operates at high speed, the time Note that we must require that For each zone, we assume a specific effective capacity ( Thus, we introduce the zone capacity factor ( After combining The equations governing the operation of Zone The model in the previous section represents the steady-state behaviour of the system. It consists of a system of 6 In order to develop a dynamic model for the crusher, we need to imagine each zone as a storage of material, that has inputs and outputs. The rate of operations on this material is governed by the rate of crushing, Assume Now, the left-hand side of the above denotes the average change over one stroke. We will assume the same average change to be valid over an infinitesimal part of the stroke, i.e. replace This approach amounts to treating each zone as a tank whose rate of inflow and outflow are governed by the rate of repetition of the strokes determined by the eccentric speed Most of the available models consider the crusher to be working on one type of material, which is a consequence of using only one breakage function. In reality, the material that is fed into a crusher may be coming from different sources with different characteristics. Finding the different breakage functions may require extensive experiments for every single material type, but approximations that only require knowledge of the hardness are also available ( In order to model this, we consider two materials a and b and treat them as separate streams whose mass and mass flows are denoted  Many parameters are affecting the crusher operation. Some of them belong to the crusher itself, like the eccentric speed, CSS, and the stroke, while others are properties of the treated materials, like the feed material moisture, material’s strength, input size distribution, and the shape of the particles ( The model presented in the previous section is a framework in which different assumptions on breakage, selection, classification can be implemented. In this section we will present the assumptions used for the simulations in the next section. The profile of the bowl, as shown in The mantle was selected to be linear with pivot point at The breakage function is from The classification function is also from ( The selection function is from ( The effective stroke was calculated by multiplying the actual stroke by a factor, which is assumed to depend linearly on the eccentric speed and equal 1 at The number of size distribution classes was selected to be 24 ( The breakage function, the classification function, and the selection function were discretized into matrices according to the size classes as According to The actuator of CSS was simulated with simple linear first order dynamic model ( Simulations were carried out in order to show the realistic behavior of the model. The simulations include the static and the dynamic behaviour of the crusher. For the static behaviour, results are illustrated using the Crusher Performance Map (CPM) ( The dynamic behavior is shown using the step response of the crusher, in response to the change of the manipulated variables, and to the input materials. Also a simulation of closed loop feedback control of the crusher is shown. A cone crusher fed by material with For high speed, the model predicts that the material classified to pass to the next zone does not have enough time to pass. This will keep much of the material in the same zone, and apply the selection and breakage action on it again. The result is increased percentage of large materials at low speeds and increased percentage of small materials at higher speeds which is in line with the experimental results reported in (   At high speed the percentage of small material of the total throughput is predicted to be larger than that at lower speeds. This is because the high speed does not give the material enough time to pass to the next zone and is subject to more crushing. Furthermore the model predicts an increased percentage of large materials with increasing CSS. This is because even if the material is not passing to the next zone the compression ratio will be reduced with increasing CSS, leading to less material being selected for breakage.  A 8  In order to demonstrate the behavior of the dynamic model, the When reducing the speed, we notice there is an increase in the total output. This is because at high speed, there is some material in the crusher that is classified to pass down, but because the speed, it does not have enough time to do so. Thus, when the speed is decreased, this material will be allowed to pass. When increasing the size of the input material, it is noticed that the model predicts that the effect of this change does not immediately appear in the output. This time delay will depend on the speed of the crusher. We can notice that the size distribution is around To simulate the operation with mixed materials, it was assumed that material  It is clear that with only soft material (100%) the total throughput is higher because the material is easier to break. Note that this does not contradict with the experimental results of In order to illustrate the use of the proposed model, a closed-loop scenario to control the ratio of the large material was simulated. The maximization of total output, by adjusting the CSS and As shown in Thus, a new index introduced, which is the ratio of the large material ( As shown in the figure, the ratio is decreasing with the increase of eccentric speed, while increasing with the increase of CSS. Also the ratio is generally more sensitive to the speed than to the CSS. For the above reason, a Proportional Integral (PI) controller was simulated to control the ratio factor of the crusher. The measurement of the ratio can be done either by using a sieve and using belt scales that measure the total and the over size material, as illustrated in The PI controller is chosen for its simplicity and availability. The parameters of the PI controller were selected to be The response of the crusher is shown in A dynamic cone crusher model that describes the output size distribution (size reduction), and the flow was presented in this work. Simulations have showed that the steady-state model behavior is qualitatively consistent with measured crusher behavior, as reported in e.g. ( The proposed model can be regarded as a framework in which detailed knowledge of the geometry of the crusher can be included as well as different assumptions on e.g. breakage and selection. Some possible extensions are to model energy consumption and quality, (e.g. product shape of the material, i.e. flakiness), and also that the bulk density will vary with the specific gravity, size distribution, degree of packing, and moisture content. The main use of the model is expected to be simulation of closed loop control strategies, but it can also be used for off-line optimization by selecting an optimal operation point with the aid of the three-dimensional CPM, provided accurate values of the model parameters and the properties of the inflow. Both on-line and off-line control strategies would thus benefit from using accurate values for the model parameters, produced by system identification on measurement data. An on-line parameter identification method would also be very useful in order to optimize the operation of the crusher, detect faults, and for production planning.