Corner-point meshes have been implemented in several commercial reservoir simulators due to their flexibility to deal with several important features of the hydrocarbon bearing-reservoirs, such as irregular boundaries, geologic fractures, and faults. Although this type of mesh presents an important step in discretization of the domains for reservoirs, some parts of the approximate equation in discretized formulations are neglected in most commercial simulators. The neglected terms are related to the cross derivatives and, in general, are neglected to produce the same Jacobian stencil as when Cartesian grids are employed. This work presents an investigation of the effect of cross derivatives in discretization schemes using structured non-orthogonal boundary-fitted meshes in conjunction with a compositional reservoir simulator. The main goal is to investigate the difference between the numerical results with and without the cross derivatives that arise when the Cartesian equations are written for a transformed plane. We used an in-house compositional reservoir simulator to carry out this study. The component mass balance equations for a compositional, multiphase, multi-component fluid flow are solved using a fully implicit reservoir simulator in conjunction with the finite volume method. The results of several reservoir simulation case studies that were performed to carry out this study are presented in this paper.Cartesian grids have been used in petroleum reservoir simulation because accumulation terms and fluxes are easily evaluated using this type of grids. On the other hand, when using Cartesian grids, the correct representation of several features of the reservoir such as faults, fractures, and irregular boundaries are not easily handled. One option for the Cartesian grids is the boundary-fitted coordinates ( All the previous publications that have investigated the importance of cross derivatives for evaluation of mass flow rate have carried out their investigations using water flooding or black-oil simulations ( In this study, non-orthogonal boundary-fitted meshes have been included in an in-house compositional reservoir simulator called GPAS (General Purpose Adaptive Simulator). This simulator was developed at the Center for Petroleum and Geosystems Engineering for simulation of enhanced oil recovery processes ( The main focus of this paper is to investigate the influence of cross derivatives in evaluation of mass flux rate using GPAS. In the following sections, we present the physical model, the approximate equations, the test problems, the results of simulation case studies, and the main conclusions of this investigation. Isothermal, multi-component, multiphase fluid flow in a porous medium can be described using three types of equations: the component-material balance equation, phase equilibrium equation, and equation for constraining phase saturations and component concentrations ( The material balance equation for the In Eq. The first partial derivative of the total Gibbs free energy with respect to the independent variables gives the equality of component fugacities among all phases, In Eq. In the approach adopted in this work, the equations are transformed from the Cartesian system to a computational domain. Subsequently, the transformed equations are integrated into the regular system, as described in The transformed equation for the In Eq. Integrating Eq. All the derivatives in Eq. The same approach is used to evaluate other fluid proprieties at each interface of the control volume. Next, the Newton method is used to linearize the equations. In order to not increase the number of non-zero diagonals in the coefficient matrix of the linear system of equations, the cross derivatives were included in the right-hand side of the residual function, resulting in a semi-implicit procedure. This procedure can reduce the convergence rate of the linear system if the mesh is highly distorted. However, this procedure reproduces the exact mass flow rate along each interface of the control volume. Finally, it is important to mention that this procedure results in a seven diagonal matrix similar to the corner-point procedures used in most commercial codes, but in this procedure all mass fluxes are correctly evaluated, no matter how distorted the mesh is. In order to investigate the effect of cross derivatives in the numerical results, we performed three case studies. The first case, which will be referred as case 1, is the simulation of water flooding in a quarter-of-five spot and the simultaneous flow of water, oil, and gas. We have chosen this case because we can verify the results using boundary-fitted coordinates with the ones using the original Cartesian meshes from GPAS that have been tested and validated with commercial codes and in-house simulators called UTCHEM ( The second case is a distorted rectangular domain. This case was used by The last case is a domain that mimics the boundaries of a real reservoir. Although the angle of distortion varies along the reservoir, the variation of distortion is not large. This is a water flooding case, and only oil and water exist in the reservoir. The fluid and reservoir properties are given in     This work presented an investigation of the effect of cross derivatives in a fully implicit compositional simulator called GPAS. The tests were done for several reservoirs with different geometries and for simultaneous flows of water, gas, and oil with several hydrocarbon components. Isotropic and anisotropic reservoirs were also investigated. From the results of the simulation studies carried out, it is possible to infer that neglecting the cross derivatives in the discretized equations produces inaccuracies in the results even when the mesh is distorted by a small amount. Also, the differences in the simulation results do not decrease when the mesh is refined. The main reason for such behavior is easily explained. When the cross derivatives are neglected, some parts of the equations that must be included in the computations of mass flow rate are neglected. If the mesh is orthogonal, the neglected mass flow rate is in fact zero. However, when the mesh is distorted, the neglected terms are not zero and should be taken into account in the mass flow evaluation. In conclusion, simulators that employ boundary-fitted coordinates to mimic important features of the reservoir should include cross derivatives, otherwise serious errors will be introduced into the numerical simulations. This work was conducted with the support of the Reservoir Simulation Joint Industry Project, a consortium of operating and service companies at the Center for Petroleum and Geosystems Engineering at The University of Texas at Austin. Also, the first author would like to thank CAPES (Brazilian Educational Agency) and CNPq (The National Council for Scientific and Technological Development) for their financial support.