Calcite is the most widely used mineral filler in paint formulations. It provides not only a decrease in the cost of paint but also modifies some physical paint properties. Although some properties of calcite such as particle size distribution and refractive index are not comparable in quality to TiO2, calcite can improve the distribution of TiO2 via its interaction with TiO2 particles. In this study, calcites of different size distributions are used as filler in the architectural waterborne, acrylic based paint recipes. The quality of paints was compared to properties based on both wet and dry paint such as viscosity, density, opacity, gloss, scrub resistance and Buchholz hardness. Examination of the results identified an optimum quantity and size distribution of calcite for the paint recipe. The second series of this study involved substitution possibilities of TiO2 with calcite using seven different paint formulations. Phase images of the dry paint films obtained using “Atomic Force Microscopy” (AFM) showed the extent of distribution and aggregation of particles for each formulation on the paint surface. The overall experimental results revealed that the use of TiO2 can be decreased up to 4% by replacement of calcite with an optimum size distribution that was also supported by AFM measurements.Paint industry, which is a highly dynamic industry in terms of improvement in formulation, demands a variety of different raw materials. Mineral additives in paint constitute anywhere from 20% to 50% of the paint formulation. Particularly, water based paint formulations utilize maximum quantities of mineral additives. In most cases, mineral raw materials undergo substantial mineral processing operations before mixing into the final recipe. Among the mineral additives, titanium dioxide (rutile and anatase), calcite, mica, clay minerals (thickeners), quartz, feldspar, barite and of course pigments are some of the major ones Titanium dioxide (TiO A good opacity is only obtained when the light is scattered. This corresponds to the mean size close to the half of the light wavelength which is around 0.25 Pigments and extenders must be well dispersed in liquid and binder because dispersion stage directly affects some major paint properties such as opacity, gloss, colors and viscosity. If a homogeneous dispersion is not obtained, not only these paint properties are adversely affected but also excess TiO Dispersants have a very critic role in water-borne paints. Their type and amount can result in substantial differences in mineral dispersion/agglomeration in paint system Evaluation of dry paint film requires some microscopic analysis such as scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to identify the distribution of particles on the paint film surface. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) technique is relatively new, easy to operate and trustable for evaluating the paint film surface There are a number of publications where AFM is used to determine the distribution titania pigment particles in the surface of the paint films and compare it with the gloss and surface roughness of these films in the absence and presence of polymeric dispersants The objective of the present paper is to find an optimum size distribution and amount of calcite which can effectively be substituted with TiO Titanium dioxide (CR-828) used in the study was received from Tronox of USA. It is made by the chloride process and a zirconia/alumina-treated rutile pigment that can be used in multiple applications. Typical properties of TiO Seven different calcite samples with different size distributions were obtained from “Somgroup Company” of Turkey. Typical properties of calcite sample are given in Electrokinetic and rheological properties of TiO The optimum amount of dispersant is determined experimentally using the method which shows dispersing agent dosage versus viscosity, also called dispersant demand curve. A mixture of water and pigment/extender also called as pigment paste is titrated stepwise with a dispersant. The viscosity values of mixtures are plotted against the amounts of dispersing agent used; the resulting diagram is “Dispersant-Demand Curve” In order to determine the dispersant demand with optimum surfactant dosage for our system, seven different pigment pastes (millbase) were prepared. They were coded as PP (pigment paste), PP1 being the blank. Formulations involving water, wetting agent, defoamer, TiO The Brookfield CAP2000 Viscometer was used to determine viscosity profile of the pigment pastes with at varying shear rates. It is a cone-and-plate, high shear rate instrument with integrated temperature control (5–40 Paint production was performed using high-speed stirrer with a maximum capacity of 10,000 Viscosities of paints were determined by Krebs Viscosimeter which is a practical and useful type for determining viscosity of paints Wet paints with the 90 Aluminum panels with 200 Calcites of seven different size distributions were used in water-borne paint recipes out of which seven different paints recipes were formulated. Amount of calcite and TiO All the additives such as dispersant, wetting agent and defoamer were selected and optimized before the experiment according to their compatibility with the styrene acrylic binder and inorganic minerals in terms of polarity. Therefore, any negative effect that may be caused by inconvenience of raw materials was eliminated for accuracy of the experiment to examine the effect of calcite size distribution. Pigment volume concentration (PVC), which can dramatically influence paint properties, was kept constant In this stage, possibility of substituting TiO Dry paint films applied on cardboard with 200 NSC36-A cantilever was used for all the measurements. Its typical spring constant is 0.95 Zeta potential profile of TiO The yield stress values of TiO Dispersant which controls the stability in paint formulations is the key additive for obtaining the desired optical and mechanical properties. However interaction mechanism of these polymeric dispersants can be dramatically changed in the presence of other raw materials like mineral particles or surfactants used as an extender and additives in paint formulations. In this concept, competitive adsorption among thickeners and some surfactants have been reported Viscosity values at four different shear rates generally used in paint industry are presented in As apparent from Optimum dispersant amount is found to occur at 1 It is interesting to note that PP1, PP2 and PP3 pastes were easily and completely removed from the cardboard after a week of application with no or very small adhesion to the substrate. However, PP4, PP5, PP6 and PP7 pastes showed enough adhesion force to stick to the substrate. The magnitude of the force can be ranked roughly as PDS7 Wet and dry paints produced by calcite of different size distributions were characterized on the basis of the standard paint tests. For this purpose, density, viscosity, opacity, gloss, hardness and scrub resistance measurements were conducted. Results from these analyses were compared among each other and with a standard paint formulation currently used in the market. As seen in The same trend was also observed for viscosity of paints. The viscosity of standard formulation is 124 Krebs Unit (KU) and all the paints produced in this study fell in this acceptable viscosity range of the standard formulation (124 Hardness of paint film depends on several factors such as binder type and minerals used in paint Although there are some differences in hardness values of paints based on size distribution of calcite used in the paint, it is not significant. Practically all paints show better hardness when they are compared to the standard paint in which 28.5 As it is expected, the opacity values of paints decreased with increasing the calcite size ratio ( The absence of air voids among the pigments and filler particles causes a decrease in the opacity. The second mechanism states that the higher amount of isodiametric particles (particles with almost the same size) is advantageous for scattering light by altering the spatial distribution of the pigments in the dry film It is interesting to note in Gloss is affected by both top size ( Scrub resistance of paints gives exactly the same values for all the paints. It is known that this property is dependent on binder type and pigment volume concentration (PVC) rather than inorganic minerals content. In this section both of them were kept constant in all stages. In summary, D1.7 was found the optimum especially for considering the opacity. In this section, the amount of TiO  Opacity and gloss values have the same trend, as shown in  AFM phase images of C4.5 and C8.5 are presented in In this study, the possibility of substituting TiO This work was supported by the scholarship program of