Introduction
                  Coronoid fractures are notoriously difficult to manage particularly when there is a small fragment. We report a retrospective analysis of our experience with consecutive type I and II Regan-Morrey coronoid fractures using a lasso plate.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  Type I and II Regan-Morrey coronoid fractures can be effectively managed using a lasso plate.
               
                  Methods
                  From October 2011 and December 2013, 25 patients (21 males and 4 females, mean age 40.0 years) with type I and II Regan-Morrey coronoid fractures were treated with the open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) using the lasso plate. Postoperative measurements of the elbow range of motion were recorded. Elbow function was evaluated by the Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) and Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) score.
               
                  Results
                  All patients were reexamined at a mean follow-up of 32.7 months (range: 24–49 months). The mean fractures healing time was 13.6 weeks (range: 6 to 18 weeks). The mean flexion range of the elbow was 121.8° (range: 90° to 135°) and the mean extension range of the elbow was 10.6° (range: 0° to 20°). The mean pronation of the forearm was 75.8° (range: 65° to 85°). The mean supination of the forearm was 80.4° (range: 70° to 90°). The mean DASH score was 10.2 (range: 0 to 28). The mean MEPS was 83.4 (range: 55 to 95), 8 patients (32%) were rated excellent, 14 patients (56%) were rated good, 2 (8%) patients were rated fair. One (4%) patient was rated poor. No patient was seriously infected but implant breakage was found in one case. Two cases of elbow heterotopic ossification (HO) were observed. Two cases of elbow medial instability were observed.
               
                  Discussion
                  The type I and II Regan-Morrey coronoid fractures combined with the instability of the elbow should be operated. The lasso plate reduces the pressure between the wire and the insertion of capsule. A tight wire results in greater stability than ordinary suture fixation, thus enabling early functional exercise.
               
                  Conclusion
                  In the treatment of type I and II Regan-Morrey coronoid fractures, lasso plate can provide concentric fracture reduction of the elbow and stable fixation to allow for early rehabilitation. Good clinical outcomes can be anticipated.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV: retrospective study.The coronoid is one of the main constraints providing ulnohumeral joint stability. It plays a critical role as an anterior buttress against posterior displacement of the elbow joint. Fracture of the coronoid can be either an isolated finding following elbow dislocation or part of a terrible triad of the elbow. As for all articular fractures, anatomic reduction, stable fixation and early motion result in optimum outcome. Current recommendations are to repair all coronoid fractures associated with elbow instability, regardless of size This study was approved by our institutional review board and all patients who had been treated with the procedure had signed the consent forms. Twenty-five consecutive patients with type I and II Regan-Morrey coronoid fractures were treated between October 2011 and December 2013 at our hospital. There were 21 males and 4 females, mean age was 40.0 (range: 18–49). The injury was in left arm in 5 patients and right arm in 20 patients. The injury occurred subsequent to a fall in 15 patients, to a traffic accident in 7 patients and to sport injury in 3 patients. The fractures were evaluated with plain radiographs, CT scan and three dimension reconstruction. Five patients had elbow dislocation. Terrible triad was present in 14 patients (elbow dislocation along with coronoid and radial head fractures; all of them were type IV according to Mason-Johnson classification). Six patients had fractures of the radial head. None of the patients sustained neurovascular injury ( The plain radiographs and 3D-CT were performed on all patients before surgery to evaluate the fracture configuration. Patients with elbow dislocation were reduced and fixed with plaster or brace in emergency room. The swelling in all patients was mitigated before surgery. All the surgeries had been performed by the same surgeon (Kun Zhang). Under general or regional anesthesia, the patient was placed in the supine position on a radiolucent operation table. The tourniquet was used. The lateral and dorsal approaches were used routinely. The elbow was flexed slightly to expose the coronoid and articular surface of the trochlea. Structures were generally addressed sequentially starting with the coronoid process, followed by the radial head and finally the lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL) Prophylactic use of cynnematin lasted for 24 Follow-up evaluation was done at six weeks, three months and then every six months after the surgery. Patients were followed up clinically and radiographically until fractures union and until the plateau stage of elbow motion range was reached. The complication, the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand questionnaire (DASH) score and the Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) All patients were reexamined at a mean follow-up of 32.7 months (range: 24–49 months). The mean fractures healing time was 13.6 weeks (range: 6 to 18 weeks). The mean flexion range of the elbow was 121.8° (range: 90° to 135°), and the mean extension range of the elbow was 10.6° (range: 0° to 20°). The mean pronation of the forearm was 75.8° (range: 65°–85°,). The mean supination of the forearm was 80.4° (range: 70°–90°). The mean DASH score was 10.2 (range: 0–28). The mean MEPS was 83.4 (range: 55–95), 8 patients (32%) were rated excellent, 14 patients (56%) were rated good, 2 (8%) patients were rated fair. One (4%) patient was rated poor. No patient was seriously infected but implant breakage was found in one case. Two cases of elbow heterotopic ossification (HO) were observed. Two cases of elbow medial instability were observed ( The ulnar coronoid is an anterior extension of the proximal ulnar metaphysis and therefore serves as an important stabilizer of the elbow joint providing a static restraint to posteriorly acting forces Coronoid fractures and dislocation of the elbow indicate a violent injury. Garrigues et al. According to the principles that the intra-articular fractures require anatomical reduction and rigid fixation, the treatment of open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) should be performed. During the treatment of ORIF, joint cavity can be cleaned to lower the incidence of HO, joint adhesion and stiffness. Therefore, experts tend to prefer surgical treatment and early functional exercise. Garrigues et al. This study has limitations in that there was no control group to prove the merits. The lasso plate which was composed of mini-plate and wire results in certain hardness. When the wire was inserted through the hole in the pre-contoured plates, it was difficult to glide smoothly. Tightening of wire should be done in moderation to prevent excessive compression. Type I and II Regan-Morrey coronoid fractures can be effectively managed using a lasso plate. The lasso plate can provide concentric fracture reduction of the elbow and stable fracture fixation to allow for early stage rehabilitation. Good clinical outcomes can be anticipated. The study protocol was approved by the ethical committee of Xi’an Hong Hui Hospital, Xi’an Jiaotong University Health Science Center. None. Pengfei Wang and Kun Zhang carried out the studies, participated in collecting data and drafted the manuscript. Yan Zhuang and Zhong Li performed the statistical analysis and participated in its design. Yahui Fu, Wei Wei and Xing Wei helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 