In this study, the effect of microwave irradiation on ilmenite surface properties and its flotation behavior was investigated. After microwave irradiation, Fe2+ ions on the ilmenite surface are oxidized to Fe3+ ions. XPS analysis indicated that the relative content of Fe3+ increased from 48.5% to 66% after microwave irradiation for 2.5min. This conversion decreased the ilmenite surface zeta potential in a wide pH range and resulted in the shift of PZC from a pH of 5.4 to a pH of 2.7. FTIR spectra and zeta potential measurements showed that the microwave irradiation enhances the adsorption of oleate ions on the ilmenite Helmholtz layer. The greater stability of chemisorbed ferric iron oleate than ferrous iron oleate resulted in the increase of contact angle and the decrease of surface zeta potential. Therefore, the microwave irradiation pretreatment improves the ilmenite hydrophobicity and floatability in a wide pH range. The maximum floatability of ilmenite occurring at a pH of 6.3 was 73.5% and 94% for non-irradiated and irradiated ilmenite, respectively.Ilmenite as a titanate of ferrous iron mineral (Fe Flotation is a surface-chemistry based process for the separation of fine solids that takes advantage of the difference in wettability at the solid particle surfaces. The separation process is based on the attachment of mineral particles to the liquid/gas interface whereby the conditions of equilibrium are based on a comparison of the magnitudes of the initial and final free energies for attachment of a bubble to a particle in an isolated system. Flotation is mainly used in mineral processing, water purification and the treatment of industrial wastewater Ti In this study, the effect of microwave irradiation on surface physicochemical properties of ilmenite including floatability, wettability, surface oxidation, surface charge, collector adsorption and morphological features were investigated in detail. The samples were taken from Qara-aghaj hard rock deposit located in the north–west of Iran. The samples were crushed and ground under 150 Sodium oleate (with 95% purity) was used as a collector and the analytical grade H The chemical composition of the samples was determined using X-ray fluorescence (XRF, Philips X Unique II). The phase composition was analyzed with XPERT MPD diffractometer employing Cu Ka radiation. The microscopic studies for evaluation of textural and morphological features were performed using Philips XL30 model Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). Microwave pre-treatment of the ilmenite sample was carried outin a 2.45 The flotation experiments were carried out in a 300 The zeta potential of mineral suspension was measured using a Malvern instrument (UK). The samples were ground under 15 XPS spectra were measured with a Specs EA 10 X-ray photoelectron spectroscope to study the distribution density and binding energy of the elements on the mineral surface, before and after treatment by microwave. The FT-IR spectra were obtained with NEXU670 FT-IR (Nicolet Corporation, USA) to characterize the nature of the interaction between the collector and the minerals. The mineral sample was ground to smaller than 0.015 The contact angle of water on a polished section of ilmenite was measured using a sessile drop method before and after microwave irradiation. A carefully selected mineral chunk was cut into desired sizes and polished with various grade polishing papers to a mirror-like finishing. The sample was then cleaned in an ultrasonic bath and rinsed with distilled water. The cleaned sample was immersed in a given collector solution for 8 The flotation recovery of untreated and irradiated ilmenite as a function of pH values is presented in  In order to investigate the oxidation of Fe The adsorption of sodium oleate on the surface of ilmenite before and after microwave irradiation was investigated using FTIR analysis. The FT-IR spectra of sodium oleate, ilmenite, and ilmenite and irradiated ilmenite conditioned with sodium oleate at a pH of 6.3 are presented in The zeta potentials of raw ilmenite and irradiated ilmenite measured as a function of pH in the absence and presence of sodium oleate are shown in The zeta potential measurements in the presence of the collector showed that the collector adsorption resulted in a significant change in the zeta potential. When the oleate is present between a pH of about 3 and 11, the zeta potential of raw ilmenite and irradiated ilmenite is considerably more negative than when KCl is present only. Using sodium oleate of 3.65 The maximum difference between zeta potential of non-irradiated and irradiated ilmenite in the presence and absence of sodium oleate occurs at a pH of 6.3 which is in agreement with flotation results. The hydrophobicity of ilmenite and irradiated ilmenite conditioned with sodium oleate was investigated by measuring the contact angle. The morphology of an ilmenite grain before and after microwave irradiation studied by SEM is shown in The surface properties of ilmenite are strongly controlled by the state of Ti As shown in the previous work, Fe In water, Fe The ferric iron compounds are much more difficult to dissolve than ferrous compounds. Therefore, the adsorbed layer of ferric iron oleate ( The oxidation of Fe