An aromatic ethereal compound, 1-methoxy-2-octoxybenzene, was recently found to be a good extractant for Au(III) from hydrochloric acid media. The present study therefore investigated the structural factors of ethereal compounds for the extraction of Au(III) under dilute extractant concentrations. In the series of aromatic ethereal compounds used in this study, 1-dodecoxybenzene showed the highest extractability for Au(III). There was a clear correlation between the extractability of Au(III) and the strength of hydrophobicity of the aromatic ethereal compounds. Au(III) was selectively extracted using 1-dodecoxybenzene over other precious- and base-metal cations. Au(III) was quantitatively stripped from this extractant using aqueous thiourea solution.The use of electronic devices has proliferated in recent years and the quantity of these that require disposal is growing rapidly throughout the world ( Solvent extraction is one of the most important technologies for the separation and recovery of gold from primary and secondary leaching solutions ( Dibutyl carbitol (bis(2-butoxyethyl)ether; DBC), an ethereal compound, is currently the most popular extractant for Au(III) from hydrochloric acid media ( The authors recently reported extraction behavior of Au(III) using a novel aromatic ethereal compound, 1-methoxy-2-octoxybenzene ( In the present study, a series of aromatic monoether compounds of different alkyl chain lengths was prepared. To study the structural features influencing the extraction of Au(III) from hydrochloric acid media, extractability under dilute conditions was compared using various compounds: aromatic monoethers, aromatic diethers, diphenylether (DPE), the aliphatic ethers DBC and 1-methoxy-2-octoxyethane (MOE), and dodecylbenzene (DBN), which does not contain an ether group. Additionally, extraction of metal ions using the aromatic monoether compound, 1-dodecoxybenzene (DB), which showed the highest extractability, was studied in detail. Stripping of Au(III) from DB was also studied. Systematic studies for the extraction of Au(III) using aromatic ethers have not been conducted to date. Analytical-grade gold(III), palladium(II), platinum(IV), rhodium(III), iron(III), gallium(III), indium(III), cobalt(II), nickel(II), copper(II), and zinc(II) chlorides (Wako Pure Chemical Ind. Ltd., Japan) were used to prepare solutions of the metal ions for extraction tests. The molecular structures of the organic compounds that were used as extractants for Au(III) are shown in The logarithm of the partitioning coefficient between DB was prepared as follows using phenol and 1-bromododecane, in a manner similar to that of In order to evaluate the degradation of DB at high acidity, the following test was conducted: An aqueous solution (5.0 cm Additionally, aqueous solubility of DB was investigated by contacting an aqueous solution (10 cm 2EHB was prepared using phenol and 1-bromo-2-ethylhexane, in a manner similar to that of DB. The resulting 2EHB product had the following properties: HB was prepared using phenol and 1-bromohexane, in a manner similar to that of DB. The resulting HB product had the following properties: BB was prepared using phenol and 1-bromohexane, in a manner similar to that of DB. The resulting BB product had the following properties: Liquid–liquid extraction tests were conducted batchwise with a typical procedure as follows ( Stripping of extracted Au(III) from DB was studied using hydrochloric acid solution containing thiourea or oxalic acid as follows (  From the result of  To study structural features of the extractants, extraction behaviors of Au(III) using 200 × 10 Because the hydrophobicity of the ethereal extractant is an important factor for Au(III) extraction, this was evaluated using log The molecular mass (236.4 g/mol) and log Because DB showed the highest extractability for Au(III) of the series of aromatic ethers, its selectivity for various metal ions was studied. The extraction capacity of Au(III) using 200 × 10  From the results of this study, Au(III) extraction from hydrochloric acid media improved with increasing hydrophobicity of aromatic ether extractants. The alkyl chain length of the aromatic ether significantly altered the extractability of Au(III). The aromatic diether, This research is partially supported by the