Estimating values of permeability (k), efficient porosity (P) and hydraulic conductivity (K) by analysing field outcrops as analogue of geothermal reservoirs, is a timely theme useful for predictions during geothermal exploration programs. In this paper we present a methodology providing k, P and K values, based on geometric analysis of quartz-tourmaline faults-vein arrays hosted in micaschist exposed in south-eastern Elba Island (Tuscan Archipelago, Italy), considered as the analogue of rock hosting the so-called “deep reservoir” in the Larderello geothermal field. The methodology is based on the integration among structural geology, fluid inclusions results and numerical analyses. Through a detailed structural mapping, scan lines and scan boxes analyses, we have reconstructed three superposed faulting events, developed in an extensional setting and framed in the Neogene evolution of inner Northern Apennines. Geometrical data of the fault-veins array were processed by reviewing the basic parallel-plate model equation for k evaluation. Fluid inclusion analyses provided those salinity and pressure-temperature values necessary for defining density and viscosity of the parent geothermal fluids. Then, permeability, density and viscosity were joined to get hydraulic conductivity (K). Permeability is estimated between 5×10−13 and 5×10−17
                     m2 with variations among the different faults generation, while the hydraulic conductivity is encompassed between 1.31×10−8 and 2.4×10−13
                     m/s. The obtained permeability and hydraulic conductivity values are comparable with those from several geothermal areas, and in particular from the Larderello geothermal field. The main conclusion is that the proposed integrated approach provides a reliable methodology to obtain crucial values, normally obtained after drilling, for developing numerical flow models of geothermal fluid path in active geothermal systems by field and laboratory analyses of analogue, exhumed, geothermal systems.Hydraulic properties of rock volumes, in terms of permeability (k), hence efficient porosity (P) and hydraulic conductivity (K) are parameters describing the ability of the rock volume to channel fluids at crustal depth, where primary porosity is negligible and fluid flow is controlled by fracture networks ( Hydraulic properties of reservoirs can be directly measured in laboratories (e.g. Permeability values in active geothermal areas have been directly measured in the range of 10 These opposite processes may coexist and/or occur in several repeated cycles implying that permeability in geothermal systems is overall time-dependent ( Generally, in hydrocarbon studies, determination of the hydraulic parameters of rock masses are derived from conventional 2D or 3D reservoir simulators ( Differently, in analogue, exhumed, geothermal systems, the fracture array that was present during fluid circulation is now defined by veins filled with hydrothermal minerals, indicating the original path through which fluids were channelled at the time and depth of their flow ( In this paper we describe a methodological approach based on geometrical analyses of hydrothermal (tourmaline-quartz) veins hosted in micaschist belonging to the eastern Elba Island exhumed geothermal system ( The evolution of the hydrothermal veins, in terms of their spatial distribution (array) and growth through time, was defined by a detailed examination of their crosscutting relationships, mainly based on geometrical analyses through scan line and scan box methodologies applied in selected outcrops, and by mineralogical and fluid inclusion studies. Reassessing the base algorithm for the permeability estimation ( The Elba Island (Tuscan Archipelago, Since Langhian, the migration of extension is accompanied by magmatism, with an eastward younging direction ( Hence, the high heat flow of Tuscany (regionally above 100 Thus, in the frame of the eastward extensional and magmatic migration, Elba Island ( Furthermore, the structurally deepest rocks of Elba Island are micaschists affected by low-P metamorphism, crosscut by leucogranite dykes ( Low-P micaschist ( The Monte Calamita micaschist derives from a pelitic protolith of Cambrian to Ordovician age ( The syn-kinematic mineralogical assemblage defining the main schistosity is given by Qtz The leucogranite dykes range from few centimeters to 1 In order to get parameters useful to define permeability, porosity and hydraulic conductivity from field and laboratory data, we developed a methodological approach based on: (a) geological survey and fluid inclusion analyses; (b) detailed geological mapping in key areas and collection of geometrical parameters (length and width of fractures) through scan lines and scan boxes; (c) estimation of permeability from the collected structural data; (d) estimation of fluid density and viscosity from fluid inclusion data and, finally, (e) hydraulic conductivity, considering the results from each of the previously listed steps. In the following, data related to each passage are described in different sections. The geological survey of the study area ( The older mineralized fault system (hereafter 1st faults generation) is defined by low-angle slip zones (B-Vein, The boundary of the cataclasite consists of polished surfaces where tourmaline fibers can be locally recognized, attesting their syn-kinematic crystallization. Furthermore, mechanical striations on tourmaline cataclasite suggest that fault activity continued even after the tourmaline crystallization ( Stereographic diagrams ( These low-angle faults are also characterized by splay fractures (A-Vein, The high-angle fault-slip zones (hereafter 2nd faults generation, The 3rd faults generation consists of sub-vertical SSW-NNE fault-slip zones ( Hydraulic conductivity computation requires the knowledge of the viscosity of the fluid that flowed in the fractures. Fluid inclusion analyses can provide clue parameters (i.e., fluid density, salinity, temperature and pressure) needed for the calculation of viscosity. Preliminary data on fluid inclusions trapped in quartz occurring in quartz-tourmaline veins at Cala Stagnone are reported in Because of its relatively poor optical features and fine-grained nature, very few inclusions were observed within tourmaline. All these inclusions were found in larger crystals belonging to the 1st faults generation, only. Fluid inclusions occurred as isolated exemplars or groupings in 2–3 individuals, and ranging from 5 to 20 Differently, no fluid inclusions were observed in tourmaline of the 2nd faults generation, probably due to their low dimensions, not discernible at the optical microscope. Many fluid inclusions, suitable for microthermometry, were observed in quartz of the 3rd faults generation. Here, fluid inclusions may group together in many individuals ( In tourmaline of the 1st faults generation and in quartz of the 3rd faults generation, phase assemblage at room temperature divided fluid inclusions in two typologies ( Microthermometry was performed at Linkam THMSG600 heating-freezing stage coupled with ZEISS POL-BK at CNR-IGG at Florence. The stage was calibrated by using pure H Microthermometric data for L and S inclusions are reported in In tourmaline, Th of L inclusions ranged from 322 to 540 For L inclusions in tourmaline, Tm Salinity for fluid inclusions is conventionally reported as wt.% NaCl equivalents ( Salinity for S inclusions, similarly expressed in wt.% NaCl eq., was calculated following the methods of The all possible trapping conditions of fluid inclusion in tourmaline and quartz are shown in The occurrence of at least two fluid inclusions populations within both tourmaline and quartz (L and S), the relatively large ranges of their microthermometric data (particularly Th) and the variable compositions of veins tourmaline pointed out to fluids with a composite physical-chemical evolution ( On the basis of this survey, three key areas were mapped at 1:100 scale ( Area 1 (map-view, Area 2 ( Area 3 ( Scan lines (3–12 Their orientation is almost normal to the trend of the 1st and 2nd faults generations and is at high-angle with respect to the 3rd faults generation. The spacing between scan lines was defined in 2 In all scan lines ( The minimum spacing value (i.e. 0.2 Within each scan box, collection of data (i.e. mineralized fault length, minimum and maximum mineralized slip zone width, and number of structures for each faults generation) has been carried out in the field, when the size of structures was suitable for the direct measurement. Differently, image analyses were performed (by the software ImageJ 1.45) for pictures taken at right angle to the scan box surface. By this methodology, structures from 30 The analyzed fracture dataset consists of about 450 data. The splay structures belonging to the 3rd faults generation are present in almost all scan boxes, with numerosity ranging from 1 ( The sum of the length of all structures belonging to the same generation was computed for each scan box. This analysis highlights that a high numerosity does not always imply a high value of total length. The best example of this is provided by the comparison of Values of the averaged minimum and maximum widths are significantly different only for the 1st faults generation, varying between few centimeters (e.g. In summary, the 3rd faults generation, the most diffuse, is the one showing the lowest averaged width value. On the contrary, the 1st faults generation displays the higher values of averaged width and total length. Permeability can be mathematically estimated using the parallel-plate model, assuming a laminar fluid flow and combining continuous fractures with different orientations, apertures, and spacing ( The parallel-plate model was used in many studies. Among them, it is worth mentioning Estimation of permeability has been obtained through the following Eq.  Many authors have debated on the connectivity of the fracture network. According to The effective conductance of a set of conductors arranged in parallel array is governed by the arithmetic mean rather than the geometric or harmonic mean. The geometric mean is a special case of power law averaging, extensively used by According to these considerations, we modified Eq. where F is the connectivity parameter ranging from 0 to 1. On the basis of the main geometrical configuration of the analyzed structures (angles of about 60°), we have considered F The b and L parameters derive from the fieldwork structural data collection, described in the previous section. When fractures are wide more than 2 The b and L parameters were obtained for each faults generation, within each scan box (  Generally, the higher permeability values are from the 1st faults generation, with values up to 10 Finally, the whole k values have also been analyzed through frequency distribution diagrams ( Based on the fluid inclusions results previously described (i.e. salinity, maximum and minimum pressure-temperature conditions for both L and S inclusions), maximum and minimum fluid density and viscosity were computed through the software SoWat NaCl-H Fluid viscosity was computed for the two kinds of fluid inclusions (L and S) and for all the faults generations at the minimum pressure conditions (i.e. at homogenization conditions), and at maximum pressure trapping conditions ( Considering permeability in addition to the parameters listed in This section will be focused on two main points: a) relationships between structures and tourmaline-quartz mineralization; b) estimation of permeability and hydraulic conductivity. Tourmaline is the most significant mineralogical phase associated to the first hydrothermal event during the Porto Azzurro magma cooling ( The 2nd faults generation is locally characterized by a mineralogical association with quartz and tourmaline similar to that of the 1st faults generation, suggesting the involvement of B-rich fluids also during this faults activity ( The Stagnone area was also described in Differently, Concluding, the structural and kinematic dataset from Cala Stagnone can be better framed in the Neogene extensional (rather than compressional) tectonic evolution of the northern Tyrrhenian Sea (e.g. The method to estimate permeability (k) and hydraulic conductivity (K) is based on the measurements of the vein length and thickness, as previously described. It is therefore assumed that veins with the same mineralogical association have been contemporaneously active. This is also a consequence of the fact that, given the comminution of mineral-filling veins, indications about the evolution of veins (e.g. K values were calculated for the minimum and maximum possible pressure values of fluid inclusion trapping. Maximum pressure (up to 2 The maximum and minimum K values computed from the data of S inclusions are always lower than the corresponding K values of L inclusions in all faults generations. However, the relatively high viscosity of the fluid trapped in S inclusions (>200 The validity of the proposed approach finds a confirmation in the k and K values from comparable reservoirs in active geothermal systems ( Thus, although the parallel-plate model has limitations, the results provide reliable estimations. Permeability values beyond the resolution limits of the model can be explained as the contribution of overpressured fluids. Another positive confirmation derives from the experimental studies conducted on brittle shear zones assisted by fluids, indicating typical values of permeability comprised between 10 As it regards the obtained viscosity values, these are not directly comparable with those of the Larderello geothermal field, where exploited fluids are vapour-dominated ( On the basis of the results obtained in this study, we propose the following protocol of investigation, during the preliminary phases of any geothermal exploration: identifying the analogue exhumed geothermal system of the exploitable area; in the exhumed geothermal area, mineralized key areas should be chosen, where a detailed structural and kinematic survey can be carried out and reported in a detailed map; mineralized faults and veins distribution at map-scale will indicate the most suitable orientation for the frequency analysis along scan lines; the frequency analysis will be used to calibrate the scan box size and spacing; within each scan box, width and length of each vein will be collected through field and image analyses; based on the collected data, the parallel-plate model will give permeability values; fluid inclusions data will provide information to estimate trapping temperature and salinity of the circulating geothermal palaeo-fluids; from these values, density and viscosity of fluids can be obtained; joining permeability with viscosity and density, the hydraulic conductivity will be gained. Summing up, in exhumed geothermal systems, the study of the faults-veins array through geometrical and kinematic analyses, integrated with fluid inclusions data and numerical modeling (parallel-plate model equation), can provide reliable data (commonly obtained after drilling) for rock-physical and hydraulic parameters, representing key values for an evaluation of the geothermal potentiality of any exploitable area. The research leading to these results has received funding from the