Generation IV high temperature gas-cooled reactors (HTGR) are preferentially fueled by spherical fuel elements, which are composed of a fuel zone of triso-coated uranium oxide (UO2) particles and a matrix graphite layer. Unqualified coated particles and spherical fuel elements unavoidablely occur during the processing of coating UO2 kernels and embedding the coated particles into the graphite matrix. So it is necessary to reprocess the UO2 in the unqualified coated particles and spherical fuel elements to maximize the use of the reactor core materials. In this work, we present several methods to: (1) separate the coated particles from the graphite matrix and, (2) expose and recover the UO2 kernels from the coated particles. The comparison of different methods shows that the thermal oxidation of graphite by a fixed bed burner and the jet grinding of the unqualified coated particles are prosing in practice for the separation of coated particles from the graphite matrix and recovering the uranium dioxide kernels, respectively. Some other methods, such as etching the SiC layer with the active fluorine species in plasma generated by the dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) under the atmosphere also show their great potential values in the reprocessing of reactor core materials, especially for the activated and contaminated fuels.Recently, high temperature gas-cooled reactors (HTGR) has attracted ever increasing attention due to its higher performances in terms of temperature and fuel burn-up, as well as its excellent the inherent safety (e.g. chemical inertia of the helium, high temperature resistance of the fuel, the prompt negative temperature coefficient and the single phase inert helium coolant) ( Up to now, two main fuel element concepts have been utilized: (1) the block-type fuel element applied in the prismatic core; (2) the spherical fuel element used in the pebble bed. For the latter one, the reactors are fueled by so-called pebbles of 60 However, during the fabrication, testing of the TRISO-coated fuel particles and the following embedding of the particles into the graphite matrix, the waste with uranium unavoidablely occurs. So it is necessary to reprocess the core waste to maximize the use of the nuclear resource, reduce the nuclear waste and cost. Two steps can be envisaged: (1) separation of the TRISO-coated fuel particles from the graphite matrix; (2) subsequent fragmentation of the fuel particles to enable the uranium reprocessing. The main methods to separate the TRISO-coated fuel particles include the mechanical grinding, oxidation of the graphite at high temperature and high voltage pulsed discharge ( Burning the graphite is one of the eldest ways to separate the TRISO-coated fuel particles from the matrix. In the early of 1980s, most researchers thought it was the most safe, controllable and effective way. In our experiment, we examined the airflow speed influence on the oxidation of graphite by using the thermogravimetric analysis. As shown in As we know, the graphite reacts with the air based on the equations below ( Burning the graphite is an effective and commercial method, especially for the un-spent graphite. The comprehensive consideration of the factors which can affect the graphite oxidation (e.g., the airflow speed, the gas composition) will increase the efficiency and reduce the cost in practice. Compared with the separation of the fuel particles from the graphite matrix, the fragmentation of the fuel particles is much more difficult. As known, the carbon layer (i.e., porous carbon layer, inner pyrocarbon layer and out pyrocarbon layer) can be easily removed by the oxidation processing. And the key part is the removal of the silicon carbide layer (SiC). SiC shows the properties of great hardness, high melting point, excellent chemical stability and good thermal shock resistance. It hence provides the fundamental safety of the high temperature gas-cooled reactors. On the other hand, the above properties of SiC make the fuel particles reprocessing really difficult. The mechanical grinding is the traditional method to fragment the SiC layer. However, great hardness of SiC wears recovery instruments easily. And the recovery rate is no more than 95%. Recently, researchers have turned their attention on the jet grinding. The jet grinding displays simplicity, process stability, no need of the tail gas treatment and little corrosion of the recovery instruments ( In our experiment, we used TRISO-coated Zirconium oxide (ZrO Jet grinding of the TRISO-coated ZrO  Different from the jet grinding, the etching of SiC layer by using fluorine-containing plasma, which has been widely used in the micro-electronics fabrication ( In our experiment, the TRISO-coated particles with ZrO2 kernels were first treated in the high temperature oven at about 900 to remove the out carbon layer. Then particles of about 300 All of the particles were weighed and measured before and after the 4 In addition to the mass and diameter changes of coated particles, the surface topography also shows differences as shown in Compared with the jet grinding, the plasma etching has the advantages of: (1) by controlling the etching time, complete removing of SiC layer without the etching of UO Several methods to: (1) separate the coated particles from the graphite matrix and, (2) expose and recover the UO This work has been partly supported by the National S&T Major Project (Grant No. ZX06901), Research Fund for Independent Research Projects of Tsinghua University (20111080971) and Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China (20121010010 & 20120002120012).