Froth flotation is considered the most effective process of beneficiating low grade ores and is widely used in the base metals industry. For effective flotation, the attachment of mineral particles to air bubbles is important and has been studied by many researchers by measuring quantities such as attachment time, film-thinning time and induction time. This paper identifies an important step in the bubble–particle attachment process, namely, the expansion mechanism of the three phase contact (TPC) line between liquid, solid and air. It has been shown that the TPC expansion time is determined by the drainage of the surrounding fluid. It is influenced by factors such as pulp chemistry surrounding the particle, variations in surface forces and pressure inside the bubble. It has been observed experimentally that the TPC expansion time bears square root relationship to attachment efficiency. In this work, it has been argued that the attachment efficiency is related to the TPC circle radius propagation.adjusted means square regression coefficients effective diameter degree of freedom attachment efficiency statistical parameters rate constant particle radius or flotation recovery radius of TPC circle sequential sum of squares attachment time contact time drainage time induction time rupture time time for TPC expansion volume drained of liquid during attachment process particle volume investigated factors TPC expansion parameter liquid viscosity pressure gradient Flotation is widely used physicochemical process in mineral processing and chemical industries to separate particles with different surface properties by selectively attaching them to air bubbles. First the particle surfaces are conditioned to render them hydrophobic using collectors and suspended in a pulp through agitation. Air is then introduced along with a frother to generate sufficiently small air-bubbles. The moving particles collide with and attach to air bubbles. The mineral particles are then recovered when the particle-laden air bubbles rise to the surface forming a froth layer. For that reason, the process of bubble–particle attachment is a critical stage that determines the efficiency of the overall flotation process. It involves several stages: the approach of the bubble and particle towards each other, the draining of the liquid film between bubble and particle to a critical thickness so that rupture occurs forming a three phase contact (TPC) between air, mineral and liquid, the propagation of the three-phase contact line to form a stable attachment of the particle to the air bubble. Initially, researchers lumped the time for these sub-processes to occur as Considering the drainage time as the induction time, In the work, a model has been proposed to determine the time TPC expansion and its influence on flotation recovery. It involves a parameter that takes into account the effect of chemistry of the pulp that influences the driving pressure. Although numerous authors have studied the relationship between attachment time and flotation recovery, both bubble–particle attachment time and flotation recovery have been studied mostly as a function of one selected factor at a time while other factors, such as particle size, pH, ionic strength, concentration of surfactants, bubble size, and pulp temperature, have been kept constant. The main limitation of such approaches is not detecting the interactions occurring between two or more factors, and hence the detailed information about sensitivity of bubble–particle attachment time to predict flotation response has not been examined. For that reason, this study also focuses on investigating the effects of three commonly used variables i.e., collector, pH and activator, on the TPC expansion parameter based on a full factorial design. The factors studied are collector (dodecyl amine hydrochloride) and activator (potassium chloride) concentration as well as solution pH. Bubble–particle attachment time can be measured using several techniques such as the Glebotsky induction timer ( Bubble–particle attachment time is commonly determined using pure minerals such as quartz ( The solution chemistry conditions (pH, dissolved ions and surfactant dosage) change the surface properties of particles which influence the attachment time ( Minerals with different composition at a fixed solution chemistry condition may also have different attachment time ( The higher the solution temperature, the shorter the attachment time between a bubble and a particle because the viscosity of liquid decreases with the increase of temperature ( The higher the bubble or particle size, the longer the attachment time since it takes longer time for the displacement of wetting film on the surface of bubbles or particles ( The sharp-edged particles have shorter attachment time than spherical particles because sharp edges facilitate the thinning of wetting film ( As regards modelling of attachment time from first principles, the Stefan–Reynolds model ( Once the liquid film between a particle and an air bubble is drained to the critical thickness during their relative approach, rupture will occur and a nucleic hole of the TPC between air, liquid and mineral will be formed at the point O as shown in Assuming that the bubble is large in comparison to the particle size which is the case in most practical applications of flotation, the curvature of the bubble may be neglected. The volume of liquid drained during the propagation of the TPC line may be represented by the volume, ( On integration: Normalizing this volume by particle volume, For This implies that the volume drained is proportional to the square of the TPC circle radius. Since the drainage volume is small it may be considered to occur under laminar flow conditions for which Poiseulles equation applies. i.e., the liquid drainage rate is defined as where Also, it may be argued that the attachment efficiency which in turn is related to the flotation recovery depends on how strongly the particle is attached to the air bubble. The attachment force is distributed along the length of the TPC line and its strength is dependent on the pulp chemistry due to the presence of various flotation reagents and particle surface characteristics. The attachment efficiency and the flotation recovery would then be directly proportional to the perimeter of the TPC circle. Therefore, Therefore, the flotation recovery is expected to be proportional to the square root of the time for TPC propagation. This result has been investigated using experimentation in this work. Experiments were carried out to establish the relationship between bubble–particle attachment time and the efficiency of attachment in different flotation pulps. The pulps consisted of suspensions of pure quartz conditioned with combinations of important flotation reagents. The variables investigated were dodecyl amine hydrochloride (DAH) concentration, KCl concentration and pH. DAH was effectively a collector with sufficient frothing properties while KCl was considered an activator that influenced the positively charged collector attachment on the negatively charged quartz particles. In order to establish the interactive effects between the variables were combined according to a factorial experimental design. Batch flotation tests were also conducted under the same reagent combinations to evaluate their influence on recovery. A full factorial experimental design with three variables was selected to describe the bubble–particle attachment time experiments. The experimental design procedure was employed to study both the main effects and the interactions of the selected variables with the minimum number of experimental runs. The variables selected were DAH concentration ( The pure quartz crystals obtained from Opty-quartz (Queensland, Australia) were used for this study. First, the crystals were dry-ground using a hammer, and then the ground crystals were wet-screened to obtain the size fraction of 212 The cationic collector, dodecyl amine hydrochloride (99.5% of C The induction timer obtained from the University of Alberta (Canada) was used for the bubble–particle attachment time measurements (see Flotation experiments were carried out using the UCT (University of Cape Town) microflotation unit ( The bubble–particle attachment time was determined at different reagent combinations conditions commonly encountered in flotation (see As discussed in Section  The effect of changing of DAH and KCl concentration is illustrated in  Since the experiments were carried out on the basis of a full factorial design, analysis of variance was carried out on the dependent variables Thus, it may be construed that both Batch flotation recovery is generally modelled using the Klimpel model which is a modified first order model and given by: In this work, it has been shown that the bubble–particle attachment efficiency is directly influenced by the TPC line expansion. The TPC circle radius is proportional to the square-root of the time for TPC line expansion and in turn to the attachment efficiency. The effect of the variations in pulp chemistry due to the presence of flotation reagents on the TPC expansion has also been quantified in terms of the proposed TPC expansion parameter ( We thank the anonymous reviewers for their great feedback.