Materials are critical to any economy. They are integral to the systems that provide energy to industry and society such as photovoltaic (PV) technology. Also, the energy costs of developing critical materials can seriously impact the PV industry. Assessing precisely what these costs are is extremely difficult, especially for secondary ores and uncommon materials used by the industry. While PV module efficiency is increasing, the energy costs of securing materials for development is increasing as well. Not all materials are likely constrained, and there are ways to improve efficiencies. Today, obtaining materials of PV-grade purity relies heavily on fossil fuels, for which energy costs are also increasing. One of our most critical needs if we are to achieve a better understanding of a future involving a continued rapid-upscale of PV electricity, is better information about material availability in the long term and the energy costs associated with that.“We’re made of star stuff,” Carl Sagan explained decades ago in his iconic television show Cosmos. It is theorized that during the Big Bang the lightest elements—hydrogen, helium, and trace amounts of lithium and beryllium—were formed. As stars form even today, their cores fuse hydrogen into helium, and then when they begin to die they manufacture carbon from fusing helium atoms. Very massive stars begin a further series of reactions forming oxygen through iron (Fe). The most massive stars die in a supernova, which releases enough energy and neutrons to form elements heavier than Fe, such as uranium and gold (Au). Today we have identified 90 such naturally occurring elements and in total 119 elements are known to man. On Earth we have found methods of extracting, refining, and using every material found for our increasingly complex industrial society The world is currently in a state of transition and the shift from fossil fuels to renewable technologies will lead to greater consumption of certain essential materials Our current modern economies are dependent on growth; thus, the same technological and resource dependence that has allowed us to experience a wealth of materials defines our vulnerability within the system. Disruptions in the complex network of global resource chains and industrial development can lead to serious degradation of productivity and where energy production is concerned, even a decrease in social well-being. Recent rapid development of PV energy throughout the world has led to questions of material constraints on it, especially given other profitable industries competing for resources. Material constraints are those that arise due to limited amounts of critical metals required for rapid PV production Ever since Hubbert predicted, in 1956, a future peak in crude oil production in the United States (US) Given the interest in material constraints to industries such as PV production, it is no surprise that recent efforts have been made to quantify future supply disruptions. Sherwood et al. modeled resource criticality in modern economies using agent-based dynamics in 2017 and found that there are vulnerabilities from technological interdependence Unfortunately, information on material constraints to PV is relatively scarce and given its novelty, there are more questions than answers at this time. This is due mainly to the uncertainty of the composition of future energy economies, as is today, but was even more so in the past. As we can make better predictions of what the future may look like, the possibility of material constraints will become clearer. In the year 2000, Andersson evaluated the material necessary for large-scale thin-film PV development and found that copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) technology was limited by In reserves and that cadmium There are five different technologies typically discussed in the literature pertaining to materials relevant to the PV industry: mono-crystalline silicon (mono-Si) and multi or poly-crystalline silicon (multi-Si or poly-Si), which are both forms of c-Si PV, and amorphous silicon (a-Si), CIGS and CdTe, which are all forms of thin-film PV. All five technologies have different pathways for production and therefore can carry different footprints based on where they are manufactured Each technology has its advantages and disadvantages as well as different metal content. C-Si is the most popular and widely deployed PV technology to date. It is most popular in large-scale and rooftop applications. Thin films are generally less efficient than c-Si cells, but they are also less energy intensive to produce and can be applied in As can be understood from Mining the Earth for materials is something humans have been doing for thousands of years. Today mining is done mostly by heavy machinery, but it is still integral to industry and can be the backbone of a nation’s economy. There are thousands of mines on earth today, ranging from small family-size operations to large-scale mountain top removal. It is important to remember that every ore deposit is different, and so is every mine. Mining includes searching for, extracting and beneficiating (separating commercially useful ore and mineral content from surrounding materials) from the Earth. There are seven distinct main steps in any mining operation: (1) exploration, (2) design, (3) construction, Once ore is beneficiated and processed, it must be refined. There are two categories for the process of refining ore: pyrometallurgical processing and hydrometallurgical processing. Pyrometallurgical processing uses physical properties such as smelting and is more widespread. Hydrometallurgical processing uses chemical properties and relies on leaching ores with strong acids and recovering concentrated materials by precipitation or solvent extraction/electrowinning (SX/EW) For pyrometallurigical processing, or smelting, the ore is simply heated in a furnace until the metals physically separate. Electric or “flash” furnaces are used for lower material volumes and higher by-product recovery rates For hydrometallurgical processing, several steps must be taken. The ore goes through crushing, grinding, washing, filtering, sorting and sizing, gravity concentrating, leaching, ion exchange, solvent extraction, electrowinning, and precipitation Al is second to Si as the most abundant metallic element on Earth; however, its commercial industrial application is only about 100 years old because it is very reactive in nature and difficult to separate from other materials. Today, Al is favored for its lightweight malleability, ductility, resistance to corrosion and durability. It can be easily machined and cast. Second to Fe, Al is the most widely used metal in the global economy, including areas Ga is a secondary by-product from aluminum oxide production from bauxite, although some is produced from Zn-processing residues. It is used in producing integrated circuits and optoelectronic devices (mostly laser diodes and light-emitting diodes). For the most part, specific methods for refining Ga to semiconductor grade are proprietary information. Some likely processes involved include fractional distillation, electrolysis, extracting, vacuum distillation, fractional crystallization, zone melting, and single crystal growth. The exact process would depend upon Ga concentrations in the alumina being refined. Ga is most relevant to the PV industry in terms of its application in thin-film PV technology, specifically CIGS. Amounts of between 0.12–6.17 kg of high-grade Ga are consumed per megawatt of CIGS installations Cu has played an important role in human development for thousands of years. It is favored for its properties of ductility, malleability, resistance to corrosion, and thermal and electrical conductivity. Cu is an invaluable industrial metal mostly used in building construction, building wiring, telecommunications, and electronics. It can also be found in transportation, industrial machinery, and general consumer products. Usually associated with sulfur in natural deposits, it is currently produced by a variety of multistage processes in many countries. Generally, it begins with the mining and concentrating of low-grade ores (<0.5% Cu) containing copper sulfide minerals and then smelting and electrolytic refining to produce cathode grade Cu (>99.99% pure Cu). Hydrometallurgical Cu processing is increasing in popularity. Given that Cu is the second-best-known conductor of electricity, it is used in electricity transmission, distribution, and to Compared to other materials, Se is relatively new to industry. Growth in consumption was driven by applications in rubber compounding, steel alloying, and Se rectifiers. By 1970 its major use was as a photoconductor in paper copiers. Today Se is used to decolorize green tint in different glasses, in architectural plate glass as an insolating agent, in catalysts to enhance selective oxidation, plating solutions, blasting caps, corrosion resistance, electrolytic production of manganese, and in Cu, Pb and steel alloys to improve machinability. It is also an essential micronutrient found in fertilizer and used as a dietary supplement for humans and livestock. Se is recovered from the electrolytic refinement of Cu. It accumulates in the electrolyte or “anode slimes” after Cu electrolysis has been performed. In general, Se is concentrated using very strong acids or roasting and leaching, followed by hydrometallurgical processing and precipitation. Se is an integral semiconductor for producing CIGS modules. Amounts ranging between 0.5 and 84.41 kg of Se are consumed per megawatt of CIGS installed Tellurium is also relatively new to industry and also a relatively rare element. It was used in the chemical industry as a vulcanizing agent and accelerator in the processing of rubber and a catalyst for synthetic fiber production. Today it used as an alloying additive in steel, copper, lead, cast iron, and malleable iron. Like Se, Te is recovered from Cu anode slimes but in much lower concentrations. It is also recovered from effluent in the process of refining Pb. General steps in refining Te include separation, roasting, leaching, cementation, electrolysis, vacuum distillation, and zone refinement. One of the major uses for high-grade Te today is as a semiconductor in the development of CdTe thin-film PV modules. Up to 90.38 kg of Te is consumed per megawatt of CdTe installed Si is the most abundant element on Earth. Si in the form of silicates constitutes more than 25% of the Earth’s crust. Today the uses of Si include the production of Al and Al alloys, The history of Ag in human civilization is thousands of years old as it has been used for utensils, jewellery, and even currency. Ag exhibits high ductility, electrical conductivity, malleability, and reflectivity. In fact, of all metals, Ag has the whitest color, the highest optical reflectivity, and highest thermal and electrical conductivity. Today it can be found in electronics, coins, jewellery and silverware, photography, antimicrobial applications, clothing, pharmaceuticals, plastics, batteries, bearings, brazing, soldering, catalytic converters, electroplating, inks, mirrors, water purification, wood treatment, and solar photovoltaics. The chemical characteristics of Ag are similar to Cu and it can even substitute Cu on an atomic level in most minerals formed in the ground. Ag can be a principle product for a mine, or it can be obtained as a by-product of Pb, Zn, Cu, and Au mining. Once extracted, Ag containing material is beneficiated and refined by smelting and leaching. To produce solar-grade Ag, the concentrate also undergoes electrolytic Cu refining. Ag can be found in all forms of PV technology depending upon the design. It is used in c-Si for metallization of the module and in general for its excellent electrical conductivity. Cu can substitute for it in some applications. Amounts ranging from 5.17 to 19.2 kg of Ag are consumed per megawatt of overall PV installations After Fe, Al, and Cu, Zn is the most mined metal in the world. Zinc sulfide, or sphalerite is the primary mineral ore for Zn production and it is never found in its elemental form. It is mostly consumed as a metal for coatings to protect iron and steel from rusting, alloys such as bronze and brass, Zn based dye casting alloys and rolled Zn; however, it also has applications in rubber production and medicines. It is required for proper growth and development in plants and animals and is the second most common trace metal found in the human body after Fe. Zn is typically refined through electrolysis. Although Zn is not directly used in PV modules, it is necessary for PV in that it is the primary metal for Cd, Ge, and In, which may not otherwise be produced economically. It is estimated that 29.99 kg of Zn is required for every megawatt of overall PV installation Cd is also a relatively new industrial metal. It is soft, malleable, and ductile. Industrial applications include rechargeable batteries, pigments, coatings, plating, and stabilizers for plastics. Since Cd shares certain chemical properties with Zn, it can substitute Zn in sphalerite formations. Zn:Cd ratios in sphalerite range from about 200:1 to 400:1 Ge is another metal that is relatively new to industry. It is hard, has a metallic luster, the same crystal structure as a diamond and is brittle. Ge is also a semiconductor and once seemed very promising as a transistor material. Unfortunately, among other deficiencies, it proved difficult to concentrate to the necessary purities. It was replaced by very-high quality Si in transistors but was then used for fiber optics, infrared systems, and polymerization catalysts. Today, the energy costs associated with semiconductor grade Si are being reevaluated and Ge is once again considered as a good option. Like Cd and In, Ge is a by-product of Zn production and occurs as germanite, which is associated with Zn ores. Concentration of Ge is very energy intense and typically consists of precipitation, electro-refining or leaching with solvent extraction, and then zone refinement. Today, Ge is mostly of interest in a-Si production. It is estimated that 4.07 kg of Ge is consumed per megawatt Like Ge and Cd, In is a relatively new industrial metal and is derived from Zn production. Applications for In include fusible alloys, solders and electronics, semiconductors and thin films for liquid crystal displays—which is its main application today. Typically, the residues from Zn smelting and roasting are leached and concentrated into a precipitate that includes precipitation. Process steps for purification include recovery from Zn leaching, roasting, concentration, solvent extraction, back extraction, plate immersion, anode casting, electrorefinement, vacuum distillation, and zone refinement. The last three steps can be repeated several times until the metal is of sufficient purity for application in CIGS technology. Amounts ranging between 4.5 and 83.79 kg of In are consumed per megawatt of CIGS installed This section considers the energy costs of developing the materials necessary to construct PV systems. Since the PV systems are an energy delivery system, insight into the energy required to develop the materials, especially as a trend over time, is of concern (see The extraction of metals from geological deposits on Earth and their concentration for modern industrial utility requires a significant amount of energy. In 1986, Hall et al. As can be understood from this chapter so far, Cu is integral to the future of the PV industry because it is required in PV systems themselves and in the infrastructure required to transport and consume the energy produced. It also has a useful amount of scientific information associated with it given its history and prevalence in industry. As is the case for most resource extractions, as Cu is mined, the grade of the ore tends to decline overtime As discussed it is very difficult to generate good data for mining metals, as no two mines are the same. Differences include those in the deposits, both in quantity and quality of the ore, the geography, and even the technology at hand. A time-series industry-wide view can therefore be very useful. It is important to observe how the energy costs associated with mining and metal extraction and production relate to the rest of the economy over time. Global mining and quarrying includes all upstream activities pertaining to mineral extraction and beneficiation applied to metals and nonmetals, excluding fossil fuels. Energy consumption for nonmetallic minerals, nonferrous metals, and iron and steel refer to downstream activities, including final energy consumption, which refers to the entire global economy. We can see that, especially in the twenty-first century, the energy consumption for the materials industry is growing faster than that for the global economy as a whole. This is especially true for upstream activity (mining and quarrying), which is sensitive to ore grades and where the most material is handled. One reason for this increase is the extraction and processing of increasing volumes of ore. Another reason is the increasing energy required to obtain more remote and less concentrated deposits. In other words, there could be an increase in quantity and decrease in quality. In the United States, during the year 2000, 92% of metals obtained were through surface mining  The idea of handling large quantities of materials and its relation to energy costs can be used to describe another trend in materials production. Fizaine and Court found that sectors of global metal extraction and production represent a significant share of total global final energy consumption. They reported a range of about 7%–10% from literature and themselves calculated around 10% for 2011 Just as primary ore energy costs tend to be higher than that for secondary ores, primary materials can also have a much higher energy cost than secondary, or recycled, materials. In general, it is accepted that to increase life cycle efficiency and lower energy costs for PV systems, a serious effort is going to have to be made for the recycling of electronics sometime in the future. In fact, from 1900 to 2010, global human-made material stocks accumulating in buildings, infrastructure, and machinery increased 23 fold and required half of all the annual global resource use to be improved, maintained, or operated The impact of recycling PV panels and electronics to the energy costs of PV production is already beginning to be studied. This work could inform material and design choices in the future to minimize life cycle energy costs and maximize material throughput. Pathways for recycling PV and manufacturing waste have been studied for some time Currently, of the most important metals utilized in the PV industry, only Al and Cu experience any significant recycling efforts from industry or the public Options to relieve this stress on the PV industry include increasing energy efficiency in production at rates that offset the effects of decreasing ore grades, or improving the ore grades themselves. This can be achieved through greater recycling efforts, switching materials to those that are not energy intensive or constrained, or finding new resources of high-quality materials. Interestingly, it is the third option to increase ore grades—finding new resources—that seems to be receiving the most investment. Currently, there is a push for plans and technology being developed for NASA to optically mine asteroids for materials It is not just we that are made of “star stuff,” but our economy as well. Materials are vital to the economy, especially when it comes to those parts of our industries that we depend upon for our energy, such as the PV industry. Not just the availability, but also the energy costs of developing such materials are very important. It is currently uncertain if we are going to realize disruptions in very large scales of PV development from metals critical to the industry, whether from depletion, competition from other industries, or uneconomic energy costs. Assessing precisely how much material we have, especially secondary ores, and also the energy costs associated with them is complicated as every mining operation is different. Currently we are experiencing a rapid-upscale in global PV capacity installations and there are some concerns over whether or not we have the materials or the production capacity to keep up. Also, although PV modules are becoming more efficient at producing electricity, the energy costs for securing the materials for development is increasing. So far the efficiency gains seem to be outperforming the increased costs, but this dynamic needs more study. One of our most critical and urgent needs if we are to achieve a better understanding of a future involving a continued rapid-upscale of PV electricity, is better information about material availability in the long term and the energy costs associated with that.