Surface roughness affects both the adsorption capacity of collector and mineral flotation separation. To investigate the role of surface roughness in quartz flotation, in this study, quartz particles were ground by different mills to produce two quartz samples with different nano-sized roughness, which was quantified with atomic force microscopy (AFM). Flotation experiments were carried out using CaCl2 as an activator and sodium oleate (NaOL) as a collector. The results of flotation experiments showed an excellent performance with high recoveries for the rough quartz particles in contrast to the case with the smooth ones. Surface chemical aspects for the role of surface roughness in flotation were investigated through measurements of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Scanning Electron Microscope-Energy Dispersive Spectrometry (SEM-EDS), collector adsorption capacity and contact angle analysis. Both XPS and SEM-EDS results demonstrated larger adsorption capacity of Ca2+ for the rough quartz particles due to more adsorption sites provided by larger specific surface area. The NaOL adsorption capacity results also confirmed that larger surface roughness corresponded to higher adsorption capacity of NaOL. Subsequently, the contact angle results revealed that after interacting with NaOL the rough quartz particles presented more hydrophobic. Combined with flotation tests and surface chemical analysis, it might be arrived that surface roughness affected the adsorption capacity of both Ca2+ and NaOL, therefore impacting the wettability and floatability of quartz particles.Flotation separation is primarily based on the physicochemical differences between the surface of the valuable and associated minerals Minerals surface roughness influences the surface properties (i.e., stability and deformability) of an aqueous film which either hinders or delays the particle-bubble adhesion during floating process and thus, is one of the most vital factors that interfere with flotation rate and separation process Although the different impacts of surface roughness on the flotation performance of particles have been described in the previous reports, there is still a long way to fully understand the causes of these influences. In a direct measurement of colloidal force, Karakas et al. However, the previous reports on the surface roughness related to the surface chemical properties of minerals were not sufficient, which was not conducive to revealing the mechanism that affects particle flotation. Therefore, it is particularly important to study the effect of surface roughness on mineral flotation from the perspective of surface chemistry. In this work, based on the adsorption capacity of flotation reagents onto mineral surface, the role of surface roughness on quartz flotation was investigated via a variety of experiments to be able to explain the potential reason for the flotation difference. Experimental investigations to deduce the role of surface roughness in quartz flotation included the analysis of XPS, SEM-EDS, and NaOL adsorption capacity as well as contact angle measurement. It is anticipated that the findings of this research will provide a fundamental understanding of the role of surface roughness in surface chemistry and mineral flotation. Representative sample of pure lump quartz was selected from Xingtai, Hebei Province, China. The x-ray florescence analysis confirmed the high purity of lump quartz with 99.81 wt% SiO In this investigation, NaOL was selected as collector rather than amines because a thick layer of foam is generated and difficult to dissipate when amines is used Two typical methods utilized for obtaining the surface roughness of +0.038–0.074 mm quartz particles were atomic force microscopy (AFM) determination and BET surface area detection. The BET detection is used as a typical and convenient technology for measuring the surface roughness of particles. In this investigation, the BET surface area detection was determined with a 3H-2000 surface area and pore size analyzer from BeiShiDe Instruments Technology (Beijing) Co.,Ltd, using nitrogen as purge gas. The surface roughness factor was quantified based on the measured specific surface area using Eq. The surface topography of quartz particles was performed via using AFM determination, which is reliable to image both sub-microscopic and microscopic topographies of particle surface under specific test conditions. In comparison with BET technique, surface roughness values can be quantified on the basis of the arithmetic average (R In this research, AFM images of quartz particle surfaces were acquired with a MultiMode 8 AFM (Bruker Corporation, Karlsruhe, Germany) using the peak force tapping-mode. First, the quartz particles were affixed on a glass slide with glue. Then, five different particles were randomly chosen for imaging the quartz surface. Finally, both R The XPS experiments were performed to compare the adsorption amount of Ca The purpose of SEM-EDS observation experiments was to identify the distribution characteristics of Ca The NaOL adsorption capacity tests of quartz particles were performed by using the UV1901PC UV–Vis spectrophotometer at a wave length of 204 nm. During the measurements, 2 g of quartz particles was added to 35 mL of DI water and stirred for 2 min. Next, NaOH (or HCl) was added to obtain the required pH of 12.3 and also stirred for 2 min. Then, CaCl In this equation, Г is the amount adsorbed on quartz surfaces (mg/g), C The contact angle of quartz particles was determined by the sessile drop method using a DSA 100 contact angle goniometer. Prior to the test, 2 g of quartz particles was added to 35 mL of DI water and stirred for 2 min. Next, NaOH (or HCl) was added to obtain the required pH of 12.3 and also stirred for 2 min. Then, CaCl Micro-flotation tests were conducted in an XFG-type flotation machine  The results of surface roughness determined by BET method are reported in CaCl The amount of Ca The distribution characterization of Ca The role of surface roughness in the adsorption capacity of NaOL on minerals surface should be emphasized because the flotation reagents have a vital effect on the attachment and detachment of bubble-particle Surface roughness plays a vital role in the wettability of different surfaces, and it is acknowledged that as the surface roughness increases, the hydrophobic surface becomes more hydrophobic while the hydrophilic surface becomes more hydrophilic Micro-flotation experiments were carried out to investigate the effect of surface roughness on the floatability of quartz particles. The flotation results, obtained at the given pH of 12.3 and NaOL concentration of 25 to 125 mg/L, are shown in The flotation results, obtained at a NaOL concentration of 75 mg/L and at a pH of 7–13, are revealed in From the surface roughness measurement results, it is clear that the quartz particles from the ceramic ball mill had larger specific surface area and higher surface roughness than the quartz particles from stainless-steel disc mill. On the basis of both XPS and SEM-EDS results, it is easy to be concluded that the adsorption capacity of Ca In this work, surface roughness has been identified and successfully used to enhance the flotation performance of quartz particles. Some fundamental aspects of surface chemistry of different rough quartz particles have been investigated to elucidate the flotation difference through variations of XPS, SEM-EDS, and NaOL adsorption capacity as well as contact angle analysis. With the variation of surface properties, surface roughness is likely to have a considerable number of potential applications in the mitigation of minerals. Several points can conclusively be made at this time: Based on the results of flotation experiments, it is clear that the gap of flotation recovery of quartz particles with different surface roughness was gradually decreased with the increasing NaOL concentration, while the higher flotation recovery for the rough quartz particles was observed with the selected NaOL concentration. Based on the results of XPS and SEM-EDS analysis, more Ca Based on the results of NaOL adsorption capacity and contact angle studies, the particles with higher surface roughness had a better adsorption capacity of NaOL, and therefore the rough quartz particles presented more hydrophobic.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The financial supports for this work from the National Natural Science Foundation of China under the grant No. 51874072 and No. 51974064, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under the grant No. N180106006, N180104017 and N2001029 are gratefully acknowledged.