The feasibility of cleaning three Turkish lignites (Beypazarı, Gölbaşı and Kangal lignites) by the dense medium separation or the froth flotation method has been investigated. Solutions of zinc chloride (ZnCl2) with specific gravities ranging from 1.1 to 1.75 have been used as the dense medium. In the case of froth flotation, methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC), diethyl isohexanol (DEH) and sodium dodesyl sulphonate (SDS) were used as the frother and kerosene was used as the collector. In both methods, each lignite sample was separated into two sub-fractions: the lignite rich part and the mineral matter rich part. The results indicate that the effectiveness of the methods in ash and sulphur removal is appreciably different for the different lignites. An effective pyritic sulphur removal (over 90%) was obtained for Beypazarı or Gölbaşı lignites by the dense medium separation. The effectiveness of the froth flotation was relatively different depending on both the lignite and frother type. The recovery is generally low and changes considerably depending on the frother type and particle size.Mineral matter and water are the main undesirable inert matters in coal. Both of them absorb some of the useful heat, and hence, reduce the calorific value. Mineral matter is a complex mixture of inorganic minerals and elements, and they remain as ash when coal is burned. Ash, sulphur or heat specifications generally dictate whether or not a cleaning process is necessary for coal. In coal fired power generation, the optimal operation of the combustors generally requires the ash content of pulverized coal not exceeding 20%. Therefore, high ash content coals require some kind of cleaning process before use. For this purpose, several physical or chemical processes have been developed. In practical applications, some physical methods, such as washing or dense media separation, froth flotation, oil agglomeration etc., are widely used for the preparation of clean (low ash content) coal from a high ash content coal Another physical method generally used for cleaning coal is froth flotation. This technique is essentially based on the difference in the surface properties and characteristics of particles and is commonly used for cleaning coals. The hydrophobic coal particles are selectively removed from the suspension in water by attachment to the rising air bubbles Turkey has abundant lignite and brown coal resources, and these are used as one of the main energy sources. However, their ash and sulphur content are relatively high. The possibility of cleaning some Turkish lignites by some physical methods is discussed in several papers Approximately, a sample of 10 kg in lumps from each of the three Turkish lignites has been ground by a laboratory type ball mill with porcelain balls. The ground samples were then sieved and classified into particle size fractions and kept in closed containers to minimize oxidation. These size fractions were analyzed for moisture, ash and forms of sulphur by following standard methods Zinc chloride (ZnCl The flotation experiments were performed in a sub-aeration Denver D-12 laboratory cell with a capacity of 1.5 l. In a typical test, 60 g of the lignite sample was conditioned in tap water for 10 min at an impeller speed of 1200 rpm. The pH of the slurry was adjusted as ∼7. An appropriate quantity of collector (e.g. 1500 g/t kerosene) and frother (e.g. 140 g/t DEH) was then added. The pulp was further conditioned for 1 min and then air was introduced into the cell. The froth product was collected by scraping from the top of the cell into the receiver, until the froth ceased (approximately 3 min) to overflow. The fractions were filtered, washed, rinsed, dried, weighed and analyzed for their ash and sulphur contents. The recovery, ash and sulphur reductions were calculated as mentioned above. To determine the convenient concentration of the collector for a certain lignite type, a set of experiments were conducted by using kerosene and samples with particle size of −60 Dense medium separation is generally applied for cleaning relatively higher rank coals, such as bituminous coals or anthracite. The coarse mineral particles are effectively removed from coal by the float and sink method. In the case of fine particles, generally, centrifugal separation may be required for an effective separation The data in The data in The dependence of total sulphur contents of the recovered fractions on the specific gravity of the medium is represented in Froth flotation is basically a mineral processing method for separation of valuable minerals from gangue minerals. The froth flotation technique usually requires a relatively high dosage of oily collectors to make a lignitic coal floatable. It is also well known that oxidation affects the efficiency of flotation The effectiveness of the flotation for the three Turkish lignites is investigated by using a collector and three different frothers. The results are summarized in The reductions in ash and total sulphur of the lignites in the use of SDS are represented in The reductions in ash and total sulphur of the lignites in the use of MIBC are represented in The above discussed data indicate that although the flotation behavior of the lignites are similar, the effect of the frothers in ash removal is relatively different, depending on the lignites. By using different frothers, in the most effective cases, 42%, 29% and 22% ash removal were obtained for Beypazarı, Kangal and Gölbaşı lignites, respectively. This different behavior may arise from the different composition of the inherent mineral matter of the lignites The data in The float and sink data for a coal may be used to determine the quantity and quality of the products from a cleaning process. The above discussed data indicate that the dense medium separation is moderately effective for ash removal from the lignites at the specific gravity of 1.35–1.45. Approximately 60% ash reduction and 24% sulphur reduction was obtained for Beypazarı lignite. The ash and sulphur reductions were lower for the other lignites. The results indicated that the reductions in total sulphur are due to pyritic sulphur removal, and almost no sulphur reduction was obtained for Kangal lignite. Based on this result, it is concluded that the pyritic sulphur in Kangal lignite is finely disseminated and not separable from the lignitic structure by the dense medium. The froth flotation data indicate that particle size and reagent type are effective parameters in the extent of ash and sulphur removal. Although the dense medium separation is not effective for the pyritic sulphur removal from Kangal lignite, froth flotation is relatively effective, especially in the case of DEH as the frother. This result suggests that the froth flotation is effective for removal of pyritic sulphur if a convenient frother is used. However, the above discussed results indicate that both methods are not very effective to obtain “clean lignites” with high recoveries. Further investigations should be directed to more selective separations to enhance the ash and sulphur reductions while maintaining lignite recoveries at high levels.