Laser surface alloying (LSA) is increasingly recognized as a powerful surface modification tool for enhancing the wear resistance of engineering components. Experimental investigations have been carried out to examine the influence of re-scanning on tribological behavior in laser surface alloying of Al with Ni. Dry sliding wear tests have been conducted using a reciprocating machine under different normal loads of 10,15, and 20N and at a constant sliding speed of 0.1m/s. Re-scanning was found to substantially affect the laser-alloyed layer, including its phase constitution. Re-scanning leads to higher hardness compared to a single-time scan; however, the specific wear rate following re-scanning is lower. These observations are rationalized in terms of microstructure and the wear mechanism.Laser surface alloying (LSA) is particularly efficient for improving the wear resistance of aluminum and its alloys, since it combines controlled modification of both the microstructure and the chemical composition, allowing tailoring of the surface properties to application requirements Tribological properties of laser surface alloyed aluminum-based material have also been investigated and considerable improvements in wear resistance have been reported In this paper, we report on an investigation of the influence of laser re-scanning on the tribological behavior of Al samples laser surface alloyed with Ni. Aluminum samples (90 The pieces were mounted on an After laser processing, one sample each from the single-time scan and two-time scan samples was cut from the middle of a plate and the cross-section (perpendicular to the alloyed surface) of the alloyed layer was polished metallographically. The microstructure of the laser-alloyed layer was examined by means of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX). Small pieces were cut from these samples and the alloyed surfaces were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (model Philips XPERT) using Cu Dry sliding was carried out at a relative humidity of 30–60% at room temperature (25  If the initial temperature were constant at the beginning of each scan, the thickness of the alloyed layers would have been nearly identical for successive scans carried out using the same parameters  Owing to the formation of aluminum hydroxide in a laser-alloyed layer under re-scanning and some other factors, including a high cooling rate, the possibility arises of inhomogeneity in the microstructure due to re-scanning, and cracks and pores were formed in the laser-alloyed layer. The presence of cracks and pores in the microstructure increases the probability of contact of the steel counterface with surface unevenness. Since surface cracks could not support the applied normal loads, particles were separated from the wear track in the form of debris ( It can be seen in With increasing sliding distance, due to formation tribo-layer on contacting surfaces The increase in specific wear rate with increasing hardness under conditions of re-scanning with the laser beam as opposed to the decrease in specific wear rate under a single-time scan ( The present study led to the following results: The microstructure of a laser-alloyed layer, as well as its constitution, is greatly influenced by re-scanning. Re-scanning of the laser-alloyed layer leads to the formation of numerous pores and cracks. Re-scanning does not change the dilution of the alloyed zone by Al from the substrate. Although re-scanning leads to higher hardness than a single-time scan, the specific wear rate following re-scanning is lower; this is due to the formation of pores and cracks in the re-scanned laser-alloyed layer. The mechanism of wear is mainly abrasive for the range of loads applied at the sliding speed used in the present study. This applies for all of the laser-alloyed Al surfaces investigated, both those subjected to a single-time scan and those subjected to re-scanning. Following re-scanning, the average coefficient of friction and the specific wear rate are influenced by changing the normal loads applied. The lowest average coefficient of friction and specific wear rate were seen with a 15 In re-scanning, the wear debris, which is hard, will be rubbed between the alloyed material and the steel counterface, resulting in a three-body abrasive wear. This process leads to crushing of the debris into smaller pieces as compared to that in the case of a single-time scan.