The current nanotechnological progress has evolved through the development of numerous newer nanobiomaterials, including nanocomposites. Nanocomposites are comprised of multiple nanoscale materials, or a nanoscale material incorporated into the bulk material. During the past few decades, different types of nanocomposites have been investigated for use in biomedical applications such as orthopedics, dentistry, drug delivery, tissue engineering, cardiac prosthesis, biosensors, and so forth. Numerous dental nanocomposites have also been designed and investigated for dentin-pulp regeneration, dental restoration, enamel substitution, periodontal ligament regeneration, periodontal drug delivery, and so forth. In recent years, a variety of dental pulp capping nanocomposites for the fortification of multifaceted vital dentin pulp have already been developed by various research groups. This chapter presents a comprehensive review on the use of nanocomposites in dental pulp capping.With the progress of nanotechnology, extensive research has been done on designing and developing newer nanobiomaterials, such as nanoparticles, nanocapsules, nanovesicles, nanoceramics, nanocomposites, nanofibers, nanocoatings, nanotubes, nanorods, and so forth, for various biomedical applications The purpose of direct and/or indirect pulp capping is the care and treatment of exposed crucial pulp by the use of capping material for ease of reparative dentin formation and to maintain the exposed pulp Usually, vital pulp can easily be categorized into three different types on the basis of the clinical manifestation: normal or standard pulp, reversible pulpitis, and steady or irreversible pulpitis A single-stage technique of direct pulp cap includes placement of protective dressing directly over an uncovered pulp. The technique is used for disclosed vital pulp, including the dressing of a pulp capping composite over the bare vicinity to smooth out the progress of both the enrichment of protective barrier Indirect pulp cap, or, in other words, gradual caries removal, is a 2-stage method over about 6 Functional, biologically active substances are accessible as possible scaffolds and self-possessed natural or artificial polymers, and can be categorized in three groups: (1) naturally occurring organic material such as collagen, (2) synthetic organic matter such as polylactic acid (PLA), alginate, or polyglycolic acid (PGA), along with their copolymers, and (3) inorganic matter, such as different compositions of hydroxyapatite (HA), calcium phosphate, and tricalcium phosphate (TCP), along with compositions of silicate, bioglasses, and phosphate (PO A composite material, also known as composition material, is a material synthesized by the treatment of two or more constituent materials having particularly diverse chemical and physical characteristics that, after combination, result in the formation of a material with properties different from the discrete components Strong chemical bonding with the tooth structure, and their esthetic properties, are the two major reasons that the resin-based composite materials are well-known dental restorative materials The most well-known materials in the dental composite material group are the methacrylates hybrid composites Filtek supreme XTE and Filtek Z250 XT (3 IPS Empress Direct and Tetric Evo Ceram (Ivoclar Vivadent; Amherst, New York) Enamel Plus HRi (Micerium; Avegno (GE), Italy Miris 2 and Synergy D6 (Coltene/Whaledent; Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio) Herculite Ultra and Premise (Kerr; Orange, California) Basically there are three constituents of ormocers: organic and inorganic fragments, and the polysiloxanes. A change in a fraction of these components may alter the optical, mechanical, and thermal attributes of the matter. The organic polymers are responsible for polarity, the capacity to cross link, hardness, and optical attributes. The glass and ceramic constituents (inorganic components) influence chemical stabilities and thermal expansion. The polysiloxanes direct the interface characteristics, elasticity, and processing. The compomers category includes the chemical composition of composites and glass ionomers. This material is an amended composite of polyacrylic-/polycarboxylic acid. The point of compomers is to combine the beneficial properties of glass ionomers by using composite technology. However, this objective has been only moderately achieved, owing to low fluoride release. Compomers are widely acceptable for revamp in the ephemeral dentition because of their opposition to moderate abrasion Silorane-based composites originate from siloxanes and oxirans. A spectrum of properties, such as less marginal discoloration, lower shrinkage, and longer resistance to fading is the main attraction of this product category. There is a sharp difference between silorane monomer rings and chain-monomers of hybrid and fused composites. The siloxanes are accountable for increased hydrophobicity of the material, such as reduced water absorption and exogenous discoloration. The oxirane nucleus influences the physical properties, along with low polymerization shrinkage (< At first, in 1921, Hermann and coworkers introduced Ca(OH) Due to the downside of the aqueous solution of Ca(OH) In 1974, Tronstad reported that a therapy of ZOE cement works more positively against inflamed and revealed pulp Glucocorticoid scaffolds containing a cortisol nucleus in combination with numerous antibiotics have been documented in the literature for direct pulp capping. Corticosteroids such as hydrocortisone, cortisone, cleocin, Ledermix (a composition of Ca(OH) Zinc polycarboxylate cement is accessible as a liquid, and in powdered form. The solid powder form contains oxides of zinc, magnesium, bismuth, aluminum, and stannous; while the liquid contains an aqueous solution of polyacrylic acid (30%–40%), its copolymers having a molecular weight ranging from 3000 to 50,000, and unsaturated carboxylic acids such as itaconic acid, tricarboxylic acid, and maleic acid. The powder and liquid are mixed in the proper proportions. Attack of acid on the powdered cement results in the immediate release of zinc, magnesium, and stannous ions. The reaction of ions with carboxylic groups of polyacid chains leads to the formation of a cross-linked salt. Zinc polycarboxylate cement is employed in the fixation of dental crowns and inlays, along with cavity linings A composite of 2-methylpropyl 2-cyanoprop-2-enoate and TCP ceramic was investigated as a direct pulp capping material. Typical cyanoacrylate products contain ethyl cyanoacrylate, isobutyl cyanoacrylate, or Collagen, the natural polymer and a predominant component of dentin matrix, is a necessary protein present inside the human body. This is a self-possessed insoluble fiber material and supports the initiation of calcification. According to a report, collagen fibers were found less irritating in comparison with Ca(OH) Calcium phosphate cement, a biodegradable and bioactive grafting material available both in the powder and liquid forms, upon mixing, sets as primarily HA. Calcium phosphates lie at the cluster of biologically energetic synthetic scaffolds. The most often used calcium phosphate material in hard tissue engineering is TCP, which is considered resorbable. However, HA is considered a nonresorbable material. The calcium phosphate cement group is often used, owing to its crystallographic structures, osteoconductivity, and chemical formulation comparable to the pulp tissue. Its predominant compressive strength, good biocompatibility, and relatively quick conversion into hydroxyapatite make the cement a feasible substitute. It was demonstrated that a composite of Ca(OH) Lasers offer attractive properties in terms of hemostasis, neutralization, or removal of dangerous substances, radioactivity, or germs from the pulpal area for field preparation through direct pulp cap sealing; although the treatment revealed vital pulp with the dental dressing matters such as Ca(OH) Glass ionomers were found to provide good biocompatibility and magnificent bacterial resistance; but when used in close composition with other materials, no direct contact was found with the pulp. However, there were a few negative outcomes. Resin-modified glass ionomer (RMGI) composites employed as direct pulp capping materials manifested slight chronic inflammation and insufficiency of a reparative dentin bridge; though the Ca(OH) MTA materials are the combination of refined Portland cement and bismuth oxide, along with trace amounts of CaO, SiO MTYA1-Ca is the resinous direct pulp capping composite material composed of Ca(OH) It was found that a composite of only the resins, viz. HEMA, BisGMA, UDMA, and TEGDMA with an antimicrobial agent such as quaternary ammonium salt monomer (e.g., 2-methacryloxylethyl dodecyl methyl ammonium bromide) was a successful pulp dressing composite for crucial pulp protection and healing of deep caries Growth factors control the development of hard tissue, and initiate quick healing and reformation. Growth factors are also called “cytokines” or “metabologens.” A list of growth factors used in the biomedical area is presented in TGF-β1, BMP, and IGF-1 are the constituents of the extracellular milieu of vital pulp, and were found to regulate the differentiation course of odontoblasts during generation of dentin and predentin in mature teeth. The spectrum of BMPs have been concerned in the tooth progression and related to the separation of ameloblasts and odontoblasts, which is responsible for enamel and dentin. Members of the FGF group have attracted attention for the contribution of calcification and mineralization of the dental matrix secretion.    According to the literature, bone sialoprotein (BSP) was the most capable bioactive nucleus, a component of mineralized tissues such as bone, dentin, and cementum. BSP has the capability to induce remineralized and homogenous reparative dentin. Both BSP and BMP-7 were found to surpass Ca(OH) Biodentine, a material relying on calcium silicate, is used for repairing of perforations and resorption, apexification, and root-end fillings. Biodentine is available in powder and liquid forms. The biodentine powder form includes tricalcium silicate, dicalcium silicate with calcium carbonate, and a filler of zirconium oxide (as radiopacifier). The liquid form contains calcium chloride in an aqueous solution, and an admixture of polycarboxylate. Tricalcium silicate and dicalcium silicate are the primary and secondary core components, respectively. It is novel bioactive cement with lower porosity leading to dentin-like higher mechanical strength that can be used as a dentin alternative. It has a positive outcome on vital pulp cells, and accelerates tertiary dentin bridge generation due to its positive properties such as microhardness, compressive strength, radiopacity, and bond strength Heme oxygenase-1 (HMOX1) is the essential rate-limiting enzyme that catalyzes the degradation of heme. Oxidatively distressed pulp cells and odontoblasts illustrate HMOX-1, indicating that the dental pulp cells definitely respond to oxidative pressure at the molecular scale. Manifestation of HMOX-1 is sheltered against hypoxic distress, and cytotoxicity mediated by nitric oxide. It has been determined that carbon monoxide released from HMOX-1 reactions accomplished cytoprotective functions against proinflammatory cytokines and influenced the function of nitric oxide synthase in human dental pulp cells. Moreover, bismuth oxide containing Portland cement (BPC) induced HMOX-1 illustration in pulp cells, which played a preventative role in becoming resistant to cytotoxic effects of BPC Simvastatin (3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A, HMG Co A reductase), a rate-limiting enzyme for cholesterol biosynthesis that is available under the trade name Zocor is a first-line drug responsible for endogenous production of cholesterol, and is used to treat dyslipidemia and reductase inhibitors. Statin enhances the osteoblast activity, via BMP-2 route and arrest osteoclast function, which leads to enhanced bone genesis and development. Hence, statin may raise the working of odontoblasts, consequently leading to accelerated dentin formation. Statin is well-known for the induction of angiogenesis, and the increment of neuronal cells, reflecting the plausible virtue of statin in pulp and dentin reformation. It has also found antiinflammatory applications in different tissues, and accordingly, it is now expected as a standard stimulant component in pulp capping to create momentum for reparative dentin generation The proprietary composition of Propolis (Russian penicillin) includes various aromatic compounds, including caffeic acid phenethyl ester, flavonoids, phenolics, and elements such as iron and zinc. According to a histological comparison among materials such as MTA, Dycal, and propolis in human vital pulp, the authors concluded that Propolis and MTA illustrated comparable dentin bridge formation in comparison with Dycal NEC is a composite matter of phosphate, oxide, silicate, carbonate, chloride, and sulfate of calcium. When a comparison was made between MTA and NEC for capping of vital human dental pulp, it was concluded that both MTA and NEC manifested comparable biocompatibility and positive reaction in pulp capping therapy and inducing the property of dentinal bridge formation, but the dentin bridge formed by NEC was thicker, with reduced dental pulp inflammation EMD, an enamel matrix derivative extracted during porcine fetal tooth maturity, is laid down by secretion of Hertwig’s epithelial root sheath. It is a key controller of enamel biomineralization, and acts as an important player parallel to periodontal hard and soft tissue formation. It triggers the revival of periodontal ligaments, a cellular cementum, and alveolar bone. EMD includes a BMP-like nucleus and BMP-expressing cells. The role of BMP and such scaffolds in EMD is to accelerate odontoblast differentiation and homogenous reparative dentin bridge formation. Recently it was concluded that EMD defeats inflammatory cytokine secretion by immunocytes and comprises TGF-β-like scaffolds. It might create a positive milieu for enhancing wound healing in the damaged pulp cells and tissues ODAM is demonstrated in odontoblasts, dental pulp cells, and ameloblasts. ODAM directs ameloblast growth and tooth enamel calcification. It was found that ODAM, a major player in hypermineralization of enamel, enhances formation of reactionary calcified tissue surrounding the pulp cavity of a tooth in the vicinity of the pulp disclosure zone, hence conserving traditional odontoblasts in the persistent pulp Endo sequence root repair material is comprised of silicates and calcium phosphate, oxide of zirconium and tantalum, and dominant fillers, along with thickening materials A melt compounding technique was used for synthesis of a novel biologically resorbable composite of polylactide and calcium phosphate with enhanced mechanical strengths using a more general filler, TTCP. Interfacial interaction between TTCP and polylactide (PLA) was enhanced by using the pyromellitic dianhydride (PMDA) and The COB or Polyol and prepolymer are the two main constituents of castor oil polyurethane resin. The polyol was prepared from castor oil and multipurpose polyester with a hydroxyl degree of 330 Tronstad and Spångberg reported an in vivo collation of methyl methacrylate (MMA)-based composites with various composite resins During 1968, a report successfully completed a clinical trial of a composite of MMA-TBB resin cement, by filling F1 (MMA-TBB resin) reflecting a diminished pulp damage histologically after a period of 9–12 TheraCal is a light colored, resin-modified calcium silicate and a pulp protectant/liner specially designed and synthesized for treatment of direct and/or indirect pulp capping, as a shielding base material under various cements, amalgams, composites, and other basics. TheraCal LC came to light as a protectant, insulator, and basic barrier for treating dental pulp complexes. TheraCal LC, a combination of tri- and dicalcium silicate particles as a proprietary hydrophilic monomer, executes consequential calcium release, which makes it a persistent and exclusively steady substance as a base or liner. Chemical composition of TheraCal includes oxide and silicate particles of calcium, fussed silica, strontium glass, sulfate and zirconate of barium, and resin incorporating Bis-GMA and PEGDMA. Calcium release gives momentum to HA, leading to a thick secondary dentin bridge formation. The direct placement of TheraCal LC on pulpal exposures after hemostasis makes it better than other materials. It is utilized for any kind of pulpal exposures; for example, carious exposures, mechanical exposures, and exposures because of trauma. It was found that 4.4 Doxadent is a composite of calcium aluminate, accessible as both liquid and powder forms. It can be used as a persistent therapeutic material. The proprietary formulation of doxadent consists of alumina, water, calcium oxide, zirconium dioxide, and variant alkali oxides. First, powder and liquid forms are mixed, and calcium aluminate powder is dissolved in water, and progressively, aluminum, calcium, and hydroxyl ions are formed, and finally, formation of katoite and gibbsite takes place HA is the emerging bioceramic that is dynamically stable, and a superior form of synthetic CPC (calcium phosphate based ceramics) Numerous HA nanocomposites made of nanoHA and synthetic polymers or inorganic metallic substances have been reviewed and evolved as a backbone to boost the mechanical positive points of microporous hydroxyapatite and vice versa, and to upgrade excellent connections to dentin walls, after fillings in tooth perforations DPP, the main noncollagenous multianionic protein found in dentin has been dressed over vital pulp in composition with atelo collagen fibrils A composite of β TCP-HA bioceramic or Ca(OH) Nanomaterials, either alone or in combination with drugs, stem cells, and growth factors form nanocomposites, and can be used for dental pulp capping Crosslinked collagen composites were prepared to design a vital support scaffold by a composition of a crosslinked collagen nucleus within a root canal zone to induced blood clots, and exposure of dentin enamel. This emerged as a competent point of focus to generate a vital supporting scaffold for treating imperfect teeth with acute periodontitis Various PGA-MSH nanocomposites accelerate the starting of pulp connective tissue regeneration, resulting in adhesion and development of pulp fibroblasts. A report was published in 2010 to manifest the consequences of composite PGA-α-MSH on pulp fibroblasts. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) provoked fibroblasts (incubated with composite PGA-α-MSH) demonstrated a late occasion of IL-10, an early time dependent arrest of TNF-alpha, and no effect was found on IL-8 excretion Composites made of electrospun matrices of PCL exhibited positive results for connective tissue regeneration. PCL, a biomimetic 3 dimensionally thick nanofibrous composite scaffold, was provided by electrospinning of the biodegradable, bioresorbable, and FDA-approved polymer. The designed nanocomposite material was capable of stimulating in vivo calcific bone initiation The technique of functioning of nanofibers by nanoreservoirs of BMP-2 illustrated effectiveness for bone origination and boosted the differentiation and development of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), increasing the tissue production in vivo. A layer-after-layer immobilization of the BMP-2 growth factor in combination with poly- According to a report, in vivo and in vitro performance of dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) evolved on a composite, and electro-spun PCL/gelatin with the supplement of nanoHA was investigated, and it was concluded that inclusion of nanoHA in nanofibers certainly increased differentiation of DPSCs toward a phenotype similar to an odontoblast in vitro and in vivo According to a report, odontogenic differentiation of DPSCs was acquired on NF-PLLA nucleuses both in vitro and in vivo. The assembly of BMP-7 and DXM initiated odontogenic differentiation with high efficiency as compared with DXM alone. The NF-PLLA nucleus and fused odontogenic inducive facets offer an excellent milieu for DPSCs for regeneration of dentin and dental pulp Coherence on the comprehension of technological fostering, biology of caries, and persuasion about boosted restorative materials has established a preserved pulp, fortunately for the patient and the clinician. The invention and relevance of nanocomposites synthesized from synthetic biologically resorbable and active polymers and bioceramics/inorganic materials such as HA, TTCP, or favored bioactive glasses became progressively more considerable, offering the convenience of bioactive and resorbable uniqueness to direct tissue generation procedures. In this manner, the design is focusing on minimum disadvantages and the exploitation of the advantageous properties of the single constituent to expand an optimistic tissue engineering scaffold with well-defined properties, plus a degradation rate in vivo balanced with the generation of fresh tissue. An additional benefit of the composites is the elevated hardness of the scaffold. In contrast, resorbable polymers are better for fabrication, but very feeble in meeting the necessities of dental tissue regeneration. Moreover, cell adhesion, cell spreading, and cells’ viability development onto polymer-bioglass composites could be enhanced, and assert the high biocompatibility and bioactivity for hard tissue renovation. Nanotechnological research has revamped the distribution of potent scaffolds and the extracellular mimetic structure of nucleuses. Hence, these come into sight as essential techniques to orchestrate pulp cell differentiation and colonization, and to arrest and/or control inflammation and infection. These multitasking nanocomposites are equipped to face the challenge of complicated dental pulp renewal.