The platinum/rhenium bimetallic catalyst is widely used in reforming process for the production of high octane fuels. This spent catalyst contains 0.2% Pt, 0.43% Re and other impurities. This work has investigated two alternative methods for leaching spent catalyst sample. In the first method the sample was refluxed with aqua regia at a liquid/solid ratio of 5 for 2.5 h. In the second case, microwave radiation was used at a power of 150 W with aqua regia at a liquid/solid ratio of 2 for 5 min. After leaching, the platinum was separated from rhenium and recovered as diammonium hexachloroplatinate with recoveries of 96.5% and 98.3%. Rhenium was recovered as potassium perrehenate by recovery of 94.2% and 98.9%, respectively in these methods.The catalytic reforming process in petrochemical refining and manufacturers has significant commercial application. The original function of this process was to upgrade low octane naphtha to higher octane aromatic hydrocarbons. A significant step in the catalyst development was made by commercialization of bimetallic catalysts. The platinum/rhenium bimetallic catalyst is widely used throughout the world due to its activity, stability and selectivity ( Different authors have investigated the recovery of platinum group metals from spent catalysts. Platinum recovery from spent reforming and isomerzing catalysts has been studied by selective dissolution of base metals in 50% H Microwave-assisted leaching has been investigated in an attempt to improve the yield of extracted metal and to reduce process time, especially with the increasing demand for more environmental-friendly processes. Unique microwave heating characteristics are the main drivers for the potential implementation in metal extraction. These include low processing time, direct, selective and volumetric heating, and a more controllable heating process. Various authors have suggested potential applications of microwave energy in mineral extraction and several review papers can be found in this area ( The aim of this study is to investigate the leaching, separation and recovery of platinum and rhenium from the spent catalyst from a reforming plant. Acid leaching and microwave-assisted leaching followed by chemical precipitation were examined. Parameters affecting leaching and separation processes such as time, temperature, acid concentration, liquid A representative sample of spent catalyst was obtained from aromatic plant of Bandar Imam Petrochemical Company, Iran. The sample was decoked by heating the pellets at 350 °C in air. X-ray fluorescence analysis (Philips X′ Unique II 1480) indicated that the sample contained 0.20% Pt, 0.43% Re and other impurities such as iron oxide, coke and large amount of aluminosilicate supporting carrier. Chemical analysis of the sample and products was determined by using an atomic absorption spectrometer (Perkin Elmer Model 4100 ZL) and XRF. The composition of the sample is shown in Two methods for leaching the catalyst sample were investigated. In the first method, leaching experiments were performed with 1500 g of spent catalyst in freshly prepared aqua regia. The 2-L glass balloon flask was equipped with a mechanical stirrer and a return-flow cooler (glass condenser) was used to recover HCl and NO The reactions were occurred as below: In both cases, after the leaching process, the reaction mixture was filtered and washed. The solution was then heated and purged with N After the recovery of platinum the pH was raised to 10.5 using 25% NH The leaching and precipitation steps have the main influence on the purity and yield of metal. Solid The leaching of catalyst with aqua regia at different times, temperatures and liquid It can be seen that even after 20 min, the extent of platinum recovery was relatively high with a recovery of 75%. The recovery increases with increasing time, reaching a maximum and constant value of 96.5% after 2.5 h. The effect of liquid/solid ratios at 109 °C for 3 h is shown in In the precipitation stage, saturated ammonium chloride was added to the concentrated metal solution and diammonium hexachloroplatinate precipitated (    The recovery of platinum from a platinum/rhenium bimetallic spent catalyst containing 0.2% Pt, 0.43% Re and other impurities was investigated by two leaching methods. In the first method, the sample was refluxed with aqua regia at a liquid The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of Bandar Imam Petrochemical Company (BIPC). Also Dr. M. Zahedi and Mr. N. Purmand are kindly acknowledged for their fruitful suggestions.