Extraction, scrubbing, and stripping of Pt(IV) in microfluidic solvent extraction (microSX) chips were studied using a secondary amine as the extractant. Real-time efficiency of phase disengagement was precisely determined. The time-dependant platinum concentration in the aqueous phase could be fitted with a pseudo-first order rate equation for three different organic/aqueous phase ratios (0.6, 2.2, and 5.7) that were achieved using dissimilar channel cross-sections. Extraction equilibrium was achieved within several seconds (2–6s) in agreement with the fast extraction rate expected for a diffusion-limited ion exchange mechanism and the microscopic dimensions involved. Aqueous phase derived from a precious metals refinery was also extracted successfully, demonstrating that the process is relevant to refinery conditions. Scrubbing reported negligible loss of platinum from the organic phase. Stripping revealed that longer contact times were necessary to achieve equilibrium (~12s) compared with extraction. Phase disengagement efficiencies were precisely determined for the first time using an online and quantitative approach, revealing up to 2% inefficiency with a slight bias towards the organic phase being lost into the aqueous stream.Microfluidic systems boast very high surface-to-volume ratios, which can be exploited in a wide variety of flow chemistry applications ( In microfluidic systems, Reynolds numbers are typically very small, yielding laminar flow and, as fluid dimensions are small, fast mass transfer is possible via diffusion alone. Interfacial forces can dominate compared with inertia and viscous forces, and can be exploited to precisely control fluid behaviour (droplet formation, MicroSX has been intensely studied as a separation tool for on-chip analysis and small-scale separations. Rapid extraction of cobalt(II), ( In precious metals refineries, the liquids contain very high concentrations of metal from primary or secondary (recycled) sources that pass through extraction, scrubbing, and stripping stages ( Aqueous platinum solution (24 A Y–Y extraction chip design was chosen, similar to that used previously ( For any given channel design, the relative flow rates of the organic and aqueous streams, The channel cross-section is not cylindrical, as assumed in Eq.  We now consider the effect of slightly varying the etch depths to understand the sensitivity of The inlet and outlet tubing radii are ignored in the above discussion but are important parameters to consider. For a fixed feed pressure, it is possible for the tubing dimensions to influence the flow rate ratio observed in the channels. Two limits can be imposed on the relative flow rate of the two phases, which are derived here. The Hagen–Poiseuille equation for the total pressure drop over the complete system (tubing plus microchannels) is  Furthermore, smaller inlet tubing radii (75 The extraction of PtCl  The ion exchange is known to be fast, however bulk (dispersion) extraction methods cannot resolve the details of the kinetics due to the long phase disengagement times (typically 30–60 The progress of the extraction is shown in Pure sodium hexachloroplatinate solutions were used as model feed streams in the above experiments; however, actual refinery feeds are far more complex, containing a range of metals and potentially other impurities. To demonstrate the technology under more challenging conditions and compare with our model experiments, we diluted a refinery feed solution to match the concentration of the model Pt solutions used in this study (24 Bulk experiments were carried out in parallel to compare the raffinate concentration of Pt with that achieved in the microchip. The raffinate [Pt] after 20 Scrubbing of the Pt loaded organic phase is used to wash the organic phase prior to stripping, thus removing other metals inadvertently extracted. The model Pt solution did not contain other metal species, so this step was carried out only to evaluate losses of Pt from the loaded organic phase during scrubbing and the stability of the flow in the microchip. The results for microfluidic scrubbing are shown in Stripping of Pt via ion exchange with Cl For microfluidic stripping experiments The bulk SX stripping efficiency was independent of Efficient and complete separation of the two phases is usually carried out in a mixer-settler after extraction, scrubbing, or stripping. The microfluidic approach, however, offers instantaneous disengagement via branching the aqueous and organic streams at the downstream Y-junction. We have qualitatively shown that inefficiencies and incomplete disengagement at the bulk-scale, caused by crud formation, can be prevented using the microfluidic method. (  Several mechanisms are possible for poor on-chip phase disengagement, with two featuring frequently in microSX using Y–Y chips. They are droplet formation and stream splitting at the downstream Y-junction. Droplet formation is observed when the three-phase contact line is pinned at the apex of the downstream Y-junction such that only the Laplace pressure must be overcome to form a droplet that then detaches and enters the flow of the adjacent phase. In this case, the local pressure difference between the streams should dictate which phase enters the other. For stream splitting, the three phase contact line is not pinned and the stream of the phase with a higher pressure is divided between the two branches of the Y-junction, thus contaminating the other phase. The pressure at any given location along the streams can be calculated using the Hagen–Poiseuille equation by segmenting the flow path into sections. Fixing the pressure drop over the complete fluid path to be the same for both fluid phases (i.e. equal inlet pressures, which is the case here), we can calculate the local pressure at any location along the entire length of both streams ( Platinum extraction was investigated for a range of organic/aqueous phase ratios (0.6, 2.2, and 5.7) in a microSX chip. The extraction rate indicates that the process is governed by diffusion of ions to the liquid–liquid interface. The characteristic diffusion time was calculated to be ~1 The authors thank Anglo American Platinum and Johnson Matthey for financial and technical support, insightful discussions, and granting the authors permission to publish. Part of this work was performed at the Optofab and SA nodes of the Australian National Fabrication Facility. The authors also acknowledge financial support from the