Adsorption of phosphate onto manganese nodule leached residues was investigated as a possible alternative to conventional methods of phosphate removal from industrial effluents. Adsorption behaviors were studied as a function of time, temperature, pH, and concentration level of adsorbate and adsorbent in acetic acid–sodium acetate buffer medium. The adsorption of phosphate follows the Langmuir adsorption isotherms. The magnitude of adsorption of phosphate in manganese nodule leached residues was compared with that in naturally occurring Mn nodule. Manganese nodule leached residues show better affinity toward phosphate adsorption.In the past few decades, excess phosphate has been recognized as a non-point-source agricultural pollutant throughout the world due to the overapplication of both synthetic and animal-based fertilizers A manganese nodule sample (MN) collected from the central Indian Ocean basin was subjected to NH The representative leached residue sample used in the present study was prepared from ∼5 kg of material by a quartering and coning method. The residue was processed for removal of (NH For chemical analysis of various constituents about 1 g of the leached residue was digested in 20 ml of aqua regia (15 ml conc. HCl + 5 ml conc. HNO Chemical analysis, along with some surface properties of Mn nodules and their leached residues used in the present study ( Adsorption experiments were carried out in 100-ml stoppered conical flasks by mixing an appropriate amount of potassium dihydrogen phosphate solution and about 4 g/L of the water-leached residue. The same procedure was followed for the powdered manganese nodule sample. Predetermined amounts of acetic acid and sodium acetate were added to maintain the pH of the solution. The final volume was made up to 25 ml. A preliminary experiment revealed that about 4 h is required for phosphate ions to reach the equilibrium concentration. The flasks were shaken mechanically for 4 h at The rate of absorption of phosphate on the manganese nodule samples and the water-washed manganese nodule leached residues has been described as a function of time, pH, temperature, and absorbent and adsorbate concentration. The kinetics of adsorption of phosphate at pH 5 showed that equilibrium was attained at about 4 h. There is no significant change in equilibrium concentration after 4 h up to 24 h ( The effect of pH on adsorption of phosphate at a fixed concentration (10 mg/L) is shown in According to the anion adsorption reaction given in Eqs. The adsorption of PO The percentage of phosphate adsorption with varying amounts of leached residue and PO The effect of different competitive ions such as selenite (SeO After adsorption, the resulting phosphate-bearing WMNLR is safe for disposal. Desorption was found to be higher at pH 2 (around 30%) and in strongly alkaline media ( From the foregoing discussion the following conclusions may be drawn. Manganese nodules and their leached residues have an appreciable sorption capacity for phosphate removal from aqueous system. However, manganese nodule leached residues behave as better adsorbents than manganese nodules. Although effective adsorption of phosphate occurred at pH values greater than the pH The authors are thankful to Dr. B.K. Mohapatra and Dr. S.N. Das, Head EM&IC Department, for their constant encouragement throughout the work. Financial assistance by DOD, Government of India, is gratefully acknowledged.