Double refractory gold concentrates were subjected a two-stage microbial process to destroy both sulfides and carbonaceous matter. In the first stage, the well-known sulfide biooxidation process, which utilizes chemolithotrophic bacteria was used to oxidize sulfides and in the second stage carbonaceous matter is destroyed using the bacterium Streptomyces setonii. After biooxidation of sulfides in the first stage, cyanidation resulted in 81.1% gold extraction. The action of Streptomyces setonii in the second stage led to a reduction in the content of carbonaceous matter, which reflected positively in the preg-robbing and leaching behavior of the sample. Degradation of carbonaceous matter was affected by pulp density, temperature and retention time. After degradation of carbonaceous matter, gold extraction increased by 13.6% resulting in an overall extraction of 94.7%. The results depict a novel two-stage microbial process to degrade both sulfides and carbonaceous matter and increase gold recovery from double refractory ores.Refractoriness in gold ores may be caused by several factors including the presence of sulfides, tellurides, cyanicides and carbonaceous matter ( The pretreatment processes used for such refractory sulfide ores include roasting, chlorination, pressure oxidation and bacterial oxidation ( Due to the bacteria's interaction with the minerals, ferrous iron in the ore is converted to the ferric state and the sulfide sulfur is ultimately converted to sulfate and sulfuric acid. Gold is also released from the matrix of the sulfides. Unfortunately, carbonaceous materials are not oxidized by this pretreatment step and continue to serve as preg-robbers in the subsequent gold leaching process. Some studies on the microbial degradation of CM have been reported. In this study, biooxidizing the carbonaceous material with an actinomycete, Flotation concentrate was obtained from a plant that processes double refractory gold ores. The particle size was 80% passing 75 μm. Sulfur and carbonaceous matter (CM) in the samples were determined using the Leco combustion volumetric method. A LECO titrator SC-444DR was used in this study. The grade of gold was determined by conventional fire assaying. The main sulfide minerals were pyrite and arsenopyrite. The grade of some important constituents of the flotation concentrate used is shown in The bacteria used were The mixed cultures were maintained in a medium containing 0.5 g/l of (NH  The microbe, Biooxidation of sulfides is currently a well-known technique and the operational parameters have been well established ( The products of sulfide biooxidation were filtered and washed several times with de-ionized water. Several portions of the oxidized material were weighed out into 250 ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing 80 ml of a culture of In order to ascertain the state to which CM was converted, a chemical scrubber was mounted on one flask to remove carbon dioxide from the in-let air and a barium hydroxide trap was used to detect any carbon dioxide evolution. Visual observations were also conducted. Reduction in the percentage of CM was determined quantitatively using the Leco volumetric combustion technique. To prevent the organic carbon in the bacterial cells from influencing the determination of carbon, the biomass was dissolved from samples of pretreated material before carbon analysis. After digestion was done using 5% hypochlorite for 30 min as described by Preg-robbing and cyanidation tests were used to evaluate the gold extraction properties of products obtained from the microbial pretreatment processes. All pretreated samples used in these experiments were washed with water and dried before evaluation. Preg-robbing tests were conducted on both pretreated and untreated ore samples. Five-gram samples were placed in 20 ml solution of potassium gold cyanide containing 4.5 mg Au/l in 100-ml flasks. The pH was kept at 10.5 and free cyanide concentration was negligible, hence no gold dissolution took place in the course of the preg-robbing tests. The samples were agitated on an orbital shaker at 175 rpm for 24 h. The ore was then separated from the solution and the final concentration of gold in solution determined using an atomic absorption spectrophotometer. The difference in gold concentration before and after the solution-ore contact is the gold preg-robbing percentage. The effect of bacterial pretreatment on gold recovery was determined by cyanide leaching. Cyanidation was conducted on 100 g each of ore after biooxidation of sulfides and after both biooxidation of sulfides and destruction of CM. Samples were leached at a pulp density of 40% by weight for 24 h at pH 10.5–11. The pH was adjusted using 0.1 M sodium hydroxide and cyanide strength was 10 kg/t. The dissolved gold concentration was determined using atomic absorption and the remaining gold in the residue was determined by conventional fire assay method. Biooxidation of sulfides using the chemolithotrophic bacteria is currently a standard practice and has been applied in industry for some years. Bacteria such as There was a progressive increase in the ferric: ferrous ratio over 5 days ( The components of carbonaceous matter associated with gold ores include hydrocarbons, humic acids and elemental carbon. Maturity of the elemental carbon fraction ranges from high rank lignite to anthracite and the distribution of these components vary from one deposit to another ( The actinomycete The carbon content of samples was determined directly after the interaction of ore and microorganisms and significant reductions were observed ( There was a marked increase in decomposition of CM as the pulp density decreased ( To determine the effect of contact time on the degradation of CM, pulp densities of 5% and 20% solids were exposed to In a batch system such as the one used in this study to degrade CM, bacterial growth and hence metabolic activity increases to a maximum then decreases beyond that point. However, in a continuous system, the growth phase is sustained indefinitely ( There was no appreciable change in degradation of CM with increase in temperature from 23 to 37 There was a much lower preg-robbing activity after bacterial destruction of CM ( In the recovery of gold by cyanidation after biooxidation of sulfides, the initial gold dissolution was very fast with over 50% extraction by the second hour ( The results of this investigation constitute a novel technical process for recovering gold from double refractory ores. As indicated on the flow diagram ( The technical advantages of this proposal compared with the current biooxidation process is that the two-stage pretreatment process leads to a drastic reduction in the preg-robbing behavior of the ore and an increase in gold recovery during cyanidation. The process is also environmentally compatible. From the results and discussions above, it can be concluded that this two-stage microbial process for double refractory ores lead to a substantial increase in gold extraction. The three well-known chemolithothrophic biomining bacteria oxidized sulfides in the first stage and