Faults are natural tectonic events as planar features along which rock units are moved. The patterns of these planes on seismic sections include linear or curvilinear features that are called edge in image processing, where amplitudes sharply change. In seismic data, these edge features made by fault traces are usually detected by seismic attributes, which need complex mathematical calculation such as a dip-steered cube. In this study, we introduce faults as global anomalies which disturb the normal interaction of seismic reflectors. Here, the normal interaction means the absence of intensive changes in reflectors trend in seismic sections. Fault detection as a global anomaly is done by the Gaussian process regression model (GPR), which is a nonparametric probabilistic model based on Bayesian statistics supporting noisy (Gaussian noise) and sparse features in data. In data mining, anomaly detection identifies items or events that do not match an expected pattern in a dataset. Global anomalies are sparse and affect a wide range of normal trends of data which are also held by fault features in seismic data. In this study, the GPR-based anomaly detection algorithm was implemented on the 3D seismic data of the Gulf of Mexico containing normal growth faults and a salt dome to detect salt boundary and fault traces in seismic data. In this respect, the reflections from rock units and fault features were taken into account as normal interactions and global anomalies, respectively, because faults disrupted the normal trend of reflectors in seismic sections. To detect fault locations, the location of a voxel in voxel grid where it is a part of fault in seismic data, after smoothing the seismic data, a Gaussian process (GP) model was trained on seismic data, attempting to describe the seismic amplitude data as a multivariate Gaussian model. However, GP regression fails to describe the seismic data at fault locations. Thus, the failure of the GP in the regression step was analyzed to separate the probable fault points, highlighted by calculating the variance of the GPR results. Finally, the detected probable fault points were improved and separated from background results by implementing a consistent reconstruction morphological algorithm. The results were validated using a similar structural index method, mean square error, and power signal to noise ratio indices in comparison with interpreted faults, implying the superiority of the proposed method in comparison with seismic attributes. The faults detected by the proposed method have the most structural similarity to faults interpreted. This similarity has improved by 22% compared to used attributes.Faults are natural tectonic events that cause rock units to be crushed and moved along their plane. They play a significant role in the well pattern design and fluid flow simulation, as well as posing strong effects on the skeleton, compartmentalization, and the boundary area of the hydrocarbon reservoir model. The importance of faults in petroleum engineering has necessitated fault detection and extraction for geophysicist interpreters. Fault interpretation consists of three steps, namely highlighting and detecting the fault, extracting the fault surface, and estimating the amount of displacement of the layers caused by the fault. Regarding the fault surface extraction, one can refer to Fault detection varies from semi-automatic to automatic approaches. The algorithm of these studies is based on the continuity, and discontinuity of seismic reflectivity enhanced by seismic attributes ( Supervised machine learning (SML) has been extended to detect and localize faults. Anomaly detection identifies items or events that do not match an expected pattern in a data set. In other words, anomalies exhibit abnormal behavior over the normal patterns in the data set ( It is intended in the present study to detect fault locations, the location of a voxel in voxel grid where it is a part of fault in seismic data, in 3D seismic data by different approaches from those described above without using the dip-steered cube. This study focused on fault identification as a global anomaly in 3D seismic data. The GPR is applied as an unsupervised learning algorithm. The seismic data is not labeled, classified, or categorized. The normal trend of continuous seismic reflectors is modeled by the nonlinear multivariate Gaussian function. The abnormal locations are highlighted by analysis the error of GPR results. It is typical to describe smooth and natural processes using the Gaussian distribution or one of its generalizations, namely multivariate Gaussian distribution, hybrid Gaussian model, or Gaussian process ( In this study, two assumptions were made to detect faults by the Gaussian process. First, the reflections from a rock unit as a geological layer were described by a multivariate Gaussian function while there was no abnormality (e.g., fault) occurring in them. Secondly, the distribution of faults in 3D seismic data was assumed to be sparse. Fault features in seismic data are sparse rather than the whole volume of seismic data. According to the first assumption and given that a combination of Gaussian functions also is a Gaussian function; the combination of amplitudes of seismic reflectors in 3D seismic data (whole seismic data at once) can be modeled by a Gaussian process while their smooth trend remains unchanged. Here, the GPR was used to describe amplitude seismic data of rock units. Given the sparseness and anomalous properties of faults in seismic data, they can be detected in 3D seismic data using GPR, which is attributed to the second assumption and the GPR ability to support abnormal sparse features ( To extract the most probable fault locations, after smoothing the data two stages of processing have been performed on 3D seismic data of the Gulf of Mexico, including the Gaussian process to detect the probable fault points, a voxel in a voxel grid where the voxel has been labeled as being part of a fault, and post-processing analysis to extract the most probable fault locations. To validate the two assumptions, described in section The Gaussian process uses a nonlinear multivariate Gaussian function to describe data. A multivariate Gaussian function is shown in equation The mean and covariance functions are described based on a set of parameters called hyperparameters. For example, in the squared exponential covariance function, expressed as equation GP regression should optimize hyperparameters during the training process. It is accomplished by minimizing the negative logarithm of the marginal likelihood (equation Seismic amplitude data can be described by the GP unless an abnormal event occurs (see Using equations In other words, transformation matrix In this study, all 3D seismic data (all layers) were described as a GP. A combination of unfaulted layers can be described by a global model using the GP, Furthermore, the input data were assumed to involve Gaussian noise and, thus, the random background noise in seismic data can be learned by GP. The GP cannot completely remove all kinds of noise, aside from Gaussian noise (random noise). In this regard, pre-processing can remove some level of background noise and improve the smoothness. The filtered amplitudes of the seismic cube offer an approximation of the random variable named “Layer” which can be modeled as a Gaussian process in the input coordinates according to equation In this study, the GP was trained for 3D seismic data using the Gaussian process machine learning (GPML) library. This model is based on the mean-zero function, the squared exponential covariance function (equation In machine learning, three general principles cover the generality of the model selection: (1) computing the probability of the model given the data, (2) estimating the generalization of error, and (3) bounding the generalization error ( To analyze the sensitivity of the GPR model concerning the hyperparameters, the result of a varying set of them, The sensitivity analysis of the log marginal likelihood (Q = The global minimum of negative marginal likelihood (the objective function “-Q”) is required to reach the optimal performance of the GP model and its global convergence. The GA optimization method was implemented to find this global minimum. The GA requires The error of GPR prediction on the 3D synthetic seismic data was monitored based on the optimal hyperparameters. In addition to optimal hyperparameters, the number of training data is also important for GPR. As to the maximum likelihood, the convergence performance of the predicted model is proportional to the inverse of the number of training data. To evaluate the importance and check a sufficient number of training amplitude data on the convergence error, a few small cubes of the real 3D seismic data with different sizes were selected. The mean squared prediction error (MSPE) was computed for this wide range of training amplitudes of real 3D seismic data. The number of the training amplitudes varied from 60 (i.e., crossline, inline, and time of 5, 2, and 6, respectively, in the real 3D seismic data) to 673,064 (i.e., crossline, inline, and time of 98, 68, and 101, respectively, in the real 3D seismic data). The log-log plot shown in It is worth noting that a linear combination/transformation of multivariate Gaussian distributions also has a multivariate Gaussian distribution. Accordingly, a combination of normal reflections, reflections with no global abnormality occurrence, which makes the 3D seismic cube, was described by a Gaussian process. Thus, the GPR training step was taken for the 3D seismic amplitude cube at once; in turn, a set of optimal hyperparameters was obtained. This approach eliminates the need to follow the layers and makes the method dip-consistent. The trained GPR was applied to In the GP regression, not only fault points can be found as less probable locations but also the neighboring points are identified as probable fault points since the Gaussian process attempts to fairly describe the seismic amplitudes next to the fault locations and their neighborhood. Accordingly, the probable anomaly cube was produced, which included the most probable fault points with some of the local anomalies around them. Finally, the most probable fault points were obtained using a consistent reconstruction algorithm wherein the nearest local anomalies remain alongside the most probable fault points. The results of the GPR still contained some anomalies with less probability value that do not represent faults (see the detected anomalies located in the orange ellipse and the similar ones on the background of The proposed method was applied to a real 3D seismic data set of the Gulf of Mexico ( In the first step, the data were smoothed to remove some levels of noise. However, the GPR supports To separate the most probable fault points from other local anomalies, the post-processing algorithm was implemented over the GPR results. At this stage, the T The cube results of the proposed algorithm are compared with the interpreted faults cube and some fault detection and enhancement attributes. These attributes include the dip-steered similarity cube, dip-steered fault likelihood cube (1- semblance A new method was developed for highlighting fault locations using GPR in seismic data. In this regard, the GPML library provided by The GP model selection/adaptation is an important step to describe the input data. There are many choices for mean and covariance functions based on prior information and the physical nature of the data. If they are not selected correctly, the model will be over-fitted or under-fitted. The squared exponential covariance function was used, which is an appropriate option for modeling smooth functions. The zero mean function was assumed since the real seismic amplitude data offered approximate normal distribution with zero mean. These two functions have a set of hyperparameters that should be optimized for each data set. The objective function -Q, which should be optimized regarding the hyperparameters, is the negative marginal likelihood (equation The sensitivity analysis of objective function Q revealed that the characteristic length scales have posed higher effect on Q compared to σ The GPR failed to estimate the amplitudes around a fault because the fault abruptly collapses the smooth trend of layers around its plane (see the error of GPR prediction on the bottom right of The input data was assumed to include Gaussian noise (equation Compared to other methods, the proposed method has been capable of detecting the fault locations more accurately based on SSIM, PSNR, and MSE indices ( The Gaussian process regression, as a nonparametric probabilistic model based on Bayesian statistics, is highly capable of identifying sparse global anomalies. Since faults disrupt the smooth trend of rock units, it is possible to investigate the fault trace as a global anomaly based on the Gaussian process analysis. In this study, a global GP model was trained over all 3D seismic amplitudes and a dip-following algorithm was not implemented for the GPR step. The fault traces were found through the variance analysis of the error of the GPR. Further, the morphological reconstruction algorithm, as post-processing, was implemented to separate major global anomalies from the background and less probable anomalies. The Gaussian process was tested on a 3D synthetic and real seismic data. The synthetic data contained flat reflectors and a normal fault, while the real data contained normal growth faults and salt dome. The strength of this method was validated by comparing the proposed algorithm with some other seismic attributes. The SSIM, MSE, and PSNR indices were used to assess the performance of GPR compared to the seismic attributes. The interpreted faults by geophysists were used as ground truth. The GPR outperformed the dip-steered curvature, dip-steered similarity, and dip-steered fault likelihood (1-semblance The seismic data of this paper is the training data set of Petrel 2006 package.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to express their thanks to the authors of the GPML laboratory for their help in offering open access to the GP packages. The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Dr. Hanning Hoeber for his comments. The authors also thank Dr. Xinming Wu for his technical paper support and generating a synthetic seismic fault data, which was used to improve the methodology. We express our thanks to the reviewers for the positive feedback, and helpful comments. We thank them for giving freely of their time and expertise. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at