A pseudotachylite vein network crosscutting late Hercynian foliated tonalites can be observed along the Copanello cliffs (Calabria, Southern Italy). Pseudotachylites formed during the Oligocene–Miocene at intermediate crustal levels (ca. 10 km). They show variable thickness ranging from few mm up to 10 cm, as observed in injection veins branching from the fault plane. Microscopic observations indicate that pseudotachylite matrix mainly consists of plagioclase (An46–An58) and biotite microlites. Rounded clasts of quartz, plagioclase or of plagioclase–quartz lithic fragments are disseminated in the matrix. Intergranular, flow and spherulitic textures are commonly observed. Microstructural features are consistent with rapid crystallisation from melt. EDS analyses of rare and tiny glass veins indicated a trachyandesite or An50 plagioclase melt composition.
                  The conditions for pseudotachylite formation were reproduced by an analytical model taking into account the heat released by friction along a horizontal fault plane during a seismic event. The model is based on a three-stage rupture history that includes nucleation, propagation and stopping. In addition, by means of a numerical approach, the model reproduces cooling that follows the stopping stage.
                  According to previous studies, the thermal perturbation induced by fault displacement is very intense. In fact, temperatures exceeding the tonalite and even An50 plagioclase liquidus (1470 °C) are reproduced by small amount of slip (≤6 cm) in suprahydrostatic regime. On the other hand, the thermal perturbation is strongly localised and of short duration. Peak temperatures abruptly decrease at a short distance from the fault plane (typically in few millimetres). In these conditions a thin film of melt can be produced. Therefore, the presence of cm-scale pseudotachylite veins can be only explained assuming an efficient and fast melt migration towards dilatant sites, such as pull-apart structures and injections veins. Results of the model may be useful to predict the thermal disturbance produced by earthquakes of low intensity.Pseudotachylites, though first defined in impact structures ( Several numerical and analytical models (e.g. In this paper we present a new model for the heat pulse generated by frictional heating on a fault plane. The model is based on seismic source kinematics (e.g. Sudden temperature increase is responsible for the production of small amounts of melt that can be found along the fault plane in the so-called fault veins, or as accumulations in dilatant fractures to form injection veins ( Widespread evidence of melting with formation of a pseudotachylite vein network is found in a fault zone crosscutting late Hercynian foliated tonalites, exposed along the Copanello cliffs (Calabria, Italy; Field observations and petrological features of pseudotachylites from Calabria were used to obtain constraints on the frictional heating model. The Calabria–Peloritani terrane ( Pseudotachylites are recognizable along a fault zone that can be followed in the field for about 1 km ( Most of the fault planes are characterized by shallow dips to the E or SE ( Pseudotachylite veins along fault planes (fault veins according to A macroscopic view shows that the pseudotachylite has a sharp contact with tonalite ( Optical microscopy and SEM observations indicate that the pseudotachylite matrix mainly consists of microlites of plagioclase (andesine to labradorite) and biotite, with very small amounts of ilmenite. Partially resorbed rounded clasts consist of quartz, plagioclase and quartz-plagioclase lithic fragments ( Plagioclase microlites have lengths of 10–150 μm and are mostly skeletal. They may be randomly oriented to form a framework with triangular interstitial spaces filled by biotite, in a geometric arrangement typical of an intergranular texture ( Compositions of plagioclase and biotite by SEM/EDS analysis are given in Some veins, having the more convincing characteristics of glass, were selected for SEM/EDS analysis ( Obviously, melting of a very high proportion of plagioclase and low quantities of biotite and quartz are required to produce the second glass composition. In particular, analyses in sample St3 indicate that the glass composition is hardly distinguishable from pure plagioclase with An The glass composition in samples St1 and St3 can be quantitatively reproduced by combining appropriate proportions of tonalite minerals ( The involvement of small amount of quartz in the melting process, predicted by least squares calculations, is compatible with examination of the K Pseudotachylite veins in tonalites are found in a cataclastic fault zone. Quartz deformation took place in conditions of low temperature, since evidences for recrystallization and recovery are scarcely found. The local occurrence of recrystallization processes by bulge nucleation in quartz aggregates within cataclasites suggests temperatures of at least 250 °C ( The exhumation path indicates that temperatures spanning from 250 to 300 °C were attained at depths of 8–12 km between 21 and 30 Ma, corresponding to the Chattian–Aquitanian time. The estimated depth interval is compatible with the occurrence of microlite-rich and amygdale-free pseudotachylites associated with cataclasites ( To estimate temperatures produced by frictional heating we considered melting temperatures of tonalite and of plagioclase. In the two examined cases, the minimum melting temperature pertains to the tonalite mineral assemblage. The liquidus temperature at atmospheric pressure according to Higher peak temperatures are required to melt selectively plagioclase. Considering the anhydrous Ab–An system at atmospheric pressure ( The presence in the studied pseudotachylites of a near plagioclase glass composition suggests that frictional melting selectively involved the dominant minerals in tonalite. Therefore, frictional melting acted as a disequilibrium process (see These data have been used to constrain the thermal model. Temperature increase along a fault plane depends both on the slip time function and on the shear stress during the seismic event ( The 1D model proposed in this paper applies the kinematics of the seismic source to evaluate the temperature increase during an earthquake that occurs along a horizontal fault plane. This is because, at present, the analysis of pseudotachylites is not able to provide information on the shear stress evolution during rupture, which is a fundamental requirement to develop a model based on dynamics of the seismic source. The proposed model, based on the above described three-stage slip evolution, represents an improvement of the approach followed by The extension of the model to the case of an inclined fault at depth is allowed since the thermal disturbance has an extremely localized shape. This may be achieved by simply multiplying the solution for a constant that accounts for the dip angle (e.g., In our model the origin ( The expression of the 1D temperature disturbance Since The solution During a seismic rupture the heat flux generated along the sliding surface is given by: The analytical solution of the problem is given in the An analytical expression of this solution could be obtained by series integration, but in this work we have simplified the approach by evaluating numerically, with the trapezoidal rule ( The above formulation describes both the heating due to the frictional sliding along a fault and the cooling phase taking place after sliding. In determining the intensity and shape of the thermal perturbation the critical dependence of the heat flux source (Eq. The total slip In our calculations we have considered a seismic event that occurred at a depth of 10 km, appropriate for the generation of pseudotachylites in the Copanello area. We have assumed hydrostatic to near-lithostatic pore pressure conditions. Finally, typical values of thermal diffusivity ( To illustrate results of the model we used Curves in  Curves in Let us consider the well known relationship among the total amount of slip By using Δ Longer slips (> Pseudotachylite veins are associated with a wide fault zone that transects Late Hercynian tonalites near Copanello in Calabria. Field observations, textural and SEM/EDS analyses allowed estimation of the conditions for pseudotachylite genesis. This has served to constrain a thermal model that may be of widespread application to frictional heating studies related to seismic events. The main results achieved in this study are summarized below. Pseudotachylite formed during Oligocene–Miocene tectonic activity along a fault zone consisting of several shallow- to moderately-dipping faults. At that time tonalite wall rocks resided at depths spanning from 8 to 12 km. As commonly observed (e.g., The pseudotachylite-forming event was responsible for the cataclastic fragmentation of tonalites with incipient quartz recrystallization, indicative of an ambient temperature between 250 and 300 °C. The frictional heating produced temperatures exceeding the liquidus for tonalite (from 1000 to 1220 °C, depending on P The melt underwent rapid cooling to produce microlitic plagioclases and interstitial biotites. Compositions of these phases are only slightly different with respect to corresponding compositions in the tonalite. In thinner veins the melt cooled to a glass with compositions spanning from basaltic trachy-andesite to An The results of the thermal model indicate that a minimum slip from 2 to 6 cm on horizontal fault planes is able to reproduce the temperatures required to activate melting in tonalite. The melting front in the wall rocks reached a maximum distance of about 1 mm from the fault plane. The model predicts a duration of the thermal perturbation of few minutes. Existence of melt is dramatically short-lived, typically confined within one second. These results indicate that melt accumulation in injection veins and pull-apart structures occurred rapidly, implying very fast melt migration. Forced injection of melt into dilatant cracks could be enhanced by thermal pressurization, as observed by The results of the present paper may be useful for low magnitude earthquakes. Future efforts are needed to evaluate the decay rate of the coefficient of dynamic friction during melting in a larger earthquake. This research was supported by University of Bari and University of Basilicata funds (fondi di Ateneo). Constructive comments by two anonymous referees helped to improve the manuscript. Assistance kindly provided by Pino Corigliano and Eugenia Ducci was precious for the field work. By substituting Eq. ( In the same way, the heat flux during the constant velocity slipping phase is obtained by inserting Eq. ( Finally the heat flux contribution during the deceleration phase is obtained by inserting Eq. ( Let us consider now the temperature rise due to slipping. During the nucleation phase (0 The temperature solution during the propagation phase ( Finally, the temperature solution during the deceleration phase is obtained by substituting Eq.