Introduction
                  The purpose of this study was to identify risk factors present at the time of injury that predict poor functional outcomes and heterotopic ossification (HO) in open periarticular elbow fractures.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  We performed a retrospective review of 136 combat-related open elbow fractures from 2003 to 2010. Patient demographics, injury characteristics, treatment variables, and complications were recorded. Functional outcomes were analyzed to determine range of motion (ROM) and Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS). Secondary outcome measures included the development of HO, return to duty, and revision operation.
               
                  Results
                  At a median 2.7 years from injury the median MEPS was 67.8 (range 30–100) with an average ulnohumeral arc motion of 89°. Bipolar fractures, with periarticular fractures on both sides of the elbow and at least one side containing intra-articular extension, were independently associated with decreased ulnohumeral motion (p
                     =0.02) and decreased MEPS (p
                     <0.004). Additional independent risk factors for decreased ROM included more severe osseous comminution (p
                     =0.001), and increased time to definitive fixation (p
                     =0.03) and HO (p
                     =0.02). More severe soft tissue injury (Gustilo and Anderson fracture type, p
                     =0.02), peripheral nerve injury (p
                     =0.04), and HO (p
                     =0.03) were independently associated with decreased MEPS. HO developed in 65% (89/136) of extremities and was associated with more severe Orthopaedic Trauma Association (OTA) fracture type (p
                     =0.01) and escalating Gustilo and Anderson fracture classification (p
                     =0.049).
               
                  Conclusions
                  In the largest series of open elbow fractures, we identified risk factors that portend a poor clinical outcome and decreased ROM. Bipolar elbow fractures, which have not previously been associated with worse results, are particularly prone to decreased ROM and worse outcomes.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Prognostic level IV.Open periarticular fractures of the distal humerus, proximal radius, and proximal ulna are uncommon but disabling injuries, frequently associated with substantial long-term morbidity With improved casualty care during the recent military conflicts resulting in increased survivability of combat injuries After Institutional Review Board approval, we identified all patients treated at our institution for an open elbow fracture sustained between March 2003 and August 2010 during Operations Iraqi Freedom (OIF) and Enduring Freedom (OEF). The specific methodology used in this retrospective case series has been previously described The Joint Theater Trauma Registry (JTTR), a database of medical injury and treatment information collected on patients injured in combat operations, was used to identify patients with open elbow fractures receiving treatment at a single tertiary US medical facility. The Armed Forces Health Longitudinal Technology Application (AHLTA) is the Department of Defense electronic medical record system and was accessed to evaluate treatment, patient outcomes, and complications. Inclusion criteria were US service members that sustained a combat-related open periarticular elbow fracture receiving definitive treatment at our tertiary medical treatment facility. A periarticular elbow fracture was defined as a radial, ulnar, and/or humeral fracture within 5 Abstracted data included patient demographics, Injury Severity Score (ISS), mechanism of injury, wound size and location, Gustilo and Anderson Outcomes were evaluated with the Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) and ROM. In all cases, ROM measurements were performed with a goniometer by a board-certified orthopaedic surgeon or physical therapist. If patients required motion-restoring procedures, such as lysis of adhesions or HO resection, their ROM was determined based on their elbow motion prior to surgery. The MEPS is a four-component outcome tool that assesses ROM, pain, stability, and function to obtain a composite score from 0 to 100, with 100 representing the best outcome Complications were defined as infection, HO A total of 143 combat-related open elbow fractures were sustained in 141 patients (two bilateral) and received treatment at our medical centre during the study period. Six patients were excluded from the study due to lack of sufficient follow-up; specifically, one patient with bilateral open elbow fractures died during the initial hospital course and five patients with insufficient follow-up records after transfer to another hospital were excluded from all analyses. In total, 136 open elbow fractures met inclusion criteria and these fractures comprised our study cohort. Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS statistical software (IBM, Armonk, New York). Descriptive statistics were performed for all variables. The MEPS and ROM were the primary outcome measures and are continuous variables. Continuous variables were assessed using two-sample The median patient age was 26 years (range 19–42 years), with a median ISS of 14 (range 4–36) requiring a median hospital stay of 44 days (range 3–206 days; ROM data were available for 76% (103/136) of extremities. No significant differences in demographic, injury, or treatment characteristics were demonstrated between those with and without complete ROM data. Prior to motion-restoring procedures, the median flexion/extension arc was 47° (range 0–85°) and at final follow-up the median flexion/extension arc of motion was 89° (range 0–144°). Prior to any motion-restoring procedure, a significantly shorter ulnohumeral arc of motion was associated with bipolar elbow fractures ( MEPS were available for 122 elbows (90%). Fourteen extremities had incomplete MEPS and were excluded from this analysis due to upper extremity amputations in 11 cases and incomplete records in three patients. No significant differences in demographic, injury, or treatment characteristics were demonstrated between those with and without complete MEPS. The median MEPS was 70 (range 30–100). There were 48% (60/125) good to excellent results; however, in part due to other concurrent injuries, only 21% (28/136) of service members remained on active duty. Among injury variables at the time of initial presentation, a bipolar fracture pattern was most predictive of worse MEPS ( Radiographic and clinical evaluation demonstrated that 65% (89/136) of extremities developed HO ( The development of HO was significantly associated with the need for reoperation ( At the time of final follow-up, 65% (88/136) of extremities had required revision surgery following definitive treatment. These late reoperations were performed for symptomatic HO in 32% (43/136), infection in 21% (28/136), contracture release in 14% (19/136), removal of symptomatic implants in 13% (18/136), delayed union in 7% (10/136), and nerve repair or neurolysis in 6% (8/136). Two patients required late amputation following an initial period of attempting limb salvage, with the other nine amputations occurring early in the treatment course at our facility (five transradial and six transhumeral amputations). Reoperation was associated with Gustilo and Anderson type III fractures ( The most important finding of this study is that patients with high-energy open elbow fractures and a bipolar fracture pattern will have decreased ROM and worse functional outcomes compared to similar injuries without intra-articular extension into the distal humerus or proximal radius/ulna. Additionally, the degree of the soft tissue injury, as measured by the Gustilo and Anderson fracture type and the presence of peripheral nerve injury significantly, negatively impacted the functional outcomes. Previous studies have reported a mean final ulnohumeral arc of motion following open periarticular distal humeral fractures between 82° and 100°, which is consistent with the results of the present study following motion-restoring procedures Contrary to the return of ROM, open periarticular elbow fractures demonstrate inferior objective outcomes when compared to floating elbow injuries. Ipsilateral diaphyseal fractures of the humerus and forearm, initially termed the floating elbow in children Four studies of open distal humeral fractures with a cumulative 50 extremities treated with external fixation are reported in the English literature The treatment of open periarticular elbow fractures with plate osteosynthesis remains controversial. Some authors have concluded that contamination in the setting of open distal humeral fractures precludes treatment with plate and screw constructs HO following operative fixation of distal humeral fractures is a well-recognized complication occurring in 0–21% of closed distal humeral fractures without prophylaxis The current study has several notable limitations that should be considered when interpreting our findings. A major limitation of this study is the retrospective study design, which limits the detail and type of variables that can be evaluated. Although a prospective study design is ideal, such a study design for this uncommon injury in not feasible in the authors’ institution. Additionally, the variations in treatment, including type and timing of staged fixation and the method of definitive fixation, were not standardized; they were rather based on surgeon preference. As such, we are not able to draw conclusions on the optimal method of stabilization in these injuries. The relatively short follow-up period in this series is an additional limitation. While longer-term follow-up is desired, the separation of soldier members from our military health-care network limits our ability to obtain longer-duration outcomes. Finally, our subject population is limited to young and previously healthy service members who sustained a high-energy blast-induced trauma. Consequently, these results may not be generalizable to open elbow fractures resulting from lower-energy mechanisms as might be seen in the civilian trauma setting. Despite these limitations, the present study includes the largest cohort to date of consecutively treated severe, open periarticular elbow fractures, and represents the first study of its kind to perform a detailed risk factor analysis for poor outcomes analysis in such patients. We found that bipolar fractures were the strongest independent risk factor for both decreased ROM and worse functional outcomes following open periarticular elbow fracture. The severity of the osseous injury is thus a significant predictor of ROM, although lysis of adhesions and HO excision significantly improved motion. Functional outcomes were additionally associated with the initial soft tissue injury pattern, including the Gustilo and Anderson fracture type, and the presence of a peripheral nerve injury. Staged treatment of severe open elbow fractures with provisional external fixation followed by delayed plate osteosynthesis remains a reasonable, and our preferred, treatment option. However, outcomes of these severe injuries remain guarded regardless of the definitive treatment modality. None declared. None.