The role of reagents utilised in igneous phosphate ores flotation is reviewed. Fatty acids soaps derived from different vegetable species are utilised as collectors. Less expensive species, such as rice and soybean bran oils replaced successfully the more expensive tall oil as the source for the apatite collector. Synthetic collectors such as sarcosinate and sulphosuccinate are also employed. The collector species plays also the frother role. Corn starch is the gangue depressant. Less pure starches, with oil contents equal to or higher than 3%, may be utilised without the risk of suppressing the froth. Actually they may act as a froth controller due to the fact that the fatty acid soap that plays the frother role is an ionic species, generating thus a voluminous froth. Non ionic ethoxylated surfactants may also be used to control the surface tension of the system. Barite, when present, may be either pre-floated with cetyl-stearyl sodium sulphate or depressed, in the fine apatite flotation circuit, at pH 12.Phosphate deposits may be divided in three groups, according to their origin: (i) deposits from sea sediments; (ii) igneous deposits; (iii) biogenetic deposits. Igneous deposits represent 80% of the Brazilian reserves. Apatite concentrates produced by flotation of these ores are the source of phosphorus for NPK fertilisers. Different reagents schemes are employed in each concentrator due to ores peculiarities. Reagents used in the flotation of phosphate ores was recently reviewed by The largest deposit of igneous phosphate mined today is Kola, in Russia, producing 9 million tonnes of apatite concentrate per year (39% P When barite is present in significant contents it is, in general, pre-floated. In the natural fines (fines produced in rod mill grinding) circuit, barite depression in the fatty acids flotation of apatite may be achieved at pH 12, an expensive option considering the high costs of NaOH. In the early days of operation, all Brazilian plants utilised saponified imported tall oil as collector. Due to currency fluctuations and to the low quality of local tall oil (high content of rosin acids), alternative collectors have now been adopted: rice bran oil, hydrogenated soybean oil, “sojuva” (a blend of soybean oil with oil extracted from grape seeds), rice bran oil blended with sulphosuccinate or sulphosuccinamate, and sarcosinate. The so-called Considering that the collector also acts as frother and the well-known fact that ionised species generate excessively stable froths ( An overview of the reagents currently utilised in the flotation of phosphate ores in Brazil is presented in Typical mineralogical compositions of the main ore types processed in Brazilian phosphate concentrators are presented in Barite pre-flotation is performed in two concentrators Bunge/Araxá and Ultrafértil/Catalão. Microflotation studies by Certain vegetables are capable of reacting self contained glycerol and fatty acid molecules producing tryacylglycerol or oil molecules. Oil extracted from the vegetables is then purified and submitted to a process that combines heat, high pressure and alkalinity, being converted into fatty acids. The fatty acids are saponified with NaOH to produce soluble soaps that act as apatite collector. Different vegetables produce fatty acids with distinct proportions of individual components. The composition changes for the same vegetable depend on soil and weather conditions and on the genetic variety. Tall oil presents a strong predominance of oleic acid followed by linoleic acid. In the early days of phosphate flotation plant practice there was a belief that its enhanced performance was due to this high oleic acid content. Laboratory scale investigations aiming at finding alternative collectors pointed towards the use of rice bran oil. Fundamental studies showed that linoleic acid is as effective as oleic acid, a feature that was confirmed by plant practice. The next step was testing derivatives of soybean oil. The high ratio linoleic:oleic was not beneficial. Two procedures were adopted to even the linoleic:oleic ratio: (i) hydrogenation, (ii) combination of soybean oil with other oil richer in oleic acid. The main collector currently utilised at Fosfertil and Ultrafertil plants is a hydrogenated soybean oil. A creative option was the development of the so-called Fosfertil’s concentrator was refurbished, after some years of operation, to include two distinct flotation circuits, treating the two major ore types from their mine: friable or brittle ore and grainy ore. The reagents scheme for the grainy ore was altered. The vegetable oil was combined with a synthetic collector (sulphosuccinate) aiming at taking advantage of the higher selectivity of the synthetic collector and the stronger recovery capacity of the fatty acids. An amphoteric collector, belonging to the family of sarcosinates, was successfully introduced in the reagents scheme of Bunge’s concentrator in Cajati. This collector proved to be selective for this particular ore. The addition level of the depressant, corn starch, was reduced to 100 Reagents schemes for the flotation of igneous phosphate ores with mixed silicate-carbonate gangue are currently being investigated. The single stage direct flotation of apatite presents the problem of the lack of an effective depressant for the gangue minerals, leading to low P Interfering ions play a relevant role in the flotation of phosphate ores. Apatite and most gangue minerals are classified as sparingly soluble minerals. Their contact with the aqueous phase releases ionic species in solution. Water recycling also contributes to the contamination of the aqueous phase. The interference of ions in the flotation of a phosphate ore in a batch column was investigated by The utilisation, in the industrial circuit, of water containing ions up to their limit tolerance concentration did not impair the flotation process of barite and apatite. The quality of process water to be recycled was defined and a monitoring system for ions was developed. A water recycling project was developed resulting in a closed water system. The concentration of phosphorus in the receiving body of the plant wastewater was brought down to a value below the legal limit. Corn starch is the gangue depressant utilised in the flotation of igneous phosphate ores in all Brazilian concentrators. Corn starches with different size distributions are employed. The selection criterion is, in general, based on cost, rather than on the quality of the product. Depressants such as guar gum, tanins, ethyl cellulose, and carboxy methyl cellulose were widely investigated. The performance of corn starches was consistently superior to that of those reagents ( Starch depresses more effectively apatite than calcite. The understanding of this behaviour, for both are sparingly soluble minerals and contain the same cation (Ca Industrial products commercialised as corn starch consist essentially of: starch fraction (amylopectin The components amylose and amylopectin represent the active matter of the reagent, being primarily responsible for the depressant action. The role of proteins in this flotation system is still unknown. The designation conventional starch refers to a high purity product, the content of amylose Typical physico-chemical analyses of conventional (very pure) and non conventional (less pure) starches are presented in All ground corn products contain and also absorb water to an extent from 10% to 13%, depending on weather conditions. Presenting the starch content in dry basis is a tradition from the food industry that was incorporated by the mining industry. Oil is the popular designation of triacyl glycerol, an ester produced in the vegetable via a reaction between glycerol and three molecules of fatty acid. Iron ores flotation froths are inhibited by oil content in starch above 2%. Phosphate ores flotation froths are not affected by oil contents as high as 4%. An explanation for this difference in behaviour may be the fact that the frothing agent in phosphate flotation is the ionised fatty acids soap species. Fibres and mineral matter are inert species that do not play any chemical role. Unmodified corn starches are not soluble in cold water. The solubilisation procedure is known as gelatinisation. Caustic soda is added to the starch, previously mixed with water, at a weight ratio 3:1 (starch:NaOH). The final concentration of the corn starch solution is 3% Corn starches may be chemically modified for different purposes. Dextrines are modified corn starches that present solubility in cold water as a major characteristic. The molecular weight of dextrines is by far lower than that of unmodified starches. Dextrines keep the hydrophilisation ability of large molecular weight starches, but act as dispersants rather than flocculants. Corn is not the only source of starch. Potato starches are being extensively used for industrial purposes in Europe. In Brazil, cassava (also known as manioc or yuca), is a common vegetable rich in starch with high amylopectin Additives used in phosphate flotation are synthetic organic species. The are produced via the ethoxylation of fatty alcohols. The alcohols are obtained from vegetable oils or animal fats. Ethylene oxide comes from the petroleum industry. These reagents may present variable molecular composition and number of carbon atoms in the hydrocarbon chain, as well as the presence of double bonds, different stereo-chemistry ( Additives employed in phosphate ores flotation present different lengths of carbon chain, with a predominance of 18 carbon atoms. The ethoxylation level is represented by the average number of ethylene oxide groups in the molecule. Best results have been achieved with 3 or 4 groups. The dosage of additives is 5% with respect to the collector dosage, reaching 10% under special conditions. The additive is dosed either in the collector conditioning tank or in the flotation cell, in the case of mechanical machines. The additives dosage depends on the ore mineralogy. They enhance the flotation selectivity in the presence of silicate minerals and also act as froth modulators. The use of additives is a tool for the control of the surface tension of the flotation system, facilitating significantly froth transfer via pumping. Barite occurring associated with apatite in some igneous phosphate ores may be either pre-floated with cetyl stearyl sodium sulphate or depressed at pH 12, in the fines circuit. The usual apatite collectors are fatty acids soaps. The traditional tall oil may be replaced by soybean and rice bran oils. Soybean oil, due to its low oleic acid content, is hydrogenated to partially oxidise the double bonds. Corn starches are employed as gangue depressants. Higher oil contents in the starch do not inhibit the froth, for the ionic collector species plays also the frother role, producing a voluminous froth. Ethoxylated non ionic surfactants, known as additives, enhance the selectivity in the presence of silicate minerals, act as froth modulators and also control the pulp surface tension, facilitating pumping.