The quantities of the dusts, scales and sludge arising in the steel plants of Rautaruukki Group (two in Finland, one in Sweden and one in Norway) and Imatra Steel (in Finland) have been determined. Not all materials can be recycled, a material may contain some harmful component(s) like Na, K, Zn, Pb, Cd, S, cyanide, oil or humus. It may also be too fine-grained and a small iron content may prevent utilisation or it may be too difficult to process the sludge. The total amount of the unutilised materials is 92 140 t/a, that is about 32% of the fine-grained remains. The recycling capabilities of the sintering plant, the blast furnace (BF) and the basic oxygen furnace (BOF) have been evaluated. Usually, the fine-grained remains disturb the primary production processes. Additionally, most of the non-recycled remains contain harmful components and cannot be utilised in the sintering process or in the BF. In the BOF, it is possible to use the iron oxide remains, but the maximum amount would be only about 10 000 t/a, so the recycling to the BOF can be only a partial solution. It is possible to recycle small amounts of appropriate dusts, scales and sludge to the sinter plant, to the BF or to the BOF, but this cannot be an overall solution of the waste problem. Big amounts of fine-grained remains must be treated separately. The costs of the separate process can be covered due to the savings caused by the more smooth-running primary processes. Moreover, it is possible to choose a separate unit process, the product of which can be fed back to the production chain in the optimal stage. The separate processing of the dusts, scales and sludge may also decrease the emissions and energy consumption of the steel plant.Oxide dusts, scales, and sludge arising from iron and steel making are recycled both to the processes producing iron and steel and to separate unit processes. The separate processes can be classified into either pyrometallurgical or hydrometallurgical methods ( Dusts, scales and sludge often contain heavy metals, alkalis and petrochemical compounds, which harm the primary processes if the materials are recycled without any pre-treatment ( The processing of dusts by means of pyrometallurgical methods has been tried in many plants. Usually, however, the financial yields from the products do not cover the high costs of this type of processing ( Hydrometallurgical processes have usually been developed for one specific substance or residue. This is one of the weak points of hydrometallurgy, if the properties of the substance change, the process may waste more or works less efficiently. Besides, the treated materials may contain zinc ferrites, which are very difficult to dissolve ( Many new processes developed to treat dusts have not reached pilot scale testing. Some methods have been commercialised for a period of time and then have been abandoned. Perhaps, the major reason for the numerous failures is that it is more economical to extract metals from ores than from dusts ( Sintering plants have traditionally been used to recycle by-products in integrated steel plants. There are, however, constraints on the materials that can be recycled, if operational problems are to be avoided in the sinter plant or in blast furnace (BF) operations. In particular, the concentration of zinc and alkalises (sodium and potassium) must be controlled to avoid problems in BF operations and similarly, hydrocarbons must be controlled to avoid problems in the sintering plant gas cleaning system ( Recycled wastes may also have noticeable effects on sinter quality, sinter strength and productivity and, therefore, waste recycling is limited depending on the analysis of the waste materials ( In the case of a waste recycling into the BF, the phosphorus content in hot metal may rise to undesirable levels. Usually, however, the zinc content of the residues plays a major role ( Due to the high gas velocity, fine materials cannot be charged from the top into a BF, therefore, dusts become agglomerated to pellets or briquettes. Agglomerating is expensive, as is also blowing dust into the furnace by tuyeres ( In a basic oxygen furnace (BOF) the waste oxides have a cooling effect and scrap and/or lump ore can be saved ( This paper presents the conclusions of the research concerning optimisation of the dusts, scales and sludge recycling in the steel plants of Rautaruukki Group and Imatra Steel. These are two integrated steel plants using ores as main raw materials and three scrap-based steel plants. The integrated plants are Rautaruukki Steel in Raahe (northern Finland) and Fundia Koverhar (southern Finland). The scrap-based steel plants are Fundia Smedjebacken (southern Sweden), Fundia Mo i Rana (central Norway) and Imatra Steel (SE Finland). A portion of the products of Fundia Koverhar is rolled in Dalsbruk and Fundia Smedjebacken has a rolling mill in Boxholm. Dusts arising from integrated steel plants are different in composition to dusts of scrap-based plants and they must be treated using different methods. This paper emphasises the recycling of the fine-grained waste materials of the integrated steel plants. The quantities and the present day treatment of different kinds of dusts, scales and sludge arising in the plants have been investigated. The scrap fines (0–10 mm) of the plants in Raahe and in Koverhar were included in the investigation. The emission dusts were excluded, because, the goal of the research is to optimise the recycling. The return fines of the sinter plant of Rautaruukki Steel are recycled immediately and they also were excluded. There are some uncertainties in the results of the steel plant inquiry. The streams of dusts, scales and sludge are not regularly weighed and some minor streams are not weighed at all. The quantities of some materials are calculated using a correction factor and the amount of the products, but it is considered that the factor may vary. Based on the results of the steel plant research, the possibilities to make the recycling more effective have been investigated. Personnel working with research, development and production have been participating in the survey. Especially important has been the contribution of the operating staff, because, recycling must be integrated in an optimal way with iron and steel production. A significant portion of the steel plant dusts, scales and sludge is recycled. The sintering plant of Rautaruukki Steel is the most important route to recycle the materials, but also other methods are used for the utilisation (e.g. BOF and electric arc furnace). The unutilised materials are stored. Materials, which are utilised or which potentially will be utilised, cannot be called wastes. If, however, stored materials will not be recycled in the future, they also cannot be called by-products. Therefore, the term ‘fine-grained remains’ or just ‘remains’ is used for dusts, scales and sludge. The total amounts of the fine-grained remains arising in the steel plants are presented in The non-recycled materials are most problematic, so the primary goal is to develop a recycling method for them. However, if it is purpose to optimise the recycling, it is necessary to consider also the material streams already recycled, because, it may be possible to utilise them in an optimal way. There are many possibilities to recycle dusts, scales and sludge. Some alternatives can be eliminated, based on the collected data, and on the demands of the iron and steel making processes. One possibility is to feed the fine-grained remains into the processes of the integrated steel plants. Potential unit processes for recycling are sintering plant, BF and BOF. General constraints of these processes on the recycled materials have already been described but there are more constraints and limitations on recycling to the processes of Rautaruukki Steel. If the recycling to the sinter plant of Rautaruukki Steel will be increased, it will be necessary to build a pre-treatment plant, where the dusts will be agglomerated before feeding them onto the sinter strand. Into the BFs, it is possible to inject dust by tuyeres, but it may disturb the smooth running of the process. Additionally, most of the non-recycled remains contain harmful components, so they cannot be utilised in the sintering process or in the BFs, unless the harmful components are removed using some pre-treatment process. In the BOFs it is possible to use the iron oxide remains as coolant instead of sinter, but the maximum amount of the remains would be only about 10 000 t/a, so the recycling to the BOF can be only a partial solution. Not only is the more intensive recycling difficult, but even the lower level recycling creates problems. Small amounts of fine-grained materials are needed in the sinter mix but excess dust has a negative effect on the productivity and on the dust emissions of the sinter plant. It is possible that in the future, the sinter plant cannot utilise as much dusts as today. Similarly, in some particular cases, some remains may be useful in the BF or in the BOF, but as a general rule it can be said that the remains are disadvantageous to the processes. It must be emphasised, also, that the most important functions of the sinter plant, BF and BOF are to produce sinter, hot metal or steel and not to process wastes. Based on the previous reasons, the alternatives to recycle more dusts, scales and sludge to the sinter plant, to the BF or to the BOF must be abandoned. It is possible to utilise small amounts of appropriate materials in the processes, but this cannot be an overall solution of the waste problem. Large amounts of non-recycled remains must be treated in another way. The elimination of the alternative, to use the iron and steel making processes for increased recycling, leads to the conclusion that there is a need to treat the remains in a separate process. An advantage of the separate unit operation is that the primary production of the steel plant is not disturbed. In the separate process, it is possible to utilise some of the materials, which are now treated in the sintering process. If the amount of the dusts in the sinter mix will decrease, the production capacity of the sinter plant will increase and the dust emissions will decrease. Due to the more efficient production, it is possible, partly, to cover the costs of the separate processing. The decrease of the dust emissions is ecologically positive, presuming that the separate treatment does not cause other negative environmental impacts. The decision to process the dusts, scales and sludge separately, leads on to new alternatives. Many facilities and processes have been developed and modified for treating fine-grained remains (e.g. cupola furnace, PRIMUS process, rotary hearth furnace). Criteria for the choosing the optimal method are among other things: a treatment capacity; a productivity; a possible pre-treatment method; a rate of reducing harmful components; energy consumption; labour costs; capital costs. An especially important feature is the form of the products. In Rautaruukki Steel, the optimum product would be hot metal that can be utilised in the smelting plant. In Raahe, there is lack of hot metal, so the recycling of dusts, scales and sludge could increase the productivity of the steel plant. In this sense, the methods producing for example solid direct reduced iron, are just pre-treatment methods demanding an extra smelter. Usually, there is the aim to recycle dusts, scales and sludge arising from iron and steel making processes back to the same processes. Often, this is the primary goal and a separate processing is counted as an unfavourable solution. This way of thinking, however, is not necessarily justified, because, the separate recycling may be a better choice both economically and ecologically. If the remains disturb the primary production processes, it may be more favourable to treat them separately and cover the costs of the separate process due to the savings caused by the more smooth-running primary processes and due to the profits from the potentially higher quality products. Moreover, it is possible to choose a separate unit process that produces material, which can be fed back to the production chain in the optimal stage removing bottlenecks of the production. The separate processing of the dusts, scales and sludge may also decrease emissions and energy consumption of the steel plant. When recycling of industrial wastes is researched, it is important, that the personnel working with the production, participates in the research work in a rather early stage. In that case, the recycling can be optimised and resources are not wasted on the research and development of the recycling methods, which cannot be used in the plant, which is the subject of the research. We are grateful to Uolevi Idman, Pentti Eklund, Vesa Pihlaja and Helena Manninen for their work and many valuable discussions and advice. We thank personnel of Rautaruukki Group, Rautaruukki Steel, SKJ-Companies, Fundia Koverhar, Fundia Smedjebacken, Fundia Mo i Rana and Imatra Steel. Support from Technology Development Centre of Finland, Rautaruukki Group and SKJ-Companies is gratefully acknowledged.