A specific energy-based size reduction model for batch grinding ball mills was reported in a previous paper (Shi and Xie, 2015). A discharge function modified from the Whiten classification efficiency equation has been incorporated in the size reduction model to extend its applications from batch grinding to continuous operation. Five sets of the industrial ball milling survey data were used to validate the ball mill model. The data were acquired from four full scale ball mills covering primary and secondary grinding duties in a gold concentrator and a PGM concentrator. In all cases, the model fits the ball mill operational data well.
                  Features of the specific energy-based ball mill model include the use of an ore-specific and size-dependent breakage function, whose parameters are independently measured with a fine particle breakage characterisation device, the JKFBC. This allows simulations of the effect on ground product size distribution of changing ore breakage characteristics. The model utilises separate selection function and discharge function, which permits the investigation of the influences of mill operational conditions on grinding performance.ore competence indicator, the large value indicating the less resistance to breakage the maximum probability of particles reporting to the fine component (–) the discharge rate for size geometric mean particle size in fraction the maximum discharge rate for the ground product exiting the ball mill like water (h the particle size at which classification efficiency is 0.5 (mm) mass specific energy (J classification efficiency for material reporting to the fine component (–) mass fractions of size parameter in the size-dependent breakage model (kg the mass holdup of the mill ground product in size size dependent breakage model parameters, lower-triangular breakage matrix (–) mass flow rate of the ground product in size mass fractions of size product cumulative passing 1/10 product cumulative passing 1/ particle size in the size-dependent breakage model (m) classification efficiency parameter (–) A specific energy-based size reduction model for batch grinding ball mills has been developed ( As a first step approach to upgrading the ball mill model, a specific energy-based size reduction model was developed. In this batch grinding size reduction model, no mass transport or discharge mechanism occurs, and the product size distribution solely represents the size reduction results in relation to specific energy input and material breakage characteristics. A Fine-particle Breakage Characteriser (JKFBC, A model to describe size reduction in a batch grinding ball mill was developed. This model is based on the mass-size balance, or mass conservation, which is expressed by Eq. The breakage matrix It is worth noting that the ore testing data are not simply used in the ball mill model as a single number (e.g. The size-specific energy term A number of batch grinding test datasets using a standard Bond ball mill were used to validate the size reduction model. The model fits the batch grinding data well. The calibrated model from one ore sample was used to predict the breakage results for another ore with the measured ore characteristic parameters. The same approach was applied to the JKSimMet ball mill model. Comparison of the predictions by the two models shows better results from the specific energy-based ball mill model. As a second step in the ball mill model development, the specific energy-based size reduction model was extended from batch grinding to full scale ball milling in continuous operation mode, which is reported in this paper. In essence the size reduction model can be applied as a basic structure for both batch grinding and continuous grinding ball mills. For a continuous grinding mill, however, a classification mechanism and a discharge function must be added into the size reduction model to allow discharge of the ground product based on the particle size. The literature on tumbling mill classification mechanisms was reviewed. A set of classification data collected by The Whiten efficiency curve can be expressed by Eq. To describe ball mill discharge rate the classification function (Eq. For continuous ball mill operation, the mass flow rate of mill product, Five sets of full scale ball mill operational data were used to validate the specific energy-based ball mill model. The five datasets were collected during plant surveys conducted in a gold ore concentrator in Australia and a PGM (platinum group minerals) concentrator in South Africa. The gold ore concentrator comminution circuit surveys were conducted in the AMIRA P9P project by a research group comprising JKMRC, Chalmers University and site personnel. The PGM concentrator grinding circuit surveys were conducted by MPTech of the University of Cape Town (UCT). The gold ore grinding circuit comprises three ball mills, one used for primary grinding and the other two for secondary grinding. The PGM concentrator employs one ball mill for primary grinding. Two surveys on the ball mill grinding circuit in the PGM concentrator were conducted when the ball mill treated the crusher product and the HPGR (High Pressure Grinding Rolls) product respectively. Specifications of the four ball mills are summarised in In the gold ore concentrator the primary ball mill was operated in a closed circuit with a DSM screen and a cluster of hydrocyclones. The primary ball mill feed comprises the new feed, DSM screen oversize and hydrocyclone underflow. The primary ball mill ground product (ie. the trommel undersize), together with the DSM screen undersize and the primary hydrocyclone overflow, were pumped to the secondary grinding circuit. The secondary grinding circuit consisted of two ball mills in parallel and one cluster of secondary hydrocyclones. The primary grinding circuit products and the trommel undersize from the two secondary ball mills were combined to feed the secondary hydrocyclones. The secondary hydrocyclone underflow material was split to feed the two ball mills in parallel. In the PGM concentrator the primary ball mill was operated in a closed circuit with a screen. The screen oversize returned to the ball mill. Two surveys were conducted. PL1 was conducted when the ball mill treated a feed from a special mobile crusher. Survey PL2 was performed when the ball mill received a feed from HPGR, which had a much finer mill feed than that of the crusher product in PL1. During the plant surveys, samples from the grinding circuits were collected. Mass balancing was performed on the tonnage, percent solids and size distributions of various streams in the circuits. The ball mill feed was reconstituted by the new feed and the mass balanced circulations. The reconstituted mill feed and product data from the five surveys were used to fit the parameters of the specific energy-based ball mill model respectively. Five ball mill feed samples were collected during the plant surveys. For the primary ball mill circuit, the new feed samples were tested; while for the secondary ball mills, the hydrocyclone underflow samples were tested. The JKFBC tests were performed on the five ball mill feed samples. Four narrow particle size fractions (2.8–4.0 The fitted For the three gold ore samples (BM1, BM2 and BM3), the JKFBC tests indicated that they were similar in ore competence. This is expected as the three ball mill feed samples were collected in the same survey when the primary and secondary grinding circuits treated the same ore. The Bond work indices showed large variations among the three ball mill feed samples. Particularly BM2 and BM3 were in parallel with both feeds coming from the same hydrocyclone underflow, the ore competence was unlikely to vary from 22.3 For the two PGM ore samples, on the other hand, the Bond work indices indicated that they were similar in ore competence (20.0 vs 19.6 In the size reduction model, it predicts particle breakage distribution from the breakage fineness index It was found from the single-particle impact breakage tests of a number of ore samples that the The specific energy-based size reduction model and the discharge function have been coded in the SDK (Software Developer Kits) version of JKSimMet. JKSimMet is commercial comminution software. The results of the upgraded ball mill model fitted to the five sets of full scale ball mill operational data are presented in  One of the major features of the specific energy-based ball mill model is the use of ore-specific breakage function determined by the JKFBC test for an individual ball mill feed sample. Thus the fitted breakage selection function and discharge function would reflect the influence of the machine and operational conditions. Once calibrated, the model allows simulation of changes in ore breakage property. By way of example, the model calibrated to the BM1 in the gold concentrator primary grinding circuit was employed to demonstrate the effect on ground product size distribution of changing ore breakage characteristics. Two sets of ore breakage characteristic parameters were used for the demonstration, which are given in Another distinct difference between the two datasets is the Simulations were performed for the ball mill to treat the two feed ores respectively using the calibrated selection and discharge functions to the BM1 survey data and the same feed size distribution data. The simulated product size distributions by the specific energy-based ball mill model are presented in The simulations predict that at a particle size coarser than 0.2 The specific energy-based ball mill model incorporates two separate functions: the selection function and discharge function. The selection function, presented in the previous paper ( As shown in Interestingly, when the results of the ball mill model fitting to the PGM concentrator grinding circuit survey data were reported back to the UCT, the following comment was received (Sweet, 2015, Personal communication): “I’m intrigued by the lower In summary, incorporation of the discharge function in the specific energy-based size reduction model has been proved to be a successful approach for modelling continuous ball mill operation, in overcoming the limitation of the lumped breakage rate and discharge rate used in the prior-art perfect mixing ball mill model. A discharge function was incorporated in the specific energy-based size reduction model. The discharge function takes a form of the Whiten classification efficiency equation, with its Five sets of industrial ball mill survey data were used to validate the ball mill model. The data were acquired from four full scale ball mills covering primary and secondary grinding duties in a gold concentrator and a PGM concentrator. The ball mill feed samples collected during the surveys were characterised using a JKFBC to determine their breakage characteristic parameters, based on which the size reduction results were calculated from the given size-specific energy input levels. The ball mill model fits all the five sets of ball mill operational data well. Since the model uses the measured ore-specific breakage characteristics, it has the capacity to do simulations of the effect on ground product size distribution of changing ore breakage characteristics. The model utilises separate selection function and discharge function, which permits the investigation of the influences of mill operational conditions on grinding performance. An example of the effect of grinding density, and implicitly the rheology, on the maximum discharge rates of fines is demonstrated through the model fitted discharge function. This work has been supported by the