The effects of dust collection from steelmaking plants on the combustion characteristics of pulverized coal were investigated. Three influencing factors including the dust types, addition method, and addition amount of dust on the catalytic combustion were determined. Four types of basic oxygen furnace (BOF) dust can improve the combustion reactivity and combustion efficiency to different extents. The catalytic effects include that the ignition/burnout temperatures was decreased, and the maximum combustion rate and heat release were increased. A smaller particle size, larger BET surface, developed pore structure, and higher amount of CaO in BOF dust are beneficial for improving the catalytic effects on coal combustion. When increasing the addition amount, the catalytic effects on coal combustion first increased and then decreased with an optimum rust-to-coal ratio of 1:30. The addition methods have significant effects on catalytic combustion. The mixture prepared through grinding after blending showed better combustion reactivity than that prepared through blending only, and the suspension blending displayed was better than that of dry blending. The pollutant gas evolution including CO and SO2 during coal combustion was suppressed by adding BOF dust, and the CO2 evolution was promoted owing to the transformation of CO into CO2.In 2016, China's crude steel production reached 808 million tons, accounting for 49.6% of the world's annual total. The metallurgical dust and sludge invariably generated in integrated steel plants makes up nearly 10% of crude steel production. Hence, about 80 million tons of metallurgical dust and sludge is produced in steel plants in China. Among the different types of metallurgical dust, 16.16 million t/a of BOF dust has been collected in China through the converter steelmaking process. In the USA and Canada alone, BOF dust is the second largest solid-waste residue generated by integrated steel mills at over 2 million t/a [ Physical beneficiation, hydrometallurgical and thermal methods have been developed to utilize metallurgical dust [ In addition to the methods mentioned above, the injection of different metallurgical by-products such as dust and slag into the tuyere of a BF was evaluated by Ökvist et al. [ The coal sample used during this study was obtained from a steel work plant of the PanZhiHua Iron and Steel Group in Sichuan, China, and is being applied in the pulverized coal injection (PCI) process in a BF. The coal samples are a blended coal with a blend mass ratio of anthracite to bituminous coal of 8:2. The properties of the coal sample are lists in Coal was mixed with dust using three physical methods to investigate the effects of different additive methods on the catalytic combustion: 1) dry blending and grinding, i.e., the dust and pulverized coal were placed into a mechanical mixer at a certain ratio and blended automatically for 10 min. Next, the mixture was placed into a quartz crucible, and then physically grinded for 10 min at 20 rpm (5 min clockwise, and 5 min counterclockwise). For a blank sample without the addition of dust, the rotation speed and time was necessary to assure the uniformity of the coal samples, due to that the intensity of the physical grinding could be leading the structural change [ The particle size distribution of the BOF dust was examined using a laser particle size analyzer (Retsch, Camsizer P4, Germany), and an elemental analysis of the BOF dust was carried out on an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF-1800XING, Shimadzu, Japan). The phase compositions were determined using X-ray diffraction (X'Pert PROMPD, Panalytical, Holland) with a scanning speed of 4°/min. The surface area and pore structure of dust were determined based on the nitrogen adsorption at 77 K using an accelerated surface area and a porosimetry system (ASAP 2020 + C, Micromeritics, USA). A thermogravimetric and differential thermal analyzer (TG-DTA) (SETARM, Setsys evolution, France) was coupled in line with a mass spectrometer (PFEIFFER, ThermoStar, Germany), in which the emissions evolved in the gas off-take were monitored through a thermal analysis. The resolution ratio of thermos-balance reached 0.02 μg, and therefore the tiny mass change can detected. The reference samples were 10 ± 0.1 mg at a heating rate of 15 °C/min, and the heating temperature range was from room temperature to 1000 °C. The atmosphere was 50% O There are many characteristic parameters that can be used to evaluate the gasification reactivity. The following parameters were used in this study: 1) the temperatures ( The combustion efficiency is another index for supplying further information regarding a heterogeneous combustion to evaluate the carbon transfer from CO to CO The elemental compositions in The particle size distribution of the four dust types are shown in The microscopic surface topography of each type of dust is shown in Furthermore, BOF dust can decompose during heating, as shown in The TG and DTG curves of coal combustion with and without the addition of different types of dust are shown in In addition, when we consider the effects of the additive types on the coal combustion behavior, it is clear that the On the other hand, the mean particle size of the DTA curves of the coal samples during combustion before and after the dust was added are shown in According to Eq. Homogeneous and heterogeneous reactions are the two processes that occur during coal combustion, and CO In a catalytic system, the concentration of the catalyst is also of great importance in terms of the catalytic effect. The impacts of the addition amount of BOF dust on the catalytic combustion were also investigated using the TGA method. Owing to its greatest catalytic activity, the A BOF dust was selected as the additive. TG-DTG curves of coal samples during combustion with different added amounts of In addition, the impact of the added amount of dust on the heat released during coal combustion was investigated. DTA curves of the coal samples during combustion with different amounts of dust added are shown in As is well known, the different degrees of dispersion for the additive to a system may be a major factor related to the catalytic effects, and thus the effects of the addition method on the catalytic effects of coal combustion were compared in this study. The TG-DTG curves of coal samples with dust added using different blending methods are shown in DTA curves of coal samples during combustion with the A dust type added using different blending methods are shown in The pollutant gas evolution including CO However, under the conditions applied in the thermal analysis, the CO occurring during coal combustion cannot adequately transfer to the CO  It deserves to be specially noted that there has no thermodynamic condition for desulfuration during pulverized coal combustion in raceway of BFs due to a high temperature. However, the BOF dust has the potential for applying in coal-fired boiler and civil utilizations for sulfur removal during coal combustion process. This study focused on the effects of dust collection from steelmaking plants in terms of the combustion characteristics of pulverized coal. Factors including the dust types, addition method, and amount of additive on the degree of catalytic combustion were determined. The following results were found: Four types of BOF dust can improve the combustion reactivation and combustion efficiency to different extents, including a decrease in the ignition and burnout temperatures, and an increase in the maximum combustion rate and heat release. The The catalytic effects on coal combustion were first increased and then decreased as the amount of added dust increased. The optimum amount of added dust in this study was at a dust-to-coal ratio of 1:30, which results in an interaction by suppressing and promoting BOF dust. The addition methods used have significant effects on the catalytic combustion. Grinding (10 min) after blending shows a better effect than blending only, and suspension blending showed a better effect than dry blending. The degree of dispersion for the additive has the following order: dry blending < dry blending & grinding < wet blending & grinding. The gas evolution, including CO and SO The authors thank the