Tetrakis(2-hydroxyethyl) orthosilicate (THEOS) introduced by Hoffmann et al. (J. Phys. Chem. B., 106 (2002) 1528) was first used to prepare hybrid nanocomposites containing various polysaccharides and immobilize enzymes in these materials. Two different types of O-glycoside hydrolyses (EC3.2.1), 1→3-β-d-glucanase LIV from marine mollusk Spisula sacchalinensis and α-d-galactosidase from marine bacterium Pseudoalteromonas sp. KMM 701, were taken for the immobilization. To reveal whether the polysaccharide inside the hybrid material influences the enzyme entrapment and functioning, negatively charged xanthan, cationic derivative of hydroxyethylcellulose and uncharged locust bean gum were examined. The mechanical properties of these nanocomposites were characterized by a dynamic rheology and their structure by a scanning electron microscopy. It was found that 1→3-β-d-glucanase was usually immobilized without the loss of its activity, while the α-d-galactosidase activity in the immobilized state depended on the polysaccharide type of material. An important point is that the amount of immobilized enzymes was small, comparable to their content in the living cells. It was shown by the scanning electron microscopy that the hybrid nanocomposites are sufficiently porous that allows the enzymatic substrates and products to diffuse from an external aqueous solution to the enzymes, whereas protein molecules were immobilized firmly and not easily washed out of the silica matrix. A sharp increase of the enzyme lifetime (more than a hundred times) was observed after the immobilization. As established, the efficient entrapment of enzymes is caused by few advantages of new precursor over the currently used TEOS and TMOS: (i) organic solvents and catalysts are not needed owing to the complete solubility of THEOS in water and the catalytic effect of polysaccharides on the sol–gel processes; (ii) the entrapment of enzymes can be performed at any pH which is suitable for their structural integrity and functionality; (iii) a gel can be prepared at reduced concentrations of THEOS (1–2%) in the initial solution that excludes a notable heat release in the course of its hydrolysis.The nanocomposite materials of silica prepared by the sol–gel technique in the aqueous solutions have drawn attention owing to the propensity to entrap enzymes without their covalent bonding to the matrix. It is significant that the immobilized biomolecules retain or even enhance their bioactivity and stability. Furthermore, the porous silica matrix provides enzyme accessibility to external reagents and removal of the reaction products through the pore diffusion. These advantages open up a way for the development of biocatalysts and biosensors for biotechnological and medical uses. Tetraalkoxysilanes (tetramethoxysilane, TMOS and tetraethoxysilane, TEOS) are common precursors to synthesize silicate. Their hydrolysis in aqueous solutions and further polycondensation reactions cause first a formation of sol particles of which the cross-linking leads to the self-organization into a porous three-dimensional network in the bulk. In view of the fact that the tetraalkoxysilanes are poor-water soluble compounds, methanol or ethanol is generally added to prevent the phase separation The main objective of the present article was to apply hybrid silica nanocomposites for immobilization of practically important enzymes (endo-1→3-β- The preliminary experimental data considered in the article showed that both the enzymes could be successfully entrapped in the hybrid silica–polysaccharide nanocomposites. They retained their activity in the immobilized state. It was also found to have a significant increase in their stability after the immobilization. Tetrakis(2-hydroxyethyl) orthosilicate (THEOS) was synthesized from tetraethoxysilane (ABCR, Germany) as described in details in The sol–gel derived silica materials were synthesized as suggested in The activity of α- The activity of 1→3-β- As the control samples were used, enzyme solutions were prepared by the dilution (1:20) of the initial enzyme solutions by the corresponding buffer. They did not contain the precursor and polysaccharides, which were added for the immobilization. They were performed with a Rotovisco RT 20 (Haake) stress-controlled rheometer. Measuring cells had cone and plate geometry of which the diameter and the angle of the cone were, respectively, 35 mm and 2°. A special chamber was used to decrease the evaporation of water in the course of measurements. The rheometer was run either in an oscillation or creep regime to determine frequency dependencies of the rheological parameters as well as a zero-shear viscosity Samples were prepared by using the cryo-technique. The pictures were made with a JSM-840A (JEOL) scanning electron microscope. The salient physicochemical features of the sol–gel derived hybrid silica–polysaccharide materials synthesized by us are considered here because the results have not been published yet. It was found that first the precursor and then the silicate generating in situ are compatible with polysaccharides, i.e. with xanthan, locust bean gum and cat-HEC. The organic and inorganic components were mixed with each other without the phase separation, forming a monolithic material. A gel settled within 5–20 min that depended on the precursor concentration, as well as on the polysaccharide amount and type. The enzymes, in their turn, were compatible with polysaccharide–silica materials that enabled us to entrap them into these bionanocomposites. The initially prepared monolithic biomaterials did not shrink in the course of time. In other words, the syneresis was not observed. It should be stressed that the jellification occurred without the addition of a common catalyst, which is applied in a case of TMOS or TEOS. The catalytic effect was provided by the polysaccharide added into a THEOS solution. If it was not introduced, the sol–gel transition was not seen within a few days. The jellification caused a sharp rise of the viscosity. It was accompanied by a change in the rheological behavior. An initial Newtonian or non-Newtonian solution, which depended on the type of added polysaccharide, transferred into a state that is characteristic of “soft” or “semisolid materials”. In their case (see, e.g. The introduced polysaccharides influenced all the mechanical properties of hybrid bionanocomposites. This is considered by an example of cat-HEC-containing biomaterials. A dependence of the rheological parameters of biomaterials on the concentration of precursor in the initial solution is shown in  The silica biomaterials prepared by the sol–gel technique are porous that is caused by the peculiarities of processes. The formation of three-dimensional network results from the cross-linking of initially formed sol particles. The porous morphology is typical of silica nanocomposites The polysaccharides, as followed from the picture in 1→3-β- One may see that the enzymes retained their activity after the immobilization in the hybrid silica nanocomposite. There was only an exception for α- The next important conclusion followed from the examination results in The enzymes considered in the article are representatives of two different groups of The α- It is typical of enzymes that they have a short lifetime after the isolation. Their stability decreases sharply with dilution of solutions, whereas it is necessary to have them in the diluted state for using as catalysts. This is one of the main reasons retarding the development of biotechnological processes. This restriction is valid in full measure for the considered enzymes. Their diluted solutions (control samples) lost the enzymatic activity, as obvious from It is reasonable to mention that endo-1→3-β- The examined enzymes differ notably by the molecular weight and optimum pH. The endo-1→3-β- The presented results There is also another important aspect of the increased precursor concentration. When it is mixed with water, a heat release on the precursor hydrolysis happens. It results in a temperature increase by 10° and more, depending on the precursor amount. This can be critical for the entrapped enzymes. The advantage of THEOS is that its amount can be decreased up to few percent in the solution It is worthy of mentioning that a cross-linking agent is unnecessary to introduce for the efficient immobilization. It is believed The second constituent of biomaterials—polysaccharides—plays also a notable role in the enzyme entrapment. This is obvious from a comparison of their enzymatic activity. The influence is mostly pronounced for α- The testing of activity of both the enzymes entrapped inside a polysaccharide–silica matrix showed that they are accessible to the low- and high-molecular-weight substrates from an external solution. The accessibility can be associated with the structure of hybrid materials. There is a stiff network consisting of crossed filaments that are formed by mineralized polysaccharide macromolecules Thus, the forgoing results demonstrated that the new hybrid nanocomposites prepared on the basis of THEOS and polysaccharides can be successfully applied for the immobilization of labile enzymes. This is due to few advantages of the newly introduced precursor. (i) The entrapment can be performed at pH and temperature, which are suitable for the structural integrity and functionality of enzyme. (ii) The organic solvents and catalysts are not needed to solubilize the precursor and promote the sol–gel transition. (iii) A gel can be prepared at reduced concentrations of THEOS that makes the heat release in the course of its hydrolysis as small as possible. (iv) The porous structure of hybrid nanocomposite provides the accessibility of immobilized enzyme by the enzymatic substrate and proper functioning while the protein molecules are sufficiently linked inside of the matrix and not easily washed out of it. It is reasonable to add that the polysaccharide–silica biomaterials hold their integrity after performing the enzymatic processes. This enables one to separate them from the reaction products and be repeatedly used again that is of great importance for biotechnological applications. The suggested method for the enzyme immobilization is based on the entrapment of protein molecules into pores of hybrid matrix generated in the course of hydrolysis of silica precursor and polymerization into three-dimensional network in bulk solution. Its advantage is that the processes are performed at pH and temperature which are dictated by the immobilized enzyme, but not the sol–gel processing. The most obvious potential applications are in the development of biocatalysts for biotechnology and biosensors. The authors are indebted to the help of Dr. C. Abetz and I. Otto (Bayreuth University) in the SEM micrographs of biomaterials.