The crystallization capability of a parent glass made from a mixture of coal ash (40 wt%) and soda-lime glass was investigated using differential thermal analysis (DTA), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy. Different glass particle size distributions were considered in the range 20–500 μm. Two crystallization exotherms in DTA were attributed to the formation of both pyroxenes (diopside Ca(Mg,Al)(Si,Al)2O6 and augite Ca(Mg,Fe)Si2O6) and plagioclase (Na,Ca)(Si,Al)4O8. These phases were confirmed by XRD analyses. Analysis of non-isothermal DTA data yielded values of 545 kJ/mol and 1.8 for the activation energy of crystallization and the Avrami exponent, respectively. This value for the Avrami exponent was consistent with a decreasing nucleation rate and the observed dendritic morphology. The data on crystallization kinetics obtained in this study are relevant for the production of glass-ceramic materials by a sintering/crystallization method from powder compacts made of this parent glass.Disposing of industrial waste is a major problem. Much waste is dumped in landfill sites but in many countries there is a limited number of suitable sites and furthermore this disposal method is generally considered to be environmentally unfriendly. Because of the undesirability of dumping, the direct costs to the waste producer (handling, transport costs, etc.) are in many cases significantly increased by government taxes. A consequence of these environmental and financial considerations is that there is a growing demand for wastes to be re-used or recycled. The re-use of silica-rich wastes for the production of glass-ceramics is a promising development. Glass-ceramic materials are fine grained polycrystalline ceramics, with some residual glass matrix, that are prepared by the controlled crystallization of a parent glass The raw materials were coal ash resulting from the combustion of coal from El Maghara, Egypt, and soda-lime glass cullet. The composition of the former was determined by X-ray fluorescence analysis. The ash was calcined at 800 °C for 2 h to remove any volatile matter, ground and the resulting powder characterized by means of particle size analysis and X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a CuK source with voltage and tube current of 40 kV and 40 mA, respectively. Parent glasses were made from mixtures containing ash and 10–60 wt% soda-lime glass. The parent glasses were batch melted in an alumina crucible at 1500 °C for 2 h, poured onto a preheated steel plate, annealed at 600 °C for 2 h and left to cool inside the furnace. As a result of preliminary experiments the parent glass containing 40 wt% coal ash was selected for this study. The 40 wt% coal ash parent glass was ground and sieved to various particle size fractions, namely +20–53, 53–74, 74–150 and 150–500 μm, prior to devitrification studies. The devitrification was investigated by means of differential thermal analysis (DTA) complemented with XRD and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) studies (with energy dispersive analysis facilities). The preliminary DTA runs were carried out at 20 °C/min but then a more detailed study of the 74–150 μm powder was carried out at heating rates in the range 5–30 °C/min. All runs were performed in flowing air at 65 cm XRD has been used to identify the crystalline phases present after DTA runs and also after heat treatment for various times of up to 20 h at temperatures in the range 800–1200 °C. The microstructures of the glass-ceramics crystallized particles were characterized by SEM; samples were first mounted in cold-setting resin, mechanically ground on SiC paper, diamond polished to 1 μm finish and coated with carbon. The composition of the ash used in this investigation is compared with coal ashes from other sources in The parent glass containing 40 wt% coal ash was selected for study on the basis of basic processing characteristics such as ease of melting and flow of the molten glass. XRD confirmed the glass to be amorphous. This parent glass still has a high Fe The effect of particle size of the parent glass powder on the DTA traces at constant heating rate of 20 °C/min is shown in The peak temperature of the second exothermic peak increases with increasing particle size again suggesting an effect associated with surface area of the particles. This is unusual as often parent glass powders have a particle size dependent exothermic peak associated with surface crystallization and a higher temperature particle size independent peak attributed to crystallization in the bulk (see for example reference The well-defined DTA high temperature crystallization exotherm for glass samples of particle size 74–150 μm at different heating rates is shown in The value of the Avrami time exponent, Matusita and Sakka Substituting the values of The calculated activation energy, The XRD patterns from powder samples (74–150 μm) heat treated at different temperatures in the range 800–950 °C and at 1200 °C for a constant time of 2 h are shown in Thermal treatment of the samples at 950 °C for longer periods up to 20 h revealed that the peak intensity of plagioclase increased with time whereas those for pyroxene remained approximately constant. (results not shown here). At the highest temperature studied (1200 °C) partial melting occurred and the resulting material was consisted of augite and a glassy phase. It is interesting to note that with the same composition of parent glass as used in this investigation, namely 40 wt% ash–60 wt% soda-lime glass, the petrugic method with a cooling rate of 1 °C/min resulted in a glass-ceramic with plagioclase as the major phase and augite as the minor crystalline phase Crystallization at temperatures in the range 730–810 °C of the powdered high Fe The formation of an X-ray amorphous glass from a mixture of 40% coal ash and 60% soda-lime glass cullet was possible at 1500 °C. Glass powders made from the vitrified waste mixtures in different particle size distributions, in the range 20–500 μm, were considered. The crystallization of the glass revealed the presence of two main phases pyroxene (diopside Ca(Mg,Al)(Si,Al) The authors thankfully acknowledge the financial support of the Royal Society (London). We also appreciate the significant assistance of the colleagues in the Department of Materials, Imperial College London.