Background
                  Distal humerus fractures are difficult to characterise and to classify according to the AO system. In this multicentre study, our objectives were to assess the usefulness of computed tomography (CT) and to measure intra-observer and inter-observer reliability according to observer experience.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  An online survey of professional practice was performed using a questionnaire based on a clinical case. Participants were asked to determine the AO classification using radiographs then to reappraise their answers after the addition of CT images. For the reliability study, 16 observers in five centres evaluated radiographs and CT scans of 26 distal humerus fractures. They used the radiographs to determine the AO classification and assess the main fracture characteristics then reappraised their findings after adding the CT images. The radiographs and 2D CT images were read twice at an interval of 2 weeks, and during the second reading, 3D CT images were available also. At least 1 month later, the same observers performed similar readings 2 weeks apart (radiographs and 2D CT images at the first reading and addition of 3D CT images at the second reading).
               
                  Results
                  Correct fracture classification was achieved in 95% of cases with the CT images compared to only 73% with the radiographs. CT led to diagnostic and therapeutic changes in 90% and 25% of cases, respectively. Inter-observer reliability was poor for both AO classification and fracture characteristics, not only with the radiographs and 2D CT images, but also with the added 3D CT images. In contrast, intra-observer reliability improved after the addition of 3D CT images. Assessment accuracy was influenced by image quality and geographic origin of the observer but not by observer experience.
               
                  Conclusion
                  CT improves diagnostic accuracy and, in some cases, changes the surgical strategy. In our study of a large number of observers, CT did not improve inter-observer agreement about the study variables. Intra-observer agreement was improved by 3D CT but not by 2D CT. Accuracy was not influenced by years of observer experience but was dependent on image quality, proficiency with computer-based tools and, above all, image observation and interpretation.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level III.Distal humerus fractures account for 5% of all fractures in patients older than 60 years of age The imaging studies performed in the emergency setting are often of limited quality. The result is poor reliability of fracture characterisation and classification, which hinders comparisons of published case-series studies The objectives of this study of distal humerus fractures are to evaluate the usefulness of CT imaging via a survey of professional practice and to conduct a multicentre evaluation of inter-observer and intra-observer reliability of 2D and 3D CT imaging for AO classification and fracture characteristic assessment. In addition, we evaluated whether observer experience and image quality influenced inter-observer and intra-observer reliability and whether adding 3D CT imaging affected therapeutic decisions. For the practice survey, a questionnaire based on a clinical case was put on a website (Limesurvey; The first part of the online questionnaire collected data on surgeon experience, AO fracture classification For the multicentre reliability study, we invited five hospitals to participate. These five centres contributed a total of 26 sets of imaging studies inpatients older than 65 years of age with distal humerus fractures. Each set comprised antero-posterior and lateral radiographs of the elbow, thin-slice (< All 16 observers evaluated all 26 fractures, using the radiographs and 2D CT images. At least 2 weeks later, they re-evaluated the same fractures using not only the radiographs and 2D CT images, but also the 3D reconstructions. At least 1 month later, the observers re-evaluated the 26 fractures, using the radiographs and 2D CT images first then, 2 weeks later, the radiographs and the 2D and 3D CT images. Statistically, the kappa coefficient measures agreement among observers, after correction for the effect of chance We obtained 614 assessable questionnaires, completed by 64 residents, 60 clinical fellows, 123 orthopaedic surgeons with less than 10 years of experience, and 367 orthopaedic surgeons with more than 10 years of experience. The fracture type was C1 in the AO classification. Based on the standard radiographs only, the fracture was classified correctly by 73% of respondents overall, 65.6% of residents, 73.3% of clinical fellows, 73.2% of orthopaedic surgeons with less than 10 years of experience, and 73.5% of orthopaedic surgeons with more than 10 years of experience. The fracture was mistakenly classified as A2, C2, or another type by 14%, 8%, and 5% of respondents respectively. Surgeon experience did not significantly influence diagnostic accuracy ( The evaluation of intra-observer reliability showed strong agreement, with kappa coefficients greater than 0.6 for over 60% of observers in the assessments of the AO classification and of the fracture characteristics using the 3D CT images. Intra-observer agreement was moderate (kappa In our practice survey, less than three-fourths of respondents determined the correct AO classification based on the standard radiographs, and the level of experience had no influence on this parameter. The intercondylar fracture line was missed by 14% of respondents, who therefore mistakenly classified the fracture as A2 instead of C1. Importantly, we chose an optimal clinical case: the fracture was simple, without comminution, and radiograph image quality was very acceptable, which is not always the case in everyday practice. Radiographic diagnostic precision may be noticeably lower with complex fractures and poorer image quality. Reading the CT images resulted in correct fracture classification by 90% of the respondents who initially indicated the wrong fracture type. We believe CT is now an indispensable component of the initial pre-operative imaging armamentarium for most articular fractures, particularly in patients older than 60 years of age, fractures in which the main line is in the coronal plane, and comminuted fractures We report the first evidence of reliability regarding the evaluation of distal humerus fractures by surgeons with different degrees of experience working in different centres. We found a marked centre effect. Similarly, a study of inter-observer reliability for the Mason classification modified by Broberg and Morrey, as assessed using 2D CT images, showed differences in kappa coefficient values between surgeons in the US and in Europe The use of 3D CT images improved intra-observer reliability for fracture classification and the assessment of fracture characteristics. These data are consistent with the results of single-centre studies of distal humerus fractures involving small numbers of observers The quality of 3D CT images is considerably better when the reconstructions are derived from native images. This method deserves to be used routinely, regardless of the joint under study, and will undoubtedly improve the inter-observer kappa coefficient values for fracture classification or the analysis of fracture characteristics. A limitation of our study is the use of images obtained at different centres under a variety of imaging conditions, with some images being derived from whole-body CT scans or pre-processed electronically using filters. Furthermore, observer experience differed regarding use of the image processing software. CT of the elbow performed on an emergent basis is often obtained in a non-standardised position in terms of both flexion-extension and pronation-supination. It is of the utmost importance to use image processing software such as Osirix Our results confirm the usefulness of CT for evaluating and managing distal humerus fractures. CT imaging improves diagnostic precision and can therefore modify surgical decisions. To optimise image quality, the scan should be centred on the elbow and the 3D reconstruction images should be routinely obtained from the native images. Use of image reconstruction software capable of providing multiplanar images is indispensable. Regarding fracture classification and the analysis of fracture characteristics, 2D and 3D imaging did not improve inter-observer agreement in our study. In contrast, 3D imaging increased intra-observer agreement. Rather than the number of years of experience of the observers, image quality, use in everyday practice, proficiency in using computer-based tools and, above all, observer-specific interpretation of the images influenced the results of our reliability assessment. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article. We thank the residents, clinical fellows, and orthopaedic surgeons of the hospitals in Besançon, Bordeaux, Nancy, Strasbourg, and Toulouse (France), who participated in this study.