Periodontitis refers to inflammatory disease of the periodontal structures (the gingiva, dental cementum, periodontal ligament (PDL) and alveolar bone) that ultimately leads to their destruction. Whereas collagens are well-examined main components of the periodontium, little is known about the other structural proteins that make up this tissue. The aim of this study was to identify new extracellular matrix (ECM) components, including fibulins and matrilins, in the periodontium of mice.
                  After sacrificing 14 mice (Sv/129 strain), jaws were prepared. Each tissue sample contained a molar and its surrounding alveolar bone. Immunohistochemistry was carried out on paraffin-embedded sections.
                  Our results show that mice exhibit fibulin-3, -4 and -5 and matrilin-1, -2, -3 and -4 in PDL and in blood vessels of alveolar bone and PDL as well as in the pericellular matrix of osteocytes and cementocytes. In dental cementum, only fibulin-4 is expressed.
                  For the first time, we show that fibulin-3, -4 and -5 and matrilin-1, -2, -3 and -4 are essential components of the periodontal tissues. Our findings indicate an association of these proteins with collagens and oxytalan fibers that might be of future interest in regenerative periodontitis therapy.Periodontitis is an inflammatory and destructive disease that affects the periodontal tissues, including the gingiva, dental cementum, periodontal ligament (PDL) and alveolar bone ( Fibulin-3, -4 and -5 belong to a family of extracellular glycoproteins that can be found in elastic tissues such as aorta, lung and skin as well as in blood vessel walls and basement membranes ( Matrilin-1, -2, -3 and -4 are non-collagenous glycoproteins of the ECM ( In this study, we localize matrilins and fibulins in the mouse periodontium for the first time and introduce them as two novel structural components of this tissue. The study was performed on 14 mice (Sv/129 strain) of both sexes between 18 and 47 weeks of age. The animals were obtained according to the regulations of the Animal Welfare Act of the County of Lower Saxony, Germany. After sacrificing the animals, the molar regions of the mandibles and maxillae were detached from the attached gingiva and dissected into specimens each comprising a molar and its surrounding PDL and alveolar bone. The specimens were decalcified in 20% ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (E5134, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA) for 5 weeks, dehydrated using an ascending alcohol series and embedded in paraffin. Then, they were cut into tissue sections of 6–7 Affinity-purified polyclonal rabbit-anti-fibulin-3, -anti-fibulin-4 and -anti-fibulin-5 antibodies were generously provided by Dr. Timpl (Max Planck Institute, Martinsried, Germany). The antibodies have previously been shown to be specific for the individual fibulin subtypes ( Immunoperoxidase staining of decalcified paraffin-embedded tissue sections was performed as follows. First, the tissues were deparaffinized, rehydrated and rinsed for 10 Fibulin-3 was detectable in lacunae of cementocytes but not in the surrounding ECM (Fig. S1a). In the PDL, fibulin-3 was located in the ECM and in blood vessels ( Fibulin-4 was located in the lacunae of cementocytes (Fig. S1b), in the ECM of dental cementum, in the PDL and in blood vessels ( Fibulin-5 was detectable in the lacunae of cementocytes (Fig. S1c) but not in the ECM of cementum. In the PDL, it was found in ECM and in blood vessels ( Matrilin-1 was not detectable in the ECM of the cementum, but in the lacunae of cementocytes. In the PDL, matrilin-1 was located in the ECM as well as in blood vessels ( Matrilin-2 was not detectable in the ECM of cementum, but in the lacunae of cementocytes (Fig. S1d). In the PDL, both the ECM and blood vessels expressed matrilin-2 ( Matrilin-3 was not located in the ECM of cementum, but in the lacunae of cementocytes. In the PDL, matrilin-3 was found in the ECM as well as in blood vessels ( Matrilin-4 was not located in the ECM or in the lacunae of cementum, but in the ECM of the PDL as well as in blood vessels of the PDL ( In this work, we demonstrate for the first time the localization of fibulins and matrilins in the adult periodontium of mice. In elastic tissues, fibulins are closely associated with elastogenesis ( Matrilins are widely expressed in embryonic tissues ( Recently, molecular effects of ageing on the PDL have been reported ( Fibulins and matrilins are two previously undescribed protein families in periodontal tissues that supposedly interact with oxytalan fibers and collagens, respectively, and might be of future interest in regenerative periodontitis therapy. None. The authors would like to thank the staff of the animal facilities at the MPI Experimental Medicine, Goettingen and the Medical Faculty of the University of Goettingen for animal care. We also wish to thank Mr. Eschholz, from whose doctoral thesis some of the results were taken. This research was not supported by any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: