Introduction: The aim of this study was to examine alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity in the dental pulp of orthodontically treated teeth. Methods: Sixteen healthy subjects (mean age 17.0 ±1.6 years) who required extraction of 4 first premolars for orthodontic reasons participated. One maxillary first premolar subjected to orthodontic force was the test tooth. The contralateral first premolar, bracketed but not subjected to mechanical stress, was the control tooth. After a week of treatment, the first premolars were extracted and the dental pulp removed from the teeth. ALP activity was determined spectrophotometrically and the results expressed as units/liter per milligram of pulp tissue [U/(L x mg)]. Results: ALP activity was 89 ± 26 U/(L x mg) in the test teeth and 142 ± 33 U/(L x mg) in the control teeth. The difference between the groups was statistically significant (P < .01). Conclusions: Orthodontic treatment can lead to significant early-phase reduction in ALP activity in human dental pulp tissue.The response of dental pulp tissue to orthodontic force has been evaluated previously, Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme involved in tissue mineralization, To date, no studies have evaluated ALP activity in the dental pulp of teeth subjected to orthodontic force. Many previous studies have focused on only 1 dental movement—eg, intrusion Sixteen orthodontic patients, 10 female and 6 male (age range, 15.0-19.6 years; mean, 17.0 ± 1.6 years), who required extraction of the maxillary first premolars because of dental crowding participated in the study. The inclusion criteria were (1) need for fixed appliance therapy, (2) good general and periodontal health, (3) no use of anti-inflammatory drugs in the month before the study, (4) periodontal probing depth values not exceeding 3 mm in the whole dentition, and (5) no evidence of marginal periodontal bone loss after a periapical radiographic examination. During the study, the subjects were not allowed to take anti-inflammatory drugs that could affect the results. Informed consent was obtained from the patients and from the parents of those under 18 years of age before the study. The protocol was reviewed and approved by the Ethical Committee of the G. D’Annunzio University Medical Faculty. In each patient wearing the orthodontic appliance, the maxillary first premolars were the experimental teeth. A first premolar undergoing orthodontic force was used as the test tooth (TT), and its contralateral first premolar was the control tooth (CT). Both the TT and the CT were unrestored and asymptomatic, with no radiological evidence of caries or periapical radiolucency. Orthodontic brackets (MBT, 3M Unitek, Monrovia, Calif) were placed on the buccal surfaces of the incisors, canines, and premolars in the maxillary arch; the bands were bonded on the first molars. A unilateral circular orthodontic archwire, 0.018 inch (MBT, 3M Unitek), was then mounted in the same quadrant as the TT to activate the orthodontic appliance ( Immediately before biochemical analysis, the specimens were weighed and homogenized in 1 mL of 10 mmol/L potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, containing 0.1% sodium cholate. This homogenate was centrifuged at 100,000xg for 60 minutes at 4°C, and the supernatant was recovered, diluted to a volume of 2 mL with the phosphate buffer, and used for the enzymatic activity determination. One milliliter of supernatant was taken for ALP activity determination; to it was added the substrate, with the final concentrations of 20 mmol/L p-nitrophenol phosphate, 5 mmol/L magnesium chloride, 200 mmol/L mannitol, 0.05% sodium azide, and carbonate buffer (pH 10.2 ± 0.1) in a total volume of 2 mL. ALP hydrolyzes p-nitrophenyl phosphate to p-nitrophenol and inorganic phosphate. The rate of increase in absorbance was read with an ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer at 405 nm for 4 minutes, by using the kinetic method to record the absorbance variation per minute as the p-nitrophenol formed. For each analysis, a control was used that consisted of the reagent and the phosphate buffer without the sample, and the value of absorbance variation per minute in this control was subtracted from the experimental values. By using 18.45 as the p-nitrophenol millimolar absorptivity, the absorbance was converted into enzyme activity units (1 unit = 1 micromole of p-nitrophenol released per minute at 30°C). ALP activity was expressed as units/liter per milligram of pulp tissue [U/(L x mg)]. The Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS, Chicago, Ill) was used for data analysis. Each data set was tested for normality with the Shapiro-Wilks test and Q-Q normality plots; equality of variance was also tested with the Levene test and Q-Q normality plots of the residuals. Because each data set met the required criteria for parametric analyses, a paired ALP activity was 89 ± 26 U/(L x mg) (range, 54-145 U/[L x mg]) in the TTs; enzymatic activity was 142 ± 33 U/(L x mg) ([range, 78-198 U/[L x mg]) in the CTs ( This cross-sectional study examined ALP activity in the dental pulp tissue of orthodontically treated teeth, compared with untreated teeth. The results demonstrate that a significant decrease in ALP activity (that does not correlate significantly with patient age) can be detected in the dental pulp tissue of teeth undergoing orthodontic force ( In several studies, dental pulp response to orthodontic force was evaluated through analysis of the mineralized tissue of the tooth, but conflicting results have been reported. An increase in the predentin width coincident with the peak of tooth movement has been described The decrease in ALP activity in the TTs might be explained by damage of the pulp cells responsive to the synthesis of this enzyme, as a consequence of applying orthodontic tools to the teeth. Apoptosis in rat dental pulp tissue of teeth under orthodontic load for 3 days to 2 weeks was evaluated by Rana et al, Different pulpal reactions to orthodontic forces have been correlated with age and size of the apical foramen. This cross-sectional study showed a decrease in ALP activity in dental pulp tissue during the earliest orthodontic stages. Further investigations are needed to fully understand the long-term effects of orthodontic tooth movement on ALP activity of the pulp and its possible clinical implications. We thank Dr Christopher P. Berrie for his critical appraisal of the text.