In order to gain insights into the kinetics of dissolution of Gen(IV) MOX fuels, sintered pellets of Th0.25U0.75O2 were prepared as surrogates. The study of the kinetics of dissolution was achieved to determine the impact of the incorporation of 25 mol % of thorium in UO2 on the rate and on the mechanism of dissolution. Especially, various acidic media were used to evidence changes occurring in the rate of the limiting step and to establish specific rate laws. For most of the investigated dissolution media the dissolution reaction was found to be congruent. The homogeneity of the Th0.25U0.75O2 solid/solutions allowed both elements to be recovered at the same rate. The way of synthesis by oxalate co-precipitation, then conversion in mixed oxide, allowed the quantitative dissolution of the elements. In aerated hydrochloric acid solutions, the kinetics of the overall dissolution reaction appeared to be controlled by adsorption and desorption of protons on activated surface sites. The dissolution rate determined in aerated sulfuric acid solution was enhanced compared to hydrochloric acid solution of the same acidity. This result was interpreted in terms of formation of sulfate ions surface complexes that favor the detachment of the actinides from the mixed oxide solid solution. In nitric acid solutions, the dissolution of the Th0.25U0.75O2 pellets followed several successive steps. During this first steady state period, the kinetics of the overall dissolution reaction appeared to be controlled by the oxidation of U(IV) by HNO3 at the solid/solution interface. A rate law was established by adding a redox contribution to the proton-promoted surface contribution defined for aerated hydrochloric acid solutions. Then, an increase of the normalized dissolution rate was observed, which was attributed to the simultaneous increase of the specific surface area of the pellet and of the HNO2 concentration in solution.Pressurized Water Reactors currently use uranium dioxide (UOX) as fuel, and can also run on actinides mixed dioxides (MOX), which are (U, Pu)O As the UOX spent fuels still bear 96 wt. % of uranium dioxide [ Ikeda et al. [ The kinetics of this reaction was considered to be relatively slow. However, in concentrated nitric acid solutions (typically between 4 and 10 mol L The production of HNO For Carrot et al. [ One of the main issues concerning the chemical durability of U However, many questions remain largely unanswered regarding the dissolution of U In order to perform the synthesis of thorium-uranium dioxide solid solutions, a thorium solution was prepared by dissolving 50 g of thorium nitrate pentahydrate (Sigma Aldrich, 99%) in 580 mL of a 4 mol L The synthesis of thorium-uranium dioxide solid solution was performed through oxalic precipitation. First, the oxalate precursor was prepared by the quantitative precipitation of the cations according to the following chemical reaction: The synthesis of the precursor was performed by mixing first the hydrochloric solutions of actinides in the fixed stoichiometry, then by pouring this mixture in a 0.5 mol L The chemical transformation of the precursor was followed through ThermoGravimetric Analysis (TGA) and Differential Thermal Analysis (DTA), performed on a Setsys Evolution Apparatus (Setaram). Such experiments were performed under Ar - 5% H2 atmosphere from 300 to 1200 °C with a constant heating rate of 5 °C.min As previously described, a temperature of 500 °C offers a good compromise between the complete conversion into mixed dioxide and a relatively high specific surface of the resulting powder [ The thorium-uranium dioxide powder was characterized before sintering by Powder X-Ray Diffraction (PXRD) and N X-ray Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (X-EDS) analyses were performed on the sintered pellets to determine the stoichiometry of the mixed oxides. The samples were first embedded in an epoxy resin, polished then finally metalized by carbon deposition. At least twelve measurements per pellet were performed. More than 750,000 counts were collected in the spectra using an optimal working distance of 10.4 mm and an acceleration voltage of 15 kV. In these conditions, the average uranium and thorium mole fractions were determined and the absolute error estimated as twice the standard deviation. The collected data showed weak dispersion of ±0.02. The densification rate was determined by combining geometric measurements thanks to a caliper splint and helium pycnometry (Micrometrics - AccuPyc II 1340). The apparent density of each pellet, The microstructural characterization of the samples was performed by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) with a FEI Quanta 200 apparatus using a Back-Scattered Electron detector (BSE) or a Secondary Electron detector (SE) in vacuum conditions with an acceleration voltage of 25 kV. Samples were always directly analyzed without any additional preparation step such as metallization. SEM micrographs of the sintered pellets recorded at low magnification were also used to evaluate the initial specific surface area ( The acid solutions used in this study were prepared from analytical grade reagents (supplied by Sigma or Fisher). The dissolution tests were performed under “dynamic” conditions, with continuous high leachate renewals (from 0.5 to 15 mL h At the outlet of the dissolution reactor, the solution passed through a 0.45 μm filter before being regularly sampled using an automatic fraction collector. The dissolution of the solid was monitored through analyses of the elemental concentrations in the collected samples by inductively-coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES, Spectro Arcos). The intensity of the peaks was recorded at λ = 279.394 nm, 367.007 nm and 409.014 nm for uranium and at λ = 274.716 nm, 283.730 nm and 401.913 nm for thorium in order to avoid any interference between the emission rays of both studied elements. The ICP-AES was calibrated against standard solutions (PlasmaCAL single element calibration standard for ICP-AES 1000 ppm, SCP-Science) prepared by dilution of Th and U certified solutions at 1000 mg L The relative mass of solid dissolved at a given time t, The examination of the shape of the various For most of the experiments (except those performed in 2 and 4 mol L The normalized weight loss, For the experiments performed in 2 and 4 mol L During the dynamic dissolution of U One dissolution experiment was performed in 2 mol L Several authors already derived rate laws for the dissolution reaction of ThO When complexing ligands are introduced in the acid solution, the normalized dissolution rate depends also on the activity of the ligand promoting the dissolution through: When redox sensitive species are introduced in the dissolution medium, In this work, HCl and HNO H Finally, HNO To derive kinetic parameters, the activities of H The activity correction was performed using the Specific Interaction Theory (SIT) implemented in PHREEQC for HCl, H The composition of the final sintered pellet measured by X-EDS was found to be U The densification rate of the pellets used for dissolution experiments were systematically determined through geometric and He pycnometric measurements. The total porosity of the pellets was found in the range between 10 and 25% with 99 ± 1% of open porosity. The specific surface area of each pellet determined from SEM micrographs and used in the calculation of the normalized dissolution rate is reported in The values of the specific surface area were found to vary between 0.60 ± 0.24 and 0.03 ± 0.01 m Various dissolution tests were performed in different acid media. Hydrochloric acid was first selected to dissolve U In This transient step was followed by a steady state during which the As expected, the normalized dissolution rate was found to increase with the concentration of the hydrochloric acid solution. The normalized dissolution rate The congruence ratio As mentioned above, dissolution experiments of U It can be seen from The normalized dissolution rates Besides the experiment performed in 0.1 mol L As already described for the experiments performed in HCl, the normalized dissolution rate was found to increase slightly with the concentration of H In order to underline the role of redox reactions during the dissolution of U The The first step was only noticeable for The second step corresponded to the establishment of a steady state during which the normalized dissolution rate remained almost constant. It is important to note that the normalized dissolution rates, noted The third step was only evidenced in 2 and 4 mol L The last step identified during the experiments performed in 2 and 4 mol L In order to discriminate the impact of the increase of the effective surface area on the dissolution rate from that coming from the presence of HNO The examination of The results obtained with and without urea are gathered in The normalized dissolution rates The dissolution performed in various HNO The examination of the As it was expected considering that the kinetics of reaction In order to compare the results obtained in the different dissolution media considered in this study, the normalized dissolution rates determined for uranium and for thorium were reported as a function of the proton activity in The linear regression of log In sulfuric acid solutions, it appears that HSO In nitric acid solutions, the rate law determined by adding the contribution of a surface controlled mechanism to an oxidizing mechanism that involved molecular HNO Obviously, since steady state conditions were only reached for high progresses of the dissolution reaction (step 4), rate law could not be derived for reaction Th In aerated hydrochloric acid solutions, the normalized dissolution rate values were found to increase with the protons activity. The kinetics of the overall dissolution reaction appeared to be controlled by adsorption and desorption of protons at activated surface sites. The apparent rate constant as well as the partial order of the reaction relative to the protons activity were equal to (1.05 ± 0.02) × 10 The dissolution rate determined in aerated sulfuric acid solution was enhanced compared to aerated hydrochloric acid solution of the same acidity. The influence of the activity of HSO In various nitric acid solutions, the dissolution of the Th For most of the investigated dissolution media, the dissolution reaction was found to be congruent. Especially, in nitric acid solutions, the homogeneity of the Th The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time due to technical or time limitations. The authors are grateful to Paul-Henri Imbert (ICSM) for his participation in the dissolution experiments, Renaud Podor (ICSM), Joseph Lautru (ICSM) and Béatrice Baus-Lagarde (ICSM) for their help in SEM and ICP-AES analyses. The following are the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at