Pretreatment is often necessary when the fresh water available to industrial plants is impure, and when some processes are particularly sensitive to contaminants. Partitioning processes such as membrane separation units are often used for such applications. However, the use of pretreatment units adds to capital and operating costs for a water system. Hence, it is of interest to develop design procedures to minimize the cost for such system. This work presents a graphical pinch analysis approach for targeting minimum flowrate of partitioning water pretreatment systems in single component problem. The approach determines how product and reject streams from the treatment unit can be allocated, along with bypassed freshwater, to satisfy multiple process sinks with their respective flowrate and purity requirements. Hypothetical case studies are presented to illustrate the approach, and generalized design principles based on pinch analysis heuristics are drawn from the examples.Pinch analysis was originally developed in the 1970s for the synthesis of heat exchanger network ( This paper presents a novel graphical pinch analysis technique for targeting the minimum size (i.e., flowrate) of a partitioning pretreatment unit for a set of process water sinks, given an impure fresh water supply. Partitioning processes such as membrane-based systems have been considered only for regeneration purposes in previous work ( A partitioning pretreatment unit is defined as one that separates a single water feed stream into two streams of different quality. One stream is known as the The overall water balance is given as: For concentration-based system, the contaminant balance is given as: In property integration, the approach is based on determining an appropriate mathematical function, For such system, Eq. Alternatively, a In the fixed RR case, the quality of both product and reject streams depend on their relative flowrates ( The formal problem definition is given as follows. The following parameters are specified: An external source of impure fresh water of fixed quality. The latter may take a concentration of a single dominant contaminant, or is expressed with a fixed property value. A set of process sinks, each with a specific flowrate requirement and a specified quality limit based on contaminant concentration or property value. A partitioning pretreatment process defined either by (a) a fixed product stream quality and liquid recovery, or (b) a fixed mass or property load removal ratio and reject stream quality. The task is to determine the minimum pretreatment unit flowrate (and hence the size of the pretreatment unit), defined in terms of the combined flowrates of the product and reject streams. Each process sink is satisfied by an appropriate mixture of product or reject stream with bypassed fresh water. It will also be seen later that the pinch analysis technique precludes the remixing of the product and reject streams. The problem implicitly assumes that the total cost of pretreatment is a linear function of the size (i.e., total material throughput) of the pretreatment unit, which is in turn expressed as the summation of the flowrates of the product and reject streams. This problem can also be formulated as an equivalent mathematical programming model, as shown in In this hypothetical case study, it is assumed that there are four water-using processes with flowrate and concentration requirements given in The first step to construct the pretreatment pinch diagram is to plot the Next, the Finally, the bypass stream line is drawn parallel to the fresh water supply line (indicating that the two have the same concentration) such that it is tangent to the sink composite curve. This step is shown in To synthesize a water network, any established water network synthesis tool may be used to determine the flowrate allocation that satisfies the optimal pretreatment flowrate target of 4.33 For a simple system such as this case, some flowrate allocation guidelines based on inspection were given by This case study uses the same limiting data and fresh water concentration as in Case 1. However, it is assumed that the pretreatment unit is characterized by fixed RR, as given in Eq. The targeting procedure using the pretreatment pinch diagram is given as follows. The fresh water line, sink composite curve and reject stream line are plotted in the same manner as in Similar to Case Study 1, it is then necessary to draw the fresh water bypass line to generate the supply composite curve, as shown in The analysis thus far has assumed that the reject stream concentration is set to the highest tolerable level. There may be some advantages to reducing the contaminant level of the reject (e.g. increased membrane life), at the expense of larger flowrate. The following sensitivity analysis illustrates some of the implications of such adjustments. In this case, if This case study extends the newly developed targeting technique for a property-based water pretreatment network. Using Eqs.  One of the most valuable feature of pinch analysis techniques is that, they provide insights for systematic design. This same advantage may be found in this current technique. It is now possible to draw generalized design principles from the case studies described in the previous sections. These principles are extensions of the so-called “golden rule” of pinch analysis summarized as follows: Process sinks below the pinch (i.e., in the HPR) are to be satisfied using combinations of pretreatment product and bypassed impure fresh water only. Process sinks above the pinch (i.e., in the LPR) are to be satisfied using combinations of pretreatment reject and bypassed impure fresh water only; however, excess reject may be discharged from the plant without being used. Both of these design principles forbid cross-pinch transfer of water sources, in a manner analogous to those found in previous pinch applications, e.g. heat ( A pinch analysis technique for targeting minimum partitioning water pretreatment flowrate has been developed for single-component or single-property systems. The approach determines optimal targets to satisfy multiple water sinks, each with specific flowrate and concentration specifications. The pretreatment units can be modeled either with fixed product concentration (or property) and liquid recovery, or, alternatively, with fixed mass/property load removal ratio and minimum reject stream quality. The graphical approach provides the same design insights that can be derived from other pinch-based techniques, which may not be found directly from purely mathematical programming models. Case studies were shown to illustrate possible variations of the technique. Finally, generalized design principles are drawn from the examples to ensure optimal design of water allocation schemes. Future work should explore extensions of this approach for multiple partitioning units mounted in series or parallel. Hybrid methodologies combining pinch and mathematical programming may also be explored, particularly in applications wherein it is not possible to make the assumption that total pretreatment cost is a simple linear function of the total flowrate through the pretreatment unit. Such approaches may be based on automated targeting models ( The authors would like to acknowledge support of the De La Salle University Science Foundation Visiting Scholar Grant. Funding from the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MOSTI) Malaysia through Science Fund (03-02-12-SF0018) is deeply appreciated. The targeting problem can be stated in the form of an equivalent mathematical programming model, as follows. The objective is to determine the minimum flowrate ( Optimization is subject to the following constraints. Each process sink ( The concentration limit For property-based systems, the following is used instead, with property operator values of The sum of the pretreated water supplied to all the sinks is equal to the total pretreatment product flowrate ( On the other hand, the sum of reject flows supplied to all the sinks is less than or equal to the total reject generated by the pretreatment unit ( The total flowrate through the pretreatment unit is the sum of the product and reject flowrates: The liquid recovery factor ( The contaminant balance defines the relationships of the concentrations of the feed, product and reject of the pretreatment unit: Alternatively, property operator values of these streams may be used instead for property-based systems: The pretreatment unit may be defined by a fixed outlet quality level ( On the other hand, for property-based systems, the relationship will be: On inspection, it can be seen that the above model is a linear program (LP) when a fixed pretreatment product quality (