Gas drilling is considered as an ideal technique for drilling horizontal wellbore in hard formations. However, due to the low cuttings-carrying energy of gas in horizontal gas drilling, drill cuttings returned to surface are dusk-like, and the large cuttings not only can't be circulated out of down hole in time but also can't be reground by the bit teeth as in vertical gas drilling do. As a result, they are easily accumulated in the horizontal wellbores, which may lead to accidents such as wellbore plugging and pipe sticking. Based on jet comminution technique, a new type of bit called jet mill bit (JMB) was presented and optimal designed in this research, it provides a promising solution to the problem by comminuting cuttings into dust-like scale right after the cuttings are generated. In order to promote the optimal design and execution of the JMB, analytical models were developed for predicting the required cutting's impact velocity and designing the minimum length of accelerating tube in JMB, meanwhile the factors affecting the optimal design of JMB were also investigated. Case study using field data in the published article shows good consistency is observed between the predicted result and field experience. It is also concluded that the required cutting's impact velocity and the minimum length of accelerating tube increase with the initial cuttings size and decrease with the final cuttings size, and they decrease slowly with the final cuttings size when the final cuttings sizes larger than approximately 0.3 mm. This paper provides drilling engineers with a promising technology to eliminate cuttings accumulation in horizontal gas drilling.Gas drilling is defined as an operation of drilling wells with gas including air, nitrogen, and natural gas. Compared to liquid drilling, gas drilling can increase rate of penetration (ROP) over ten times. Therefore it is considered as an ideal technique for drilling horizontal wells in hard formations where the available weight on bit (WOB) and thus ROP are low. However, unlike conventional mud drilling, gas drilling can't improve hole cleaning efficiency by optimizing the drilling fluid's rheological properties. Due to low cuttings carrying energy of gas in horizontal gas drilling, large cuttings not only can't be circulated out of down hole in time but also can't be reground by the bit teeth as in vertical gas drilling do ( In order to solve the problem, the field-applied gas flow rate in horizontal gas drilling is much higher than that in vertical gas drilling for hole cleaning ( According to the field experience, drill cuttings returned to surface in gas drilling are dust-like with equivalent average diameter between 0.08 mm and 0.1 mm. If the cuttings size can be reduced at bottom hole by certain means, cuttings accumulation in the horizontal wellbores will be eliminated, meanwhile the gas flow rate required to clean the hole can also be lowered. This gave us an idea of crushing the cuttings right after they are generated so that cuttings accumulation in horizontal gas drilling is eliminated ( A new type of bit called jet mill bit (JMB) has been designed and manufactured in this research. Its sketch and flow diagram are shown in The concept of jet comminution is not new. It uses high velocity gas jet to impart energy to particles to project against a fixed target for size reduction in other industries to produce powders. The carrier fluid is usually compressed air and nitrogen ( As shown in the above equation, cutting's impact velocity is the key parameter of jet comminution, while it is mainly determined by the length of accelerating tube for a given gas velocity at the outlet of backward jet nozzle of JMB. Therefore, required cutting's impact velocity and minimum length of accelerating tube in JMB can be designed to support the design and execution of JMB in horizontal gas drilling. We propose the following model to determine the required cutting's impact velocity (derivation is given in Based on the required cutting's impact velocity, minimum length of accelerating tube in JMB can also be designed. It can be estimated as (derivation is given in Where ( Application uses field data in the published article ( In order to verify the models, field test data in the published article is cited. In 2012, There are four major uncertainties in determining the required cutting's impact velocity and the minimum length of accelerating tube in JMB: lithology, the fraction of crushing and comminuting energy from impacting, initial cuttings size, final cuttings size. The initial cuttings size is estimated on the basis of ROP. Then sensitivities of results to these parameters could be analyzed, the base data of the above application example is used in the following sensitivity analysis. With all other parameter values set constant in the base case, the effects of the fraction of crushing and comminuting energy from impacting on the required cutting's impact velocity and the minimum length of accelerating tube in JMB are investigated in horizontal gas drilling. The results are plotted in The initial cuttings size is estimated on the basis of ROP. With all other parameter values set constant in the base case, the effects of ROP on the required cutting's impact velocity and the minimum length of accelerating tube in JMB are investigated. The results are plotted in With all other parameter values set constant in the base case, the effects of final cuttings size on the required cutting's impact velocity and the minimum length of accelerating tube in JMB are investigated for final cuttings size between 0.1 mm and 0.9 mm. The results are plotted in In this paper, a new type of bit called jet mill bit (JMB) was presented and optimal designed. By comminuting cuttings into dust-like scale based on jet comminution technique, it provides a promising technology to eliminate cuttings accumulation and reduce the gas flow rate required for hole cleaning in horizontal gas drilling. In order to promote the optimal design and execution of the JMB, analytical models were developed for predicting the required cutting's impact velocity and designing the minimum length of accelerating tube in JMB, meanwhile the factors affecting the optimal design of JMB were also investigated. Case study using field data in the published article shows good consistency is observed between the predicted result and field experience. This research was financially supported by the  stress generated from the impact between the cutting and the comminution target (Pa) velocity of the wave in the grain of cutting because of impact (for most nonmetallic particles, gas velocity at the outlet of the JMB nozzle (m/s) cutting's terminal velocity (m/s) cutting's velocity (m/s) cutting's impact velocity (m/s) required cutting's impact velocity (m/s) gas injection rate (m gas density of downstream (kg/m total nozzle area (m nozzle discharge coefficient ( heat capacity ratio of gas (dimensionless) gas specific gravity (air = 1) upstream temperature (° upstream pressure (MPa) downstream pressure (MPa) energy requirement for crushing and comminuting particles (kWh/short ton)  Bond work index for crushing and comminuting (kWh/short ton) initial cutting diameter ( final cutting diameter ( energy requirement for crushing and comminuting an individual particle (J) initial cutting diameter (m) cuttings density (kg/m gas density (kg/m rate of penetration (m/h) bit rotary speed (r/min) kinetic energy of impacting cutting (J) fraction of the crushing energy from impacting on the target (dimensionless) drag force (N) particle's weight (N) gravitational acceleration (m/s hole angle (°) drag coefficient (dimensionless) Reynolds number (dimensionless) fluid viscosity ( correlation constant correlation constant correlation constant correlation constant drag coefficient of cutting (1.40 for flat particles (shale and limestone) and 0.85 for angular to sub-rounded particles (sandstone) according to cutting sphericity factor (dimensionless) the equivalent diameter of the annulus (m) length of accelerating tube (m) minimum length of accelerating tube (m) In gas drilling, the initial cuttings' equivalent diameter is usually on the order of 10 mm. The final cuttings' equivalent diameter is normally dusk-like. Bond's equation for comminuting energy has been widely used in the powder comminution industry for this particle-size range ( Where W is energy requirement in kWh/short ton (1 short ton = 907 kg) for crushing particles from a grain-size distribution characterized by Conversion of Insert Eqn. The cutting's required kinetic energy impacting on the comminution target of JMB can be expressed as It is understood that cuttings' crushing and comminuting energy should be from the rotating JMB, rotating drill string, flowing gas and jet mills in the JMB, while cuttings-size reduction in the jet mills of JMB occurs by impacting, dissociation of fluid wedge effect, collision or shearing by cutting–cutting or cuttings-wall interactions. If the fraction of cutting's crushing and comminuting energy from impacting on the comminution target of JMB is Substituting Eqn. The derivation of the minimum length of accelerating tube in JMB is based upon the following assumptions: (1) when the cutting is entrapped into the accelerating tube in JMB, its initial velocity equals to zero, namely The drag force on the cutting is given by The gravity is expressed as Insert Eqn. In the equation, the drag coefficient, C, is a function of the Reynolds number, Re, and while Assume Eqn. While In Eqn. Substituting Eqn. Substituting Eqn. Rearranging Eqn. (1) For In horizontal gas drilling (2) For