Boehmite, rather than gibbsite, precipitation has been proposed in the literature as a potential energy-saving modification of the Bayer process for the production of alumina. Previous experimental studies have reported that true equilibrium solubilities were not attained during boehmite precipitation. Instead, a pseudo-equilibrium or an apparent ‘steady-state’ aluminate concentration of about twice the boehmite solubility was reached. In this work, the dissolution and precipitation reactions in synthetic and plant liquors using seeds of (i) pure boehmite and (ii) various boehmite/gibbsite ratios were investigated at 95°C. Only boehmite precipitation was observed on pure boehmite seed at relatively low supersaturation (alumina (A)/total caustic (TC)≲0.56). The aluminate concentrations measured as a function of time decreased continuously and did not exhibit an apparent ‘steady state’. Stable equilibrium, as established by boehmite solubility measurements, was approached very slowly but not attained even after ten weeks. At higher supersaturation (A/TC≈0.67), after an initial desupersaturation, ‘steady-state’ aluminate concentrations of about twice the boehmite solubility were observed. There is convincing evidence that these ‘steady states’ correspond to metastable solubility equilibria with gibbsite, which is precipitated initially and gradually transforms into the stable phase, boehmite. Gibbsite also nucleated in the case of pure boehmite seeds. ‘Steady states’ were attained in one up to several days and remained constant for one to ten days. The length of these periods correlated with the gibbsite content of the seeds. After sufficient recrystallisation of gibbsite to boehmite, the aluminate concentrations decreased significantly and eventually approached boehmite solubility, thereby following a much slower precipitation kinetics typical for boehmite. Due to short observation times, previous workers did not detect the end of the ‘steady-state’ periods and therefore failed to identify the observed ‘steady-state’ aluminate concentrations as arising from metastable solubility equilibria with gibbsite.The Bayer process is commonly used for the production of alumina, Al The aluminate-depleted caustic solution is recycled back to the digestion stage and alumina is finally produced from gibbsite (‘trihydrate’) through the removal of (3 Boehmite, AlOOH(cr) (‘monohydrate’), contains only (1 In addition, boehmite precipitation should increase the alumina yield because it has a lower solubility than gibbsite ( Another, hitherto unexplained, obstacle to a ‘boehmite route’ concerns the occurrence of ‘steady-state’ aluminate concentrations during the precipitation of boehmite from Bayer liquors ( In this study, we investigate dissolution and precipitation reactions of gibbsite and boehmite, as a function of supersaturation, in synthetic and plant liquors at 95 Dissolution and precipitation reactions were carried out in a special solubility apparatus developed at Murdoch University ( Measurements were performed with boehmite, gibbsite or their mixtures as solid phases at a temperature of 95 For each TC, two sets of liquors with different aluminate contents corresponding to under- and supersaturation respectively, were tested. In the case of synthetic liquors, the undersaturated solutions were NaOH solutions made up to the appropriate TC. Undersaturated plant liquors were prepared by seeded precipitation of aluminium trihydroxide at room temperature over several weeks. The resulting solutions were filtered through 0.45 In this study, the seed loading was 10 X-ray diffraction phase analyses of solids as well as the chemical analyses of liquor were performed by Alcoa (TDG, Kwinana). The presence of gibbsite and boehmite was analysed for using a Philips X'Pert Multi-purpose X-ray diffractometer. The relative amounts of gibbsite and boehmite were estimated from the measured diffraction pattern by a calibration method based on standards prepared by combining known amounts of pure boehmite and gibbsite. Standards comprising 0%, 1%, 2%, 5% gibbsite were used to develop a quantitative analysis program. Boehmite is included in the method, but not calibrated for. The 0% gibbsite standard sample was also examined as a qualitative scan to ensure there was no gibbsite present. The uncertainty in this method has been tested internally at Alcoa, using three different operators and a range of freshly prepared samples of known quantities of gibbsite and boehmite. The variability was found to be The aluminate liquor composition analyses were performed using the Connop titration method ( The Murdoch Bayer liquor model, incorporated into the BAYER.EXE v5.15 software ( The experimental results obtained in this study are shown in Results of solubility and precipitation measurements of boehmite in synthetic liquors of TC Precipitation experiments with pure boehmite at lower supersaturation (A/TC In contrast, the precipitation kinetics from synthetic liquors of TC When transformation of gibbsite to boehmite proceeded, it was indeed observed that aluminate concentrations decreased in all cases. Solids harvested from synthetic liquors with boehmite in the seed material contained only traces of gibbsite or no gibbsite at all. On the other hand, XRD phase analysis showed that synthetic liquors seeded with pure gibbsite still contained gibbsite as the “significant” solid phase together with “traces” of boehmite even after 4 In the present study, progressive dilution of the liquors during the ‘steady-state’ periods was in fact measured analytically. Metastable solubility equilibria with gibbsite and corresponding ‘steady state’ concentrations were also established from undersaturation (Experiments 210v&w). The small ‘gap’ shown in The present results indicate that gibbsite not only precipitates on seed material containing gibbsite (between 2 and 20% w/w) but also on pure boehmite seed, evidenced by a ‘steady state’ corresponding to metastable equilibrium with gibbsite. This result might be explained by heterogeneous nucleation of gibbsite on boehmite surfaces at these relatively high supersaturations (A/TC Results of solubility and precipitation measurements of boehmite in plant liquors of TC Similar to synthetic liquors, at lower supersaturation (A/TC At higher supersaturation (A/TC The main difference between plant and synthetic liquors concerns the onset and the duration of the ‘steady-state’ periods, both of which depended on the gibbsite content of the seed material. For pure gibbsite seed (Experiment 210m), the ‘steady-state’ aluminate concentration was attained after one day and lasted for two weeks, while for pure boehmite seed (Experiment 210h), these periods were five days and one day respectively (as compared to two days and more than a week, respectively, for synthetic liquors). The corresponding times for boehmite/gibbsite seed mixtures (Experiments 210j–l) fell in between these extremes. The dependence of the onset and duration of the ‘steady-state’ periods on the gibbsite content is more pronounced than for synthetic liquors and may indicate some ‘mixed’ kinetics due to the precipitation of both boehmite and gibbsite. The reason for this may lie in the presence of organic species in the plant liquors, some of which are known to retard gibbsite crystallisation while affecting boehmite precipitation kinetics to a much lesser extent ( The desupersaturation curves at high supersaturation were generally measured for three weeks, which is at least 2.5 times longer than in previous studies. At the end of the ‘steady-state’ periods, the liquor aluminate content decreased significantly, particularly when the seed contained boehmite. The resulting curves, which were very similar to those observed for boehmite precipitation at low supersaturation, approached boehmite solubilities. This is especially obvious for sample 210e ( As a consequence of the potential energy savings to the Bayer process as outlined above, the precipitation of boehmite from supersaturated sodium aluminate solutions has been studied by a number of workers at temperatures below 100  Several authors studied the effect of initial supersaturation on the nature of the precipitates.  While at 150 This study provides compelling evidence that the apparent ‘steady-state’ or pseudo-equilibrium concentrations observed during seeded boehmite precipitation from liquors of high initial supersaturation (A/TC In contrast, this study found that only boehmite precipitated on pure boehmite seed at relatively low supersaturation (A/TC Taken collectively, the present results suggest that the ‘mystery’ of the boehmite ‘solubility gap’, i.e. the reported occurrence of an apparent ‘steady-state’ aluminate concentration during the precipitation of ‘boehmite’ from Bayer liquors has been resolved. We have shown that initial precipitation of gibbsite leads to ‘steady-state’ aluminate concentrations of about twice the boehmite solubility, in accordance with reports from the literature. The experimental ‘steady-state’ aluminate concentrations agreed well with the results of gibbsite solubility measurements obtained from undersaturation under essentially the same conditions. The reliability of the experimental data was corroborated by the good agreement with results calculated using our Bayer liquor model encapsulated in the BAYER.EXE software ( Significant technical assistance from Ms Raquel Taylor and TDG analysts (Alcoa) is gratefully acknowledged.