A population balance model is used to describe the flocculation of tailings particles in aqueous salt solutions. The synthetic tailings, composed of quartz and kaolin particles, are flocculated in a jar at a constant shear rate where in-situ FBRM determines the size of the aggregates. The model follows the dynamics of aggregation and breakage processes and provides a good approximation to the temporal evolution of aggregate size. The fractal and permeable nature of the aggregates are considered, while the depletion of the collision efficiency allows describing the initial growth of aggregates and subsequent size reduction. The numerical solution requires five parameters, which are obtained by minimizing the difference between experimental size data and model predictions. A specific aim is to study the effect of magnesium hydroxide that is formed at pH ca. 10, and its interaction with flocculant, on the flocculation kinetics parameters. At pH ≥ 10 the aggregates grow less due to the presence of the magnesium hydroxide gel that surrounds quartz, kaolin and flocculant. The fractal dimension is quite stable at pH < 10 with a representative value of 2.7, typical of a clustered network, although in the presence of magnesium at pH ≥ 10 the fractal dimension of the aggregates is only 2.2, typical of Gaussian chains. Tailings aggregates in the presence of hydroxide are smaller and weakly three-dimensional and therefore contribute little to the settling velocity. The aggregation and breakage parameters are largely constant for a particulate system which composition remains unchanged over a pH range, and if the composition changes, for example by precipitation of magnesium hydroxide, then the aggregation parameters are different but close to constant.Low-grade ore deposits, shortage of water resources and seawater used directly or partially desalinated have created a challenging scenario for the sustainability of the mining industry. A great challenge is the effective closing of the water circuit, ideally with a modest water makeup, which involves optimizing the thickener stage for efficient solid-liquid separation. Fine particles from old deposits that remain in suspension require high molecular weight flocculants to collect them in large flocs heavy enough to decant by gravity Commonly, copper concentration operations are carried out at alkaline pH (pH > 10.5), which implies that both mineral particles and flocculant molecules develop negative surface charges. This determines that the mineral-flocculant affinity is low, although sufficient to produce porous aggregates of low density to easy the transport to the final destination in tailings dams. Experimental evidence shows that the adsorption of the polymer on the mineral requires the mediation of multivalent ions, otherwise, the adsorption is low In fresh water, it is common for the flotation and thickening operations to be carried out at pH 10–12. In seawater, at a strongly alkaline pH, typical hydroxides are generated in the form of specific complexes Ca(OH) The phenomena involved during the particle aggregation process determine the efficiency of the operations of thickening and transport to tailings dam. Therefore, flocculation studies have focused at the microscopic level on the measurement of properties of aggregates, such as size distribution. Several techniques can be used for this purpose The PBM models are increasingly robust and predictive. To this end, modifications have been introduced to the Smoluchowski equation to represent more complex systems that include aggregation and disaggregation, apart from numerical techniques that facilitate calculations. One of these improvements is the early work of Hounslow et al. In the present work, a population balance model is applied to the flocculation of fine tailings particles with a high-molecular-weight polymeric flocculant in aqueous solutions containing magnesium, including natural seawater, for a wide range of pH. The chosen flocculant is commonly used in solid-liquid separation in the mineral processing industry. The aim is to study the effect of magnesium hydroxide, which is formed at a pH ca. 10, and the hydroxide-polymer interaction on the kinetics of flocculation and the impact on the parameters of the model and its predictive capability. The ultimate goal is to provide new insight into the flocculation of tailings particles that contribute to sustainable water management for a sustainable mining industry. The population balance equation (PBE) used in this work is derived from the work proposed by Spicer and Pratsinis The aggregation kernel Is has been shown that fluid flow can penetrate through particle aggregates The porosity Collision frequency by gravity sedimentation is neglected because densities are similar. There are several expressions for collision efficiency depending on the type of aggregate and polymer used. Here, the depletion of adsorbed high molecular weight polymer and its reorganization on the surface of the particles is represented by an exponential decay between two fitted parameters, as in the recent work of Vajihinejad & Soares The There are several ways to define the breakage distribution function The shear rate required by the aggregation and breakage kernels is calculated from Heath et al. If the data is available, Eq. To solve the stiff ODEs in Eq. ation Two criteria validate the model fit and predictions, one is the coefficient of determination ( Finally, conservation of the total volume of particles is verified after every integration to ensure that the simulations are maintaining the particle population. High purity kaolinite (Ward’s Science) with density of 2.6 g/cm  With these conditions and the viscosity of the different solutions, Flocculation experiments were conducted using a PTFE-coated 30 mm turbine type stirrer, placed in axial position in a vessel of 100 mm in diameter and 1 l capacity. All the experiments were performed by placing the stirrer 20 mm above the vessel bottom. A volume of 232.2 ml of salt solution, either 0.01 M CaCl Batch settling tests were conducted after 30 s of flocculant-suspension mixing in closed cylinders of 300 cm Solving the PBM equations for a given suspension requires the initial number concentration of particles for each size class and per unit volume of suspension ( For all suspensions considered, at low pH ca. 10 the initial distribution is skewed towards the smaller sizes, however at pH greater than ca. 10 the distribution is skewed towards the larger sizes. The change is slightly more gradual in CaCl To determine the fractal dimension, we simply follow the methodology of Heath et al.  Of great interest is the effect of different brines and pH on the optimized parameters of the model. The results obtained with the PBM on the flocculation process of tailings particles show an interesting result ( A more detailed analysis of The breakage rate in terms of aggregate size is shown in Eqs. These results are a consequence of the truly tree-dimensional clustered network of tailings particles that forms at pH < 10, which is highly permeable especially if the size of the aggregates is large, but not as much as the weakly three-dimensional structure that it is formed in MgCl Next, the temporal evolution of the permeability of the tailings aggregates is determined by replacing the diameter of aggregates of given size class with the measured mean diameter of aggregates as a function of pH in brines and seawater.  To test the predictive capacity of PBM with the parameters determined in the preceding sections, new experiments were carried out to determine the kinetics of flocculation of tailings particles in seawater at pH 7.8, 8.4 and 8.7. Pulps with the same composition and percentage of solids were considered as in the trials in section 4.3. The size of primary particles is again 5 µm. Also, the same flocculant and the same operating conditions are used, that is, temperature, flocculant dose, and agitation time and intensity. The flocculation of fine particles of tailings with a high-molecular-weight anionic polymer flocculant in aqueous salt solutions, including natural seawater, revealed that in the presence of ionic magnesium at pH The manuscript was written through the contributions of all authors. JR, PR and RIJ designed and performed the experiments, GRQ performed the calculations, RIJ, GRQ and PGT analyzed the results and wrote the manuscript. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors thank financial support from