In this work, high performance thin layer liquid chromatography (HTPLC) is applied to the determination of sugars in fast pyrolysis liquids (bio-oil) and fractions thereof. The proposed procedure allows the separation of anhydrosugar levoglucosan and cellobiosan, as well as glucose, arabinose, xylose and cellobiose. Pre-treatment and derivatization of samples are not necessary and volatile compounds present in bio-oil do not interfere with sugar analysis. The detrimental effect of the complex bio-oil matrix on columns and detector lifetime is avoided by using disposable HTPLC plates. Prior screening of glucose, present especially in aged and aqueous bio-oil fractions, is required to quantify cellobiosan without interference. Concentrations of levoglucosan and cellobiosan in bio-oil samples obtained from Pinus radiata sawdust were ranged between 1.27–2.26% and 0.98–1.96% respectively, while a bio-oil sample obtained from native wood contained a higher levoglucosan concentration.Bio-oil, the liquid product of fast biomass pyrolysis, is attracting considerable interest as a renewable source of liquid fuels and chemicals. There are several methods for thermal biomass conversion. One of them is fast pyrolysis, which maximizes the yield of this liquid fuel Characterization of bio-oil is a challenge and several analytical techniques must be applied to obtain a detailed product distribution which is still incomplete. Only about 40% of bio-oil compounds can be quantified by gas chromatography (GC), especially volatile and thermostable compounds The ‘sugar’ fraction of bio oil has particular interest as a fuel and as a source of chemicals. As chemical, levoglucosan (1,5-anhydro-β- The main compounds in the ‘sugar’ fraction are levoglucosan ( For rough determination of ‘sugars’ in bio-oil, a method based on solvent fractionation of the water soluble fraction and analysis by refractive index has been proposed Other sugars, like monosaccharides, disaccharides and polysaccharides have of course been determined in different matrices (e.g., food, drugs and human fluids) using high performance thin layer chromatography (HPTLC) The main aim of this work is to determine sugars, especially anhydrosugars in bio-oil and fractions thereof, by using a HPTLC technique. This offers great advantages in biomass pyrolysis research, especially considering that bio-oils are complex matrices with different kinds of compounds, some of which can be retained in the HPLC column and damage it. For GC analysis, sugars need complex derivatization procedures. On the other hand, bio-oil has many volatile compounds that will not remain on the plate after sample application and will not interfere with sugar separation. HPTLC has the additional advantage over HPLC that the separation layer (the plate) is used just once, so compounds that are irreversibly bonded to the plate are not important. Because the separated analyte remains on the plate after chromatography, multiple development procedures that definitely improve separation can be used, giving reproducible and confident quantitative results, especially if, as in this work, the Automatic Development Chamber (ADC2) is used. Levoglucosan (1,6-anhydro-β- The HPTLC system was constituted by a Scanner 3 spectrodensitometer, running winCATS 1.4.3 software, an automatic application band device ATS 4 and an automatic developing chamber ADC 2, all from CAMAG (Muttenz, Switzerland). Chromatographic plates were 20 Stock solutions of sugars were prepared in methanol/water 70/30 (v/v) at 1.0 The samples were weighted on analytical balance and dissolved in methanol. This last step was carried out at the moment of analysis, because methanol can react over time with compounds present in bio-oil. Generally, sugars can react with acids, esters or alcohols by acid catalysis Bio-oil samples (1, 2, 3 and 4) were produced in a bench-scale pyrolysis plant at the Metallurgical Engineering Department of the University of Concepción. In each run, oven-dry sawdust was fed into a fluidized bed reactor using nitrogen and pyrolyzed in contact with hot sand. After removing char, bio-oil was condensed and collected in two catch pots. The first one collected was the main liquid product after the condenser and cyclone; the second one collected was bio-oil drops trapped in a demister. Bio-oil samples 1 and 4 were obtained by mixing the two liquid products, while bio-oils 2 and 3 were samples of the two liquids. In addition, three bio-oil fractions were prepared from bio-oil 4 for ‘sugar’ analysis in different matrices: a water insoluble lignin derived precipitate, an aqueous phase and an organic extract obtained as described below. 100 20 HPTLC silica–gel plates were impregnated with anhydrous di-potassium phosphate (0.2 Different mobile phases were evaluated in order to detect glucose, especially in aged bio-oil samples. Finally the separation was carried out on plates without impregnation and using butanol/formic acid 45:5 (v/v)  In Linearity, detection and quantification limits and intermediate precision (the latter measured with a bio-oil sample) are summarized in The determination of anhydrosugars in crude bio-oil and fractions can be affected by the presence of glucose, produced by first-order hydrolysis reactions of levoglucosan and cellobiosan. The decay in anhydrosugar concentrations was notorious in aqueous fractions of bio-oil and aged bio-oil samples. Hence, for quantification of the main sugars in bio-oil and aqueous fractions, the presence of glucose must be established. This separation has not been studied before using any chromatographic method. The first results of HPTLC analysis showed good separation between levoglucosan and cellobiosan, but not between cellobiosan and glucose. Different mobile phases were studied for HPTLC separation of cellobiosan from glucose (butanol/boric acid (100 Considering that this procedure is effective only to separate glucose from cellobiosan, it was used just for screening purposes, avoiding the overestimation of cellobiosan due to the presence of glucose. Based on this fact,  Analysis revealed no presence of glucose, cellobiose, or arabinose in the freshly produced bio-oils. Analytical signals for xylose were observed, but their values were below the detection limit of the methodology (see The raw material for the production of bio-oils 1–3 was sawdust of The bio-oils 2 and 3 were collected at different steps of the pyrolysis condensation train: bio oil 2 at the exit of the cyclone after the condenser, and bio oil 3 at the bottom of the demister. The presence of anhydrosugars in bio-oil 3 shows that high-molecular-weight compounds are not condensed and are not trapped effectively in the condenser and these are carried over to the demister. Pyrolysis products tend to form aerosols difficult to trap successfully. In this case, no final electrostatic precipitator has been used. Common bio-oil fractionation schemes start by removing high-molecular-weight compounds derived from lignin by the addition of water and precipitation. A heavy, viscous organic fraction settles down and sticks to the walls of the recipient. However, if an excess of cold water and a homogenizer are used, a fine precipitate can be collected. In An alternative bio-oil fractionation scheme involves an organic polar solvent that dissolves the hydrophobic lignin compounds, giving a lighter organic phase and a heavier water fraction. In the case of bio-oil extracted with Our results show that a high percentage of sugars still remain in the pyrolytic lignin fraction, obtained either by dispersion using water or organic polar solvent, producing both treatments similar sugar levels. Another dispersion step, using water, followed by filtration and washing could allow the separation between anhydrosugar and pyrolytic lignin. The HPTLC technique displays a major advantage in the analysis of bio-oil samples than other expensive or laborious procedures using HPLC or GC: no sample pre-treatment and disposable HPTLC plates providing a new separation layer for each sample. The proposed HPTLC method shows adequate analytical parameters for the quantification of main sugars in bio-oil samples and their fractions. In addition, the same methodology can be used to quantify the main sugars in different bio-oil extracts (butanolic, pyrolytic lignin and aqueous extract) with adequate intermediate precision. In all studied bio-oils, cellobiosan and levoglucosan were detected but not xylose, arabinose and cellobiose. On the other hand, glucose screening of bio-oil samples is needed, because of its interference with cellobiosan, especially for aged bio-oil samples. A separation using butanol/formic acid as mobile phase allows for this purpose. Considering this fact, a scheme for the determination of principal sugars in bio-oil samples is proposed. Separation of anhydrosugars from pyrolytic lignin is complex. To achieve their separation, an additional resuspension in water may be necessary. The authors thank the financial support received from