Excessive bone resorption by osteoclasts relative to bone formation by osteoblasts results in the development of osteoporosis. Anti-osteoporotic agents that are able both to inhibit bone resorption and to stimulate bone formation are not available. We now show that water-soluble nacreous factors prepared from the pearl oyster Pteria martensii prevent osteoporotic bone loss associated with estrogen deficiency in mice mainly through osteoclast inactivation. Nacreous factors stimulated osteoblast biomineralization in vitro in association with activation of signaling by c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) and Fos-related antigen-1 (Fra-1). They also suppressed both osteoclast formation by blocking up-regulation of nuclear factor of activated T cells cytoplasmic 1 (NFATc1) as well as bone pit formation mediated by mature osteoclasts, likely by disrupting the actin ring of these cells. Our findings thus show that the components of a natural material have beneficial effects on bone remodeling that are mediated through regulation of both osteoblast and osteoclast function. They may thus provide a basis for the development of biomimetic bone material as well as anti-osteoporotic agents.Bone is a dynamic tissue that provides mechanical support and physical protection of soft tissues in the vertebrate body as well as serves as a mineral reservoir to supply the needs of other tissues Osteoclastic bone resorption involves mineral dissolution and matrix protein degradation Natural products analogous to bone might be expected to contain bioactive molecules able to promote biomineralization and to stimulate bone formation by osteoblasts. One such product, nacre (also known as mother of pearl), consists of 95–99% crystalline calcium carbonate (aragonite) and 1–5% organic matrix Although several studies have independently reported a possible action of nacre in osteoblastic bone formation and osteoclastic bone resorption, no directly coordinated evidence between nacre and bone remodeling has been demonstrated. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of water-soluble nacreous factors (WSNF) on bone remodeling both in an ovariectomized (OVX)-induced osteoporotic mouse model and in an osteoblast and osteoclast cell culture system. α-Minimum essential medium (α-MEM), fetal bovine serum (FBS), antibiotics, and trypsin-EDTA were obtained from Hyclone (Logan, UT, USA). Macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) and RANKL were kindly provided by Yongwon Choi (University of Pennsylvania). Ascorbic acid, β-glycerophosphate, hematoxylin, eosin, alizarin red S, cetylpyridinium chloride, and fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated phalloidin were obtained from Sigma–Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Antibodies to phosphorylated ERK (Thr WSNF were prepared as described previously Eight-week-old female ddY mice (Central Lab Animals, Seoul, Korea) were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of Avertin and subjected to bilateral ovariectomy or sham surgery, as described previously Primary osteoblast precursors were prepared from the calvaria of newborn C57BL/6J mice (Central Lab Animals) by five sequential digestions with 0.2% dispase II and 0.1% collagenase type IA. Cells isolated in fractions 2–5 were pooled and cultured until they achieved 90% confluence in α-MEM supplemented with 10% FBS. For examination of mineralized nodule formation, osteoblast precursors (1 × 10 Bone marrow–derived mononuclear osteoclast precursors were prepared from the tibia and femur of 6-week-old male C57BL/6J mice as described A retroviral vector for a hemagglutinin epitope (HA)-tagged constitutively active form of NFATc1 (pMX-Ca-NFATc1) as well as a control vector (pMX) were described previously For RT-PCR analysis, total RNA was extracted from cells with the use of the Trizol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), and 3 μg of the RNA were subjected to RT followed by PCR with the use of a Thermo Hybaid PCR Express system (Thermo Hybaid, Ulm, Germany). PCR primers were synthesized by Bionics (Seoul, Korea), and their sequences are listed in For statistical analysis, all data were presented as means ± SD from at least three independent experiments. Data with more than three groups were assessed by analysis of variance (ANOVA) using the SPSS 18.0 software package. When significant differences were found, the two-tailed Student's We prepared powdered nacre by grinding the inner layer of the shell of the pearl oyster Analysis of the inorganic and organic components of WSNF revealed the presence of sodium, calcium, potassium, phosphorus, iron, and zinc as well as lipid and protein ( We next examined whether WSNF might potentiate osteoblast formation in an osteogenic culture system To identify possible mediators of WSNF-induced osteoblastogenesis, we examined various signaling molecules that are necessary for osteoblast differentiation. RT-PCR analysis showed that the amounts of mRNAs for transcription factors required for the osteoblastic phenotype, such as RUNX2 (encoded by Given that the increased osteoclast formation in OVX mice was inhibited by administration of WSNF ( To investigate the molecular mechanism underlying the inhibitory effect of WSNF on osteoclast formation, we examined early and late RANKL signaling. Immunoblot analysis revealed that WSNF suppressed RANKL-induced late responses including the up-regulation of c-Fos and NFATc1 Finally, we measured the bone-resorbing capacity of mature osteoclasts in the presence of WSNF. The resorbed area of pits formed by mature osteoclasts on dentine slices was markedly reduced by the addition of WSNF ( The ultimate goal in the development of anti-osteoporotic agents is bone improvement by simultaneous osteoblast stimulation and osteoclast inhibition and with no undesirable side effects. To achieve this goal, we have examined natural materials for such anti-osteoporotic agents. In the present study, we selected nacre, which is functionally and microstructurally similar to human bone Hard tissue biomineralization results in the formation of a skeleton composed of calcium phosphate in vertebrates and in that of a shell composed of calcium carbonate in invertebrates Despite the differences between bone and nacre, we have now found that WSNF ameliorated osteoporotic bone loss associated with estrogen deficiency in mice mainly through osteoclast inactivation and possibly through osteoblast activation. Nacre has been shown to contain osteogenic factors ranging from small inorganic and organic components to large matrix proteins Our data suggest that WSNF inhibit osteoclast maturation and bone resorption by respectively preventing the up-regulation of NFATc1 and inducing disruption of the actin ring that forms at the sealing zone of active osteoclasts and is critical for bone resorption. Remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton in osteoclasts is regulated by a signaling pathway including integrin α Newly synthesized bone forms around implanted nacre, and nacre particles are slowly dissolved by active osteoclasts in bone with limited degradation The development of therapeutic agents for osteoporosis is ultimately required to prevent bone resorption and to enhance bone formation. However, uncoupling agents that display antiresorptive and anabolic functions have not yet been developed. In this regard, we have now shown that a natural material–derived preparation, WSNF, modulates bone remodeling by inhibiting osteoclast differentiation and function and stimulating osteoblast function. These effects resulted in prevention of osteoporotic bone loss associated with estrogen deficiency in mice. Further studies are warranted to apply nacreous factors to the development of bone substitutes and anti-osteoporotic agents for humans. We thank J. S. Bae (Uiseong Oriental Medicine Hospital, Korea) for helpful discussion on the clinical efficacy of nacre. This work was supported, in part, by grants from the Korea Healthcare Technology R&D Project,  Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at