The mineralogical analysis of a sphalerite concentrate by electron-microprobe shows that the main indium-bearing minerals are pyrite, zinckenite, galena, cassiterite, jamesonite. The kinetics of indium dissolution from sphalerite concentrate in the sulphuric acid–oxygen system indicated that the particle size, temperature and sulphuric acid concentration significantly influenced the leaching efficiencies of indium. The experimental data indicated that under the conditions employed up to 92% indium extraction were achieved. The empirical kinetic model, −ln(1−
                     x)=
                     kt was used to describe the dissolution kinetics of indium in sulphuric acid solutions, and the results showed that indium dissolution process was controlled by chemical reaction with the activation energies calculated to be 47kJ/mol and the reaction order with respect to sulphuric acid concentration closed to 1.Indium is an important metal in a variety of high-tech applications including semiconductors, solar cells and display devices such as LCDs (liquid crystal displays) ( The extraction of indium from sphalerite may include the following steps. Firstly, indium is extracted into solution by pressure acid leaching, then ferric is removed by the method of jarosite, and indium goes into jarosite. In order to recovery indium, jarosite residue is dissolved using hot sulfuric acid solution. In some times indium is also directly extracted from leach solution by D2EHPA ( The chemical composition of the sphalerite concentrate used in the present study is shown in From The leaching apparatus and experimental procedure were similar to that described previously ( All the experiments were performed with grains of the size 48–42 The effect of particle size on leaching of sphalerite concentrate was studied using different size fractions (147–106 These results present that particle size has a significant effect on the extraction of indium from sphalerite concentrate and show a decrease in particle size enhances indium dissolution. However, when the particle size smaller than 58  The influence of sulphuric acid concentration on the degree of indium leaching was investigated in the solutions containing different initial sulphuric acid concentrations (1.0, 1.5, 2.0 and 2.5 For determining the kinetic parameters and the rate-controlling step of this work, Sharp's method of reduced half time of reaction was used to select the kinetic models ( It is possible to determine the values of the reaction half time and time for different degrees of leaching, for each temperature in The experimental results for various conditions plotted according to Eq. From the plot of −ln(1 From the results presented the following can be concluded: According to the mineralogical analysis, no special indium bearing minerals are identified from the X-ray diffraction patterns. By electron-microprobe analysis the main indium-bearing minerals in the sample are pyrite, zinckenite, galena, cassiterite, and jamesonite. The leaching kinetics of indium from a sphalerite concentrate was investigated by pressure oxygen leaching in sulphuric acid. It was found that the temperature, sulphuric acid concentration and particle size had a pronounced influence on indium dissolution, with increasing the temperature and sulphuric acid concentration the indium leaching rate improved a lot. The experimental data indicated that under the conditions employed up to 92% indium extraction were achieved. The empirical first order kinetic model, −ln(1− The authors gratefully acknowledge the