Pyrite is a gangue mineral in the flotation of sphalerite activated by copper sulphate (CS). In this study, the attachment of air bubbles onto sphalerite and pyrite surfaces activated by CS was comparatively studied using a novel approach with High-Speed Video Microscopy (HSVM) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS). HSVM allowed for the in-situ determination of the liquid film Drainage Rate (DR) and Contact Angle (CA) of the bubble attachment. The results showed that after the activation sphalerite became hydrophobic by the formation of polysulphide as confirmed by XPS while pyrite remained hydrophilic. With increasing activation time and CS concentration, both DR and CA on the sphalerite surface rapidly increased at the beginning and reached constant values, while those on pyrite remained unchanged. The changes in the CA values of the sphalerite was successfully modelled by considering a second-order rate process for the CS activation which was proportional to initial copper concentration and available Zn active sites on the sphalerite surface. If both sphalerite and pyrite were simultaneously exposed to CS solutions (but not in the physical contact), the rate of CS activation of sphalerite remained unchanged when the ratio of sphalerite to pyrite surface areas exposed to CS solutions was equal to 1:1. However, the activation rate of sphalerite significantly dropped with increasing the sphalerite:pyrite surface area ratio from 1:3 to 1:6. The effect of the surface area ratio on the CS activation rate was prominent at activation times higher than 3min. The XPS results for the mixed minerals showed the reduction in sphalerite Cu/Zn exchange and polysulphide/Cu ratios with increasing available pyrite surface area in CS solutions, indicating the significant drop in the CS activation of sphalerite in the presence of pyrite. The outcomes of this study provided further insights into the selective flotation of sphalerite from pyrite.The activation mechanism of sphalerite (ZnS) by copper sulphate (CS) prior to adsorption of xanthate in flotation has been extensively studied in literature ( CS activation kinetics of sphalerite in the absence of many other minerals has been widely investigated (  Despite comprehensive studies on the CS activation of sphalerite, there is a relative paucity of comparative studies into the CS adsorption kinetics of mixed sphalerite and pyrite, and the possible competition between sphalerite and pyrite for Cu ions. This paper focuses on the probable competition between sphalerite and pyrite during the CS activation using in-situ High-Speed Video Microscopy (HSVM) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) techniques to monitor hydrophobicity, surface components of sphalerite after CS activation in the presence of pyrite with the different surface area, and the Cu activation kinetics. This study aims to gain a better understanding of the effect of pyrite on the CS activation kinetics of sphalerite and the selective flotation of sphalerite. The sphalerite and pyrite samples were obtained from Wards Scientific (USA). They were cut into 5 The experimental setup for monitoring the liquid film drainage and bubble-surface contact interaction is shown in Before each experiment, the prepared mineral samples were wet polished using #1200 polishing paper for 1 The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis was carried out using a Kratos Axis ULTRA X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer incorporating a 165 Atomic concentrations were calculated using the CasaXPS version 2.3.14 software and a Shirley baseline with Kratos library relative sensitivity factors. Peak fitting of the high-resolution data was also carried out using the CasaXPS software. The XPS spectra were corrected using the main line of the carbon 1 The attachment of hydrophobic particles to air bubbles is a well-known process in froth flotation. A few steps involved in the bubble-particle interaction in flotation are identified. HSVM videos of bubble-mineral interactions showed that there would be three steps in a bubble-mineral surface interaction as shown in When the bubble is far away from the surface, the so-called long-range hydrodynamic force strongly affects the bubble approaching the mineral surface ( Colloidal forces can significantly affect bubble-solid liquid film thinning. To define the interaction between an air bubble and a solid surface, and liquid film drainage rate, a theoretical model based on the classical Stefan-Reynolds theory was applied to planar parallel and tangentially immobile film surfaces as follows ( Colloidal forces are divided into two components: DLVO (Derjagin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek) and non-DLVO forces ( Regarding the non-DLVO forces, hydration force is a repulsive force between hydrophilic surfaces, and hydrophobic forces are attractive forces between hydrophobic surfaces. The hydration force is short-ranged ( The experimental setup shown in The image analysis from HSVM records revealed that liquid film thinning and bubble spreading (the proposed first and second steps) rate on the mineral surface significantly increased with increasing CS concentration and time. This behaviour is the result of the development of hydrophobic species on the treated mineral surface. Consequently, a stronger hydrophobic attraction force between the mineral surface and the bubble leads to a faster liquid film drainage rate. It is the link between the changes in the hydrophobicity of the mineral surface and the drainage rate (DR).  However, the CS-activated sphalerite displayed an increasing trend of DR with increasing the activation time. It clearly indicated that more hydrophobic species were formed on the mineral surface during the activation process. The recorded maximum DR of 0.142 The contact angle in mineral bubble interaction is determined by properties of the mineral surface and its interaction with air and water. Those interactions are defined by cohesive and adhesive The contact angle can also be changed with the dynamics of bubble-surface attachment, i.e., the spreading of the bubble-surface contact radius (area). It was found that the contact angle measured at the maximum bubble spreading stage at maximum contact radius ( In the activation of sphalerite by Cu ions, the second-order kinetics is anticipated since the rate of Cu adsorption is proportional to the concentration of Cu ions in solution and the available Zn sites on the sphalerite surface. Therefore, we have Eq. Since maximum Cu adsorption and the actual amount of adsorbed Cu are much smaller than initial Cu ion concentration, Eq. It is assumed that the rate of Cu adsorbed onto the sphalerite surface is proportional to the rate of the contact angle growth. We have the following proportionality: It is noted that It is noted that contact angle increases as the activation time progresses, representing higher Cu ion adsorption on the mineral surface. The adsorption kinetics is significantly affected by initial Cu ion concentration at first 7 Different ratios (1:0, 1:1, 1:3, and 1:6) of sphalerite to pyrite surface areas exposed to CS solutions during the activation were applied to investigate the effect of pyrite on CS activation of sphalerite. CS activation of pyrite is related to the available active sites (S The Cu activation for mixed sphalerite and pyrite in 0.1 The experimental and calculated obtained contact angles on the sphalerite surfaces in different sphalerite:pyrite surface area ratios are shown in The contact angle results also confirm the results of liquid film drainage, i.e., the increasing pyrite proportion in the two minerals system consumes more Cu ions from the solution, leading slower adsorption kinetics for Cu activation of sphalerite. Moreover, these results also confirm the idea that pyrite Cu activation rate is related with the available S To validate the results of liquid film drainage and contact angle for the experiments with different ratios of sphalerite to pyrite surface areas exposed to Cu solutions, XPS was used to investigate the surface component of Cu-activated sphalerite in the presence of pyrite. High-resolution XPS spectra of single sphalerite activated by 0.1 As there is an overlapping of elemental sulphur and metal-deficient sulphides 2p peaks, those sulphides related to bulk ZnS and CuS formation are deducted from the total identified sulphides, and the remained sulphides was generally marked as polysulphides (S The results of Cu activation reveal that the Cu/Zn exchange ratios for both cases of single sphalerite and mixed sphalerite:pyrite with 1:1 surface area ratio are very close, i.e., 0.46 and 0.44, respectively. It means that Cu adsorption rate is higher for sphalerite rather than pyrite in the same available sphalerite:pyrite surface areas. However, with increasing the available pyrite surface area to 1:6 sphalerite:pyrite ratio, the Cu/Zn ratio drops to 0.34, indicating a lower Cu adsorption rate on the sphalerite surface with increasing pyrite proportion during 10 The ratio of S The bubble-mineral interactions recorded by HSVM provided many useful details about the successful attachment of bubbles onto sphalerite activated by CuSO The image analysis of the recorded bubble-mineral interactions at different Cu activation condition of sphalerite showed that the liquid film thinning rate from planar liquid film formation step to the maximum bubble spreading step or the contact angle formed at the maximum spreading step could be used to monitor the hydrophobicity of the treated mineral in-situ. The liquid film drainage and contact angle results showed that the activation of pyrite by copper sulphate showed no effect on the liquid film drainage rate or bubble-pyrite contact angle. It means that hydrophobic species cannot be formed on the Cu-activated pyrite surface which is opposite to the case of Cu activation of sphalerite. The liquid film drainage studies showed that the time required to reduce the drainage time, which is an indicative of the maximum of the Cu adsorption on sphalerite surface, increased with the decreasing CuSO Effect of different ratios of sphalerite to pyrite surface areas exposed to Cu solutions on the bubble-surface attachment was studied by taking advantage of the proposed in-situ HSVM technique and XPS. The liquid film drainage and contact angle methods showed a similar decreasing trend of Cu adsorption onto the sphalerite surface with growing the available pyrite surface area exposed to Cu solution. The XPS results also confirmed the decreasing Cu/Zn and S This study revealed that there was no adverse effect on the Cu activation of sphalerite by pyrite in the mixed sphalerite-pyrite system of the same mineral surface areas exposed to the copper sulphate solution. However, the Cu activation of sphalerite decreased with the increasing available pyrite surface areas in the other mixed mineral systems. As the sphalerite:pyrite ratio in an ore and flotation feed can fluctuate, these results can be significant for the industrial applications.