The aim of the present study is to examine the function of the two significant biological cations, Zn2+ and Sr2+, when co-doped in the structure of hydroxyapatite (HA). Six samples with different Zn2+ and Sr2+ concentrations were prepared by a hydrothermal process that includes the addition of Zn2+ and Sr2+ containing precursors to replace Ca2+ partially in the HA structure. The obtained nanomaterials were examined via XRD, ICP, FTIR, Raman spectroscopy, FESEM, TEM, and TGA for the investigation and confirmation of co-doping, crystallinity, phase purity, lattice parameters, elemental compositions, particle morphology, and thermal stability respectively. Interestingly the Zn2+ substitution increase with Sr2+ co-doping and the apatite structure going disappear up to 20%Zn10%Sr or 10%Zn20%Sr in the solution. Furthermore, in vitro cell viability even at high Zn2+ concentration (up to 6 wt %), MC3T3-E1 cells proliferated at a high rate on co-substituted HA materials, confirming that Sr2+ offset the cytotoxic effect of Zn2+ and increased the biocompatibility of the material. Moreover, the antibacterial effects of co-substituted HA against pathogen bacterial strains (E.coil and S.aureus) were also significantly increased. Overall results demonstrated that HA co-substituted by Zn2+ and Sr2+ at (10%Zn10%Sr-HA) is a potential material for hard tissue scaffolds.It is well-known that calcium phosphate (Caps) occurs in nature and has been widely studied as an active biomaterial component, particularly in the repair and regeneration of bones. Hydroxyapatite (HA) in the calcium phosphate group is highly used due to its prominent properties like chemical homogeneity and crystallographic similarity to the mineral phase in the human bones [ Strontium (Sr Zinc (Zn It has been suggested that over single ion substitution, co-substitution of Zn Although extensive previous studies have focused on Zn-substituted HA at low concentrations and demonstrate excellent bioactivity and antibacterial properties. However, previous studies reported that for the biomedical application, Zn Pure and substituted HA were synthesized by a one-step hydrothermal method. Ca (NO In a typical procedure pure HA nanocrystalline, Ca (NO Zn/Sr co-substituted HA with different Zn and Sr concentrations were prepared by replacing Ca (NO The compositions of the synthesized pure HA and substituted HA nano-powders were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using (Rigaku, Tokyo, Japan), which was scan at 40 kV and 100 mA with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) in the interval of 10⁰ ≤ 2θ ≥ 70⁰ at 0.02⁰ step size at room temperature. XRD patterns were compared to the standard database PDF patterns of HA. The degree of crystallinity (X In order to observe the functional groups of the synthesized nano-powder, attenuated total reflection-Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy was conducted on Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (Tensor27, Bruker, Germany). The sample was studied in spectra (Wave number 400-4000 cm The morphology of nano-powders was observed via using an LEO Supra 35 field emission scanning electron microscope (Zeiss, Jena, Germany). Furthermore, the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were acquired using Tecnai F30 transmission electron microscope (TEM, FEI, Hillsboro, U.S.A.). The bright-field images and selected area diffraction (SAED) patterns of pure HA and co-substituted (Sr, Zn)-HA powders were obtained. The trmogravimetric analysis was determined by TGA/DSC to examine the thermal behavior of the pure HA and co-substituted HA powders during heating. The heating was performed under Ar atmosphere using alumina crucible with 10 °C/min heating rate up to 1000 °C. 12 mm diameter disc of the synthesized nano-powders were prepared by uniaxial pressing of 0.4 g powders at 3000 psi for 30 s. To evaluate the cell proliferation on each group of samples, cell counting Kit (CCK-8) (Beyotime, China) was performed for different days via MC3T3-E1 cells. The samples (disc-shaped) were placed in 48-well plates individually, and each disc (n = 3) was seeded 2 × 10 The adhesion and distribution of MC3T3-E1 cells on all co-doped HA samples were evaluated through fluorescence microscopy. The cells were cultured for one and three days at density 1 × 10 The MC3T3-E1 cells were cultured for 72 h on pure HA and all co-substituted HA pellet surfaces. In the very next step, the samples were washed gently twice with PBS and soaked in glutaraldehyde solution (2.5% V/V) solution for 4 h to immobilize the cells. The resultant pellets were slightly again washed with PBS and dehydrated using ethanol in a series of raising concentrations (50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 95%, and 100%), respectively. The attachment and morphology of MC3T3-E1 cells on all samples were observed by SEM. Antibacterial activity of Sr All experimental data are expressed as a mean ± standard deviation (S.D). Statistical analysis was performed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a post hoc Tukey test. Statistical significance was considered P less than 0.05. The crystallinity and phase composition of synthesized nano-HA powders with varying Zn For quantitative purposes, the mean crystallite size was evaluated from the broadening of the (0 0 2) reflection, and it is due to the fact that this plan corresponds to the c crystallographic axis, is well resolved, and shows no interference. The crystallite size of the pure HA and substituted HA was measured ( The crystallinity is defined as the ratio of the crystalline phase with sample volume, corresponding to the average width of (Zn, Sr)-HA crystallite, which was summarized in ( The lattice parameters of the samples are listed in ( It is well documented that the divalent cations such as Ni The structures of the apatite in pure HA and co-substitute nanopowders were additionally confirmed via FTIR in ( SEM examination shows the morphology of pure HA and co-substituted HA with various amounts of Zn The TEM and SAED patterns shown in ( The Raman spectroscopy collected for all the synthesized materials to detect the substitutions and their effects in the apatite lattice. The peaks of the Raman spectrum in ( From ( The TG curves ( The CCK-8 test was performed to check the cytotoxic effects of a nanomaterial at different concentrations and incubation periods. All the discs were incubated with MC3T3-E1 cells for 1, 3 and 7days (  The MC3T3-E1 cellular attachment and growth rate on all pellets were observed by FESEM, and are shown in ( To evaluate the functions of ionic concentration (Ca, Zn, P, and Sr) on cell proliferation, the release profiles of Ca For Zn The antimicrobial activity of Zn The incorporation of extrinsic ions into apatite structure is of great importance because of human tissues, such as teeth and bones, composed apatite made up of small amounts of others ions such as Zn Although in this study we focused on Zn The XRD demonstrates the crystallinity change with Zn The ICP results indicate the Ca/P ratio varied with Zn The Raman studies also confirmed the crystallinity is changing with Zn The TEM results also clarified that the size of nano-rods changes with Zn The TGA result as well confirmed the co-doping by changing the weight loss. From these above supply evidence, the co-substitution of Zn The phase composition shows that the lattice parameters decrease with the addition of Zn Furthermore, the M/P (M = Ca + Zn + Sr) molar ratio decrease with the co-addition of Zn In vitro examinations of biomaterials in the cell culture medium is the primary stage to monitor the biocompatibility of the materials (before in vivo test). Biomaterials must be bioactive, biocompatible and have no cytotoxic effects on tissues and stimulate cell regeneration [ Solubility is the promising factor which determines the bio-functionality and antibacterial properties of the materials. Chemistry of the material, crystallinity, particle size and dissolution media pH are the primary factor and play a vital role in dissolution [ The performance of a material does not only depend on their dissolution, biocompatibility but also antimicrobial activity. The implant survivability and integration are preferred to present the host defense from pathogenic bacterial adhesion, which causes post-surgical wound infection, due to their high resistance and increasing frequency against the antibiotic [ HA with good thermal stability, desirable biocompatibility, antibacterial properties, resorbability and beneficial influence of Zn In the present study, pure HA and Zn The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by the