It is commonly accepted that prismatic precipitates in Mg alloys are more potent strengtheners than the ones formed on basal planes. However, in most rare-earth (RE) free Mg alloys, precipitation commonly occurs on basal planes. Recent results showed that coupling {10-12} twinning, aging and detwinning (a process termed TAD) promotes prismatic precipitation in Mg-Al alloys by a mechanism that remains unclear. The present work aims to theoretically and experimentally evaluate possible crystallographic orientation relationships (ORs) between the prismatic precipitates and the detwinned matrix in TAD processed samples in order to understand their formation mechanism. A crystallography-based algorithm is proposed to predict such ORs and the predictions are subsequently validated through experimental observation in a transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Three new ORs between Mg17Al12 precipitates and the α-Mg-Al matrix are experimentally determined, which agree well with the predictions of the proposed algorithm after considering the 3.69° rotation of precipitates at twin boundaries. Additionally, the proposed algorithm is validated in other RE free Mg alloys produced via the TAD process, including Mg-Sn-Zn, Mg-Al-Ca, Mg-Zn and Mg-Ca-Zn systems. This work provides a clearer understanding of the ORs between prismatic precipitates and the matrices of Mg alloys that is deemed critical to fully exploit their potential for precipitation hardening.In the past decades, light magnesium (Mg) alloys have received considerable attention from the automotive and aerospace industries, as they attempt to increase fuel efficiency through weight reduction Another critical factor contributing to the poor precipitation hardening response of the above-mentioned commercial Mg alloys is the orientation of the hardening phases, which have a preference to lie parallel to the basal plane of the α-Mg matrix. As basal slip is the dominant deformation mechanism in Mg alloys, the precipitation of basal plates is not very effective in inhibiting dislocation movement, thus limiting the potential of precipitation hardening [ A recent work Several studies have analyzed the dominant ORs between matrix and precipitates in Mg alloys OR-A: (0001) OR-B: (0001) Finally, the Rong-Dunlop HCP/BCC OR was reported for steels The aim of this work is to propose a new crystallography-based algorithm to predict the ORs between the α-Mg matrix and the prismatic precipitates that result from the TAD process. This algorithm is further validated in other Mg alloys in which the main strengthening phases following conventional aging treatments are also basal precipitates, including Mg-Sn-Zn [ The alloy used in this work was a hot-rolled AZ80 plate (40 mm in thickness) with a nominal composition of Mg-8 wt%Al-0.5 wt%Zn. The plate was solution treated at 420°C for 24 h, and then quenched into water at room temperature. As previously confirmed The microstructure of all CAC specimens was examined using a JEOL 2100 transmission electron microscope (TEM) operated at 200 kV. Samples for TEM examination were first cut into 0.5 mm thick slices parallel to RD-ND plane and then mechanically polished down to a thickness of 50-60 μm. Discs of 3 mm in diameter were punched from these thin slices and then ion-beam milled in a Gatan Precision Ion Polishing System (PIPS) 695 machine using a voltage of 5 kV at approximately −70°C. An ion beam incidence angle of 6° was initially used until perforation, and then this angle was reduced to 3° to flatten the surface for a few minutes.  In addition, if we assume a BOR for precipitates formed on the basal plane in a twinned Mg lattice, the precipitates may have six possible orientations within each twin variant, as shown in In the following section, the above-described algorithm will be applied specifically to calculate the ORs between the prismatic Mg  [10-10] In [10-10] In [10-10]  The actual ORs between the precipitate and the detwinned matrix in CAC samples were experimentally determined using selected area electron diffraction (SAED) in a TEM. [10-10]  [10-10] In [10-10] These three experimentally observed ORs The aforementioned three ORs  Earlier studies have reported the deflection of Mg  Here, Using Comparing these results with the ones shown in It should be noted that the above corrected ORs were derived with the assumption that the twinning shear is fully accommodated by the rigid body rotation of the precipitate. However, in reality the interaction between the precipitate and a migrating twin boundary entails a larger degree of complexity. It is generally accepted that the motion of twin boundaries is accomplished through the glide of twinning disconnections on twin planes [ The elastic rotation of the precipitate can only accommodate the screw part of the twinning simple shear. The misfit strain at the interface should be accommodated by misfit dislocations [ Another aspect to note here is that the rotation angle of the precipitate might vary slightly with the precipitate thickness, as demonstrated by MD simulations  In addition to Mg-Al alloys, some other precipitation-hardened Mg alloys, such as Mg-Sn-(Zn) [ Mg-Sn based alloys have received great attention in recent years as high-strength casting and wrought alloys Mg-Al-Ca based alloys show promising creep-resistance [ Mg-Zn based alloys are among the earliest developed precipitation hardenable Mg alloys It is well known that other four alloy systems, including Mg-Ca-Zn [ This work aims to theoretically and experimentally evaluate possible crystallographic orientation relationships (ORs) between the prismatic precipitates and the detwinned matrix in several commercial, TAD processed, Mg alloys in order to derive tools for efficient precipitation strengthening of these materials. The following conclusions can be drawn from the present study: A new crystallographic algorithm was developed to predict the ORs between the detwinned matrix and the prismatic precipitates generated as a consequence of the sequential twinning, aging, and detwinning process. This algorithm has been validated in Mg-Al alloy that involve basal precipitation. The following three new ORs were predicted between Mg OR1 OR2 OR3 A full agreement was found between these newly discovered ORs and the experimentally determined ORs in TAD processed samples. The algorithm was utilized to predict the ORs between the precipitates and the detwinned matrix in TAD processed samples of the Mg-Sn-(Zn), Mg-Al-Ca, Mg-Zn, Mg-Ca-Zn, Mg-Nd-Zn, Mg-Gd-Zn, and Mg-Gd-Ag. The following new orientations were predicted: Mg Al MgZn The present work offers a powerful tool to develop new Mg alloys with better age hardening response. This project was financially supported by the Suppose (