The affinity of Rhodococcus opacus cells for calcite and magnesite surfaces has been studied in order to evaluate its application as a flotation collector. The surface properties of minerals and R. opacus were characterized using infrared techniques. The mineral spectrums, before and after the bacterial interaction, indicated a mineral surface interaction with the R. opacus cell wall. The results were compared with the zeta potential curves as a function of the pH. The cell wall composition of R. opacus was characterized and the R. opacus hydrophobicity was either evaluated with contact angle measurements. The interfacial tension components were calculated based on the van Oss and Fowkes equations. The obtained results were supported by DLVO and X-DLVO theories for selected pH values. The results show the paramount innovation that R. opacus presents as a biocollector and its possible application in the mineral flotation industry.Bioflotation uses micro-organisms as friendly modifiers, collectors and depressants. These micro-organisms may act as bioreagents and induce hydrophobic properties once they can adhere selectively onto the mineral surface ( The micro-organism cell surface is conformed by functional groups like polymers, peptides, proteins and micolic acids ( Application of bioreagents as collectors invokes several fundamental aspects: surface charge, presence of specific hydrophobic groups and polymers compounds which deeply affect their adhesion to the mineral ( The hydrophobic behavior is associated with the bacterial species and may change depending on the functional groups, specially the presence of lipidic and proteic groups associated with the cell wall ( The bacterial adhesion onto the mineral surface can be sustained using the DLVO and the X-DLVO theories as a function of the distance and the thermodynamic approach ( The DLVO theory may consider the interaction between cells and mineral particles as the balance of van der Waals attractive forces and repulsive forces by electronic clouds as a function of the distance in between the particles ( The extended DLVO theory considers that the total forces can be affected by specific characteristics such as roughness, pilis, steric effects, acid–base interaction and hydrophobic and hydrophilic effects. These characteristics can affect the total interaction energy between cells and particles. The acid–base (AB) interactions are based on electron-donating and electron-accepting interactions and can be evaluated using the LW–AB approach and the AB surface tension components ( The thermodynamic approach compares the interfacial free energy on the interacting forces before and after adhesion ( The The aim of this paper is to contribute for a better understanding on the fundamentals of bioflotation using a hydrophobic bacteria applied to two relevant industrial Brazilian minerals as magnesite and calcite. The DLVO and X-DLVO theories and the thermodynamic approach were used as an innovator tool to evaluate the interaction between Pure calcite and magnesite mineral samples were provided by the Centre for Mineral Technology (CETEM) and Magnesite S.A., respectively. The samples were properly ground and sieved for the experimental procedures as shown in  The The cell wall associated lipids were extracted with methanol and hexane, the organic phase was weighed. The cell wall associated polysaccharides were measured using the phenol–sulfuric acid method ( Zeta potential measurements for Infrared absorption spectra were recorded on a Nicolet FTIR 2000 spectrophotometer; a KBr matrix was used as reference and a deuterated triglycine sulphate (DTGS) as detector. The data acquisition was carried out through the transmission mode. The spectra of calcite and magnesite, before and after the The The microflotation assays were carried out in a modified Hallimond tube. An amount of 0.8 The floated and unfloated minerals were thoroughly washed, filtered and weighed. The floatability was then calculated as the ratio of floated and unfloated minerals and the total weighed mineral (floated and unfloated). The acquisition of static contact angles values were carried out with a Goniometer model 100-00-115 Ramé–Hart. The surface of each mineral sample was carefully polished. The According with the method described by The classical DLVO theory considers the total interactions as the summation of electrostatic repulsive forces and London van der Waals attractive forces ( Considering the van der Waals attractive forces are given by The According with Fowkes approach, the surface energies After evaluating the individual Hamaker constant for The thermodynamic approach considers the total energy Δ  The IEP value of According to The obtained zeta potential curves for calcite and magnesite as a function of pH are in accordance with equivalent studies by Observing The IEP displacement for magnesite was more significant than for calcite after the The micro-organism cell surface is conformed by functional groups like polymers, peptides, proteins and micolic acids ( The According to the literature (  The  The FTIR spectra for magnesite and calcite, obtained before the The FTIR spectra of magnesite, after Comparing  The results obtained in the FTIR study are in good agreement with the mineral zeta potential modification, where it is observed a better affinity of the The floatability studies were performed in order to evaluate the potential use of  The results obtained in the magnesite flotation experiments ( It was observed that the highest floatability is achieved for a  The flotation results for calcite ( Flotation of calcite would be facilitated by bacterial interaction. The biopolymers, present in the Others biofloatation studies have been carried out with the carbonate minerals. The interaction energies between  The interfacial tension value obtained for The interfacial tension values obtained for magnesite and calcite were compared with the values of  Using the thermodynamic approach and analyzing the The total interaction energy for The adhesion of bacterial cells on the mineral surfaces could be possible when the bacterial cells and minerals particles are oppositely charged the electrostatic and the acid–base interactions cause the formation of a secondary minimum. Comparing Still the bacterial interaction onto the mineral surface is not clear, many theories as the DLVO–X-DLVO and thermodynamic approach have been used with the aim to predict the adhesion mechanism. The zeta potential evaluation before and after the The FTIR spectra of magnesite after The most remarkable biofloatability results for magnesite and calcite achieved, respectively, values around 93% for a Using the thermodynamic approach the results show that the total free energy value of adhesion of The authors acknowledge Professor José Farias de Oliveira, UFRJ and Professor Maria Isabel Paes da Silva, PUC-Rio for their support on the FTIR and contact angle experiments and CNPq, CAPES and FAPERJ for the financial support.