This paper presents the results of measurements and modelling the residence time distribution (RTD) in industrial flotation columns from several plants, using radioactive and salt tracers. Columns under study had different geometry (i.e. square, rectangular and circular transverse sections) and size (from ca. 2.5m3 to 180 m3). Data were obtained for liquid (both radioactive and salt tracers), floatable and non-floatable solids by size classes (radioactive tracers). Model structures including the axial dispersion, perfect mixer (PM), large and small tanks in series (LSTS) and two parallel perfect mixers were evaluated and compared. Based on the results, it is concluded that the mixing regime in flotation columns cannot be described by a unique model structure nor can they be related to the cross-sectional area or size of the columns.
                  All industrial datasets presented in this paper showed poor fitting with the perfect mixer model. On the other hand, the LSTS as well as the two parallel perfect mixers models were outstandingly flexible compared to the other structures.
                  The tests allowed the identification of the flow regime and the effective residence times of the different phases, which ranged from 9 to 41min. The RTD characterization has been useful to detect process failure such as bypass flow identification as well as unbalanced flow distributions in parallel columns at industrial scale.Since its commercial introduction in 1980, columns have emerged as important devices in the flotation process. Some of its distinctive features are generation of fine bubbles, countercurrent bubble-slurry flows, thicker froth height and the use of cleaning water ( The fluid dynamic characterization of column flotation is important for the diagnosis and optimization of existing equipment and for the design of more efficient (or larger) machines. An important feature, the residence time distribution (RTD), can be defined as the probability density function that gives the time an element spends inside a tank in a continuous flow system. Residence time distribution arises from a complex interaction between the profile velocity, diffusion and turbulence, and it greatly influences the metallurgical performance of flotation ( Tracer studies allow the description of residence time distribution curves and its utilization for system analysis ( For reliable measurements, the tracer must not (1) interact with the other phases in the system, (2) modify the properties of the fluid or (3) disturb the hydrodynamics of the system. Desirable tracer characteristics include (1) to have behaviour similar to the material under investigation ( Radiotracers have been used for RTD determination in a broad spectrum of applications at both pilot and plant scale ( Modelling RTD of real systems involves calculation of parameters from different model structures such as axial dispersion ( This paper presents RTD of industrial flotation columns from 7 different plants. Solid and liquid RTD data were recorded using both radioactive and saline tracers. The RTD were fitted to four model structures including: (1) the axial dispersion model (ADM), (2) the classical perfect mixer (PM), and two multi-stage models, namely (3) LSTS and (4) two parallel perfect mixers. The higher flexibility of the two latter allowed the description of the mixing regime in industrial flotation columns while keeping a low number of parameters. The RTD measurements were performed in seven different concentrators (A-B-C-D-E-F-G). Column flotation characteristics are shown in The radioactive tracer technique was used to determine the RTD in columns from plants A, B, C and D ( Br-82 as ammonium bromide in solution was used as liquid tracer (half-life of 36 The way the tracer is injected into the feed is critical to generate a pulse signal. A pneumatic system of high reliability has been developed to introduce a small amount of radioactive tracer (around 100 Saline tracers ( Sodium chloride concentration was determined by means conductivity measurements. Prior to the introduction of the tracer, a measurement of the electrical conductivity inside the column was taken. After the tracer was introduced, the evolution of concentration over time was evaluated. The conductivity measurements obtained were corrected by subtracting the initial value. Conductivity was then transformed to concentration using a calibration curve. When LiCl was used, atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) was performed to measure lithium concentration. Because of the high sensitivity of AAS and the fact that the analysis specifically targets the tracer (unlike conductivity measurements), the injected LiCl mass was markedly smaller in comparison to NaCl. In addition, the low concentration of lithium at the inlet stream favoured tracer detection in the outlet stream (   The empirical RTD was obtained by means of a recursive least square method to solve the linear system Model structures presented in In Plant A (rectangular geometry, 2 According to In Plant C, one of the evaluated columns presented a significantly lower feed flowrate. As a result, a comparatively high mean residence time ( According to  It should be noted that the different cross-sectional shapes of columns (circular, rectangular and square) or size do not show a clear influence in the mixing regime. These results from 7 industrial flotation plants (3 cross-sectional shapes and two tracer techniques), including 28 tests, extend the results presented for Saline and radioactive tracers were used to obtain the residence time distribution of industrial columns from seven flotation plants. The empirical RTD were fitted to several model structures including: perfect mixing, axial dispersion, large and small tanks in series and two parallel perfect mixers. It was observed that the mixing regime in flotation columns could not be described by a single model structure nor could be related to the cross-sectional shapes or size of columns. However, the LSTS as well as the two parallel perfect mixers models were remarkably flexible compared to the other structures. The latter also allowed the identification of the by-pass percentage, where the channelling was represented by a perfect mixer with very small residence time. The RTD measurements also allowed process failure to be detected such as channelling and unbalanced flow distributions at industrial scale. Funding for process modelling and control research is provided by