The ultimate strength and deformation of jointed rock mass are important parameters that designers look for in selecting sites for foundations of civil and mining engineering structures in rocks. In the field, it is extremely difficult to stress a rock mass to its ultimate failure stress. Consequently, the field tests are performed up to a certain predefined stress level. It is shown in this study that the results of these tests can be used to arrive at the ultimate strength of the rock mass.
                  A large number of uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) tests were conducted on the specimens of jointed block mass having various combinations of orientations and different levels of interlocking of joints. Four dominating modes of failure were observed. The strength and the tangent (elastic) modulus values of the mass for a specific failure mode, when plotted on the Deere–Miller classification chart, are found to follow an empirical straight line, indicating strong correlation between them. Using the gradient of this empirical line, correlations have thus been suggested to assess the ultimate strength of the jointed rock mass.
                  The findings of the study have been verified by applying it to estimate the ultimate rock mass strength of nine rock types from few dam sites in the lower Himalayas. The ultimate strength obtained by the present methodology is compared with that obtained through the Q classification system. It is concluded that reasonably good estimates on field strength of jointed rocks are possible by using the correlations suggested in this study.While dealing with rocks as a foundation material, civil and mining engineers are confronted with discontinua. A jointed rock mass is an assemblage of intact rock pieces separated by discontinuities such as bedding planes, joints, shear planes, and faults. At a shallow depth where stresses are low, the failure of the intact rock material is minimal, and the behaviour of the rock mass is controlled by sliding along the discontinuities ( Physical model tests are one of the best ways to understand the mechanism of failure of jointed rock masses. Due to ease in working and reproducibility of results, model materials have been used to simulate the rock material. Major physical model studies reported in the literature are those by  The failure modes were identified based on the visual observations at the time of failure. Although there were complex and mixed modes, it was possible to identify the most dominating one. Schematic sketches of the failure modes observed are presented in splitting of intact material of the elemental blocks, shearing of intact block material, rotation of the blocks, and sliding along the critical joints. These modes were observed to depend on the combination of orientation The following observations were made on the effect of the orientation of the joints and their interlocking on the failure modes. These observations may be used as rough guidelines to assess the probable modes of failure under a uniaxial loading condition in the field. Material fails due to tensile stresses developed inside the elemental blocks. The cracks are roughly vertical with no sign of shearing. The specimen fails in this mode when joints are either horizontal or vertical and are tightly interlocked due to stepping. In this category, the specimen fails due to shearing of the elemental block material. Failure planes are inclined and are marked with signs of displacements and formation of fractured material along the sheared zones. This failure mode occurs when the continuous joints are close to horizontal (i.e., The specimen fails due to sliding on the continuous joints. The mode is associated with large deformations, stick–slip phenomenon, and poorly defined peak in stress–strain curves. This mode occurs in the specimen with joints inclined between The mass fails due to rotation of the elemental blocks. It occurs for all interlocking conditions if the continuous joints have  The laboratory strength and the tangent moduli of the specimens tested in this study are presented in the form of the classification charts ( The empirical line discussed above may be used to assess the ultimate strength of the jointed rock mass as given below:  Eq.  Uniaxial jacking tests were performed as per the To estimate the field strength of a rock mass, as per Eq. observed laboratory strength of intact rock, observed tangent modulus of intact rock, observed field modulus, data on mapping of joints to assess failure mode. It should be noted that, from now on, It is also observed from   The values of the rock mass strength through expressions given by Almost all the lower bound values of the ranges of The upper bound values of Experiments have been conducted on block-jointed mass under uniaxial compression condition. Several geometries of the joint configurations were used to obtain various modes of failure. Four dominating modes under uniaxial stress conditions have been observed. The results obtained on strength and tangent modulus have been used to arrive at the relations linking the properties of the jointed mass with those of the intact rock. These properties in general depend on the failure mode, which in turn depends on the joint configuration. The validity of the expressions suggested has been verified by applying them to the field data obtained from several dam sites from northern India. The following conclusions are drawn: The ultimate strength and the tangent modulus of jointed block mass tested in the laboratory are correlated with each other through intact rock properties. On the Deere–Miller classification chart, this relationship may be represented by an empirical line starting from the intact rock position. Due to presence of joints, the strength and modulus of the rock mass are reduced, and the point representing the jointed rock on Deere–Miller classification chart moves along this empirical line. The gradient of the empirical line specifies the failure mode. For splitting, shearing, sliding, and rotation, the gradient on log–log scale is 1.8, 1.8, 1.5, and 1.4, respectively. The strength reduction factor (SRF) may be estimated as SRF=(MRF) A comparison of the ultimate rock mass strength predicted through the present method indicates close prediction with the results from Some part of the work presented in this paper has been taken from the PhD thesis of the first author, which was completed under the supervision of Prof. T. Ramamurthy of I.I.T. Delhi and the coauthor of this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the contribution of Prof. Ramamurthy in completion of the work. The authors also thank the reviewers Dr. N. Barton and Prof. H.H. Einstein for their valuable suggestions to make the paper in the present form.  Inclination of continuous joints with horizontal Uniaxial compressive strength of intact rock Uniaxial compressive strength of the jointed rock/rock mass Friction angle of intact material Friction angle along the cut joints of the elemental blocks Brazilian strength Observed field modulus of elasticity Laboratory tangent modulus of jointed rock Laboratory tangent modulus of intact rock Modulus reduction factor Index Rock mass rating Stepping of joints Strength reduction factor Rock mass quality index