The configuration of an airway (or production drift) in panel cave mines is different from the typical (straight) mine airway designs. The drawpoints are connected to the airway (cross-cuts), which allows airflow from the cave into the airway or air loss from the airway into the cave due to the ventilation approach and cave porosity. These affect airflow in the production drifts, but it is difficult to investigate these conditions from field or laboratory scaled studies. Therefore, this study develops discrete and continuum computational fluid dynamics (CFD) models to study the effects of the ventilation approach and cave porosity on the airway resistance. Our findings show that: with active undercut ventilation, a unique resistance model is required for the airway in panel cave mines; and an increase in cave porosity decreases the drift’s resistance. These findings provide essential tools for a panel cave ventilation design.Panel caving is a bulk/massive underground mining method in which new drawpoints are developed continuously as the caving progresses As shown in The most common layouts of the production drift are the El Teniente and Offset Herringbone layouts with drawpoints developed with the airway similar to cross-cuts ( The discrete and continuum models are developed in AutoCAD 2015, and analyzed using a commercial computational fluid dynamics software, SC/Tetra developed by Cradle (V13). The discrete model is comprised of 7 different large sphere sizes, based on cave height to avoid the computational limitations of resolving small particles A transient analysis is conducted for both models and the results are analyzed after 9 h, which is representative of a mine operation shift. The flow at the undercut inlet (duct) and production drift’s inlet is assumed turbulent and fully developed at entry. We used the We investigated both ventilation approaches for a developed cave: with and without the undercut ventilation. The initial temperature of the model is 24 °C and the energy equation is solved; the three production drifts are ventilated each with 23.5 m In certain cases, some ore deposits contain traces of uranium, which releases radon into the mine workings. We considered a uniform radon flux of 2.5 Bq/m The effect of the undercut ventilation is investigated by comparing the pressure drop model with existing models. The commonly used pressure drop model for an incompressible turbulent flow is the square law equation: The cave (  Similarly, we repeated the same study for the second stage (without the undercut ventilation) using the discrete and continuum models. In this case, the equations (discrete and continuum) agree closely with the pressure drop model in Eq. Due to the dynamics related to cave mining, the porosity of the cave changes as mining progresses and this affects the airflow pattern. Therefore, we studied the effect of porosity changes on the drift’s airflow resistance with and without the undercut ventilation. The continuum model is used because it is difficult to obtain a significant porosity variation using the discrete model as—the lowest porosity value achieved from the cubic and orthorhombic packing of spheres of like size are 47.6% and 39.5% respectively. Therefore, using the discrete model equations from With active undercut ventilation in As shown in In Section 3.1, we established that the flow through the production drifts without the undercut ventilation (second stage) agrees with the turbulence model in Eq. By correlating the data from We investigated two ventilation stages of a fully developed panel cave: with and without undercut ventilation using discrete and continuum CFD models. With active undercut ventilation, we found that: (1) the cave act as a unique form of porous media, which influences flow through the production drifts such that the pressure drop model (in the production drifts) does not agree with either the existing models, hence, a unique model is required for the ventilation design, which provides opportunities for further research; and (2) increase in cave porosity decreases the drift’s resistance to airflow. Without the undercut ventilation, the cave has less effect on the production drift ventilation as the pressure drop model agrees with the turbulent model; and increase in cave porosity decreases the drift’s resistance to airflow. These findings provide more insight into the ventilation system of cave mine and serve as a tool for proactively designing the cave mine ventilation system. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the