The purpose of this study was to assess the effect of agricultural practices on the characteristics of soil organic carbon (SOC). The study area is located in the Central Volcanic Belt (Michoacán) in Mexico. The soil is an Acrisol, acidic and rich in clays and sesquioxides. Experimental plots were treated with four different agronomic management systems between 2002 and 2003: traditional, improved traditional, organic and fallow. Each treatment was replicated twice. Samples were taken at depths of 0–10 and 10–20cm and were subjected to a physical fractionation process by way of particle size. SOC was fractionated into fulvic acids, humic acids and humin. After two years of cultivation, the SOC content increased significantly with the organic management (2.2mgg−1 at 0–10cm and 5.8mgg−1 at 10–20cm). The C content of the soil fine particle fraction increased with the traditional and organic managements. The organic C and N contents of the silt+clay particle-size fraction were mainly concentrated as humin, indicating that this SOM should be stable and have a low risk of mineralization. The humin C content only decreased significantly under the traditional and fallow treatments. The N content of the humin fraction decreased significantly under the traditional management system (from 69% to 54%), indicating the low sustainability of this soil management. The C/N ratio of the soil increased significantly under all treatments, but mainly under the traditional and organic treatments (from 12.1 and 12.8 to 13.7 and 14.0, respectively). This indicates a decrease in humus quality. In addition, the C/N of the humin increased significantly (from 13.3 and 12.7 to 19.2 and 16.0, respectively).Soil organic matter (SOM) is an important compartment of ecosystems and agro-ecosystems ( The physical and chemical fractionation of SOM is of great interest ( From remote times the soils of Mexico’s Central Volcanic Belt have experienced strong human impact. They have been subjected to a typical cropping system, called “ The present work aimed to assess and quantify the changes produced by four different soil management systems over a short time period (two years). Our hypothesis was that a combination of determination of particle size and humic fractions could be used as sensitive indicators for ready monitoring of the changes produced by applying different agronomic management systems. The study site is located at the Atécuaro catchment, within the Cuitzeo Basin, 12 Four experimental plots of 1000 Over two years (2002–03) the experimental plots were subjected to four different agronomic management systems: (a) Traditional (Tt) as a reference, i.e. crop rotation with low fertilizer input (40–30–40 in 2002 and 60–40–00 in 2003). (b) Improved traditional (Tm), using crop rotation, mulching and moderate inputs of fertilizers (60–96–40 in 2002 and 80–40–00 in 2003). (c) Organic (To), using crop rotation and organic sub-products inputs as nutrient sources (15 Soil samples were taken at 0–10 and 10–20 Samples were air dried, sieved to pass a 2 The results were analyzed according to two-way ANOVA, considering the management systems and the years as independent factors for each soil depth level (0–10 and 10–20  After two years cultivation, significant differences in the SOC content were found at the two different depths in the To management system, due to the addition of organic manure (15 C and N contents decreased as the particle size of the aggregates decreased, as also reported by Chemical fractionation of the organic C and N (2002) revealed that 79% of C and 70% of N were concentrated in the humin of the silt In general, no significant changes were observed in the C and N contents of the very coarse fraction at a depth of 0–10 The C/N ratio (a quality index for SOM) increased each year with all the managements ( After two years of cultivation of the volcanic soil of Atécuaro (Mexico), the organic content showed significant differences caused by the management systems. A significant decrease was observed in the C and N contents in the very coarse aggregates (2–0.2 The authors thank the European Union for support of the REVOLSO Project (INCO Program) and the constructive comments of C. López-Fando Raynaud and G. Almendros. Thanks are also due to Dr. Miguel Bravo (from