The separation performance of a low-pressure hydrocyclone was tested using fine organic particles from 1 to 700μm. The dimensions of the low-pressure hydrocyclone were an inflow diameter of 30mm, a cylinder length of 575mm, an overflow diameter of 60mm, an underflow diameter of 50mm, a cylinder diameter of 335mm and a cone angle of 68°. The low-pressure hydrocyclone was operated with a lower inlet pressure (average 1.38–5.56kPa) that could be maintained under water level differences that ranged from 17.5 to 53.5cm between the water surface of the feeding mass cylinder and the middle of the inlet pipe of the low-pressure hydrocyclone. By varying the inflow rate, underflow ratio and feed concentration, the separation performance of the low-pressure hydrocyclone was affected. The separation performances were determined from total separation efficiency and grade efficiency. Separation performances were determined according to the different inflow rates of 400, 600, 800 and 1000mls−1 and their respective underflow ratios that ranged from 5% to 30%. The maximum total separation efficiencies for each inflow rate were 41%, 46% and 46% at 400, 800 and 1000mls−1 inflow rates, respectively, and at underflow rates of 30% of the inflow rates. In addition, a total separation efficiency of 46% was employed at 600mls−1 of inflow rate and with an underflow rate of 25% its inflow rate. As the feed concentration increased from 25 to 150mgl−1, the separation performances were gradually decreased. For the fine particles ranging 1–200μm, the grade efficiency was higher at the higher inflow rate (higher than 600mls−1) and higher underflow rate. However, for the coarse particles ranging 400–700μm, the grade efficiency was higher at the lower inflow rate (lower than 600mls−1) and higher underflow rate. The cut-point (d
                     50) values ranged from 30 to 200μm for a feed size range of 1–700μm. The Response Surface Method (RSM) model predicted an optimum operating inflow rate and underflow ratio of 721mls−1 of inflow rate and 30%, respectively, for the low-pressure hydrocyclone at a maximum total separation efficiency. Based on these findings, further design and operating adaptation of low-pressure hydrocyclones used for fine solids removal in recirculating aquaculture systems is expected.To date, micro-drum screens have been utilized for most solid removal processes in aquaculture systems. Because the economically allowable mesh size was set upwards of 60 The hydrocyclone is an industrially important solids–liquid type of separation equipment. Although it is widely used in many fields and industries, the selection and design of hydrocyclones are still empirical and experience based ( The separation performance of high-pressure hydrocyclones has been studied for heavy materials (>2  In centrifugal separation, performance depends on solid characteristics (particle size, particle density and feed concentration) and operating characteristics (inlet pressure and bypass underflow rate). The removal characteristics are quite conservative for solid and operating parameters. Thus, the dimensions of a centrifugal separator and its operating variations for specific fine solids are crucial data for the development and adoption of aquaculture systems and, specifically, recirculating aquaculture systems. The major diameters of well-known hydrocyclones ranging 10–30 The aim of this study is to evaluate the separation performance of low-pressure hydrocyclones for fine organic particles by varying the system's operating parameters such as inflow rate, underflow rate, particle concentration and size distributions, and to suggest the optimum operating parameter values for the effective operation of a low-pressure hydrocyclone.  The experimental conditions and operating time are shown in The feed material was prepared by grinding commercially extruded pellets for carp (containing 38% protein, 9% lipids and 10% ash) to powder. The feed material was weighed according to the experimental concentrations, soaked in distilled water at the ratio of 5 To determine the particle weight and size of fractionation, the particle size of the feed material was serially filtered using Korean standard testing sieves (203 To determine the optimum operating parameter values for separation performance, six underflow ratios, mass flow ratios of underflow to inflow (5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25% and 30%) and six feed concentrations (25, 50, 75, 100, 125 and 150 To determine the total separation efficiency, samples were collected in three 1 The significantly ( To determine the grade efficiencies, the particle size of the feed material and the particle size of the two products in the underflow and overflow were determined as previously described. The calculation of grade efficiency followed the method by The cut-point, One-way and two-way ANOVA and Duncan's multiple range tests ( The effect of underflow rates on the total separation efficiency according to the four different inflow rates of 400, 600, 800 and 1000 The operation of the inflow and underflow rates is the most important process governing the separation efficiency and partition curves. At higher underflow rate, more expenditure is required for the secondary treatment of the underflow product. The significantly lower feed concentrations in the overflow at an inflow rate of 400 and 600 In most other research on hydrocyclones, mineral and inorganic feed materials were used. The nutrient and ash content in the feed material and the two product streams tested for the inflow and overflow rates showed the highest total separation efficiency. These are shown in The fine particles were classified from the overflow and underflow according to their size. It is likely that for all size distributions, the particles containing more ash were heavier than other nutrient particles, and higher ash contents were determined in the products from the underflow streams. The specific gravity of typical aquacultural particles is between 1.03 and 1.19 The effects of feed concentration (25, 50, 75, 100, 125, and 150 The performance of hydrocyclones is usually size dependant, and the grade separation efficiency varies with particle size. The particle size of the feed material ranged from 1 to 700  The grade efficiencies for 400 and 600 According to the inflow rate and underflow ratio, the cut-point ( The hydrocyclone has a unique production pattern. The probability of obtaining relatively fine mineral particles in the underflow is low, while for coarse particles the probability is higher than it is in the overflow ( As The Response Surface Method (RSM) was used to optimize the values of the operating parameters for the low-pressure hydrocyclone. The coefficient of regression equation was calculated using Design Expert and the data was fit to a second order polynomial equation. The significance of each coefficient was determined by Student's The feed concentration and its interaction did not significantly affect to the total separation efficiencies ( A low-pressure hydrocyclone operated at a low pressure (1.38–5.56 The dimensions and optimal operating parameter values for the low-pressure hydrocyclone in the present research can be easily introduced to and implemented in a recirculating aquaculture system. The separation performance and the capabilities of the low-pressure hydrocyclone to deal with fine organic particles sized 1–700