Knowledge of the distribution of soil types and the behavior of the corresponding geotechnical properties is relevant for various civil engineering applications. This information is needed, among others, for city planning, environmental management, determination of slope stability, and foundation design. Considering the importance of geotechnical parameters for any civil engineering project, mapping this information is crucial. The Standard Penetration Test (SPT) is widely used as a geotechnical field test to characterize the soil profile. As the SPT provides information related to a specific point, it is necessary to extend this information to a large area, by filling the voids between sampling points. Civil engineers often carry out this interpolation using inappropriate practices, and the result is hence not always satisfactory. Therefore, methods that combine SPT and geostatistics are proposed for the generation of estimation maps that provide adequate tools for the decision-maker. The dataset used herein is composed of 141 SPTs carried out in an urban area spread over 5 km2. The data obtained show a strong vertical trend, as expected. Soil resistance is estimated from 50×25×1-m grid blocks, and the corresponding variance is derived. The estimation is carried out using Kriging in the presence of a trend, also known as Universal Kriging. Results from soil resistance (N
                     SPT) show the usefulness of this methodology for mapping geotechnical attributes, and consequently, a significant improvement in the quality of projects can be foreseen.Most civil engineering projects require information obtained from soil tests and underground sampling for use in foundation design and geotechnical characterization. Generally, only well loggings and a few complementary data are supplied to the project engineer. Depending on the importance of the structure to be built, some complementary investigations may be necessary. As all civil constructions are built on a particular type of terrain, the knowledge of the mechanical properties of the terrain is crucial for any average project. An average civil engineering project consumes around 1% of the total budget for soil investigation. A project engineer, confronted with insufficient or inadequate information about the mechanical properties of the soil, tends to overestimate the safety factor of the foundation. This necessitates an adequate investigation of the geotechnical properties of the soil, beginning with preliminary field tests, progressing through lab tests, and finally ending in using the derived maps of soil resistance or soil typologies during the implementation of the project. These maps provide an estimated value for each unsampled location concurrent with the corresponding measure of uncertainty. These maps can bring greater authenticity and reliability to the information derived from the above tests. Therefore, geostatistical methods, which can be used to provide information about the unsampled locations, can prove their usefulness in geotechnical domains. These methods, developed in the 1960s by Various articles have presented the geostatistical applications of geotechniques ( Soil resistance is deemed relevant for foundation engineering and Brazilian technical standards define the procedure to be followed for assessing the penetration resistance of soil ( Drilling is carried out by an auger-type bit with a 10-cm diameter. As drilling progresses, the soil material is collected and is classified according to its composition. The pressure used by the auger drill provides an initial measure of the soil consistency. However, a better measure of this property is derived by using a specific procedure explained in the following section, at every 1-m depth of or every time the type of soil changes. The procedure starts by introducing a liner tube of 6.35-cm diameter. Another tube, introduced within the liner, penetrates the soil using the energy transferred from a weight (65 kg) descending on top of the drilling rig. The soil is penetrated and collected by a sampler located at the end of this inner tube; the sample is visually inspected, classified, and sent to a lab for analysis, if necessary. The recorded index consists of the number of hits necessary for the sampler to penetrate 30 cm of the soil. The first 15 cm are not considered, to avoid recording data from loose and disturbed material. The penetration resistance of a soil is referred to as the Four main soil types have been observed in the area under study along the drill holes, with a gradational change from one type to the other. The soil types, in corresponding order from the top to the bottom, are (i) red clay of average consistency, (ii) silty red clay with yellow stains and medium consistency, (iii) silty–sandy red clay with yellow stains and rigid consistency, and (iv) silty–sandy gray clay with pieces of weathered rock, which is very rigid-to-hard in terms of consistency. Samples used in this study are obtained during the procedure for SPT ( Bedrock is considered to have been reached when  Generally, the geology of the area under study consists of basalt rocks belonging to the Serra Geral Formation (JKsg) and sandstones and psamites associated with the Tupanciretã Formation (Tt). Both formations are included in the Paraná Basin ( The Serra Geral Formation (JKsg) is composed of continental toleitic volcanic rocks, usually basalts, dacites, and rhyolites, along with dikes and tubular bodies of diabases. Occasionally, there are lenses and layers of intertrapic sandstones of the Botucatu Formation. The Tupanciretã Formation (Tt) covers part of the volcanic basaltic rocks present in the north of the Basin. It is mainly composed of sandstones with variable texture, which are usually reddish and sometimes yellow-green in color. These are poorly classified, eventually conglomeratic, and composed essentially by quartz and, subordinately, by feldspar that has weathered to kaolinite. All soil types described above belong to the Passo Fundo unit and have been developed over basaltic lithologies forming brownish humic latosoils, intermediate brownish and purple latosoils, and latosoils with well developed B horizons. The top soils show an excess of organic matter (> The profile descriptions of the weathered soil are related to the elevation, bedrock, and surface morphology. The morphology of the horizons is presented by Horizon A—well defined and subdivided, brown to reddish, formed mostly by clay, with some granular material, porous and hard when dry and plastic and sticky when wet; Horizon B—thick with subdivisions, dark red, and clayey texture; and Horizon C—very deep, formed by weathered basalt. There is a gradational conduct to the lower horizons. Experimental variograms were calculated along five directions (four horizontal and one vertical). The horizontal variograms showed isotropic behavior. The variograms calculated in the vertical direction (D5) showed an obvious trend ( This confirms the relationship illustrated by the scatter diagram of Both theoretically and practically, ordinary linear geostatistics is well established as a method for estimating stationary phenomena. Its use is widely accepted in the mining industry. However, in other fields such as bathymetry and reservoir engineering, the variables under study are clearly not stationary ( Nonstationary geostatistics was originally developed for resolving the problems of spatial interpolation when the experimental data showed a drift: for example, in the petroleum industry, this is the case for the elevation of a structure constituting an oil trap. The “stationarity” of a function is a mathematical notion that essentially depends on the working scale. It is the decision of a geostatistician based on the physical knowledge of the phenomenon under study ( Universal Kriging is a well known method that deals with nonstationary random functions (RFs) when the stationary or intrinsic hypothesis does not hold good any longer ( Universal Kriging relies on a dichotomy of the phenomenon wherein the regionalized variable The drift Thus, Moreover, Thus, Eq. The Universal Kriging model provides an optimal unbiased linear estimator. At any unsampled location, the estimation is obtained as a linear combination of the measurements, as shown in Eq. The unbiasedness condition states that the estimation error (between the unknown true value and its estimation) has a zero expectation: These constraints should be satisfied for all values of the unknown coefficient The optimality is obtained by minimizing the variance of the estimation error over the constraints derived earlier (Eqs. This is obtained by setting the partial derivative to zero for each unknown, namely the weights The partial derivative against There are as many equations as data Considering The Universal Kriging system could be summarized in a matrix form (as in Eq.  The Universal Kriging method poses a problem regarding the identification of the underlying covariance or variogram for the residuals ( The dichotomy formula presented in Eq. From the scatter diagram for After filtering the drift from the original Universal Kriging has been applied to estimate The selection of the data points that are to be included in the estimation is an important step. In the stationary example, several parameters are especially of interest when choosing the kriging neighborhood. The first parameter is the weight of the mean, which shows how (simple) kriging depends on the neighborhood. The second is the slope of the regression, which indicates whether the neighborhood is large enough ( Different neighborhood searches have been tried in the process after considering the sum of negative weights for different blocks in each level chosen (levels 1, 5, 10, 15, 20, and 25 m). The neighborhood chosen as optimal shows a small sum of negative weights in all the different regions tested, and the value of the weight assigned to the mean is very small in simple kriging ( Panels ‘a’, ‘b’, ‘c’, and ‘d’ of Specific horizontal levels have been chosen for the design of the foundation. Depths of 3 and 5 m correspond to the The average The From the An appraisal of the error in the estimation of The SPT is the most traditional, popular, and economic soil test applied worldwide in investigations of subsoil characteristics. It permits the identification of the granular density of the soil and an identification of the consistency of both cohesive soils and soft rocks. Traditional methods of designing for the construction of direct and deep foundations systematically use the results of the Standard Penetration Test, especially in Brazil. Hence, using a dedicated geostatistical method for evaluating such information is important to produce relevant information with an acceptable level of uncertainty for direct application in geotechnical projects. The challenge of this study was in applying the proposed methodology and showing its efficiency in dealing with data composed of trends. By postulating a general drift equation, it was possible to filter the trend from the phenomenon and get stationary residuals. A simple linear drift proved to be adequate for analysis. The residuals were subsequently checked for stationarity, and their variogram model was fitted. The Universal Kriging model was finally used to derive the maps of the estimation and the corresponding variance of error. The Universal Kriging method was thus successfully applied to this specific example of soil resistance. We hereby acknowledge the Multisolos Company (Brazil), for providing the dataset used in this study, and the Centre de Géostatistique (Fontainebleau, France) and the CNPq (Brazil), for supporting this research.