George S. Athwal Raul Barco and Samuel A. Antuña The elbow is a complex joint from the anatomic and biomechanical point of view. A thorough understanding of elbow anatomy greatly aids the surgeon in dealing with elbow trauma. The close vicinity of neurovascular structures should always be kept in mind when selecting a surgical approach. Any approach to the elbow needs to be safe and versatile. Knowledge of the attachment and orientation of elbow ligaments reduces the risk of inadvertent intraoperative injury and/or postoperative instability. Surgeons dealing with elbow trauma should have a good working understanding of elbow anatomy and the available approaches to effectively and efficiently conduct the surgical procedure to maximize outcomes and minimize complications. April Armstrong Simple elbow dislocation refers to those elbow dislocations that do not involve an osseous injury. A complex elbow dislocation refers to an elbow that has dislocated with an osseous injury. Most simple elbow dislocations are treated nonoperatively. Understanding the importance of the soft tissue injury following a simple elbow dislocation is a key to being successful with treatment. Klaus Josef Burkhart, Kilian Wegmann, Lars P. Müller, and Frank E. Gohlke Radial head fractures are the most common fractures around the elbow. Because they are often accompanied by ligamentous injuries, we recommend considering them to be osteoligamentous injuries rather than simple fractures, even in undisplaced or minimally displaced fractures. Surgeons should always suspect and actively exclude concomitant ligament tears. The incidence of these associated injuries increases with greater severity of the radial head fracture. However, the standard Mason classification system does not adequately address this problem, and all attempts to establish a new classification system that provides concise treatment algorithms have failed. This article discusses the current treatment options and the current controversies in nonsurgical therapy, open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) and radial head replacement. David Kovacevic, Laura A. Vogel, and William N. Levine A standardized and systematic approach for the management of an acute complex elbow dislocation involving the radial head and coronoid will maximize clinical outcomes. The cornerstones of surgical management include primary restoration of the ulnohumeral joint by reduction of the intact joint or coronoid fracture fixation, followed by radial head fixation or replacement. The lateral ulnar collateral ligament complex is then repaired before assessing elbow stability within a functional sagittal arc of motion. Miguel A. Ramirez, Jason A. Stein, and Anand M. Murthi Varus posteromedial instability of the elbow is a result of traumatic injury to the medial facet of the coronoid and usually the lateral collateral ligament. Treatment of these fractures is usually surgical; poor outcomes have been described with nonoperative treatment. Surgical management consists of coronoid fracture fixation with plates, screws, or sutures and radial collateral ligament repair. Outcomes of these injuries are mixed, but most series report fair to good objective scores. The purpose of this article is to describe the pathophysiology of varus posteromedial instability, discuss the management of this injury, and report the outcomes of treatment. Justin C. Wong, Charles L. Getz, and Joseph A. Abboud Monteggia fractures and olecranon fracture dislocations represent complex injuries with distinct patterns of bony and soft tissue involvement. Fractures of the proximal ulna and olecranon process may lead to disruption of the proximal radioulnar joint and/or ulnohumeral joint. The keys to treatment are recognition of the pattern of injury and formation of an algorithmic surgical plan to address all components of the injury process. Complications are common and may be related to the injury spectrum itself and/or inadequate fracture alignment or fixation. Tyler J. Brolin and Thomas Throckmorton Olecranon fractures are common upper extremity injuries, with all but nondisplaced fractures treated surgically. There has been a recent shift in the surgical management of these fractures from tension band wiring to locking plate fixation and intramedullary nailing; however, this comes with increased implant cost. Although most patients can expect good outcomes after these various techniques, there is little information to guide a surgeon’s treatment plan. This article reviews the epidemiology, classification, treatment, and outcomes of olecranon fractures. Mark A. Mighell, Brent Stephens, Geoffrey P. Stone, and Benjamin J. Cottrell Distal humerus fractures are challenging injuries for the upper extremity surgeon. However, recent techniques in open reduction internal fixation have been powerful tools in getting positive outcomes. To get such results, the surgeon must be aware of how to properly use these techniques in their respective practices. The method of fixation depends on the fracture, taking the degree of comminution and the restoration of the columns and articular surface into account. This article helps surgeons understand the concepts behind open reduction internal fixation of the distal humerus and makes them aware of pitfalls that may lead to negative results. Luke S. Harmer and Joaquin Sanchez-Sotelo Total elbow arthroplasty is a good treatment alternative for selected patients with distal humerus fractures. Its attractiveness is related to several factors, including the possibility of performing the procedure; leaving the extensor mechanism intact; faster, easier rehabilitation compared with internal fixation; and overall good outcomes reported in terms of both pain relief and function. Implant failure leading to revision surgery does happen, and patients must comply with certain limitations to extend the longevity of their implant. Development of high-performance implants may allow expanding the indications of elbow arthroplasty for fractures. Michael J. Carroll, George S. Athwal, Graham J.W. King, and Kenneth J. Faber Fractures of the capitellum and trochlea account for a small proportion of elbow trauma. Clinicians need to be vigilant in their assessment as they are commonly associated with other injuries about the elbow. To optimize outcomes, the goals of management include a stable, anatomic reduction and early range of motion. Closed reduction of noncomminuted fractures may be successful but requires close follow-up. Open reduction and internal fixation is the preferred management of displaced capitellum-trochlear fractures. Elbow stiffness is the most commonly reported complication in operatively treated fractures. Arthroscopic-assisted reduction and internal fixation and arthroplasty are evolving management options. John Haverstock, George S. Athwal, and Ruby Grewal A review of distal biceps tendon injuries is presented. Notable and recent studies on the incidence, presentation, diagnosis, and treatment are outlined. The benefits and risks of 1- and 2-incision techniques for repair are discussed, and classic studies are reviewed. Jay D. Keener and Paul M. Sethi Acute triceps ruptures are an uncommon entity, occurring mainly in athletes, weight lifters (especially those taking anabolic steroids), and following elbow trauma. Accurate diagnosis is made clinically, although MRI may aid in confirmation and surgical planning. Acute ruptures are classified on an anatomic basis based on tear location and the degree of tendon involvement. Most complete tears are treated surgically in medically fit patients. Partial-thickness tears are managed according to the tear severity, functional demands, and response to conservative treatment. We favor an anatomic footprint repair of the triceps to provide optimal tendon to bone healing and, ultimately, functional outcome. Leslie A. Fink Barnes, Bradford O. Parsons, and Michael Hausman Several types of elbow fractures are amenable to arthroscopic or arthroscopic-assisted fracture fixation, including fractures of the coronoid, radial head, lateral condyle, and capitellum. Other posttraumatic conditions may be treated arthroscopically, such as arthrofibrosis or delayed radial head excision. Arthroscopy can be used for assessment of stability or intra-articular fracture displacement. The safest portals are the midlateral (soft spot portal), proximal anteromedial, and proximal anterolateral. Although circumstances may vary according to the injury pattern, a proximal anteromedial portal is usually established first. Arthroscopy enables a less invasive surgical exposure that facilitates visualization of the fracture fragments in select scenarios. Lauren H. Redler and Joshua S. Dines In caring for athletes, the physician must be able to accurately diagnose and appropriately treat all forms of elbow injuries. Traumatic injuries to the elbow are common in the athlete. The late cocking phase of throwing produces tremendous valgus stress on the elbow that can lead to medial epicondyle avulsion fractures in adolescents or rupture of the medial ulnar collateral ligament in skeletally mature overhead throwers, such as baseball pitchers and javelin throwers. Common traumatic elbow injuries suffered by athletes, surgical techniques for operative repair of these injuries, as well as postoperative rehabilitation protocols and the clinical results are presented. Emilie V. Cheung and Eric J. Sarkissian The elbow is a highly congruent trochoginglymoid joint allowing motion in both flexion-extension and pronosupination across 3 articulations. Therefore, treatment of fractures of the elbow can be technically challenging to manage, even after initial surgery. The posttraumatic elbow is prone to complications such as stiffness associated with heterotopic ossification, instability or subluxation (posterolateral rotatory instability and varus posteromedial instability patterns), and wound complications. This article discusses the pathoanatomy, prevention, and treatment of these complications. Brian P. Kelley and Kevin C. Chung The elbow is particularly prone to trauma, and soft-tissue reconstruction can be challenging given the inherent motion, pressure, and lack of local tissue laxity. Small wounds and those without exposure of vital structures may be amenable to primary repair. Large wounds and those requiring more substantial structural or anatomic repair may require local, regional or free flap-based reconstruction. A comprehensive review of soft-tissue reconstruction of the elbow is provided to offer surgeons alternative options in complicated upper extremity wounds. 