We report on the preparation of high-alumina refractory (HAR) from metallurgical aluminous dross with main crystalline phase of MgAl2O4 and small amounts of CaAl2O4. Samples were characterized using X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy and petrographic analysis. Physical properties such as bulk density, apparent porosity and compressive strength of HAR were investigated. Magnesium aluminate spinel, calcium monoaluminate (CaAl2O4) and calcium bialuminate (CaAl4O7) were the primary phases of the obtained HAR. CaAl4O7 was generated after sintering and formed a matrix to bind the separated magnesia–alumina spinel effectively, which could improve the compactness of the samples. Ti promoted the propagation velocity of phase particles, and could reduce the extent of oxidation and improve HAR product compactness. The as-prepared HAR met the Chinese National Standard (GB/T 2988-2004), indicating its potential application in the refractory field.Refractory material is used extensively in ceramics, cement, nonferrous metals, steel light industry, machinery and in the war industry. Research is being extended to the rapid development of nuclear engineering and space technologies. High-alumina refractory (HAR), with a high content of Al Metallurgical aluminous dross (AD) is generated after valuable metal is melted in a conventional purification or recycling process In this paper, we demonstrate a route to the synthesis of HAR from AD without prior calcination. Its compactness and mechanical properties at room and high temperatures were studied besides the rate of volume change of spinel in the reaction process. The Al AD was obtained from Panzhihua, China, as a by-product of blast furnace smelting after Ti extraction. Its main chemical composition is 74.11% Al Phenolic resin was used as an adhesive due to its structural stability at high temperatures X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra were acquired on an X-ray diffraction apparatus (DX-2700) with an acceleration voltage of 40 The XRD pattern of the pristine AD is shown in Optical microscope and SEM images of the pristine AD are shown in SEM and EDS were used to investigate the morphology and composition of the pristine AD. CaAl The higher Al The physiochemical performance of the prepared samples is not ideal in the early temperature stage ( The physiochemical parameters of the as-prepared HAR sample and the corresponding Chinese National Standard (GB/T 2988-2004) are also presented in   The HAR microstructure is shown in Spinel, the main phase in HAR, ensures the high refractoriness of the product. During solid phase sintering, free diffusion and different particle motion speeds lead to diversity in phase concentration in different areas. Calcium aluminate has a significant impact on the formation of the air hole while magnesia–alumina spinel affects the formation of the compact areas. An appropriate amount of CaO is conducive to the physiochemical performance of HAR due to the formation of calcium aluminate at high temperature. The main crystalline phases of HAR are relatively integrated. Furthermore, the increasing liquid phase viscosity during refrigeration could inhibit the further penetration of other compounds, which then leads to excellent HAR performance. HAR was successfully prepared by sintering metallurgical aluminous dross (AD) at 1530 This work was supported by the