Iron ore tailings are currently disposed underwater in tailings dams as slurries containing from 30% to 50% of solids by weight. Conventional or high capacity thickeners are used to recycle most of the process water at the beneficiation plants. The underflow slurry stream of this unit operation feeds tailing basins either by gravity or by pumping. Alternatively, the preparation of pastes from tailings is a very attractive method since it allows their surface disposal without the need of large dam embankments and it also permits co-disposal with mine waste rock in controlled piles. In some specific cases, filling up exhausted open pits by co-disposal of tailings in a paste form and waste rock can be employed with several environmental related advantages. In the present work some physical and rheological characteristics of the slurries and pastes, prepared in different hematite/quartz systems, are presented and compared with some physical, chemical and mineralogical characteristics of the solids.Mineral paste is a relatively new concept that has continuously gained room in the minerals industry specifically in the area of mining tailings and waste disposal practices. Currently it is a fact that tailings generated during iron ore beneficiation in Brazil as well as tailings from mining of metallic ores throughout Latin America are disposed in the form of thickened slurries underwater inside settling basins created by dams. Conversely, in several other countries such as Canada, USA, Republic of South Africa, Tanzania and Australia, one can observe a trend to an increasing number of operations employing surface disposal of tailings in the form of pastes and also, when applicable, in the form of pastes mixed with cement to fill up underground mined out cavities ( Thickened disposal of tailings presents several advantages in relation to traditional methods still in use namely enhanced water recovery for its recycling as process water, steeper disposal angles of the tailings piles, smaller capital and operating costs and diminished environmental impacts ( It is important to point out that amongst the important properties of a paste-fill or cemented paste the following deserve closer attention: shear stress, slump height (as determined by the slump test), repose angle (as determined by the flume test), solid–liquid viscosity, compression strength (as determined by stress-deformation test) and permeability of the filling reached. In Considering iron ore as a case study, over 60 million tons per year of overall tailings, in the form of slimes and magnetic or flotation tailing streams are currently disposed in southern Brazil in the conventional underwater disposal basins. Raising dam heights (or building new dams) to accommodate extra tailings is a continuous practice of this industry. The possibility of disposing these tailings in a paste would increase current capacity of disposal without further investment and, even more importantly, with decreased environmental burdens in a very significant way. The objective of this work is to determine some rheological parameters such as slump height, repose angle and viscosity for mineral pastes prepared from tailings of iron ores composed of mixtures of varying mineralogical composition (basically hematite and quartz). The scope of the current work involves correlating rheological aspects with size structure, specific surface area (Blaine Index), chemical and mineralogical compositions. Mineral samples employed in this work (samples I and II) are mainly constituted by hematite (Fe The solid component of the pastes was characterised by means of the determination of density (Helium picnometry), size distribution (sieving and laser granulometer), specific surface area per mass unit (Blaine permeability), chemical composition by X-ray fluorescence and wet chemical methods and mineralogical composition by X-ray diffraction. The slump test was performed employing the simple methodology described by The flume test was employed to determine the angle of repose. It was also used for the observation of the flow characteristics of the mineral pastes. A flume apparatus was manufactured in acrylic thermoplastic with a total length of 1 Viscosity was measured on a Brookfield rotational rheometer utilising a LV4 spindle at variable rpm.  The size distributions of both samples, as measured by the laser granulometer, are shown in Blaine index was measured for both samples. The values are shown in Chemical assays for each sample are presented in Sample I is composed only by quartz and hematite, roughly in a 50/50 ratio. This is indicated by the chemical analysis shown in In order to access the results in a comparative manner, graphs were elaborated for repose angle and slump height as a function of paste percent of solids, as shown in  Regarding the flume tests, sample I shows the most promising results as angles of repose ( As slump and flume tested were being performed on sample I, a hydrophobic behaviour of the pastes obtained was evident. This behaviour is in line with the sample origin (flotation tailings from a reverse flotation plant, hence plenty of residual collector). Rheological tests were performed on the pastes under investigation to gather information on the time dependence of viscosity at varying shear rates. In As the curves are compared, sample II is the one with the highest viscosity. Besides that, it is important to point out the character of the viscous flow of both samples. Sample I always displays a rheotropic behaviour, regardless of the percent solids considered. On the other hand, sample II presents both rheotropic and thyxotropic behaviour. Thyxotropic and rheotropic behaviour represent the hysteresis of the viscosity values when measurements are taken in increasing rpm and then decreasing rpm. Sample II shows a thyxotropic behaviour for the lower range of percent solids (58% and 60%) and a rheotropic behaviour for the paste with 65% solids, as the viscosity increases in the returning loop of the measurements. Utilisation of mineral pastes for the surface disposal of materials and the filling of cavities represents a technical alternative to conventional underwater disposal practices presenting several advantages such as increased water recovery and recycling, best usage of land and decreased environmental impacts. The two tailings samples used in the present investigation showed distinct behaviours during pasting. Although both represent tailings streams for iron ore beneficiation, differences between these samples are the cause for the distinct pasting characteristics of each one. These differences are related to differences in the size distribution, mineralogy and chemical composition of the two samples. For sample I, in a narrow range of solid contents (between 78% and 82%), a significant change in paste behaviour was noted. High repose angles and low slump heights are indicative of favourable surface disposal characteristics for a paste of this sample. Furthermore, the small relevance of the flume slope also contributes in a positive way for a disposal of such a paste regardless of the topographical characteristics of the terrain. Regarding viscosity studies of the pastes, each sample presented distinct behaviour. Coarser sample I displayed a completely rheotropic behaviour whereas the finer sample II presented a mixed fluidity behaviour being thyxotropic at low % solids range and rheotropic at higher % solids. Explaining this mixed behaviour for sample II needs further investigation and the behaviour is likely related to the finer size consist of the sample, its mineralogical composition and high specific surface area. Further investigations, using other type of viscosimeter, should be carried out in order to determine other important rheological characteristics. Finally, the investigation of blends of different tailings streams is expected to be extremely important once the pasting characteristics of individual tailings have shown very distinct properties. This study is currently underway for the two samples discussed in the present work.