The effect of overpotential pulsing and periodic current reversal on the morphology of silver powders was investigated using a scanning electron microscope (SEM). It is shown that the profile of pulses or current reversal determines the micromorphology of the electrodeposited silver particles. Generally, three forms of silver were detected: (1) dendrites, (2) equiaxial crystals (independent and/or agglomerates) and (3) rods. The shape of particle seems to be the result of an interplay between the surface energy and growth kinetics.It is well known that silver powders with different properties can be obtained by electrodeposition from a range of electrolytes by varying the operating conditions. The same effects can be also obtained by overpotential pulsing whilst keeping all other parameters unchanged. When overpotential pulsing the output current reverses from reduction to oxidation, and similar effects on the morphology and grain size of powder particles can be expected using either overpotential pulsing or current reversal. Whilst it is easy to use overpotential pulsing in a laboratory-scale cell, difficulties arise on a practical scale because of the demands for higher power and a high speed potentiostat. It is easier to obtain current reversal on a practical scale therefore deposition of silver powder by current reversal is of greater practical importance than overpotential pulsing ( The ability to generate silver powder with well-defined morphologies provides the opportunity for systematic studies of the relationship between properties of particles and their geometrical shape. Morphology, which is probably the most important property of electrodeposited metals, depends mainly on the kinetic parameters of the deposition process and the deposition overpotential or current density. In the application of metal powders many properties are of interest such as: the size and shape of the particles, bulk weight, flow rate, corrosion resistance, specific surface area, apparent density and quality of sintered product. In general, these properties depend on the shape and the size, which can be influenced by appropriate electrolysis regime ( Silver powders were deposited from an unstirred solution containing 10 g L The morphology of the deposits was investigated using a scanning electron microscope. In all investigated samples three main types of particles appear: dendrites, equiaxed crystals (independent and/or agglomerates) and rods. The representative morphology obtained by overpotential pulsing is shown in The effect of increasing the pause between pulses can be seen in The surface energies associated with different crystallographic planes vary with The current due to pulsing is anodic and dissolution will occur. The dissolution of a protrusion is more rapid than dissolution of a flat surface. Consequently, branching of dendrites and the formation of agglomerates can be prevented by using overpotential pulsing. The faceted surfaces of silver powder particles can be explained by the adatoms in unstable positions dissolving faster than atoms in the lattice encouraging smooth deposition. This is possible only in overpotential pulsing electrodeposition ( The shape of a crystal is usually determined by the relative rates of advance of close-packed faces. Close-packed faces grow relatively slowly since atoms can only be added at kink sites, while high index faces grow more rapidly. Since the rapid disappearance of the high index faces is a consequence of their high growth rate, then the total growth rate will be determined by the growth of the close-packed faces. At extremely low growth rates when the solution and the crystal are nearly in equilibrium, the shape of faces will be determined by the requirement that the total surface energy of crystals is minimized ( The effect of periodic millisecond current reversal on the morphology and powder particle size is illustrated in As expected, increasing deposition current density produces dendritic deposits. In a sample obtained by current reversal, Using a longer deposition time between reversals the particles were mainly in the form of rods ( On the basis of the above results it can be concluded that the effect of overpotential pulsing is similar to that of current reversal. This enables practical application of the electrodeposition of metal powders with controlled particle grain size and morphology. Current reversal in the millisecond range was examined here because the easiest way to produce current reversal electrodeposition conditions in practice is by superimposing a small amplitude alternating current onto a direct current. However, the 50 Hz frequency examined is likely to have capacitance problems on a large scale. ( It seems that current reversal deposition may be a suitable process for obtaining ultrafine powders ( The main results obtained in this study can be summarized as follows: When silver was deposited from nitrate solution under square-wave pulsating overpotential and current reversal regime different types of particles were observed. Generally, three types of particles could be distinguished: dendrites (3D, fern-like), regular crystals (independent and/or agglomerates) and rods. Various crystallographic forms, some of them ideal, or derivates of cube-octahedron type of morphology were obtained. Some of silver particles are perfect in shape with no surface defects, but on some surfaces deep holes and fine {111} surface steps can be seen. The surface crystal structure of powder particles may vary from polycrystalline shape to one characterized by well-defined crystal planes. The deposition of silver powder by current reversal is of greater practical importance than overpotential pulsing. This work was financially supported by the Ministry of Science and Environmental Protection of the Republic of Serbia under the research project “Deposition of ultrafine powders of metals and alloys and nanostructured surfaces by electrochemical techniques” (142032G/2006). The authors are indebted to Professor K. I. Popov and Dr. Milan Jovanović for helpful discussion during the preparation of this paper.