This paper is a review of mastication and swallowing, prepared for the Food Summit on “Food Texture: Perception and Measurement”, organized by the Wageningen Centre for Food Sciences (WCFS) from 28 November–1 December, 1999. The paper emphasizes models that could link the physical state of food to oral forces acting on it. It deals with the processing of solid foods because (1) theory seems better advanced in this area and (2) the paper by van Vliet (this issue) deals with the area of liquids and semi-solids.The anatomy and physiology of the oral processing of foods is complicated. However, this is not a very helpful statement and could be said about the function of virtually any part of the body. A major problem compared to other processes is that we lack visualization of what goes on, but as great as technical problems to solve this are, it is the dearth of simple physiological models that seems to stand out as a dire need. It is claimed here that, provided the food input and output states can be characterized (the output state being the food particle aggregate that is swallowed) together with some of the principal features of the process, we can produce simple testable models that possess predictive value. It must be stressed that this article is a review and that the original papers referred to and an upcoming book (  The rate of particle size breakdown in a comminution process such as mastication involves two analytically separable processes ( In contrast, the breakage function is the measurement of the distribution of fragments of broken particles formed per chew, referred to the size of the parent particle ( Both variables can be measured on a very limited range of foods ( Three basic assumptions about fragmentation in mastication are made: Food particles are loaded relatively late in the closing phase of jaw movement. It follows from this that the displacement during which a particle can break up is small and will limit the fragmentation that could be produced. The assumption excludes possible fragmentation during jaw opening when food stuck to the upper and lower teeth is fractured as those teeth separate. Cusps stand proud of other features of the (unworn) working surfaces of the premolar and molar teeth. They are, therefore, most likely to form a critical contact with a food particle than either the ridges that connect cusps or the basins (called fossae) that they surround. Fragmentation of particles on loading follows the storage of elastic strain energy in these particles, the release of which later pays for growing cracks. This assumption might seem unnecessary. However, when a sufficiently thin rod- or sheet-like food particle is loaded by a tooth cusp, most of the work done on that particle is likely to be channelled into crack formation. In these circumstances, the loading becomes analogous (in an inefficient manner) to cutting toughness tests, where this is the intention ( It is possible to imagine two possible extremes of loading geometry. A crack in a food particle may either start: remote from cusps through bending against a three- (or more) point cuspal support ( adjacent to a cusp tip as the particle is indented (  If we substitute for For failure to the point that an engineer would be interested in, which is usually the point of crack initiation, a combination of food properties that determines the response of the food is ( If the number and size of fragments is limited by the displacement available, then ( However, if cracking starts at the cusp tip instead and runs straight through the material (   This formulation, which depends effectively on the reciprocal of the square root of particle size, is consistent with the tenets of fracture mechanics. It stems from the work of  Thus, for the first time, a food property index has been found that is correlated with the rate of mastication. The index that fits the data best also suggests that cracking could generally be remote from cusps, a geometry that is not usually utilized in semi-imitative testing in the food industry. Food particle size reduction is only one of the functions of the mouth, which has, at some point, to be cleared of food by swallowing. Efficient clearance has been under great selective pressure in mammalian evolution, but is not easy to understand. Clearance lower down in the gut seems more straightforward. There is a lot of fluid around and so the food, which is semi-solid after processing in the stomach anyway, is easily flushed along. In contrast, the mouth is fluid-limited. Saliva is the only source of fluid from the mouth itself. It is a complex fluid provided by three sources. The sublingual and many other minor glands secrete a mucous-rich film over the oral cavity to reduce friction. The parotid gland lying on the same side of the mouth as that on which food is chewed sprays a thin serous wetting secretion over particles just after they are fragmented during jaw closing. The submandibular glands produce thicker saliva that forms a pool in the anterior part of the floor of the mouth. The tip of the tongue is wetted during jaw opening as it dips into this pool just before rising towards the palate to try to encapsulate the food particles and form a bolus. There are a large number of experiments that suggest that swallowing is not simply determined by a food particle size threshold ( An alternative to a two-threshold model is to try to understand the aggregation of food particles into a bolus ( Thus, if the force that tends to stick food particles together is The above experiments demonstrate that the masticatory system of humans is highly responsive to changes in food texture. There is evidence that this is also true of other mammals, even so-called primitive ones such as a tree shrew (as judged from variation in jaw movements shown by The ability to sense food texture intra-orally should, in fact, have evolved in the earliest mammals about 200 million years ago because fossil evidence strongly suggests that mastication was first developed in these animals ( Primates are social and vocal animals, most of the identified calls being related to predator awareness, territoriality and social interactions ( Every society seems to have a variety of food texture terms — this may even be something universal to human societies. However, we suggest here that the origin of these texture concepts was not to do with oral sensations but, more likely, from the need to communicate the learned manual dexterity that was required for making and using tools. We envisage language in our ancestors having developed for the need to pass tooling skills on to other group members. There appears to be little literature on this. The linkage between language and tools seems to be implied by These models predict how the state of the mouth might affect mastication and swallowing. For example, in mastication experiments, foods could be presented as very thin sheets. The analysis presented here suggests their breakage should then depend purely on their toughness. A better characterization of the state of the dentition could be incorporated into the analysis. As the cheek teeth of humans wear, they flatten. The loading of food particles would then alter from local indentation by cusps, or bending between cuspal supports, to something similar to simple compression. As wear progresses, it thus seems likely that a stress limitation could become more important than the displacement criterion. A stress limitation seems very likely for denture wearers in any case because of their low bite forces. More common in Western populations than tooth wear is tooth loss. The value of the selection function is very dependent on the number of teeth that are present. As teeth are lost, the rate of particle size reduction will slow. The bolus formation model then suggests that the cohesive force would reduce. There are many factors which could be added to the swallowing model to better simulate conditions in the mouth, including the effect of differing food particle shapes and mimicking foods that either imbibe saliva or release large quantities of fluid on fracture. Foods could also be given a ‘taste’ by giving them a variable ability to elicit salivary flow. An almost dry mouth could be simulated. One of the most important factors to model might be the effect of changing the ingested food volume (the mouthful) because the conditions at swallowing seems to be different when very small mouthfuls are chewed ( Physiological models are described that seem to possess predictive power for both mastication and swallowing experiments. It is suggested that, prior to modern food processing, it is doubtful if orally-sensed food texture was ever communicated and that this might explain why it is proving difficult to investigate texture in food science. Many thanks to Prof. Dr. Rob Hamer and WCFS for their invitation to this unique food summit. We are grateful to many of the participants at the meeting for numerous interactions and exchanges of viewpoint. This research was part funded by the Committee for Research and Conference Grants, University of Hong Kong.