Geothermal clay rich in kaolinite was first prepared into geopolymer binders. Preparation conditions of calcination on geothermal clay, Na2SiO3 and NaOH combination in alkaline activator, and water content were studied. Thermal nature of the geothermal clay was characterized by TG-DSC and XRD measurements, which shows characteristics of kaolinite and cristobalite during calcination. Mechanical property, morphology and microstructure of the geothermal clay-based geopolymers were characterized by compressive strength measurements, SEM observation and NMR spectra analysis. With optimal synthesizing parameters, geothermal clay-based geopolymer possessed a compressive strength of 19.5MPa, as well as a homogeneous geopolymeric gel with high percentages of Q
                     
                        4
                     
                     (2Al) and Q
                     
                        4
                     
                     (1Al). As geothermal clay is supposed to be of intermediate dissolution reactivity in geopolymerization, this synthesis might extend the kinds of raw aluminosilicates in geopolymer formation.Geopolymer, a three-dimensional amorphous binder material, has attracted extensive attention due to the potential properties in replacement of ordinary Porland cement (OPC), but of low CO Therefore, in pursuing the commercialization of geopolymer as environmental friendly construction material, raw aluminosilicates from industrial waste without pre-treatment are studied extensively. For example, kaolinite, albite and silty clay were used as fine aggregates in the preparation of fly ash-based geopolymers ( Clay minerals related to geothermal activity, which is named geothermal clay in this study, are abundant aluminosilicates in geothermal fields. Their properties are not only affected by temperature but also by several factors such as rock and fluid chemistry, time, fluid/rock ratio, the nature of the precursor material or the mechanism of the crystal growth ( Geothermal clay rock was collected from the Los Azufres geothermal field, Mexico at the depth of 250 In a typical synthesis, alkaline solution was first prepared and then mixed with the geothermal clay. The mixture was poured into a cubic steel mold (50 Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermogravimetric (TG) analysis were performed using a STA 449F3 TG-DSC test machine (Netzsch, Germany) to characterize thermal nature of the geothermal clay at heating rate of 10 The thermal analysis of the geothermal clay was performed to elucidate its reactivity in geopolymerization. The XRD patterns of geothermal clay heated at various temperatures (  The microstructure of geopolymers corresponds well with the increase in compressive strength. In studying microstructure of geopolymers, short-range ordering and molecular structure have been investigated with great success using NMR spectroscopy (    Compressive strength of geopolymers synthesized with different water content was presented in   Geothermal clay rich in kaolinite possesses higher reactivity than normal clays in geopolymerization, so that it can be synthesized into geopolymers of low compressive strength. The reactivity of geothermal clay is enhanced through calcination. Thermal analysis of the geothermal clay shows analogous behavior as that of kaolinite, but it is affected by the endothermic nature of critobalite. At a heating temperature In activating geothermal clay to synthesize geopolymers, Na The financial supports for this work from the