There is a growing attention in valuable trace elements (TEs) in coal and coal combustion products as they can potentially be future resources of valuable TEs. Therefore, understanding the mode of occurrences of valuable TEs in coal has several advantages for their economical and industrial extractions. Since there is limited information on the affinity of valuable TEs in the structure of African coals, this study explores correlations between conventional coal properties and concentration of vanadium, yttrium, gallium and lithium as valuable TEs for a wide range of African coal samples (139 samples) from South Africa, Botswana, Egypt, Tanzania, Nigeria and Zambia by statistical methods. Statistical assessments indicated that the concentrations of Y, V, Li and Ga for these countries are higher than their value in the world coal (on average). The outcomes of assessments showed that the Li, Ga and V are associated with the mineral matter fraction (inorganic affinity) of the coal where they have significant positive correlations with ash and Al (as a major element) and potentially clay minerals are their main bearing minerals. However, statistical explorations suggested that Y may have both the organic and inorganic occurrences in the African coal samples.Coal as a fuel is the major source of energy for electric power generation plants in African countries (AC) (more than 90% of electric power generation plants use coal as their main fuel ( It was reported that vanadium (V) can increase the strength and toughness of steel and it is significantly used in production of ferrous and non-ferrous alloys ( The first industrial recovery of valuable TEs (Au and Ag) from coals was mentioned in the 1800s, USA ( Pervious investigations argued that TEs in the some ACs (Nigeria, South Africa and Tanzania) coals may show inorganic association or organic affinity and can occur as extraneous, epigenetic or inherent ( A robust assessment of correlations between TEs and conventional coal characters depends on a comprehensive database to cover a wide variation. In this work, the database used to explore the correlations was acquired from World Coal Quality (WCQ) Inventory ( The average of Y concentration for the world coals was reported around 8.6 ppm (for brown coal: 8.6 and hard coal: 8.2 ppm) ( The Clarke value of Li concentration for the world coal is 12 ppm (for brown coal: 10 and for hard coal: 14) (  The Ga concentration in the world coal is 5 ppm (for brown coal: 5.5 and for hard coal: 6) ( Statistical assessment of trace element values determined for select African coals (139 samples from South Africa, Botswana, Egypt, Tanzania, Nigeria and Zambia) indicate that Y, V, Li, and Ga values are higher than the world coal Clarke values (on average). Exploring correlations between these trace elements and conventional coal properties demonstrated that Li, V and Ga have strong positive relationship with ash (r > 0.87) which indicating they have the inorganic affinity in the samples. However, Y concentration showed an insignificant correlation with ash (r: 0.54) which meant Y may have the organic-inorganic affinity. Relationships between these trace elements with major elements (at least 10 ppm concentration) demonstrated that Al has a significant correlation with Li, V and Ga (r > 0.72). Stepwise regression approved that the concentrations of these trace elements can be relatively predicted with Al concentrations. Although further investigation is required to explore the actual modes of occurrences for these valuable trace elements, these relationships suggested that clay minerals potentially are the main bearing of these elements in the African coals.