Solvent extraction of Th(IV) using 2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid mono 2-ethylhexyl ester (HEH(EHP)) in kerosene from sulfuric acid medium was studied by investigating the dependence of thorium extraction on aqueous acidity and HEH(EHP) concentration. The extraction mechanism was also determined by slope analysis. Th(IV) extraction kinetics was investigated using a constant interfacial cell with a laminar flow, and the data were analyzed based on the principle of pseudo first-order reaction. Some parameters' effect on the mass transfer, including the effect of temperature, Th(IV) concentration, HEH(EHP) concentration and pH was studied, and the rate equation for thorium extraction was obtained through slope analysis. Based on the high activation energy (Ea
                     
                     =45.8kJmol−1), the extraction regime was defined to be an interfacial chemical reaction control. In addition, a mass transfer model with a rate-control step was proposed and it was consistent with the experimental results.Bastnaesites are the main source of rare earths and they are largely deposited in China, and the United States ( A cleaner extraction process is urgently desirable to reduce environmental pollution in the industry ( Solvent extraction is the most widely used technique for the separation and recovery of rare earths ( The solvent was prepared by dissolving HEH(EHP) in kerosene to desired concentrations. The HEH(EHP) was supplied by Tianjin Beicheng Chemical Plant (China) and used without further purification. The kerosene was sulfonated before use to remove reductive impurities. Stock solutions of Th(IV) were prepared using Th(NO The extraction experiments were carried out using equal volumes (25 Kinetics study was performed in a constant interfacial area cell with laminar flow at 298 The experimental data were treated based on the method proposed by Integrating Eq. The slopes of the linear relationship of The The stability of Th(IV) and its complex behavior with F(I) in the solution have been reported elsewhere ( The solvent extraction of metal in the low acidity mediums with acidic organo-phosphorus can be considered as a cation exchange mechanism ( In Eq. Additionally, it can be seen in The reaction mechanism was determined by studying the dependence of extraction on various chemical compositions. The dependence of extraction rate on the concentrations of HEH(EHP), Th(IV) and H A criterion for determining the type of extraction regime is the determination of the activation energy of extraction. In this work, we studied the effect of temperature in the range of 288  The interfacial tension between aqueous and organic phases is an important parameter in solvent extraction processes ( Many investigations ( Since the extraction of ThF The complex of extracted Th(IV) was ThFA  Assuming that the reaction ( Also assuming that an interfacial steady state was reached instantaneously, Combining Eqs. Because [HA] It is noticed that Eq. Solvent extraction of Th(IV) with HEH(EHP) in kerosene from sulfuric acid medium was studied to determine the dependence of Th(IV) extraction on the acidity and the HEH(EHP) concentration. According to the slope analysis and ionic charge balance, the reaction of Th(IV) extraction was determined to be: The kinetics of thorium(IV) extraction was also investigated using a constant interfacial cell with laminar flow. The hydrodynamic conditions were optimized to minimize the effect of diffusion. The data was analyzed based on the principle of pseudo-first order reaction. Based on the extraction rate correlated to the concentrations of the matters involved, the rate equation of thorium extraction was obtained as follows: The extraction regime was determined to be interfacial chemical reaction control based on its high activation energy ( The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support by the