In this work, a group contribution model to predict the behavior of mineral concentration circuits is presented. The new model is an expansion and modification of an existing model in the literature (Sepúlveda et al., 2014). The modifications extend the number of process groups from 35 to 143, which makes it possible to extend the number of concentration circuits that can be represented from 1492 to over 274 million circuits and to increase the maximum number of stages from 6 to 9. The errors observed between the fitting and the prediction results of concentration circuits that were not included in the fitting verifies that the new model could be extremely useful in the design of mineral concentration circuits.Group contribution models assume that a certain property depends on the sum of the contributions made by structural groups. In this way, it is possible to estimate properties of many systems based on a reduced number of groups that constitute those systems. The primary application of these models is in designing chemical products that have the ability to form molecules based on groups of atoms. Additionally, these models have also been used to design separation processes based on fractional distillation ( It is assumed that each concentration stage has two outlet streams: a concentrate and a tail. In the present work, intermediate process stages are introduced:  In the group contribution model, the behavior of a concentration circuit is predicted from the contribution of each process group. These process groups are a function of the process stages and the destinations of their products (concentrates and tails). In To estimate the circuit recovery, two models are proposed, which depend on the recovery values in the rougher stage ( For intermediate recoveries (0.37–0.63) in the rougher stage, the following model is used: and To determine the constants involved in Eqs. The group contribution model was fitted using CONOPT-GAMS. The results are shown in The measured absolute error ( As an example, the recovery of two circuits that are not present in the database used to fit the model is estimated. Consider the circuits shown in Considering Eq. For purposes of clarity, consider the recoveries of a species in circuit 1 are as follows:  In As another example, let us assume that we want to generate all feasible circuits that consist of a rougher ( A group contribution model is presented in this work, which exhibits improvements with respect to the model by Financial support from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: