Background
                  Displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures (DIACFs) can have long-term consequences in terms of foot pain and disability. This injury frequently occurs in the context of polytrauma patients and its influence in long-term functional prognosis is well known. The purpose of this study is to compare the etiology, severity, and functional outcome of the operated DIACFs between polytrauma patients and isolated cases.
               
                  Methods
                  Eighty-six patients with operated displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures through open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) were managed at our institution between January 1, 2008 and December 31, 2015. Eighty patients completed the follow-up, nine of them with both calcaneus operated (89 calcaneus) by ORIF with a plate. Two groups were established; one included 11 (14%) polytrauma patients, three of them with operated bilateral calcaneus, and 69 (86%) patients without polytrauma diagnosis. Severity of trauma, injury patterns, psychiatric background, associated fractures, second surgeries and functional questionnaire (adjusted American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society – AOFAS – ankle-hindfoot scale and SF-36) were collected. A detailed comparative statistical analysis is provided.
               
                  Results
                  There was significant statistical relationship between polytrauma patients and those with psychiatric comorbidities, severe trauma or severe injury, but not with second surgeries, later subtalar arthrodesis or outcome measures. Only calcaneal fractures with comminution according to Sanders classification was associated with second surgeries and later subtalar arthrodesis. The AOFAS score was solely related to trauma severity (71.5 vs 77; p = 0.29) and calcaneal fracture’s comminution according to Sanders classification (79.4 type II and 79.3 type III vs 69.2 type IV; p = 0.000 and p = 0.008, respectively) and SF-36 score only with trauma severity (67.4 vs 78.1; p = 0.00) and psychiatric comorbidities (62.2 vs 75.8; p = 0.048).
               
                  Conclusion
                  No differences in outcome measures and second surgeries were found between polytrauma patients and isolated fractures. For DIACFs, the severity of the impact was correlated with a higher number of second surgeries and worse functional outcomes. Following a DIACF, patients with psychiatric comorbidities presented worse health-related quality of life than people without this background.The calcaneus is the most frequently fractured bone in the foot, representing approximately 75% of the fractures affecting the foot and 1–2% of all body fractures. Around three-quarters of calcaneal fractures are intra-articular displaced (DIACs), being the main cause of these fractures a fall from a height. Calcaneus fractures present associated injuries in 40% of cases, typically in a polytrauma context. Most frequent associated injuries include spine fractures (10–20%), opposite calcaneus fractures (7–10%), and various extremity injuries (26%) Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with an extensile L-shaped approach has been established as a standard surgical treatment for DIACFs due to its simple access for fracture manipulation and fixation It is known that the outcome of multiply injured patients with foot injuries is significantly worse than that of patients without The purpose of the present study is to evaluate the functional outcome and patient satisfaction after DIACFs treated exclusively through ORIF, comparing polytrauma and isolated fractures to discern if the results are due to injury severity or to the polytrauma context. From January 2008 to December 2015, 86 patients with DIACFs were operated through ORIF at Consorcio Hospital General Universitario of Valencia. Twenty-one (24%) patients had a bilateral calcaneal fracture, and twelve out of them were operated bilaterally. All patients were contacted by telephone, in order to ask them to take part in the study. Six patients were not included in the study because of different reasons. Therefore, 89 cases (80 patients) under the diagnosis of DIACFs operated through ORIF were finally included in this study. We retrospectively reviewed prospectively collected data. For each patient, the following information was included in a database: patient demographics, mechanism of the accident, injury severity score (ISS) at admission, fracture classification according to Sanders The inclusion criteria for patient selection included intra-articular calcaneal fracture Sanders type II to IV, age of 16–70 years operated exclusively through ORIF by a standard extended lateral approach and internal fixation with a plate. The exclusion criteria included all extra-articular fractures, fractures operated by different surgical technics, as well as fractures treated with either primary arthrodesis or conservative treatment. We did not exclude any comorbidity. In order to classify the severity of the impact, we divided the fracture causing mechanism into four groups: (A) fall from the same height, (B) fall from a height lesser than 3 meters, (C) fall from a height higher than 3 meters (e.g. falls and jumpers), and (D) direct crush (e.g. traffic accidents). Afterwards, to better study the consequences of the most severe calcaneal mechanism, we established two additional groups: one included falls from a height higher than 3 meters and crushed limbs, and another with the rest of the patients. According to the ISS score Calcaneal fractures were classified based on their severity using computer tomography scans according to Sanders’ classification. Type I, non-displaced intra-articular fractures were excluded of the study. Type II includes one fracture line in the posterior facet (two-part fractures), type III includes two fracture lines in the posterior facet (three-part fractures) and type IV comminuted fractures with three or more fracture lines in the posterior facet (four or more fragments). Subdivision of type II and III on A, B, or C groups was not recorded because it was considered not to be relevant for the purpose of our study. Concomitant injuries commonly appeared associated to calcaneal fractures in cases of severe trauma. We grouped the injuries in bilateral fractures, multiple injured, pelvis fractures, spine fractures, and other extremity fractures. Special comorbidities are very common in a group of patients who have jumped from a height. We also paid attention to psychiatrics background (in treatment with psychiatric drugs), opioids addiction or alcoholism. All secondary surgeries were also recorded. Participants were evaluated using functional outcome questionnaires such as the American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society ankle–hindfoot scale (AOFAS score). AOFAS consists of both a subjective component provided by patients and an objective clinical component scored by the surgeon. In order to focus our study into the treatment functional outcome – the objective of the study, only the subjective component was included in the questionnaire. The AOFAS score was divided into four categories: a score between 90 and 100 was graded as excellent; 80–89 as good; 70–79 as fair; and less than 70 points as poor The Short Form-36 Health Survey (SF-36) is one of the most widely used and evaluated generic health-related quality of life questionnaires The mean time of patients’ review was 48 months after the operation (range 15–62). All cases were operated on by the same team (two foot surgeons). A standard extended lateral approach with L-shaped incision was used in all cases. The vertical limb of the incision was placed midway between the fibula and Achilles tendon. The horizontal limb was placed in line with the base of the fifth metatarsal. The incision was made directly to the bone in order to create a full-thickness flap. Then the retinaculum was divided and the fibulocalcaneal and talocalcaneal ligaments detached from the bone in order to expose the fracture. A direct reduction and fixation with screws and plates was performed in all cases. Depending on the fracture pattern we filled up the bone defect with iliac bone graft. Data was analyzed by a blinded member of our team using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences, version 22 (SPSS, Chicago, IL). Continuous data were found to deviate from a standard normal distribution (determined by test of Kolmogorov–Smirnov), and expressed as the median and standard deviation. ANOVA test was performed to assess the statistical significance of continuous data (test scores), Chi-square (χ Using our inclusion criteria, 80 patients with 89 DIACFs treated by ORIF were available, as 9 out of them (10%) were operated bilaterally ( We found psychiatric comorbidities (patients on psychiatric medication, opioids addicts or alcoholism background) in 29 patients (36.9%). The etiology of the fracture had been a fall from a height in almost all cases (85%). Considering mechanism of injury: 12 cases (13%) were included in group A (fall from the same height), 49 cases (56%) in group B (fall from a height lesser than 3 meters), 26 cases (29%) in group C (fall from a height higher than 3 meters) and only 2 cases (2%) in the group D (direct crush). Calcaneus suffered a severe impact in 28 cases (31%) (group C + D), and a middle impact in the rest of the 61 cases (69%) (group A + B). Nine of the patients were operated bilaterally; therefore, 24 patients were included into C + D groups and 56 into A+B groups. The calcaneal fractures were classified based on their severity using computer tomography scans according to Sanders classification: type II 17 cases (19%), type III 50 cases (56%), and type IV 22 cases (25%). Only one open fracture was operated through ORIF. Concomitant injuries commonly appear associated with calcaneal fractures because of the trauma severity. Excluding bilateral fractures, 21 of the patients (26.5%) had multiple injuries, 5% a pelvic fracture, 10% a spinal fracture, and 14% some other extremity fractures. According to ISS score we defined two groups, polytrauma group – with an ISS score higher than 16 and with injuries in at least two body regions according to the Abbreviated Injury Scale (AIS 1998) – with 11 (14%) patients, and 69 patients (86%) with isolated calcaneal fractures. Secondary surgeries were performed in 24 cases (27%), and subtalar arthrodesis was needed in 14 cases (15.7%). Seven cases (7.8%) developed a deep infection requiring further surgical procedures; in four cases, the osteosynthesis was removed, either partially or totally; also a tendon entrapment into the fibula had to be released. Another patient developed a pressure ulcer which required plastic surgery. At the time of revision, the median AOFAS hindfoot score corresponding to 89 cases was 76.72 SD± 10.22 (54–97), and the average SF-36 of the 80 patients was 69.05 SD ± 13.5 (41–90). As previously described, in our group of 80 patients 29 (36.2%) had psychiatric comorbidities, 11 (13.7%) polytrauma, and 24 (30%) patients had suffered a severe impact. In order to know the relationship between those variables, Chi-square test was used. Polytrauma patients were associated with patients having suffered psychiatric comorbidities ( Sanders classification type was associated with polytrauma patients ( Second surgeries were performed in 24 cases (27%) and subtalar arthrodesis was needed in 14 cases (15.7%) of calcaneus treated by ORIF. Chi-square test was used to evaluate the possible association with studied settings. Three cases (10.3%) of second surgery occurred in patients with psychiatric comorbidities, with no existing statistic association ( No statistical association was found between polytrauma patients and second surgeries (four cases; 30%; Patients with severe impact (C + D group) were not statistically associated with second surgeries (eight cases; 30%; Sanders classification type was not statistically associated with second surgeries ( T-student statistical test was used for AOFAS and SF-36 score to study polytrauma, patients with psychiatric comorbidities and trauma severity of trauma ( When polytrauma cases are studied, the average AOFAS score was 73.80 (SD 7.8), whereas no polytrauma cases medium was 75.59 (SD 10.6). No significance statistical difference was found ( No differences were found between groups including patients with psychiatric comorbidities and without them had similar AOFAS result than patients without them (76.38 SD 9.77 vs 76.76 SD 10.3; Significant statistical differences were found when comparing the severity of calcaneus trauma ( Concerning Sanders classification, the average AOFAS score was 79.46 (SD 8.83) for type II, 79.33 (SD 9.49) for type III, and 69.20 (SD 9.11) for type IV. Significant statistical differences were found when comparing type II with IV ( As the mortality in polytrauma patients has decreased in the last decades, foot injuries gain more importance on the overall outcome injuries to the lower extremity, exerting significant influence on long-term outcome after discharge from the acute care facility Calcaneal fractures continue to generate clinical and research interest due to the impact their outcome can have on the patients’ quality of life The purpose of the present investigation was to determine the differences of functional outcomes of calcaneus fracture between polytrauma patients and patients with isolated calcaneal fracture treated by ORIF. We also studied additional factors that could affect the functional outcomes and secondary surgeries. The severity of the impact was studied, adding in the same group falls from a height higher than 3 meters and car crushes, because the effect of cartilage damage in the join’s prognosis has been studied before in this type of trauma Only a subset of previous studies has described the calcaneus’s outcome in polytrauma patients We only included the calcaneus operated by ORIF, with or without bone graft, to avoid biases due to the different treatments, with predictable and good long-term functional results In our sample the average age of patients (48.4 years) is higher compared to that of other studies No striking differences regarding the etiology of the fracture or the severity of the fracture according to Sanders classification or concomitant injuries were found when comparing with the rest of the earlier studies There is a statistically significant relationship between psychiatric comorbidities, polytrauma and severity of the impacts because of the suicide jumps. However, higher numbers of second surgeries or subtalar arthrodesis were not observed in any of these settings. A statistically significant relationship between injury severity according to Sanders classification and later subtalar arthrodesis was observed, as described in literature When outcome measures were studied, the average AOFAS score was lower in the polytrauma group compared to the non-polytrauma group, but this difference was not statistically significant as expected from previous works The present work confirms previous studies describing a correlation between the severity of injuries and low AOFAS scores Our findings also support the known correlation between the different group Sanders classifications and the AOFAS score The SF-36 Health Questionnaire explains beyond the joint problems, how the injury affects people’s life, including psychological and social aspects Patients with psychiatric comorbidities had a similar AOFAS result than patients lacking them (76.38 vs 76.76, respectively). However, the SF-36 scores present large differences between the two groups (56.2 vs 69.8, respectively). These findings have not been previously reported. They should be taken into account when these patients are treated, because psychological, social, and job-related aspects of the patient could be more affected than expected according to the injury. No significant differences between polytrauma and non-polytrauma group in SF-36 score were found. Previous studies from Zelle The average SF-36 score for Sanders decreases depending on the injury severity, but these differences were not statistically significant. It is possible that these differences could have been more statistically significant in larger studies with more patients. No differences in outcome measures and second surgeries were found when DIACFs in polytrauma patients were treated in the same way than the isolated fractures and surgery was performed by foot specialized surgeons. Our results suggest that the severity of the impact is an important factor for DIACFs prognosis, as the more severe was the trauma sustained the more second surgeries and worse outcome the patients suffered. Following a DIACF, patients with psychiatric comorbidities presented worse health-related quality of life than people without this background. Our results support the idea that Sanders classification is a very important prognosis factor regarding second surgeries, subtalar arthrodesis and AOFAS score in DIACFs, as previously described in the literature The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.