Due to blasting’s limitations, ripping as a breaking technique of rock mass is one of the most popular methods in mining and civil engineering applications. The typical practice is that ripping is used for loosening the soils and weak rocks while blasting is used for breaking stronger rocks. With the regulatory restrictions on blasting, there is a growing interest in ripping rocks that traditionally have been blasted. The ripping is typically cheaper than blasting but predicting whether ripping can be done on a particular rock and the estimation of the excavation cost are challenging and a function of rock properties. This study aims at predicting the ripping production based on an extensive database obtained from three sites in Malaysia. The site observations for production rate and the relations with the sandstone and shale rocks were presented. In situ observations/tests (sonic velocity, joint spacing, Schmitdt hammer, weathering zone) were conducted by the site engineers and the results were used as input data for training and proposing a new model for estimating the ripping production. Many hybrid particle swarm optimization-artificial neural network (PSO-ANN) models were created and the best model was identified based on a ranking system. Then, the best PSO-ANN model with coefficient of determination values of 0.982 and 0.978 and root mean square error values of 0.038 and 0.045 for training and testing datasets, respectively, was selected and introduced to predict ripping production. This study documented that the new PSO-ANN achieved higher performance than the ANN method.For civil engineering projects consisting of highway construction and foundation, prediction of ease of excavation plays a crucial role Several researchers adopted artificial intelligent (AI) methods including artificial neural network (ANN) to address different problems in civil engineering fields In the present study, an ANN model as well as a hybrid PSO- ANN model are applied for prediction of ripping production in various zones of weathering. These two developed models are then compared and the most suitable one is suggested for prediction of ripping production. Sandstone and shale were two types of sedimentary rocks selected for this study and 123 direct ripping tests were carried out in these rock types. The performance of ripping was measured at this location through a total of 12 ripping runs. Back hoe excavator E 200 (Weight 19,400 kg and output power 110 KW) could not break hard ground or firm material with its teeth. On a sunny day, this test was carried out on dry and firm ground. At Kempas site, a completely weathered zone (V) of sandstone rock mass was observed where it was possible to loosen the material from the ground level with hand force without much difficulty. The ripping process was carried out at Kempas site with consistent speed during trials and in the first gear, ripper machine achieved an average speed of 6.5 km/h. Throughout the test, a constant embankment depth of 1.2 m was maintained by penetrating ripper shank into maximum length/ size (99%). Through examination of a low strength of rock mass and wide spacing of discontinuity by lifting mechanism on the ground and ploughing, it was observed that ground at Kempas site was easy to rip. As the material at this location was considerably denser than the materials in the Kempas location, it was not feasible to rip the hard ground with a breaker of E 200 fitted on backhoe. It should be noted that, blasting operation was not carried out before conducting ripping test. This resulted in all joints remained intact. So, there was not any change in the ground condition as blasting operation was not conducted when ripping test was performed. Even though both sites were having similar material, carrying out ripping work at this site was quite tough as compared to Kempas location. In addition, it was observed that Desa Tebaru site was having highly weathered (IV) zone of sandstone rock mass which would require a force equivalent to blow by hammer for breaking the material. Practically, slower average speed of 6.17 km/h at this site by the ripper dozer was achieved. The penetration of shank into the material at this site was lower than the Kempas site. Material at Desa Tebrau site consisted of two different (coarse and fine) grain sizes. It was observed that the penetration of shank in finer material was lower by 14% as compared to coarser material (fine material with shank penetration of 59.8% as opposed to the coarse material with shank penetration of 68.4%). Sandstone and shale heterogeneous materials were found at this location. These two sedimentary rocks were subjected to different grades (zones) of weathering. A typical weathering profile was suggested by International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM) For reaching the finished level of construction work, it was essential to rip complete ground at this site. The majority of rocks at this site consisted of sandstone and shale. Generally, in the field when discontinuity characteristics are determined, feasibility of ripping operation can be evaluated. Particularly, wherever the spacing between joints was more than 0.34 m, cutting shank was not able to penetrate in to the rock. Wherever the spacing between joints was lower than 0.29 m, cutting shank could penetrate approximately 0.7 m. The breadth of ripping was higher whenever the cutting shank penetrated deeper into the materials. Material rippability can be determined based on two critical parameters – joint fillings and ripping direction. As per field observations of crushed materials in closely spaced discontinuities, the discontinuity features and joint spacing had greater impact on the depth of excavation in weathering zone IV consisting of weaker material. It was also observed that it was impractical to penetrate ripper shank with the existence of iron pan minerals greater than 4 cm thick in discontinuities. Hence, further production monitoring was not carried out. Wherever iron pan with 5 cm thickness filled the joints with more than 0.55 m spacing (moderately wide spaced joints) in zone IV material, cutter shank was not able to penetrate. As compared to sandstone, ripper work in shale was comparatively easy. In fact, the weaker material permits ripper to achieve deeper penetration. Fundamentally, productivity level is drastically reduced due to greater resistance to ripping with rocks having wider discontinuity spacing. It was visible from easiness in ploughing system and lifting tool in materials at weathering zones IV and V in low strength spacing between joints less than 0.5 m (closely spaced). In boarder prospective, to determine whether ripping can be done or not in shale with zone IV and lower (higher strength shale), two parameters were utilized, namely the ripping direction and joint spacing. The same technique was applied to sandstone having similar weathering conditions. In some instances, the initial penetration was challenging because of shank getting stuck in materials with good strength but this was overcome by the dozer weight, driving force of tine in combination with spacing in joints. In general, depth of ripping varies from 0 to maximum of 1.2 m and ripping width is in the range of 0 to maximum of 1.6 m. It was further observed that with increase in degree of weathering of rock mass, ripping width and depth were also increased. For example, maximum ripping depth of 1.2 m was observed during ripping operation in weathering zone V with a very weak rock mass. The data analysis revealed that the ripping production rate was consistent in zone V as compared to wide variations in production with materials exposed to zones to II to IV. It shows that excavation rate not only depends on weathering zones but also on discontinuity of characteristics. In order to have a better understanding, ripping widths and depths are presented in Investigation for every site consisted of testing of surface hardness, strength and degree of weathering for the in situ rock mass. Further, scan line survey was carried out with several purposes of geological data collection, rock mass evaluation and joint surveying. Most of civil engineers are interested in the results of in situ testing which show the real condition of a given site. Common tests for the evaluation of site condition are Schmidt hammer test, ultrasonic pulse velocity test and point load test. Before starting of direct ripping test, rock mass properties such as degree of weathering and discontinuity surveys were carried out. Recorded data includes discontinuity infilling material, aperture and distance between adjacent discontinuities. Discontinuity spacing along and in perpendicular directions are measured as part of scan line methods. Scan line method was introduced by Priest and Hudson It is important to note that the in situ testing was planned to assess the complexity and economics of the ripping operation. As part of this study, Schmidt hammer test was used to assess in situ surface hardness. Considering level of sensitivity requirement in rock masses which are not strong, the hammer type L was chosen. Before ripping tests, various tests were conducted on the rock mass. Additionally, prior to every ripping test, point load tests were carried out in the field. The point load test compresses a rock specimen between two points of load application (cone bits) and provides a measure of the rock’s tensile strength To establish a comprehensive database for estimation of ripping production, several related studies were reviewed. As mentioned earlier, this study is focused on field observations/measurements and in situ tests. According to literature, SV is an input of many ripping production works Based on above discussion, five parameters including SV, Js, point load strength index (Is In this study, assessment of ripping production was done through application of two intelligent models, the hybrid PSO–ANN model and ANN model. These models as well as the method to implement them are described in the following sub-sections. The inter relation between desirable input and output is determined through approximation process by a flexible nonlinear function known as ANN Forward and backward passes are two essential passes which are utilized for BP learning which pass through the various layers of the network. The input pattern is used in the forward pass to the network-nodes. Layer by layer, within the network the development propagates. At the end, the generation of output is the real network feedback. In case there is variation in feedback from the goal value, error adjustment needs to be done for adopting weights and also in conformity with error value for bias levels in the network. Hence, BP algorithm is utilized for this function. A typical BP-ANN structure is displayed in In the following, modelling process of a pre-developed ANN technique is described. First of all, the established database should be normalized considering the following equation: Then, five different datasets were chosen at random on the basis of past studies (e.g. The particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm was developed as a bird swarm simulation by Kennedy and Eberhart The best results produced based on individual’s personal experiences The best results produced by other individuals in whole swarm population As a first step in PSO algorithm running, particles which are confident number of individuals are situated in the search space. Feasible solution is represented by each particle. An objective function decides the goal of the swarm, the objective function of each particle is considered fit when the matching value is achieved. After the swarm fitness is assessed, the best position of the swarm is based on velocity of all the particles and Eq.    and C  For gaining better command on the velocity, an inertia weight (w) could be expressed in the velocity equation Updated velocity is calculated using the following equation: Initial, social and cognitive are three parameters of the velocity equation. The two search specifications, namely the exploration and exploitation, are dependent on the velocity of particles and restricted by C As a consequence, a target value is set to accommodate particle positions to get best solutions. Later, a new error is acquired by utilizing the updated positions. This process is continued until achieving the termination criteria and with the optimization output gained with respect to Based on many parametric studies, appropriate PSO parameters were selected for development of PSO-ANN predictive model. When a small swarm size is selected, it may not succeed to get a global solution and when a large swarm size is selected, it may converge in short duration and may increase the training time. Based on specifications of problem under study, swarm size is generally in the range of 20–50 as mentioned by Mendes et al. Selecting the best method at this stage was challenging but the method proposed by Zorlu et al. The coefficients of velocity, C In the velocity equation to catch the optimum value of inertia weight (w), additional sensitivity analyses were carried out. Clerc and Kennedy On the basis of the total rank values shown in In this study, for each predictive model, five datasets were implemented during final stage, results of the training and testing datasets also acquired respectively. The performance capacities of the developed models were evaluated considering R The proposed PSO-ANN model can be used in practice prior to conducting ripping operation. Before ripping operation, the mentioned field tests and observations can be measured/identified and if they are in the range of inputs of this study, the proposed PSO-ANN model can be applied and ripping production will be predicted. It is important to mention that the developed model is valid for rock types of this study, however, it may be applicable for similar rock mass and weathering conditions. Examining the impact of input parameters is one of the ways to identify the most influential ones on the system output. Using the sensitivity analysis (Rij), the most effective and least effective parameters are investigated in this section. This method has been used to investigate effective parameters in many geotechnical studies developing statistical, machine learning and intelligent models. In this study, five parameters including SV, Js, Rn, Is The main objective of this study was to provide a new intelligent method for evaluating and estimating ripping production in sedimentary rocks. For this reason, laboratory and field tests were taken from three site locations. The various weathering conditions were also considered in these sampling. The established database consisting of SV, Js, Rn, Is None.