It has been pointed out that very high plasma levels of homocysteine are characteristic of homocystinuria, a rare autosomal recessive disease accompanied by the early onset of generalized osteoporosis. However, it is unclear by which mechanism hyperhomocysteine induces osteoporosis, although it is known to interfere eith the formation of cross-links in collagen, an essential process in bone formation. Therefore, we investigated the effect of homcysteine on expression of osteocalcin and osteopontin in MC3T3-E1 preosteoblastic cells. Confluent cells were grown in RPMI 1640 containing 10% fetal calf serum with or without homocysteine in an atmosphere of 95% humidified air, 5% CO2 at 37 °C. The secretion of osteocalcin from the cells increased time-dependently until the end of culture (day 34), but 500 μM homocysteine led to an approximately 61% decrease for osteocalcin after 19 days of culture as compared with the control. On the other hand, osteopontin was not inhibited by 500 μM homocysteine but rather activated, and ranged from 134%–209% of the control level in the period from 10 days until the end of culture. From analysis of RT-PCR for mRNA of osteocalcin and osteopontin at the end of the culture, homocysteine levels of 100 and 500 μM significantly increased the expression of osteopontin mRNA with the control (p <0.05). In contrast, the expression of osteopontin mRNA was suppressed in a dose-dependent manner, showing a mirror image of the effect on osteopontin mRNA. These findings suggest that hyperhomocystenemia appears to be an independent risk factor for osteoporosis by disturbing osteoblast function.Osteoporosis is a systemic bone disorder characterized by low bone mass and microarchitecture in the bone tissue, which leads to reduced strength and increased risk of fracture. In general, it is well known that osteoporosis is associated with many etiological causes such as nutrition, cytokines, hormones, and aging. Recently, Meurs et al. reported that the association between homocysteine levels and the risk of fracture appeared to be independent of bone mineral density and other potential risk factors for fracture MC3T3-E1 cells (a clonal preosteoblastic cell line derived from newborn mouse calvaria) were grown in RPMI 1640 (Sigma, St.Louis, USA) containing 10% fetal calf serum (Irvine Scientific, Santa Ana, California, USA) and antibiotics (100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin; BioWhittaker, Walkersville, Maryland, USA) in an atmosphere of 95% humidified air, 5% CO At the end of culture (34 days) cell viability was determined by using a microtiter assay for the formation of formazan from Cell Counting Kit-8 (Dojindo Chem., Kumamoto, Japan) as described previously At each change of the medium, the cells in the culture plate were observed by phase-contrast microscopy using an FC-300Z/OL (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The contents of osteocalcin and osteopontin in cultured medium of MC3T3-E1 cells were measured using ELISA Kits of Biomedical Technologies Inc. (MA, USA) and Immuno-Biological Lab. Co. (Gunma, Japan), respectively. Total RNA was extracted using ISOGEN (Nippon Gene, Toyama, Japan) from MC3T3-E1, as instructed by the manufacturer. First-strand cDNA was synthesized from the total RNA using ReverTra Ace Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (TOYOBO, Osaka, Japan) and random primers (TOYOBO), and was subjected to PCR amplification with AmpliTaq Gold DNA Polymerase (Roche Molecular Systems, Inc., Braunchburg, New Jersey, USA) using specific PCR primers: mouse osteocalcin, 5′-ATG AGG ACC CTC TCT CTG CT-3′ and 5′-CCG TAG ATG CGT TTG TAG GC-3′; mouse osteopontin, 5′-CTT GCT TGG GTT TGC AGT CT-3′ and 5′-AAA TGC AGT GGC CGT TTG CA-3′; mouse glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (G3PDH), 5′-CGG AGT CAA CGG ATT TGG TCG TAT-3′ and 5′-AGC CTT CTC CAT GGT GGT GAA GAC-3′. The PCR products were separated by electrophoresis on 1% agarose gel. All PCRs were performed in triplicate. Quantitation was achieved using the comparative threshold cycle method according to the manufacturer's protocol. For statistical calculation the Student's Osteocalcin is a noncollagenous bone-specific matrix protein. As shown in To clarify the mechanism for secretion of osteocalcin and osteopontin in MC3T3-E1 cells treated with homocysteine, we investigated morphological changes of cells. As shown in As demonstrated in Hyperhomocysteinemia has been reported to be associated with skeletal abnormalities and osteoporosis Regarding the homocysteine concentrations, plasma level of hyperhomocysteine may reach values of 16–30 μM (moderate), 31–100 μM (medium) or greater than 100 μM (severe), values as high as 500 μM found in patients with homocystinuria Regarding the roles of osteopontin and osteocalcin in osteoblast function, they are not very clear. Previously, Audi et al. reported that osteocalcin is a late marker of osteoblast differentiation that is related closely to osteoblast maturation