The property of lower soda and alumina contents of iron hydrogarnet can reduce the loss of soda and alumina in Bayer and Sub-molten salt process. Thus, the economic efficiency of alumina production could be improved. How to solve the effective formation of iron hydrogarnet in concentrated caustic aluminate solution and its cycle in the digestion process has become an important research topic. The base of hydroferrire desilication agents (calcium hydroferrite CHF, calcium hydroferrocarbonate CHFC, calcium hydroferrosulfate CHFS) were synthesized, the desilication experiments and desilication products (DSPs) were characterized, the results show that the hydroandradite and aluminum-hydroandradite are the main components in DSPs. The free energy of synthesis reaction of desilication agents and desilication reaction in concentrated caustic solution was investigated using the complex silicate theory. The investigation shows that CHFC has the better desilication performance for hydroferrite desilication agents. The free energy of desilication reaction in concentrated caustic solution using hydroandradite is affected by the initial silica coefficient, the reacted silica coefficient of DSPs, and the reaction temperature. From the point of view of thermodynamics, the substitution reaction between aluminum to iron that occurred in the concentrated caustic aluminosilicate solution main occurs when the higher initial silica coefficient of hydroandradite and the higher alumina coefficient of reaction product.The Bayer process is the principal method for the production of alumina from bauxite worldwide. The modern version of the process maintains the key steps of dissolution of alumina-rich minerals into hot caustic solution, separation of the insoluble phases, followed by gibbsite precipitation and calcination of the gibbsite to alumina ( The nature of crystal structure i.e. the gibbsitic and boehmitic bauxites are easier to digest than diasporic minerals by Bayer process leads to variations in processing conditions, such as less severe caustic concentrations, temperature and holding time. For the diasporic bauxite, especially Chinese and Eastern-Europe minerals, classical Bayer process at elevated temperatures of 220–300 °C and high pressures of 3–10 MPa( Based on the enhanced oxidation property of concentrated alkali solutions, a new decomposition/separation technology for chromite, diaspore, iserine, and uhligite was introduced and developed ( In the Bayer and Sub-molten salt process, the reactive silica (kaolinite, illite) is dissolved into the caustic aluminate solution ( In order to decrease the loss of soda and alumina of alumina production, the DSPs produced within the process should be calcium silicates and iron-hydrogarnet ( In previous work ( Although there are a number of studies regarding the use of iron hydrogarnet in digestion and deep desilication at atmospheric pressure, the formation conditions of iron hydrogarnet, the thermodynamics of iron hydrogarnet and desilication are still unclear. In this paper, we report our recently study of standard thermodynamics investigation of reaction process using hydroferrite desilication reagents at atmospheric pressure. The hydroferrite desilication agents, including calcium hydroferrite (CHF), calcium hydroferrocarbonate (CHFC) and calcium hydroferrosulfate (CHFS) were synthesized and reacted with concentrated caustic aluminosilicate solution, then the DSPs were characterized. On the base of experiments, the standard Gibbs energy, the Entropy or the total differential functions of free energy for hydroferrite agents and DSPs were calculated; the standard free energy and equilibrium constant that the synthesis reaction of hydroferrite, desilication reaction using hydroferrite were explored. All the chemical reagents used in this study were analytical-grade chemicals obtained from the Chemical Co. of Beijing; they were used as received without further purification. The water used in all the experiments was purified using a Milli-Q instrument (Millipore Corp.). The experimental apparatus used was a 2-L glass mixed-tank reactor, which was baffled, equipped with a two-flat-blade turbine mixer, and heated by a water jacket. The temperature was controlled using a band heater inside the reactor. Calcium ferrite was synthesized before the synthesis of CHF. Reaction mixture was prepared by mixing solid particle containing the appropriate molar ratio to maintain CaCO CHF was prepared by adding calcium ferrite according to the chemical stoichiometry of 3CaO·Fe Ferric hydroxide was synthesized before the synthesis of CHFC. The same procedure for both was as follows. A saturated NaOH solution was slowly added to saturated Fe CHFC was prepared by adding the water slaked lime, the newly formed wet Fe(OH) For the synthesis of CHFS, the newly formed wet ferric hydroxide in synthesis of CHFC was used. CHFS was prepared by adding the water slaked lime, the newly formed Fe(OH) Experimental sub-molten salt solutions containing aluminosilicate were prepared before the desilication reaction; solutions were prepared by dissolving predetermined amounts of NaOH in high-purity water. Sodium aluminate solutions containing silica at different concentrations were prepared by dissolving predetermined amounts of aluminum hydroxide and sodium silicate in hot sodium hydroxide solutions in a polytetrafluorethylene (PTFE) vessel. Desilication experiments were conducted in a 1-L stainless steel reactor which was baffled, equipped with a two-flat-blade turbine mixer, and heated by an oil jacket. The temperature was controlled using a temperature controller inside the reactor. Dry desilication agent samples were added to pre-determined amounts of a silicate-containing sodium aluminate solution, which was heated to a pre-set temperature. The reaction was carried out for prescribed time. After the reaction, the desilication products (DSPs) was filtered, washed with high-purity water, dried in a vacuum oven at 333 K for 12 h, and analyzed to determine phase compositions. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the DSPs were recorded on a powder diffractometer (X'Pert Pro, PANalytical, Netherlands) with Cu K The aluminate/ferrite desilication agents and DSPs are complex silicate compounds and it's difficult to directly determine their thermodynamic data by the experiments. According to Wen's theory ( As shown in Meanwhile, we introduce the method into the calculation of Entropy to investigate the tendency of synthesis and desilication reaction. The Calculation of Gibbs free energy and Entropy shown in Eq. The thermodynamic data of other compounds and ions that are present in the synthesis and desilication reaction are obtained from the Lange's Handbook of Chemistry ( For the chemical reaction, the standard Gibbs free energy and Entropy as a function of temperature can be calculated by the following equations: The calculation is performed using Mathcad software.   Combining the result of DSPs characterization and the previous research (Hong, Zhang et al. 2018, Hong, Zhang et al. 2018), the desilication products are main the AH, AIH and little AIS. To investigate the thermodynamics of the desilication reaction using hydroferrite agents, it is assumed that the desilication reactions are divided into three, i.e. the hydroandradite formation, desilication reaction by hydroandradite and aluminum-ferric substitution reaction. The desilication reactions of hydroferrite agents is shown in Eq. 1. Hydroandradite formation 2. Desilication using hydroandradite 3. Substitution reaction The standard Gibbs free energy and Entropy changes versus temperature for CHF, CHFC and CHFS are depicted in The synthesis reactions of hydroferrite desilication agents are expressed with Eqs. For the absolute value of Gibbs free energy and the Entropy of the synthesis reaction is >0, the hydroferrite agents can be synthesized in a multiphase aqueous system when the temperature is <373 K. The trend of synthesis reaction is CHF > CHFS>CHFC for the thermodynamic point of view. The temperature mainly reflects the Entropy of the CHF synthesis reaction. Compared with the optimum synthesis reaction conditions of different hydroferrite desilication agents, the condition required for CHF is similar to synthesis reaction conditions of CHFC. The synthesis efficiency of CHF is lower than that of CHFC due to the stable crystal dicalcium ferrite. For the CHFS synthesis, the reaction temperature than CHFC for the inert gypsum.  The absolute value of Gibbs free energy decreases with an increase in temperature, and with increased variations in the silica coefficient. The effect of a change in Entropy is opposite to that of Gibbs free energy, i.e., Entropy increases with increasing temperature and decreases with an increase in the silica coefficient. To describe the effect of temperature and silica coefficient on the free energy of hydroandradite, a quantitative analysis was undertaken using a differential function, namely that free energy is regarded as a function of silica coefficient and temperature. The results are shown in Eqs. Where x is silica coefficient (0 < x ≤ 3), T is the temperature (298 ≤ It can be seen from Eqs. The Eqs. The From the thermodynamic point of view, the desilication ability of hydroferrite agents can be evaluated by comparing the reaction equilibrium constants. It is shown that the reaction equilibrium constants of CHFC are higher than those of CHF and CHFS above 373 K, and especially increases with an increase in temperature. It means that CHFC has better desilication reaction performance in the actual reaction process, due to the reaction operation temperature being above 373 K. In our previous research, the average silica coefficient-DSP is about 0.34, the reaction efficiency is about 85% and the residual silica concentration in the solution is >0.5 g/L. Compared with the results of the In the desilication process using hydroferrite agents, the hydroandradite continues to combine with the silicate ion in caustic solution to form hydroandradite with a higher silica coefficient. Therefore the thermodynamic investigation of desilication reaction using hydroandradite is carried out. The Eqs. As seen in It can be observed that the Gibbs free energy of reaction is mainly affected by the initial silica coefficient and the silica coefficient of the DSPs; the absolute of Gibbs free energy increased with the decrease of initial silica coefficient and the increase of the silica coefficient of DSP, it means the desilication reaction is more valid. As shown in the When the hydroferrite agents were used for desilication from the caustic solution, aluminum hydroandradite (3CaO·yAl The Free energy of aluminum hydroandradite can be considered as a function of silica coefficient, alumina coefficient and temperature, the influence of silica coefficient and temperature on aluminum hydroandradite is the same as that of hydroandradite; the Gibbs free energy and Entropy of aluminum hydroandradite decreased with an increase in alumina coefficient. The Gibbs free energy and Entropy range from −6558.86 to −4424.41 kJ.mol, and 1095.65 to 246.03 J/mol under 623 K. The influence of each factor was expressed by the differential functions that are shown in Eqs. In can be seen from Eqs. In the desilication process, the hydroandradite undergoes desilication and substitution reaction between aluminum to iron simultaneously under the interaction of concentrated caustic soda and aluminosilicate solution. It was calculated that the influence of the initial silica coefficient of hydroandradite and the reaction temperature on the free energy of the substitution reaction, the simultaneous reaction of desilication and substitution was not considered. The substitution reaction between aluminum to iron as follows Eq.  As shown in  For the chemical thermodynamics, the chemical reaction occurs when the Gibbs free energy of reaction is negative and Entropy is positive; Combine the results of In this study, the thermodynamic investigation of concentrated caustic aluminosilicate solution using hydroferrite agents was investigated. The calcium hydroferrite (CHF), calcium hydroferrocarbonate (CHFC) and calcium hydroferrosulfate (CHFS) were synthesized using optimum reaction conditions. The results of desilication test using different synthetic products indicated that the mainly DSPs in concentrated caustic aluminosilicate solution is hydroandradite, the aluminum hydroandradite is low phase in DSPs for the substitution reaction between aluminum to iron due to high temperature and concentrated caustic solution. The hydroferrite desilication agents can be synthesized in multiphase solution when temperature <373 K; the standard free energy of synthesis reactions for CHF and CHFC is not favored by temperature, and it mainly reflects the Entropy of the CHF synthesis reaction. The trend of synthesis reaction is CHFS> CHFC>CHF thermodynamically. The thermodynamic investigation of desilication reaction using hydroferrite regents shown that the reaction equilibrium constants of CHFC are higher than those of CHF and CHFS above 373 K, and desilication reactions using CHF and CHFS have the same equilibrium constants under different temperature and silica coefficients. It means that CHFC has better desilication reaction performance in actual reaction process due to the reaction operation temperature above 373 K. In desilication process using hydroandradite, the Gibbs free energy and Entropy are effected by the initial silica coefficient, that of DSPs and temperature; free energy increased with the decrease of initial silica coefficient and the increase of the silica coefficient of DSP, it means the desilication reaction is more effective. For the chemical thermodynamics, the substitution reaction between aluminum to iron that occurred in concentrated occurs when the higher initial silica coefficient and alumina coefficient of product. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the