Shoulder and elbow fractures and dislocations are common injuries. The aim of this review is to provide an overview of the acute management of upper limb injuries, specifically, shoulder and elbow fractures and dislocations. The management of primary traumatic anterior shoulder dislocations is traditionally conservative however surgical management options should be discussed for patients considered at risk of recurrent instability. Early operative intervention has been shown to improve functional outcome for younger patients however further clinical trials are required to assess the role of surgery in older patients. The management of proximal humerus fractures remains contentious with current evidence advocating non-operative management with a potential role for reverse shoulder arthroplasty in complex fractures. Current management of simple elbow dislocations remains short-term immobilization which provides effective pain reduction but should be superseded by functional therapy after 1 week. The role of surgical management of simple elbow dislocations remains poorly investigated. Complex elbow dislocations frequently require operative intervention due to the loss of joint stability that results from injury. There are considerable areas of further research which should be carried out to improve understanding and effectiveness of current treatment.Surgical neck Greater tuberosity Anatomical neck Lesser tuberosity Greater tuberosity and shaft are displaced with respect to the lesser tuberosity and articular surface which remain together Lesser tuberosity and shaft are displaced with respect to the greater tuberosity and articular surface which remain together Shoulder and elbow dislocations are the most common types of joint dislocation. Understanding the relevant anatomy, aetiology and pathology combined with an understanding of the relevant literature and current controversies is required to make informed decisions with regard to the management of these injuries. This article reviews the most recent literature regarding acute management and treatment for a variety of commonly treated injuries, including shoulder dislocations, proximal humerus fractures, elbow dislocations and elbow fractures. In this article we present common management concepts based on the up-to-date literature on these topics which was identified using a broad search strategy. Proximal humeral fractures account for 5–6% of all fractures with the peak incidence occurring in females over the age of 80. Approximately half of these fractures are displaced and involve the surgical neck. Basic investigation of suspected proximal humerus fractures includes radiographs in true anteroposterior view, scapular Y view, and axillary lateral view. Computed tomography (CT) scan can be obtained for further detail and three-dimensional reconstruction. There remains controversy over the management of proximal humerus fractures between surgical treatment (internal fixation, hemiarthroplasty or increasingly, reverse shoulder arthroplasty) and conservative management with early mobilization. Proximal humerus fractures have a 1-year mortality of 9.8%, rising to 28.2% at 5 years. Female gender, increasing age, pathological fracture and increased number of co-morbidities are independent variables for increased mortality. The evidence for surgical intervention is limited in the management of proximal humerus fractures. A Cochrane review (2012) evaluated 23 small randomized controlled trials (RCTs) involving a total of 1238 patients. Pooled results of patient-reported functional scores at 1 year from three trials showed no statistically significant difference between surgical and non-surgical groups. Different methods of surgical management were tested in seven small trials. A recent multi-centre pragmatic RCT, the PROFHER trial, randomized 250 patients into surgical and non-surgical treatment groups for displaced fracture of the proximal humerus involving the surgical neck. This trial showed no statistically or clinically significant differences between surgical and non-surgical. The basic fracture configurations as described by the Neer system refer to the four main fragments comprising the head, the shaft and the lesser and greater tuberosity. One-part fractures are usually treated conservatively. Displaced two-part fractures can be treated by reducing the fracture and fixing the head back on to the shaft either with a plate or intramedullary device. Three- and four-part fractures require specific reduction and fixation techniques. It is worth noting that the strong bone of the bicipital groove means that the typical split of the tuberosities in a four-part fractures tends to occur just posteriorly to this groove. The biomechanical evidence to date suggests that optimal fixation of proximal humerus fractures in osteoporotic bone remains locking plates which are superior to non-locking plates and intramedullary nails. This is due to their increased stiffness and torsional fatigue resistance. The complication rate following plating for proximal humeral fractures is over 20% in most series and has been reported as high as 75%. Complications necessitating revision surgery include intra-articular screw penetration (7.5% according to one systematic review) and avascular necrosis. Screw penetration can occur at the time of surgery (primary) or later after head collapse (secondary) therefore it is essential intraoperative practice to obtain orthogonal X-ray imaging whilst manipulating the shoulder to confirm screw position. A systematic review of reverse shoulder arthroplasty (RSA) versus hemiarthroplasty (HA) in complex proximal humerus fractures shows that patients treated with RSA gain improved forward flexion but decreased external rotation compared with patients undergoing hemiarthroplasty. However no significant clinical difference in either American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons Shoulder Score was identified. RSA was associated with an increased rate of clinical complications (9.6%) but a lower revision rate (0.93%) at short-term to midterm follow-up compared with hemiarthroplasty. RSA offers an alternative surgical option for patients after complex acute proximal humeral fractures with some studies reporting better functional outcome, reduced pain and revision rates compared to HA. Shoulder dislocation is the most common joint dislocation with an incidence of 8.3–12.3 per 100,000 per year, the majority of whom are males aged 21–30. The risk of recurrent instability in young patients following primary traumatic anterior shoulder dislocation has been shown to be as high as 65%. Despite this, the management of first-time dislocations remains controversial between proponents of conservative management versus acute surgical stabilization. Associated injuries including engaging Hill Sach's lesions, significant (>25%) bony Bankart (anteroinferior glenoid bone defects) and greater tuberosity fractures are proven to be associated with a higher risk of recurrent instability and therefore the threshold for surgery is lower. Primary traumatic anterior shoulder dislocation frequently results in multiple injuries to the shoulder joint and surrounding structures. A description of the most common injuries seen in relation to dislocation can be seen in A number of studies have investigated conservative management of traumatic anterior shoulder dislocation. There is little consensus regarding the optimal length and type of immobilization, although a duration of 3–6 weeks is common. There is an increasing trend towards shorter durations or no immobilization at all, particularly in the elderly population to avoid developing stiffness. A Cochrane review (2014) reviewed three randomized trials involving 470 participants and found there was no significant difference between immobilization in internal and external rotation. The traditional management of acute anterior shoulder dislocation following reduction was immobilization in internal rotation in a sling. There is now a growing body of evidence that early surgical repair offers a significant reduction in the risk of recurrent instability. Surgical repair primarily focuses on treatment of the Bankart lesion to reduce risk of developing recurrent instability. There are five RCTs, a Cochrane review and a meta-analysis comparing operative and non-operative treatments for acute anterior shoulder dislocation. There is a clear overall consensus that early operative stabilization of Bankart lesions in young patients offers a significant reduction in the risk of recurrent instability. It is important to discuss with patients the relevant risks of developing recurrent instability versus the risks of surgery. Patients who suffer traumatic anterior dislocation may not develop recurrent instability and operative intervention may put them at risk of surgical complications hence a ‘wait and see’ approach may be more appropriate. On balance, the evidence suggests that young male contact sports players who suffer primary traumatic anterior dislocation should be considered for operative management as this risk of developing recurrent instability is particularly high in this population. There remains a need for further high quality evidence to support the use of operative stabilization in primary traumatic anterior shoulder dislocation across patients of all ages. Traumatic posterior shoulder dislocation is a rare injury accounting for less than 3% of shoulder dislocation. It may occur in the presence of fracture-dislocations of the shoulder as a result of high-energy trauma. The literature suggests that closed reduction of a posterior dislocation should be carried out under general anaesthesia assuming the injury is picked up in an acute time frame (<3 weeks). If closed reduction is unsuccessful then arthroscopic or open reduction should be carried out with the added advantage of providing diagnostic evaluation of the joint. From the limited literature, evidence suggests that the size of any humeral head defect (reverse Hill Sach's), and time interval from dislocation are key factors to consider when deciding suitable surgical intervention treatment strategies. Conservative treatment can provide satisfactory results for elderly patients with low demands or those with unstable epilepsy, but surgical treatment is recommended to achieve good functional results in those with recurrent instability with soft tissue deficiencies or significant bony defects. There are numerous classification systems for elbow fractures based on the anatomical location of the fracture. The commonly used fracture classification systems are shown in The basic principles of fixation for elbow fractures depend on the location, classification, and displacement of the fracture. Intra-articular distal humeral fractures are large topic with varying treatment strategies. We have not sought to review these injuries, as the scope of this review would not afford adequate room. Radial head fractures are common, occurring in up to 20% of elbow injuries often with associated soft tissue injuries. Isolated minimally displaced radial head fractures (Mason I) can be managed conservatively with early mobilization. More complicated fractures may require operative management such as open reduction internal fixation (ORIF), partial excision, radial head replacement and radial head resection. Coronoid fractures are pathognomonic for elbow instability and surgery should be considered for those with displaced fractures. Operative management such as ORIF through medial or posterior approaches can be adopted depending on associated soft tissue injuries that may require reconstruction. Alternatively, a hinged fixator can be used to provide adequate stability. The significance of these complex fractures is addressed later in relation to complex elbow dislocation. Olecranon fractures have a bimodal age distribution. Conservative management through immobilization is suitable for undisplaced fractures or displaced fractures in patients with poor functional status. Operative management of displaced fractures includes tension band wiring for fractures with no joint surface comminution. More complex fracture patterns may necessitate methods including intramedullary fixation, plate and screw fixation, and excision with triceps advancement. Capitellar fractures are rare accounting for 1% of elbow fractures. Non-displaced type I and II fractures can be managed conservatively with posterior splint immobilization. Operative management includes ORIF, fragment excision and arthroplasty. The anatomy of the elbow is complex and joint stability is provided primarily by the osseous anatomy of the distal humerus and proximal anatomy which provide bony stabilization and a number of soft tissue structures susceptible to injury. Understanding the relevant anatomy helps understand the operative treatments required to restore joint stability. The anatomical structures predominantly responsible for stability are the bony stabilizers which are supported by soft tissue structures including the lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL), medial collateral ligament, which is divided into anterior and a posterior bundle, and the radial collateral ligament. Bones and ligaments are considered static and primary stabilizing factors. Secondary stabilizing factors are joint-crossing muscles that additionally contribute to elbow stability. The elbow joint is the second most commonly dislocated joint in adults with an incidence of 5.2–6.1 per 10,000 per year. Elbow dislocations are classified as either simple, or complex depending on whether or not an associated fracture is present. Complex dislocations account for approximately 26% of presentations and are associated with fractures of the distal humerus, radial head, ulna or coronoid process. There are a number of mechanisms of dislocation with the majority posterior secondary to rupture of the LUCL. This results in posterolateral rotatory instability, causing the forearm to displace into external rotation and circumferential tearing of the capsuloligamentous structures to occur from lateral to medial. Elbow dislocation can vary in severity with increasing soft tissue injury correlated to negative prognosis such as joint instability, particularly posterolateral instability. Simple elbow dislocations can usually be identified on plain AP and lateral radiographs with CT proving beneficial if associated fractures are suspected. The management of simple elbow dislocation after reduction is traditionally conservative with short-term immobilization followed by physiotherapy. Reduction of elbow dislocation should be carried out under appropriate analgesia and sedation. At the same time, the joint should be examined for stability. Signs of instability are redislocation, a positive pivot shift test and positive valgus and varus stress testing. Unstable joints should be investigated with further imaging such as CT to assess associated fractures and MRI to assess for soft tissue ligamentous injuries. The evidence for conservative versus surgical management in stable joints is extremely limited with only two RCTs identified. The RCTs compared surgery to conservative therapy in 80 patients following simple elbow dislocation. These showed no significant difference between the surgical and non-surgical groups in range of movement. Complex dislocations are traditionally treated with open reduction and internal fixation in order to restore the bony stabilizers of the elbow. It is thus vital to assess stability and obtain appropriate imaging to identify the cause of the instability. Chronic instability, post-traumatic arthrosis, and poor functional outcomes are frequent. Orthopaedic surgeons should strive to optimize elbow function through restoration of articular congruity and stability coupled with early rehabilitation. Understanding elbow biomechanics and the injury mechanism provides valuable insight into the variations of pathology whilst identification of the particular fracture pattern, such as an axial loading, valgus posterolateral rotatory, or varus posteromedial rotatory injury mechanism, helps guide appropriate treatment. Dislocation of the elbow associated with radial head fracture and coronoid process fracture, known as the ‘terrible triad’, is challenging to treat and linked to complicated outcomes. The ‘terrible triad’ is also linked to soft tissue injuries including medially; the ulnar collateral ligament, and the flexor-pronator mass and laterally; the lateral collateral ligament, the extensor-supinator mass and the annular ligament. Terrible triad injuries are marked by recurrent joint instability therefore surgical reconstruction is indicated for the majority of patients. The primary aim of surgical intervention is to obtain a stable joint that permits early mobilization. The evidence to support current treatment protocols is limited by the wide range and severity of terrible triad injuries meaning it is difficult to compare studies, many of which consist of level III and IV evidence. Injury patterns in terrible triad injuries vary considerably depending on severity. About 50% of cases have complete rupture of the radial capsuloligament complex combined with injuries to the osseous and articular ligament. In these cases reconstruction of the radial head is mandated due to the high risk of redislocation, chronic instability and post-traumatic arthritis. There is a strong body of opinion that associated coronoid fractures should be fixed, regardless of fracture classification in order to restore the medial bony stabilizing column. There are two main strategies employed to surgically approach the elbow in these injuries. This first is a single posterior incision with wide flaps allowing almost circumferential access versus a two incision technique both posterior and lateral. The coronoid fragment should be fixed first, followed by reconstruction or replacement of the radial head and then repair of the lateral collateral ligament. Repair of the medial collateral ligament is advocated when the joint remains unstable and incongruent. If the joint remains unstable, then a hinged external fixator should be applied to allow early mobilization. Postoperatively, patients should be immobilized for a short period of time before beginning rehabilitation, gradually increasing the range of motion at a rate of 10 degrees per week. The evidence above is the strongest available but individual surgeon preference for management of terrible triad injuries varies and reflects the need for further research. This article has reviewed the acute management of upper limb injuries, specifically, shoulder and elbow fractures and dislocations. For primary traumatic anterior shoulder dislocations, patients have traditionally been managed conservatively however the evidence presented here should at least necessitate a clear discussion of surgical management options with those patients considered at risk. The evidence suggests that early operative intervention improves functional outcome for younger patients however further clinical trials are required to assess the role of surgery in older patients. The management of proximal humerus fractures remains contentious with current evidence advocating for non-operative management. There is potentially a growing role for reverse shoulder arthroplasty in proximal humerus fractures although further evidence investigating this is required. The role of surgical management of simple elbow dislocations remains poorly investigated. Current management of simple elbow dislocations remains short-term immobilization which provides more effective pain reduction but should be superseded by functional therapy no later than 1 week. Complex elbow dislocations usually require operative intervention due to the loss of joint stability that results from injury. There is a range of operative approaches depending on the exact location of the fracture and nature of the instability. There are considerable areas of further research which should be carried out to improve understanding and effectiveness of current treatment.