Synthesis of hollow hydridosilica nanoparticles with mesoporous shell (HMHNs) employing a mixture of cationic fluorocarbon surfactant (FC-04) and nonionic triblock copolymer surfactant (P123) as template and triethoxysilane as silica precursor is reported. It is found that the content of the FC-04 in the surfactant mixture greatly influences the aggregation state of the FC-04 and P123 surfactant template and therefore influences the morphology of the synthesized hydridosilica nanoparticles. HMHNs can be synthesized with proper amount of FC-04 surfactants due to the formation of FC-04 and P123 complex micelle, where FC-04 surfactant locates at the outer shell and the P123 constructs the inner core. Ascribed to the inherent hydride sites within the HMHNs, facile immobilization of Pd nanoparticles is achieved by using HMHNs as both the reducing agent and scaffold. The lesser processes produce some smaller Pd nanoparticles (2–3nm) within the pore voids and relatively larger Pd nanoparticles (10–15nm) on the outer surfaces of HMHNs. The catalytic hydrogenation of 4-nitrophenol demonstrates that the heterogeneous Pd catalyst is efficient.Well-defined noble metal nanoparticle catalysts are widely used in chemical synthesis due to their intrinsic versatility properties such as high surface-to-volume ratio and large fraction of metal atoms that are exposed to reactant molecules Recently, the Ozin group has discovered an interesting mesoporous hydridosilica materials synthesized through aqueous acid-catalyzed nonionic triblock copolymer (P123) surfactant micelle template directed self-assembly of triethoxysilane (HSi(OEt) It is useful to design the morphology of mesoporous material in order to facilitate their desired application In this contribution, hollow hydridosilica nanoparticles with mesoporous shell (HMHNs) are synthesized through the self-assembly mechanism by using a mixture of cationic fluorocarbon surfactant Cationic fluorocarbon surfactant FC-04 The synthesis of mesoporous hydridosilica nanoparticles was carried out following a procedure similar to that reported elsewhere Typically, certain amount of PdCl The catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol at room temperature under atmosphere pressure was employed as a model reaction to test the catalytic properties of the Pd/HMHNs catalyst. In the reduction of 4-nitrophenol, 0.25 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) observations were performed on a Philips Model Tecnai F20 microscope, operating at 200 The key feature in our strategy for the synthesis of HMHNs involved the utility of fluorocarbon surfactants (FC-04). Unlike the hydrocarbon chains of common surfactants, the FC-04 exhibited much higher surface activity and had more tendency to stay at the interface between the oil and water due to their both hydrophobic and lipophobic properties The nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms of the extracted MHNs synthesized with different amounts of FC-04 were shown in Based on our results, obviously, the morphology, size and pore structure of the MHNs particles were influenced by the amount of FC-04 surfactants in the synthesis. In our synthesis, the P123 surfactant and FC-04 were self-assembled in acid solution and micellar complexes were formed before the addition of the silica precursor. The micellar complexes prepared with different amounts of FC-04 were subjected to DLS measurements to monitor their aggregation states and sizes. Here it should be pointed out that in all measurements the concentration of total surfactants was kept at 1 Previous studies have shown that the micelle formation was directly related to the morphology and pore structure of the mesoporous materials synthesized through the self-assemble mechanism The chemical composition of the synthesized HMHNs was confirmed by FTIR. As shown in During the past few decades, noble metal nanoparticles, especially palladium (Pd) nanoparticles, have been widely used in chemical synthesis Since the Si–H moieties were distributed on framework of the whole HMHNs, the reduction of Pd The catalytic activity of the Pd/HMHNs was tested by employing the catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol as a model reaction. To monitor the reaction process, aliquots of the reaction mixture were withdrawn at a regular time interval and measured by UV–vis spectroscopy. The adsorption peaks of 300 In conclusion, we reported the facile synthesis of HMHNs and their dual effect in Pd nanoparticles immobilization. The synthesis of HMHNs was carried out by using the complex micelles formed by the FC-04 surfactant and nonionic triblock copolymer P123 surfactant as template, where the FC-04 surfactant forms the shell and the P123 forms the core. Facile immobilization of Pd nanoparticles was achieved by using the HMHNs as both the scaffold and reducing agent due to the inherent hydride sites within the HMHNs. The catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol demonstrates that the as-prepared heterogeneous Pd catalyst was efficient due to the well-defined hollow structure. In addition, this strategy could be easily extended to immobilization of other noble metal nanoparticles, which would be applicable in different aspects. This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 