Angular stability locking plates are commonly used in proximal humeral fractures, especially in old patients with osteoporotic bones. These implants show good results in short and midterm follow-up, but complications are not uncommon. Here we present a case report to describe a case of early failure of a proximal angular stability plate implanted in a 72 years old female with a highly unstable two part proximal humeral fracture. An optical and metallurgic analysis was also conducted to study the modalities of failure. We concluded that anatomic reduction and restoration of the medial cortical support are crucial in order to minimize the mechanical load on the bone–metal interface and to prevent mechanical failure, in particular when the fracture rim drop in the weak point of the plate that was found in the proximal two symmetric holes (Holes E).Angular stability locking plates are commonly used in proximal humeral fractures. These plates are specifically designed with the aim to reduce hardware complications and to obtain a more stable fixation. These implants show very good results at mid-term follow-up, in term of stability and rate of union [ A 72 years old female reported a highly dislocated two part proximal humeral fracture below the surgical neck: 1.1.A.3 fracture according to AO classification or two part fracture according to Neer classification ( The fracture was treated by open reduction-internal fixation (ORIF) with a Philos Plate (Synthes® Gmbh, Solothurn, Switzerland), which was implanted through a deltopectoral approach ( The patient underwent revision surgery: the plate was removed and the fracture was reduced and stabilized with a proximal humeral nail (T2-Styker®) ( At 2 year follow up, excellent functional results were demonstrated by VAS (0 mm.), SF-12 (40) and RA Constant Score (81 vs 81) evaluations. At the time of the surgical revision, plate failure and bone non-union were observed. The two parts of the plate were collected for metallurgic analysis. Instrumental examination of the plate breakage surface had been carried out using a Wild stereomicroscope (Heidelberg, Germany) and then were analysed by FEG-SEM (LEO 1530, Oberkochen, Germany) equipped with a backscatter CENTAURUS detector. The plate breakage took place in the section characterized by the presence of two threaded holes located at the same level (Holes E). The analysis was focused on the breakage surface of the two bridges marked A and B ( The low magnification image of the fracture surface of the central bridge A was characterized by a globular waved structure, characteristic of the fatigue failure ( No metallurgical or tooling defects, inclusions or porosities were observed in both the fracture initiation sites. The stereomicroscopic inspection of the other bridges of the plate evidenced another crack already developed in a third site, between the anterior hole in position C and the D hole. The crack crosses the bridge side to side. Several other smaller fatigue initiation cracks were found in the rims of thinner zone of other bridges of the plate. Plating systems for proximal humeral fractures are strongly debated because of the many complications described in the literature. The rigid fixation allowed by locking plates has been suggested to improve mechanical stability and should result in better outcomes compared to traditional plate fixation without locking system [ However, plating of proximal humeral fractures is a demanding surgical procedure and even in case of correct surgical indication, technical errors may occur [ Sufficient length of the plate should prevent implant failure due to stress fracture [ The increased number of screws in the humeral head may affect the fracture healing and the perfusion of the humeral head, even if it would increase the fixation strength. The optimal rigidity of the implants for the fixation of proximal humerus fractures is controversial in literature [ The plate design with two holes for the screws at the same level determine a low strength section in the device. When the fracture line is opposed to this section fatigue fracture may occur, especially in unstable humeral fractures. The anatomic reduction and restoration of the medial cortical support are crucial in order to minimize the mechanical load on the bone–metal interface. To improve the implant resistance it may be appropriate to avoid the positioning of the two screw holes at the same level of the fracture. It is clear that a lack of medial support will leave the lateral plate exposed to large bending effects. Surgeons should be aware of the risk of fixation failure in elderly patients with low BMD and in oblique unstable neck fracture of the humerus. To prevent a possible plate breakage, the surgeon should place the weak section of the plate (E zone) slightly above or below the line of the fracture. If this is not possible, we suggest the use of a different method of fixation. There are no identified conflicts of interest identified by any authors involved in this research. There was no financial or grant support of this case report.