The effects of heat treatment temperature and time on the hardness and the wear resistance of RE (rare earth)-Ni-W-P-PTFE-SiC and RE-Ni-W-P-SiC composite coatings have been studied, and the results indicate that the hardness of the composite coatings is lower and the mass loss (i.e., rate of abrasion) is higher in the as-deposited state. The hardness rises and the rate of abrasion decreases with increasing heat treatment temperature; the abrasion rate is lowest and the hardness is highest at 400 °C. The hardness decreases and the rate of abrasion increases with a further rise in the temperature. The hardness and the wear resistance both increase with a rise in heat treatment time, and they reach their peak values after 2 h of heat treatment. The experimental results also show that the hardness of the coating decreases with an increase in PTFE quantity, and the wear rate diminishes correspondingly. X-ray diffraction indicates that the structure of the as-deposited RE-Ni-W-P-PTFE-SiC composite coating is of amorphous status.Wear, especially abrasion, is a common phenomenon in industries. The improvement of the friction and wear properties of material surfaces may save on energy and resources, enhance the reliability of machine equipment and satisfy requirements of modern technological progress. With the development of materials science, composite materials have played a major role in increasing wear resistance and reducing friction because their unique physical and mechanical characteristics can be superior to those of single phase materials. Solid hard particles, self-lubricant particles and metals can be co-deposited on the parts of machines by making use of composite electrodeposition. This is one of a number of effective ways to improve the friction and wear properties of surfaces. The technique of composite electrodeposition has many advantages, such as being a low-cost and simple process, which can be operated at room temperature. Composite materials based on Au, Ag, Co, Ni, Ni-Fe, Ni-W, Cu, Ni-P, Ni-B, etc. The bath composition and operating conditions were as follows: nickel sulfate 20 to 30 g/l; citric acid 70 to 90 g/l; sodium tungstate 50 to 110 g/l; sodium hypophosphorous 10 to 19 g/l; silicon carbide (2.5 to 3 μm) 70 to 80 g/l; rare earth (RE) 7 to 9 g/l; polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) 15 to 30 ml/l. Cathode current density ( 30×60×2-mm carbon steels, Φ 16/40 mm×10 mm carbon steels and Φ 16/40 mm×10 mm GCr15 steels (HRC60) were used as specimens. HX-1 type micro-hardness tester was used to measure the hardness of the composite coatings and the load was 100 g. The wear resistance was measured by MM-2000 type abrasion tester, included a roll with hardness HRC 60, and the roll was pressed against the coated specimens with a force of 500 N and rotated 400 rev min The structure of the coatings was determined by GX-3B X-ray diffraction. RE content was examined by an electron spectrometer, and SiC, PTFE, Ni and W contents were measured by chemical-analytical method, and average of five point values was used. The chemical composition of the composite coating was given in The effect of heat treatment temperature on the hardness of the RE-Ni-W-P-SiC-PTFE composite coating was shown in The effects of heat treatment time at 400 °C on the hardness of the RE-Ni-W-P-SiC-PTFE composite coating and the RE-Ni-W-P-SiC composite coating are shown in As shown in The influence of heat treatment time on wear resistance of composite coatings is shown in It can be concluded that the effects of heat treatment temperature and time on the hardness of RE-Ni-W-P-SiC and RE-Ni-W-P-SiC-PTFE composite coatings are very similar to that observed in  In In By comparison (seen  The hardness of the as-deposited coatings is low and the abrasion rate is maximum. With an increase in heat treatment temperature, the hardness increases linearly, and the mass loss decreases linearly. After heat treatment at 400 °C, the mass loss is lowest, the hardness is highest and wear resistance is best. If the heat treatment temperature is raised further, the hardness will decrease, and the mass loss will rise. The hardness and the wear resistance of the composite coatings increase with increasing heat treatment time. If heat treatment time reaches 2 h, the hardness and the wear-resistance reach their peak values. If the heat treatment time is increased continuously, the hardness and the wear resistance of the composite coatings will decrease. The hardness of the RE-Ni-W-P-SiC-PTFE coating is lower than that of the RE-Ni-W-P-SiC coating, but its mass loss is much smaller than that of the latter. X-ray diffraction pattern shows that the RE-Ni-W-P-SiC-PTFE composite coating is amorphous as-deposited, but it becomes crystalline partly when the heat treatment temperature is over 300 °C.