Postoperative radiographs are conventionally taken after open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of mandibular fractures, but routine radiographic exposure in patients who have no clinical signs may not be justified. To find out whether radiographs influence immediate postoperative management, and whether they can be used to predict long-term complications, we retrospectively reviewed the radiographs and case notes of 92 patients who had ORIF of isolated mandibular fractures between June 2010 and June 2012. We evaluated them for the adequacy of reduction and fixation using locally agreed criteria, and correlated them with immediate and long-term outcomes as recorded in the case notes. Eleven patients had complications, usually infection. All 4 patients who required repeat ORIF had worrying signs and symptoms despite the immediate postoperative radiograph looking favourable. The radiographs of 7 patients looked unfavourable, but no patient required another operation, and none developed complications. Routine postoperative radiographs after ORIF of mandibular fractures seem to have little value in the management of patients, as the decision to reoperate is based on clinical signs rather than radiographic appearance, and radiographic appearance is not associated with long-term outcomes. Our findings suggest that radiographs are valuable only in patients with clear clinical indications and, in view of the risk and cost of radiation, we question their continued use.Routine postoperative radiographs are conventionally taken after open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of mandibular fractures. Reasons given in support of this include assessment of the adequacy of reduction and fixation before discharge, self-assessment, peer review, teaching purposes, and medicolegal reasons. As there is a risk of radiation-related adverse outcomes with each radiograph we should follow the Ionising Radiation (Medical Exposure) Regulations 2000 (IR(ME)R 2000). Guidelines from The Royal College of Radiologists state that “no investigation should be requested unless it can be clinically justified, and its result, normal or abnormal, is likely to influence management of the patient”. We identified all patients who had ORIF of a mandibular fracture at the University Hospital of Wales between June 2010 and June 2012. Those with concurrent facial, condylar, or pathological fractures, were excluded, as there may have been additional indications for postoperative radiographs. Three independent assessors (one consultant and 2 middle grades) evaluated the immediate postoperative radiographs for the adequacy of reduction and fixation using simple, locally-agreed criteria. In each case, both the reduction and fixation were assessed as favourable or unfavourable ( We retrospectively reviewed the case notes and data relating to the medical history, smoking and alcohol status, mechanism of injury, clinical assessment immediately after operation and at follow up, complications, and any further intervention needed. The data were analysed to identify any correlation between the assessments of the radiographs and outcomes. A total of 92 patients with 146 fractures were included in the study (86 fractures of the angle, 48 of the parasymphysis, and 12 of the body). The mean age was 25.6 years (range 13 – 51). The male:female ratio was 14:1, and in most cases, the mechanism of injury was assault. The radiographs of 7 patients were deemed to have an unfavourable appearance: 2 for reduction and fixation, 2 for reduction only, and 3 for fixation only. Six of the 7 had a satisfactory occlusion, and one had a mild malocclusion that was acceptable to the patient and did not require further intervention. Two patients who failed to attend appointments after their first postoperative outpatient review have not presented again with complications. To our knowledge, none of the 7 had long-term complications, and none required a return to theatre. Of the remaining 85 patients whose radiographs looked favourable, 11 had complications, most commonly infection (n Twelve patients did not attend any postoperative reviews and were lost to follow up, but the radiographs in all of them had been satisfactory. The number of review appointments/patient ranged from 0 to 14 (mode of 2). Patients whose radiographs looked unsatisfactory were not followed up more often or for longer than those whose radiographs looked satisfactory. Previous studies have tended to identify patients with poor clinical outcomes at follow up and have retrospectively evaluated the relevant postoperative radiographs. To our knowledge, no studies have identified patients with poor radiographic findings and followed up their clinical outcomes. We therefore think that this study adds to the current body of work. Two previous studies have assessed the value of postoperative radiographs for mandibular fractures. In their assessment of 289 patients, Childress and Newlands Other maxillofacial fractures have also been studied. In their assessment of 257 facial fractures (167 mandibles), Bali and Lopes Similar conclusions can be inferred from studies of zygomatic fractures. Crighton and Koppel Advocates for their use give several supporting reasons, including assessment of the reduction and fixation. Medicolegal reasons are also quoted as justification for routine postoperative radiographs, but they have been deemed unnecessary by The Royal College of Radiologists, the Medical Defence Union, and Medical Protection, which states that good clinical notes are sufficient. Other supporting reasons include peer review, audit, research, and teaching. Although we acknowledge the value of radiographs for these purposes, if they do not directly influence the management of the patient, we think that the guidelines of The Royal College of Radiologists show that they cannot be justified. Another problem commonly found is that many of these radiographs are not seen by a senior member of staff. To extract maximum educational value, images should be reviewed as a team and the consultant should give feedback. If a radiograph is requested purely for research or education, patients should be fully informed as part of the consent process and given an opportunity to refuse. According to the guidelines of The Royal College of Radiologists, A potential weakness of our study is the possibility of a type II error because of the small number of patients whose radiographs looked unfavourable, and the small number that had a repeat operation. Some might argue that our criteria for a favourable radiographic outcome were too simple, but they were set as minimum requirements only, based on accepted best practice, and an element of clinical acumen was also used when the assessments were done. For this reason we used 3 independent assessors (FD, AH, and SB) to minimise bias, and Kappa scores showed good correlation between them. We question the value of taking routine “check” radiographs in patients who have uneventful operations and no worrying clinical signs, and recommend that the practice is reviewed. Radiographs should be taken only when there is a clear clinical indication, such as a malocclusion or mobile fracture, and the importance of the postoperative clinical examination should be stressed to all members of the team. We have no conflicts of interest.