Cost estimation is a crucial factor for the success of an engineering project. This element is even more important at the initial stages of design where decisions should be taken based on the more accurately available cost data. In underground construction projects especially, where the variability of the geotechnical conditions can change initial estimates, the accurate estimation of the construction cost from the preliminary phases of the project can minimize cost overrun issues as well construction claims and disputes. The purpose of this paper is to provide insight in cost estimation for underground projects focusing on tunnels. For this reason, the analysis of construction cost is undertaken, based on data from a set of 9 tunnels that have been constructed in Greece. The analysis presented focuses on the excavation and temporary support cost with respect to the geotechnical conditions encountered. Although the cost is influenced by many parameters, through the analysis of past data using the Case Base Reasoning approach, valuable lessons can be learned by decoding the effect of the ground conditions on the construction cost. The construction cost of the Greek tunnels is estimated for 2011 price levels and it is expressed though range estimation for 5 rock mass categories that were identified. Furthermore, a direct linkage between construction cost and the encountered geotechnical conditions, as expressed in GSI values, are made in an attempt to capture the general trend of construction cost in terms of €/m3 and €/m. The findings can be used as a first order assessment in order to have a representative estimation of the tunneling cost from the initial stages of project design.Underground construction projects have now become a contemporary engineering practice, capable of providing efficient solutions to the problems of modern society. Especially, in the past 50 However, the “Achilles heel” of the underground construction society still lies in its shortfall when it comes to accurate assessments of the total as-built cost of the project. Past examples indicate that tunnels can deliver the job, but sometimes with an extreme increase in their financial figures. For instance, no one can argue the triumph of engineering in projects such as the development of Channel Tunnel, the Central Artery/Tunnel Project in Boston and their associated benefits; nonetheless, their cost overruns can be severely criticized. In 1984, the U.S. National Committee on Tunneling Technology ( These studies highlight the high risk levels in underground construction, mainly related to the inherent variability of the ground conditions. Especially though during the procurement and bidding stages of the projects, the limited information available coupled with the uncertainty of the ground conditions can lead to erroneous decisions. This apparent failure in prognosis and the high amount of additional funds required can result in deterring the stakeholders, raising skepticism about the possible hidden costs of underground infrastructure projects that are to be undertaken in the future. According to The paper attempts to provide insights on the construction cost of road tunnels, focusing on the excavation and temporary support costs, which can become available at the initial planning stages of the project, based on past experience gained from as-built projects in Greece. More particularly, data from 9 contemporary Greek transportation tunnel projects are evaluated and their cost figures are analyzed and presented with respect to the encountered geological conditions. Thus, the goal is to decode the effect of the ground conditions on the construction cost and to allow for a direct linkage between cost and the encountered geotechnical conditions, either by using ground classes or GSI classification values. Accordingly, this can assist in making more accurate and efficient cost assessment of tunnel projects even at the preliminary stages, a feature of key importance to be utilized by both stakeholders and members of the engineering community.  Some of the various approaches that provide cost estimation for underground construction can be found in the following literature: The main factors affecting the construction cost of underground works are: the type and purpose of the structure, the geometrical characteristics and length of the project, the geotechnical and the in situ stress conditions, the excavation process used and the respective machine characteristics, as well as the environmental restrictions and policies.  Another notable study was conducted by HM Treasury Infrastructure Review UK (2010). The selected sample consisted of 14 tunnels in the UK and 21 tunnels developed in other European countries (Norway, Spain, Netherlands, Austria, Portugal, Germany, Switzerland, France, Greece and Luxembourg). The study concluded that the planning and pre-construction phases of the project were the main sources for cost increase. Another finding was that the average unit cost for tunnels of 3 Finally, one of the most recent analyses on tunnel cost was made in Australia ( Consequently, the key cost drivers for tunneling are the encountered geotechnical conditions, the excavation type selected and the end-use. If the last two factors are kept constant, the difference in cost is directly related to the geotechnical conditions. This is the most influential factor as it governs the adopted excavation and support methods, the characteristics of which are selected so as to achieve a safe and efficient construction, compatible with the encountered ground conditions. Tunneling in Greece has experienced a boom from the early 2000 with the design and construction of large transportation tunnels under difficult and usually complex geological conditions. These tunnels are part of Greece’s Highway and Motorway Network and more specifically of PATHE Motorway (A1), Egnatia Odos Motorway (A2), MOREAS Motorway (A7) Olympia Odos Motorway (A8 and A9) as well as of the new High-Speed Railway Network. The tunnels are usually 10–12 The sequential or “observational” excavation method is frequently adopted; following the “design as you go” or “design as you monitor” approach/philosophy and the NATM principles. For instance, a common excavation pattern used in Greek tunneling consists of the following phases: top heading excavation (with or no temporary invert) followed by benching excavation with the use of invert when required. Depending on the ground conditions (i.e. good quality rock masses) sometimes a full tunnel face excavation is being adopted by excavating both the top heading and the bench at the same stage. Conventional tools such as drill and blast, mechanized excavators and hydraulic hammers are used during excavation. As for the temporary support measures used, these are usually comprised of shotcrete, mesh, anchors, steel sets or lattice girders and for face stability issues fiberglass anchors as well as forepole umbrella. In more detail, the support measures are chosen according to the anticipated geological conditions and rock mass categories, as defined at the preliminary stages of the design. Typically, for each tunnel, a number of support systems are designed and designated at each cross section, corresponding to specific rock mass conditions. They suggest the excavation sequencing as well the types and quantity of support measures to be applied at the tunnel’s roof, sidewall and face. For example, The pricing of such activities (i.e. excavation and temporary support) is made according to fixed unit prices available to the designers at the early stages of the project. What is worth highlighting is the fact that the excavation cost is based on of the span of the tunnel face regardless the encountered geological conditions and is usually expressed in €/m Moreover, all the afore-mentioned are applicable during the design stage of the project and refer to an initially estimated geological model. However, during tunnel construction the predicted geological model can vary from the real encountered geological conditions. In this case, changes in both the support and the construction methods may be required and should be incorporated into the contractual system during the construction stage. It should be also stated that in this paper only the final projects’ cost is taken into consideration. The cost figures presented in the following sections are the result of a thorough analysis conducted by selecting data from 9 transportation tunnels that have been constructed during the last decade in Greece. Many cost estimating methods/techniques are available to facilitate the cost estimating process, ranging from intuitive and analogical methods to parametric and analytical methodologies. Relying on past data to make assumptions for future projects can be usually accepted only when an in depth analysis takes place and only general conclusions should be drawn. More importantly, there can be an increased risk of reaching misleading assumptions. An illustrative example of the above notion is shown in Therefore, the analysis presented aims at introducing a more realistic estimator for tunnel construction cost. More specifically, CBR is used by taking into account the engineering practice and experience gained from tunneling projects developed in Greece, in order to eliminate the risk of unrealistic cost estimates by both investigating the overall cost of comparable projects and examining the cost composition breakdown of the selected data, as suggested by In order to perform the cost analysis, data coming from Greek tunneling projects were collected. They included the encountered geotechnical conditions along with the adopted cross-section types that were applied to cope with them, respectively. Thus, the characteristics of the excavation and the temporary support type applied in each cross-section design are analyzed and registered. Finally, the construction cost of each cross section is calculated through a unit pricing approach and is revised into the latest available pricing data (October 2011). This is made in order to assign a common reference point for the cost estimation, eliminating biases resulting from different price levels (inflation, etc.). A total of five geotechnical categories that have been identified, namely rock mass categories A, B, C, D and E ( A dataset of 9 transportation (road and railway) tunnels is included in the study (Rapsommati Tunnel, Agios Elias Tunnel, Agia Kyriaki Tunnel, Tunnel AS1 – Kakia Skala, Knimida Tunnel, Klisoura Tunnel, Platanos Tunnel, Domokos Tunnel and Kiato Tunnel) representing the current tunnel construction practice in Greece. They are all of the same type, having more or less common features, they were all constructed according to the recent regulations during the last decade, they cover a wide spectrum of the geological conditions found in Greece, and finally, their cost data was derived by the same pricing method, taken from as-built and final design stages. The total length of these tunnels range from 650 The results of the analysis are presented in detail in In the tables, new data is brought forth with respect to the previous analysis performed ( The data indicate that there is a strong relation between the encountered geological conditions and the construction cost. This is shown in From the illustration ( All the above construction cost information was presented by grouping tunnel conditions into 5 major geotechnical categories (rock mass categories). The latter provided detailed information on cost with respect to the encountered conditions; nevertheless this might lead to loss of information or biases, especially in near-threshold data cases. Thus, a more direct approach is attempted in depicting the construction cost with respect to the tunnel face conditions expressed with the use of GSI rock mass classification values. In this manner the point cloud, of all examined cases, relating cost (€/m  In the graph ( In In all cases, as presented in the above figures, the influence of geotechnical conditions in the construction cost is evident. This is especially experienced for GSI values up to 35, whereas from then onward, such influence is gradually deteriorating. This is something that needs to be further analysed in future research, as the dataset for GSI values of more than 50 is not sufficient in number to allow for the expression of a coherent conclusion on this particular finding. The cost figures presented take into account both the individual cost components of the excavation and temporary support, expressing current cost estimating practices in Greece. However, in order to further evaluate these cost components, In order to assess the influence of the cross-section of the tunnels in the construction cost The cost of tunneling projects is greatly influenced by a number of parameters, with the most influential being the geological and geotechnical conditions encountered. The design requirements to provide solutions compatible with the ground conditions, especially relating to the excavation process and the installation of the temporary support determine the construction effort and govern to a great extend the tunneling cost. The analysis presented in the paper aims at analyzing and evaluating the construction cost of tunnel projects emphasizing on the cost of Greek transportation tunnels. The methodology adopted the principles of Case Based Reasoning and by analyzing the main cost components of construction cost for the whole tunneling length of the projects under evaluation, made possible the identification of general behavior patterns in the construction cost. The apparent relation between construction cost and geotechnical conditions is identified through the 5 rock mass categories (A, B, C, D and E), as well through the cost scattergrams presented and the regression analysis that was performed to identify tunnel cost vs. GSI values. Although the findings are based on statistical analysis of historical data and thus limitations might exist in their application for future projects in terms of conformity to standards or compatibility with certain types of ground conditions, they can still be used for the assessment of the construction cost, especially for the case of Greek tunnels. Furthermore, in cases of similar approach in tunnel design the findings can be used as a first order assessment of the project’s construction cost. The aim of the authors is to demonstrate that this cost database and analysis could be further enriched with the help of other researchers, as well as to illustrate the importance of including cost data from other tunnel or underground projects in Greece and abroad. This is why comprehensive and accurate data relating to tunnel construction cost should be made publicly available to the engineering community in an attempt to form a worldwide project database which could be used as a basis for sound project costing and appraisal even from the preliminary stages of design. This would improve the applicability envelope, the accuracy and the reliability of the methodology, allowing its evolution to an accurate assessment tool for assessing the construction cost of underground projects. The authors would like to thank Mr. A. Gkiolas, Civil Engineer Ph.D., for providing tunnel cost data and helping in further enriching the results of the analysis presented. They would also like to thank Prof. M. S. Diederichs for his comments and suggestions on the research presented in the paper.