The major technical problems faced by stand-alone fluidized bed gasifiers (FBG) for waste-to gas applications are intrinsically related to the composition and physical properties of waste materials, such as RDF. The high quantity of ash and volatile material in RDF can provide a decrease in thermal output, create high ash clinkering, and increase emission of tars and CO2, thus affecting the operability for clean syngas generation at industrial scale. By contrast, a two-stage process which separates primary gasification and selective tar and ash conversion would be inherently more forgiving and stable. This can be achieved with the use of a separate plasma converter, which has been successfully used in conjunction with conventional thermal treatment units, for the ability to ‘polish’ the producer gas by organic contaminants and collect the inorganic fraction in a molten (and inert) state. This research focused on the performance analysis of a two-stage fluid bed gasification–plasma process to transform solid waste into clean syngas. Thermodynamic assessment using the two-stage equilibrium method was carried out to determine optimum conditions for the gasification of RDF and to understand the limitations and influence of the second stage on the process performance (gas heating value, cold gas efficiency, carbon conversion efficiency), along with other parameters. Comparison with a different thermal refining stage, i.e. thermal cracking (via partial oxidation) was also performed. The analysis is supported by experimental data from a pilot plant.Rapid heating and drying Pyrolysis Comminution of solid particles Partial oxidation of primary volatiles and char Decomposition of primary tars Water–gas reaction Ash detachment Hydrogasification Water–gas shift CO Tar cracking Steam reforming Boudouard reaction Ash inertization (melting at As global waste levels raise and fossil fuel and raw material reserves decline, the world is facing a growing resource crisis. A major task for global community in the next decades will be to develop means of securing dependable sources of renewable energy and also to greatly reduce the amount of materials obtained from virgin reserves. The combination of renewable energy requirements and diversion of materials from landfills has led to a focus on the use of waste materials as sources of renewable energy. In this context, there is considerable interest in new ways to dispose of waste using advanced thermal conversion technologies. Waste gasification, latest addition to Waste-to-Energy technologies, converts solid wastes into green electricity or clean gaseous fuel known as synthesis gas (or syngas). This promising technology has received increasing attention in the past two decades due to the growing demand for clean fuels and chemical feedstocks, as well as the need for reducing dependency on fossil fuels, lowering greenhouse gas emissions and disposing of existing wastes ( Most of the gasification systems from waste are based on high-temperature techniques that use oxygen as a source of heat or as partial oxidation agent. Oxygen-based gasification offers advantages over air-based gasification such as reduced capital costs or similar operating costs combined with the potential to use the higher calorific value syngas in high-efficiency power generation systems, greatly enhancing revenue creation potential ( The use of plasma has increasingly been applied with pure waste treatment for its ability to completely decompose the input waste material into a tar-free synthetic gas and an inert, environmentally stable, vitreous material known as slag. The principal advantages that plasma offers to thermal conversion processes, besides the already mentioned tar/ash related issues absence, are a smaller installation size for a given waste throughput, and the use of electricity as energy source, characteristics which permit the technology to treat a wide range of heterogeneous and low calorific value materials including various hazardous waste, such as PCBs, medical waste, and low-level radioactive wastes ( These considerations led to the development of multiple-stage processes, where the plasma is used as a post-processing stage for conditioning the product streams generated from the primary gasification unit (e.g. FBG or rotary kiln). With this configuration, the majority of the energy input to the process is derived from the controlled oxidation reactions of the solid fuel at the gasifiers, which greatly limits the plasma arc electrical power demand which constitutes only a minor fraction of the total energy content of the fuel to the process. The absence of tars in the product gas resulting from plasma cracking at 1100–1200 This study focused on the thermodynamic assets of using a two-stage process for RDF gasification over the conventional single fluid bed approach. The feedstock consists of a RDF produced from a combination of residual municipal, commercial and industrial wastes. The experimental analysis will identify the relevant parameters in the design and operation of a second stage plasma converter and compare single stage fluid beds with two-stage systems. The use of a thermal cracking stage in substitution of the plasma converter is also assessed, and comparison of the thermodynamic parameters for the two technologies will determine if there are meaningful differences among them. RDF contains high quantity of biodegradable material as well as plastics and provides solutions to the disposal of non-recyclable waste fractions, for it can be used as a direct substitute for primary fossil fuels in gasification. The physico-chemical processes taking place between the gasification agents and RDF, yielding syngas, are complex and are influenced by varying feed composition, process design and operating conditions. Nonetheless, the gasification process may be considered as a sequence of distinct conversion mechanisms ( The next and first actual conversion step, is usually referred to as pyrolysis (or thermal devolatilization), wherein water vapor, organic liquids and non-condensable gases, such as CO, H The distinction between primary and secondary conversion is based on the different times of conversion of the various processes. Experimental studies have shown that as a result of the rapid heating of the fuel, 90% of devolatilization takes place in a matter of milliseconds, whereas the reminder of gasification processes (mainly heterogeneous reactions) take one or two orders of magnitude longer time ( Fluid bed systems are the most employed in single stage processes for their homogeneous temperature, good flow mixing inside the reactor, rapid heating of the feedstock, and the possibility of including catalyst in the bed inventory to enhance the reforming reactions ( The aim of a ‘single-stage’ FBG is to convert organic substances entirely in one reactor. Depending on the type of feeding, the solid fuel is injected into or onto the heated fluidized particles, together with oxygen, which is delivered by a fan (or blower) through the distributor plate and upwards through the bed particles. Steam can also be added to the process to aid conversion. The high levels of volatiles, especially plastics in RDF are likely to lead to rapid devolatilisation on contact with the hot bed material. As the RDF particles devolatize, mixed oxygenates and other volatiles undergo gas-phase reaction with the most reactive species in the ambient gas, that is, oxygen. Thus, it is the oxygen that supplies the required heat by reacting with the reactive volatiles ( Most RDFs are characterized by high moisture and volatile content, and a porous-fragile structure ( The two-stage concept design physically separates the principal unit operations of pyrolysis-preliminary gasification zone from the final conversion zone, involving two different levels of heat intakes. Most of this type of advanced thermal processes eliminates char and tar gasification as a limiting process steps and, consequently, the efficiency of the process depends on the ability of the system to provide longer residence time whilst making a more efficient use of the oxygen required to increase the temperature. The influence of gasification temperature and residence time on a typical tar component is illustrated in From A separate thermal cracking stage, which uses oxygen to reach high temperatures, has been previously used associated with FBGs, to reduce tar content and accelerate char reactions. Examples are found in the Thermoselect and Noell dust cloud gasification processes and in the large-scale Creusot-Loire two-stage plant, which was built in the mid-1980s and is still in use ( Advanced Plasma Power (UK) developed a two stage process (the Gasplasma process) which combines fluid bed gasification with plasma technology ( The first stage is a bubbling fluidized bed gasifier operated in temperature range between 650° and 800 The main advantage of coupling FBG and plasma technologies is that the oxidant addition rate and power input in the two-stage process can be controlled independently while, unlike single stage FBGs, the gasification stability is not dependent on the gas evolved from the fuel itself. The energy input from plasma is readily controllable and (unlike oxidizing systems) is independent of the process chemistry, generating low off-gas volumes, reducing the size, complexity and the associated capital and operating cost of the downstream gas cleaning equipment and rendering the process flexible to changes in the RDF characteristics, typical of waste materials ( Modelling a two-stage plasma assisted process can provide guidance on the optimization of the gasification parameters, so that one can find the best operation conditions between the two stages. At this level of analysis, the process is treated from a purely thermodynamic point of view, and therefore the results are applicable to both stages, namely, single stage FBG and plasma converter. For a given set of inlet conditions (feed composition and oxidant flowrates), the exit conditions are computed assuming thermodynamic equilibrium. Although a literature analysis has shown that, generally, equilibrium models fail in matching experimental results from FBGs, where the reactor temperature is below 800 Conditions here vary essentially for the additional term in the energy balance, due to the plasma heating effect, and the secondary oxygen feed, which both increase the sensible heat contained in the product gas. This latter case is useful to compare results between the plasma converter and a generic thermal cracker stage, where only oxygen is used to provide the heat. The following assumptions are used to validate the model: The material properties like temperature (of gas phase and solid phase), gas composition and solid composition in each stage is expressed by “mean” values, which are calculated from the mass and energy balance. The plasma field does not affect either the rates of reactions, or the basic pathways of a chemical mechanism that would be observed in a generic thermal cracking process. The energy input in the plasma converter increases with its throughput, which is proportional to the cube of the reactor diameter. The heat loss by sidewall heat fluxes are dominated by radiation from the hot, molten bath, which is proportional to the square of the diameter. The energy duty of the plasma converter is, therefore, strongly scale dependant. Oversize material generated within the bed is fed to the plasma converter – diversion of this material would significantly reduce parasitic load in the second stage (either in plasma or thermal cracking mode). The temperature of slag flowing out of the furnace is calculated from energy balance by setting an appropriate temperature difference between the gas and slag of approximately 300 In order to validate the simulation results, two different RDF gasification experimental data from a previously published work (  The waste feed was metered into the FBG of mullite sand under controlled conditions, using a variable speed screw feeder at rates of 40–60 The full and more detailed description of the apparatus and plant operation for this test, as well as slag characterization and material recovery description, have been already published (  As noted in previous works, the gas stream exiting the single FBG shows a marked divergence from the predicted thermodynamic equilibrium conditions, whereas a very satisfactory agreement is found for the 2-stage process ( Of relevance, the measured steam, and CO On the contrary, the syngas from the plasma converter appears to be much richer in the primary syngas constituents (i.e. H The good matching between the model and WGS predictions out of the two-stage process confirms the dominance of the latter in determining the gas composition at high temperatures. The suitability of the examined model relies on the premise that the first stage operates beyond the carbon boundary point, i.e. 100% of solid carbon is completely gasified ( Waste gasification studies have shown that relatively high unburnt carbon and hydrocarbon contents may be found in the ash residues, limiting to some extent the carbon conversion efficiency ( Testing of the slag samples against organic parameters showed near zero values, being in compliance with model predictions. Total Organic Carbon (TOC) was below 1% in weight in both samples, and loss on ignition indexes were below detection limits. As stated before, these very low values are due to the combination of high temperature, turbulence, and residence time attained in the plasma converter, which results in the conversion of residual carbon to gas-phase carbon-containing species, e.g. CO and CO The Cold Gas Energy Conversion Efficiency (ECE) can be defined as the ratio of the energy contained within the gaseous product of the gasification reaction to the energy content of the fuel added to the system. Thus, While using a fixed energy input rate to the process of 1000 Of interest, the difference in syngas quality between Case 1 and Case 2 is not very significant despite the different residual ash (inert) loading of the feed. In fact, in a single stage FBG, increasing ash load normally reduces energy conversion efficiency. This is due to the need for additional oxygen to raise the temperature of the increasing ash materials retained in the fluidized bed to the system operating temperature. Whilst some of this oxygen would be consumed by oxidation of ash components, the vast majority would be used for combustion of feed to produce H In order to evaluate whether the higher flexibility in the FBG positively compensates for the plasma power demand in the second stage, the relationship among plasma power and heating value variation should be considered at the same time. One particular factor that has a significant effect on the balance between the plasma requirements and the heat lost is the effect of scale-up from pilot scale to full industrial size plant. In fact, the assumption of energy balance of the plasma being dominated by Joule heating and radiative transfer implies that the parasitic loads of the converter are inversely proportional to the size of the unit. Larger scale furnaces typically have larger heat fluxes but lower total losses due to the reduced surface to volume ratio ( For this purpose, the Cold Gas Energy Conversion Efficiency can be modified (CGE This twofold role of plasma produces a self-compensating effect in determining the CGE These results are in agreement with previous experimental results with different feedstocks ( In a thermal refining stage, the energy needed for gas heating up, tar cracking and ash vitrification can be produced from an external source (e.g. plasma), or from the injection of limited amount of secondary oxygen (e.g. thermal cracker). In the latter case, the heat released in the exothermic reactions provides the thermal energy for the primary reforming reactions to proceed very rapidly. The amount of secondary oxygen is normally limited by the equivalence ratio (ER), which for traditional gasification cannot exceed the value of 0.4–0.5 ( At this point of the analysis, it is worthwhile to compare the plasma converter with a conventional thermal cracker, and see if there are meaningful differences among these two technologies. The amount of secondary oxygen input in a two-stage process can be expressed by the oxygen inlet ratio (OIR), which is defined as: The first gasification step is normally run at optimal ER. This then sets the lower limit on the amount of oxygen required in the FBG. Simulations of different oxygen flow rate at the second stage were instead carried out to study the influence of additional oxygen on the cold gas efficiency of a two-stage process, for the same temperature increment observed in the previous section. This was seen to occur when oxygen inlet at the second stage varies from 0 to 0.36 times the oxygen inlet at the first stage (which is maintained constant). The influence of oxygen inlet ratio on gasification temperature and syngas quality is shown in This also reflected into the CGE, which is drastically reduced by virtue of the low LHV having a predominant role. It is clear that the energy efficiency for the two-stage process is strongly penalized when altering the gasification extent by increasing the oxidant inlet at the second stage, whereas it is favoured when using an external source like plasma. However, this is a purely theoretical conclusion, based on thermodynamic equilibrium and 100% carbon conversion, which does not imply that a pure plasma powered system is always the best option. In practice, a combination of plasma input and secondary oxygen is usually the preferred solution. Tars, aromatic compounds and the remaining char can undergo partial oxidation by precisely controlling the amount of the secondary oxygen inlet fed into the plasma converter (OIR Furthermore, additive such as oxygen and/or steam can alter the kinetic paths of plasma reactions, participating in oxidative decomposition of soot precursors, and extending the time-scale of the reactions ( This research focused on a novel two stage fluid bed gasification–plasma converter technology to transform solid waste into clean syngas at a commercial scale. The overall aim of this research was to investigate the performance of the process, focusing on the syngas composition, carbon conversion efficiency and energy conversion efficiency, along with other relevant parameters. Comparison with other thermal refining stages, such as thermal cracking (via partial oxidation) was also performed. Analysis, including thermodynamic modelling, was supported by experimental data. The known deficiencies of a single stage FBG process, have led to the theoretical prediction of the gas composition at the exit of the first stage deviating significantly from the values derived from the trials. From a practical point of view, this is of no consequence, as the equilibrium condition for the bulk gas species is always attained for the two-stage process, which gives a very satisfactory agreement. The study effectively demonstrated that the two-stage gasification system significantly reduces the concentration of condensable tars in the syngas, improving the gas yield of the system and the carbon conversion efficiency which is crucial in other single stage systems. Testing of the slag samples against organic parameters showed near zero values, being in compliance with model predictions. These very low values are due to the combination of high temperature, turbulence, and residence time attained in the plasma converter, which results in the conversion of residual carbon to CO. For the two RDF materials considered in this study, carbon conversion efficiency is seemingly independent of the feed type, with both efficiencies higher than 96%. Simulations of different oxygen flow rate were carried out to study the influence of additional oxygen on the cold gas efficiency of a two-stage process, at the same temperature range observed in a pure plasma stage. The LHV of the syngas is significantly affected by the extent of exothermic reactions, i.e. by the time the system reaches the high temperature required for ash vitrification and tar reforming, more gas has reacted to form H