Prevention of infection and promotion of osteoconduction are the key factors to achieve long-term success in orthopaedic implants. In this work, an effective antimicrobial and osteoconductive coating is facilely prepared by the cross-linking of ε-poly-L-lysine (EPL) and catechol (abbreviated as EPLC) via a one-step mussel-inspired chemistry. A series of EPLC paints were prepared by catechol (15 mM) and varying concentrations of EPL (30, 40, and 50 mM) and named as EPLC1, EPLC2, and EPLC3. The coatings were easy to paint on implants. EPLC3 with the highest EPL concentration exhibited the most potent antimicrobial activity (greater than 99.99%) against both Gram-negative bacteria Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Gram-positive “superbug” methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), and inhibited the biofilm formation of MRSA up to one week. Furthermore, the EPLC3 painted Ti implant was capable of reducing more than 3-log bacterial burden in a rodent subcutaneous infection model infected by MRSA. More interestingly, EPLC3 coating increased the osteoconductivity of Ti surfaces by promoting mouse pre-osteoblast MC3T3-E1 adhesion and proliferation. And the EPLC3 painted Ti surfaces could induce hydroxyapatite (HAp) formation after incubation in simulating human body fluids (SBF) within two weeks. Overall, the mussel-inspired EPLC paint can be easily applied to orthopaedic implants, and endowed Ti with antimicrobial activity and promoted its osteoconductivity, which will benefit the long-term success of Ti implants.Nowadays, biomedical implants are playing more and more important roles in the medical field, which save lives and improve patients’ life quality Surface modification is an effective strategy to solve the above problems Recently, mussel-inspired surface modification approaches have been widely utilized in biomedical applications, due to their advantages such as easy-to-implement, mild reaction condition, environmental friendliness, and surface binding ability to virtually all substrates In this study, we aimed to employ the copolymerization of catechol and polyamine to develop a facile and cost-effective antimicrobial coating that can be painted to the surface of Ti implants. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are considered as promising alternatives to conventional antibiotics owing to their broad-range antimicrobial activity and less susceptibility to drug resistance Ti plates (99.6% purity) were purchased from Leiden Bio-Materials Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). Catechol, sodium hydroxide (NaOH), phosphate buffered saline (PBS), chloral hydrate, and simulated body fluid (SBF) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA). ε-poly-L-lysine (EPL) (consisting of 25–30 L-lysine residues) was ordered from Bainafo Bioengineering Co., Ltd. (Zhengzhou, China). The LIVE/DEAD The EPLC coatings were prepared as follows. First, EPL (30, 40, and 50 mM) and catechol (15 mM) were dissolved in Tris-HCl solution (pH = 8.5, 10 mM). Then, the mixed solution was incubated at 37℃ for 3 days via partial oxidation (in the air) to form catecholamine EPLC1, EPLC2, and EPLC3. High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC, WATERS Breeze QS) was used to monitor the reaction process. Next, EPLC solutions were painted on the top of Ti plates and kept for 1 day at room temperature. The morphologies of top surface and cross section of the coatings on Ti plates were observed by SEM using with a QUANTA 200 (Philips-FEI, Holland) at an acceleration voltage of 20.0 kV. The chemical compositions of EPLC coatings were identified with attenuated total reflection flourier transformed infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR, Nicolet 6700, Thermo Scientific) in the range of 2800–800 cm The Live/Dead viability assay based on a two-colour fluorescence method was used to identify the antimicrobial activity of EPLC coatings. The samples were incubated with bacteria, and stained with a LIVE/DEAD The morphology of bacteria on EPLC coatings was examined under SEM (QUANTA 200, Philips-FEI). Bacteria (10 The anti-biofilm activity of EPLC3 coating was investigated as the following assay protocol The For investigation of cell adhesive behaviors on the various surfaces, the mouse pre-osteoblast MC3T3-E1 grew in α-Modified Eagle Medium (α-MEM, Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 µg/mL penicillin, and 100 µg/mL streptomycin, and were incubated in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO The mouse pre-osteoblast MC3T3-E1 grew in α-Modified Eagle Medium (α-MEM, Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 µg/mL penicillin, and 100 µg/mL streptomycin, and were incubated in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO EPLC3 painted Ti plates (diameter = 0.8 cm) were immersed in simulated body fluid (SBF) and kept at 37℃ to induce apatite growth. During this period, the SBF (NaCl 114 mM, NaHCO HPLC was used to monitor the reaction process of catechol and EPL. After 3 days of reaction, the determined catechol concentration in the solution was close to zero, indicating the completion of reaction. Subsequently, EPLC was coated on the surface of Ti and characterized with SEM, WCA measurements, ATR-FTIR, XPS and As  Once bacteria adhere to implant surfaces, they may cause implant infections. Therefore, it is necessary to evaluate the antimicrobial properties of implant surfaces. Although EPL has broad-spectrum antimicrobial activities ( A confocal fluorescence microscope was used to observe live and dead bacteria on coating surfaces as shown in A majority of the current reported antimicrobial and osteoconductive dual-functional coatings achieve their functions by a drug-releasing strategy Bacterial adhesion on implant surfaces is prone to trigger biofilm formation  Cell adhesion behavior is an important factor in evaluating osteoconductivity of orthopaedic implants. After 4 h of growing on sample surfaces, the cellular morphologies of MC3T3-E1 pre-osteoblasts were observed by confocal microscope and FESEM. As shown in the fluorescent microscopic images ( The improved cell adhesion on EPLC coating over Ti substrate may be attributed by the higher hydrophilicity and charge density of EPLC3 compared with Ti substrate. EPLC contained EPL has a large number of amino groups, which made Ti surface more hydrophilic ( The biocompatibility of EPLC3 towards MC3T3-E1 was investigated within 5 days Ti is widely used in orthopaedic implants. A common strategy to improve osseointegration of Ti implants is coating a layer of calcium phosphate-based ceramics, such as hydroxyapatite (HAp) In conclusion, the mussel-inspired EPLC paints were synthesized by crosslinking ε-poly-L-lysine and catechol in a facile one-step method. The EPLC paints could be conveniently painted on the surface of various substrates at room temperature. The successful adhesion of EPLC coatings on Ti surface was confirmed by SEM, WCA, ATR-FTIR, and XPS. EPLC coatings showed excellent antimicrobial efficacies against Gram-negative The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: