Solvent extraction of potassium hydroxide from strong potassium aluminate solutions was investigated systematically, where alkyl phenols with the stereo-hindrance of alkyl substituents to the hydroxyl functional group were used as extractants. The research focused on organic phase, phase equilibrium, multi-stage counter current extraction/stripping and extraction mechanism. The alkyl phenol, namely 2,4-di-tert-butylphenol, was found to be a promising extractant. When it was dissolved in 1-octanol diluent to form an organic phase, this organic phase would have a higher K/Al selectivity and a good stability for KOH extraction from the strong potassium aluminate solution. The extraction mechanism of KOH by alkyl phenol was analyzed and found to agree with the so-called pseudo-hydroxide extraction mechanism. The phase equilibrium curves in both KOH-H2O-organic phase system and KOH-KAlO2-H2O-organic phase system were measured at different temperatures with different extractant concentrations. Based on the measured phase equilibrium data, a multi-stage counter current extraction/stripping process was designed, and experiments by single-stage, two-stage and three-stage processes were carried out to evaluate the feasibility and efficiency of the KOH extraction from the strong alkaline potassium aluminate solutions. Through a three-stage extraction process at 40 °C, KOH concentration in potassium aluminate solution with 3.7 mol/L Al can be decreased from 528 g/L to 312 g/L, satisfying the Al(OH)3 seeded precipitation condition.Solvent extraction has been widely used in hydrometallurgy for the recovery of the valuable elements and the removal of impurities from the leaching solutions of minerals ( There were also many studies on alkali extraction from waste slags of minerals and from the alkaline leaching solutions ( For solvent extraction, the selection of extractant or organic phase is extremely an essential factor. Based on the published works, various kinds of weak lipophilic hydroxy acids, such as lipophilic phenols, fluorinated alcohols, and the combination of acids with a crown ether, have been reported as the candidate extractants for alkali extraction. The diluents matched with these extractants were found including C8 alcohols, aliphatic diluents, 1-octonal, Isopaw L modified with Exxal 8 ( Here, the extractant HA was a weak hydroxy acid, which was regenerated. It is clear that most of these studies related to the pseudo-hydroxide extraction from alkaline solution focus on the extraction of sodium hydroxide. The research work on potassium hydroxide extraction from the alkaline solution has been studied less by far. Like sodium hydroxide, the high concentration KOH solution also has the excellent reactivity, which has been applied to decompose many minerals for the recovery of valuable elements ( Chemicals obtained from commercial suppliers were of analytical grade and used without further treatment. Extractants, O-ethoxyphenol (OEP, CAS Number 94–71-3), 2-isopropylphenol (2iPP, CAS Number 88-69-7), 2-tert-butylphenol (2tBP, CAS Number 88–18-6), 2,4-di-tert-butylphenol (2,4DtBP, CAS Number 96-76-4), 2-tert-butyl-4-methylphenol (2tBMP, CAS Number 2409-55-4), 2,6-di-tert-butylphenol (2,6DtBP, CAS Number 128-39-2), were purchased from Alfa Aesar company, and 2,6-di-methylphenol (2,6DMP, CAS Number 576-26-1) was obtained from Shanghai Macklin Biochemical Co. Ltd. Diluents, 1-octanol (CAS Number 111-87-5), 2-octanol (CAS Number 123-96-6) and 2-ethylhexanol (CAS Number 104-76-7), were purchased from Alfa Aesar company. Organic phase consisted of alkyl phenol extractant dissolved in polybasic alcohol diluent. Aqueous phase was the alkaline solution with and without potassium aluminate. Potassium hydroxide solution was prepared by dissolving a given amount of KOH in deionized water, and potassium aluminate solution was prepared by dissolving a given amount of Al(OH) The multi-stage experiments were carried out in a jacketed glass vessel (250 mL) for single-stage extraction, two jacketed glass vessels connected in series for two-stage extraction, three jacketed glass vessels connected in series for three-stage extraction, where each vessel was equipped with a water bath to maintain the temperature at 40 °C. In each vessel, the mixture solution with a given volume ratio of organic/aqueous phase was agitated for 0.5 h to reach the equilibrium state of extraction or stripping. For the three-stage extraction procedure, KOH in stock solution was extracted by the organic phase 1 in the first vessel, and then organic phase 1 was separated by a funnel. KOH in aqueous phase 1 was extracted by the organic phase 2 in the second vessel, and then organic phase 2 and aqueous phase 2 were separated. KOH in aqueous phase 2 was extracted by organic phase 3 in the third vessel, and then organic phase 3 and aqueous phase 3 were separated. In the opposite direction for the three-stage stripping procedure, organic phase 3 was stripped by water or diluted KOH solution in the third vessel, and then organic phase 3 and strip liquor 3 were separated by a funnel. Organic phase 2 was stripped by the strip liquor 3 in the second vessel, and then organic phase 2 and strip liquor 2 were separated. Organic phase 1 was stripped by strip liquor 2 in first vessel, and then organic phase 1 and strip liquor 1 were separated. The alkaline concentration in aqueous phase was measured by the acid-base titration method, and the aluminate concentration in the aqueous phase was measured by ICP-OES spectroscopy. The alkaline and aluminate concentrations in organic phase were measured through the back-extraction of organic phase into aqueous phase for the detection of K and Al concentrations. To evaluate the dissolved amounts of alkyl phenols and polybasic alcohols in aqueous phase, the solubilities of alkyl phenols and polybasic alcohols in aqueous solution were measured by ultraviolet spectrophotometer (UV-2550, Japan) and gas chromatography (Agilent 7890A, USA), respectively. Aqueous phase is the alkaline potassium aluminate solution containing KOH in the range of 500 g/L – 600 g/L and up to 3.7 mol/L Al. It is expected that organic phase can selectively extract KOH from the potassium aluminate solution, and then easily release KOH into water or diluted alkaline solution by back-extraction (stripping). In addition, organic phase must have a low loss amount in aqueous phase and the good stability of cyclic extraction/stripping. Organic phase consists of extractant and diluent. In this work, seven types of alkyl phenols (extractants) and three kinds of C8 alcohols (diluents) will be were tested to optimize the composition of organic phase. The optimized criteria for organic phase included the high KOH extraction capacity, the low dissolved amount in aqueous phase, the high K/Al selectivity, and the good stability of cyclic extraction/stripping. Alkyl phenols to be tested included O-ethoxyphenol (OEP), 2-isopropylphenol (2iPP), 2-tert-butylphenol (2tBP), 2,4-di-tert-butylphenol (2,4DtBP), 2-tert-butyl-4- methylphenol (2tBMP), 2,6-di-tert-butylphenol (26DtBP), and 2,6-di-methylphenol (2,6DMP). The ortho-position, meta-position, or para-position of theses alkyl phenols were substituted by the alkyl functional groups in order to having the stereo-hindrance effect to the hydroxyl functional group. The KOH extraction capacity for each extractant was measured at same experimental conditions, such as organic phase with 1.0 mol/L concentration of alkyl phenol dissolved in 1-octanol, aqueous phase with a given KOH concentration, organic/aqueous phase ratio of 3:1, and extraction temperature of 40 °C. The experimental results are shown in Based on the practical application case, the initial alkaline concentration in aqueous phase can reach 500 g/L KOH. From And then, based on the experimental data in On the other hand, it is important to have a low liquid-liquid mutual solubility between organic phase and aqueous phase in order to reduce the separation requirement for removing solvent from the strip liquor and raffinate stream( Diluent is used to improve the physical properties like viscosity and density of organic phase for the mixture and separation with aqueous phase ( When a given amount of 2,4DtBP is dissolved in 1-octanol, 2-ethylhexanol and 2-octanol, respectively, the organic phase with 1.0 mol/L 2,4DtBP is formed. And then, the KOH extraction capacity by each organic phase with different diluent is measured at 40 °C, as shown in Through the comparisons of the KOH extraction capacities and the loss amounts of extractant and diluent in aqueous phase, the optimal organic phase is 2,4DtBP dissolved in 1-octanol. And then, the stability and K/Al selectivity of organic phase for the KOH extraction from the potassium aluminate solution were assessed. The effect of aluminate content in aqueous phase on KOH extraction capacity of organic phase is measured at 40 °C, and the experimental results are shown in The stability of organic phase describes the tendency of organic phase reaction with stock solution and liquor for stripping ( Through experimental screening, the optimal organic phase was found with 2,4DtBP dissolved in 1-octanol, which has a high K/Al selectivity and a good stability for the cyclic operation. For the analysis of extraction mechanism and the design of extraction process, the phase equilibrium data of KOH between organic phase and aqueous phase is very important. When KOH is extracted from potassium aluminate solution, it involves the phase equilibrium of KOH-KAlO  If the alkaline solution contains potassium aluminate, the KOH extraction capacity of organic phase will be reduced due to the interference of aluminate, as shown in According to the phase equilibrium data in both KOH-KAlO Where R is the volume ratio of organic/aqueous phase, representing the consumption amount of organic phase per unit treatment amount of aqueous phase. y There is a practical application case for KOH extraction from the leaching solution of potassium alum ore with 50% KOH solution at 50–70 °C( The simple single-stage process has low extraction efficiency and consumes a large amount of expensive organic phase. To reduce the organic/aqueous phase ratio R, two-stage and three-stage counter current extraction and stripping processes are designed based on the phase equilibrium data of KOH between organic phase and aqueous phase calculated by Eq. Based on the design results, we perform experiments for KOH extraction from potassium aluminate solution by single-stage, two-stage, three-stage processes, respectively. The experimental results are listed in For sodium hydroxide extraction from the alkaline solution by alkyl phenols, the so-called “pseudo-hydroxide extraction” has been used to describe the deprotonation of a weak hydroxy acid and the transfer of a proton to the aqueous phase with the simultaneous transfer of one sodium ion to the organic phase( In this work, we use 2,4DtBP extractant to extract KOH from the strong potassium aluminate solution. Extractant 2,4DtBP belongs to a weak acid, and KOH belongs to a strong base. When KOH in aqueous phase is extracted by 2,4DtBP in organic phase, there exists the following reaction, where HA represents extractant and n is the reaction order. The equilibrium constant is defined as: Here, based on phase equilibrium data of KOH-KAlO Which is in agreement with the proposed mechanism of sodium extraction from sodium hydroxide using 3,5-di-tert-butylphenol ( 2,4-di-tert-butylphenol, a weak alkyl phenol acid with stereo-hindrance effect to the hydroxyl functional group, is a novel extractant, which can extract the high concentration KOH (>200 g/L) from the strong alkaline potassium aluminate solution, and then easily release KOH into water or diluent alkaline by back-extraction. The optimal composition of organic phase is 1.0 mol/L 2,4-di-tert-butylphenol dissolved in 1-octanol, and the formed organic phase has high K/Al selectivity and good cyclic stability for KOH extraction from the strong alkaline potassium aluminate solution. Based on the phase equilibrium data of both KOH-H Furthermore, the extraction mechanism of potassium hydroxide extraction from potassium aluminate solution is in agreement with the so-called pseudo-hydroxide extraction, which means that the aluminates in potassium aluminate solution have no significant effect on the extraction mechanism. The authors wish to acknowledge