An improved process for the separation of uranium from the leached pulp of low grade uranium ore is reported using the resin-in-pulp method. For this study, four small pachucas were designed and calibrated. A series of tests were conducted batch-wise to determine the optimum conditions for uranium adsorption on a strong base anion exchange resin. The particle size of resin was 0.6–1.6 mm and the particle size of pulp was −0.1 mm. Flow rates of resin and pulp were adjusted on 10 ml/h and 1 ml/h, respectively. The redox potential of pulp was 500 mV and the pH of pulp was 1.8. A McCabe Thiele diagram was constructed for the process and the experimental results confirmed the theoretical predictions. It is concluded that four stage counter-current resin-in-pulp operation under optimum conditions is sufficient to recover about 99% of the uranium from the leached ore.It is a common practice to leach uranium ores with sulfuric acid and to remove the uranium by passing the leach liquor through columns containing suitable ion exchange resins, which take out a complex uranium anion. When the resin has taken out as much as it can, an eluting liquid is then passed through, removing the uranium values and regenerating the ion exchange resin, which is then used to treat further amounts of leach liquor ( The major uranium mineral of this ore is uraninite. In most cases some uraninite minerals occur in relics of magnetite, where they have been excellently preserved. Much more seldom, uranium oxide is observed in serpentine and chlorite. A small portion of uranium is connected with urano-thorianite. In the re-deposited ores, uranium is generally concentrated in weeksite and to a lesser degree in boltowoodite and uranophane. The major gangue mineral is serpentine. In strongly weathered samples, serpentine is replaced by magnesia silicates of saponite–sepiolite type. At the sites of weakly altered serpentine, some chlorite and biotite remain. Uranium and gangue minerals of the ore are given in To prepare leached pulp for resin-in-pulp process the optimum leaching conditions were as follows: Particle size: − H MnO Temperature: 70 °C Contact time: 7 h Liquid to solid ratio: 1 to 1 Specifications of the leach liquor are given in A pachuca column (volume 1.7 l as shown in A synthetic ion-exchange resin of trade mark AMn, class A (0.6–1.6 mm) was used as adsorbent. AMn resin contains phenyl tri-methyl ammonium functional groups and has a macro-porous structure. The physical and chemical properties of AMn resin are similar to strong base anion exchange resins of Zeolite MPF (GB), Amberlite IRA (USA), Levatite MP-500 (FRG), and Deion PA (Japan). AMn resin has been synthesised in all the Russian Research Institutes of Chemical Technology ( Some batch tests are performed before continuous operation in order to obtain the initial optimum conditions of the resin-in-pulp process. The weight of 50 ml resin, before and after evaporation of water, was measured and the porosity of resin was determined by using the equation: The conversion coefficient is the ratio of volume of wet resin to weight of dry resin. For this reason, a given volume of resin was dried and weighed. The conversion coefficient of 2.94 ml/g was obtained for AMn resin by this method. The resin was prepared before adsorption process by contacting with 150 g/l of sulfuric acid for 4 h. The volume ratio of resin to acidic solution was 1 to 50. Then AMn resin was washed by acidic wash water at pH 3 to 4. Some batch tests on uranium adsorption by resin at different pH were carried out. In each test, 5 ml resin was contacted by 100 ml leach liquor. The mixture was shaken during the test and some samples taken at given times. The results of these tests, shown in The capacity of resin for uranium was determined by repeated equilibration of the resin with fresh leach liquor under the following conditions: Volume of resin: 1 ml Volume of leach liquor at each stage: 100 ml Number of stages: 6 Contact time at each stage: 2 h The results of this test, shown in Some batch tests are carried out for determining the optimum contact time. The results of these tests, shown in Some batch tests were carried out with 100 ml of leach liquor and 1 ml of prepared resin where the oxidation–reduction potential at each test was adjusted to 400, 450, 500, 550, and 600 mV by adding H Some batch tests with 100 ml leach liquor and given volume of prepared resin (0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, and 15 ml) were carried out for determining the optimum ratio of resin to leach liquor. The results in Preliminary results of batch tests obtained by uranium adsorption with resin from acidic leach liquor prepared under optimum conditions of leaching process are as follows: Resin type: anionic resin Porosity: 42% Conversion coefficient of resin: 2.94 ml/g pH for adsorption: 1.8–2 Capacity of resin for uranium: 25.3 mg/ml Oxidation–reduction potential: 500 mV Contact time: 4–6 h Resin to leach liquor ratio: 1 to 50–100 Density of pulp: 1.53 g/cm Density of leach liquor: 1.21 g/cm Density of pulverized ore: 3.1 g/cm Resin to pulp ratio: 1 to 70–130 The resin-in-pulp process was carried out in a four stage ion exchange system ( The final operational conditions for the continuous resin-in-pulp process are as follows: Flow rate of pulp: 1 l/h Flow rate of resin: 10 ml/h Total contact time: 6 h Resin to pulp ratio at continuous operation: 1 to 100 Flow rate at exit 4 of each column: 93 ml/h Flow rate at exit 6 of each column: 1093 ml/h pH of initial pulp: 1.8–2.0 Oxidation–reduction potential of initial pulp: 500 mV Type of ion exchange resin: anionic resin Particle size of resin: 0.6–1.6 mm Particle size of pulp: − Number of columns: 4 Internal diameter of columns: 12 cm Internal diameter of pipes of pulp: 4 mm Internal diameter of pipes of air: 2 mm Operational volume of each column: 1.7 l Volume of pulp at each column: 1.5 l Volume of resin at each column: 180 ml Specific consumption of resin: 90–95 g/t of ore Total time of operation: 60 h Total leached pulp that recovered: 60 l Average uranium loading of resin: 61.4 mg/g of dry resin or 20.9 mg/ml of wet resin Total efficiency of resin-in-pulp process: 98.6% Results of the continuous counter current resin-in-pulp adsorption are shown in The adsorption curve has been drawn after 60 h continuous counter current resin-in-pulp operation by using analytical results of samples taken during the continuous operation ( Uranium adsorption in first column: 39.6% Uranium adsorption in second column: 33.8% Uranium adsorption in third column: 16.2% Uranium adsorption in fourth column: 9.0% A McCabe Thiele diagram was drawn from the equilibrium data ( Since solid–liquid separation of the leached pulp of this ore is very difficult and takes a long time at high cost, the resin-in-pulp method is recommended for adsorbing uranium. Elimination of the fixed and operational cost of solid–liquid separation step is one of the advantages of using this method. Another advantage of this method is preventing of uranium losses in the filter cake by inefficient washing. Also, the quantity of water used and real estate requirements are reduced and the footprint of adsorption and desorption circuits are minimized. However, in order to achieve better separation of pulp and resin on the screen of column, the ore must be more ground and the particle size of ore finer. Nevertheless the efficiency of leaching increases and consequently the total efficiency of whole operation will be increased. The efficiency of the resin-in-pulp process is itself higher than ion exchange process in fixed bed columns because of using a fluidizing bed. Also, the efficiency of counter current operation is more than a co-current operation (