Calcified heart valves display a significant imbalance in tissue content of trace and essential elements. The valvular calcification is an age-related process and there are data suggesting involvement of lipids. We studied elemental composition and lipid distribution in three distinct regions of calcified human aortic valves, representing successive stages of the calcific degeneration: normal, thickened (early lesion) and calcified (late lesion), using SR-μXRF (Synchrotron Radiation Micro X-Ray Fluorescence) for elemental composition and Oil Red O (ORO) staining for demonstration of lipids. Two-dimensional SR-μXRF maps and precise point spectra were compared with histological stainings on consecutive valve sections to prove topographical localization and colocalization of the examined elements and lipids. In calcified valve areas, accumulation of calcium and phosphorus was accompanied by enhanced concentrations of strontium and zinc. Calcifications preferentially developed in lipid-rich areas of the valves. Calcium concentration ratio between lipid-rich and lipid-free areas was not age-dependent in early lesions, but showed a significant increase with age in late lesions, indicating age-dependent intensification of lipid involvement in calcification process. The results suggest that mechanisms of calcification change with progression of valve degeneration and with age.Calcific degeneration of aortic valve is the most common type of valvular heart disease in the Western world, causing significant morbidity and mortality ( Physico-biological properties and appropriate function of aortic valves depend on their structural and biochemical integrity including elemental composition. Calcified heart valves display a significant imbalance in tissue content of calcium, phosphorus, iron, zinc and copper ( The biological samples, such as aortic valves, are usually studied by histological, histochemical and immunofluorescence methods. However, the contemporary physics offers new tools, suitable also for the biological studies. SR-μXRF (Synchrotron Radiation Micro X-Ray Fluorescence) is a multielemental and highly sensitive analytical technique based on the excitation of an extremely small sample area (a few micrometers) by the synchrotron radiation source and the resulting, element-specific X-ray fluorescence emitted from different areas of the sample allows to examine the concentration and lateral distribution of the elements. The use of high-intensity focused beam obtained from synchrotron source makes possible analysis of elements that occur in biological material even at extremely low concentrations. Since synchrotron delivers a beam of high flux and brightness, no preconcentration procedure for samples is required and the concentration of different elements can be determined with high accuracy ( The aim of the present study was to compare the elemental distribution in morphologically defined areas of calcifying aortic valves and to establish the relation between the distribution of selected elements, calcification and accumulation of lipids as hallmarks of aortic valve degeneration. Two-dimensional maps and precise point spectra of SR-μXRF recordings, acquired from microscopically selected areas, were compared with histological/histochemical stainings on adjacent sections to prove topographical co-localization of the examined elements and lipids. Since the age is a significant factor involved in both calcification and lipid accumulation ( The study material comprised 15 human aortic valves. Eleven valves were excised during routine surgery (six men and five women, mean age 68.58 The valve cusps were first examined under Stemi 2000C stereomicroscope (Zeiss, Germany) coupled to Coolpix 990 digital camera (Nikon, Japan). In each valve, three distinct areas representing the successive stages of calcific valve degeneration were analyzed: (1) normal – thin, semitranslucent, pliable and showing unchanged microscopic structure, (2) thickened – opaque with prominent thickening characteristic for early lesions and (3) calcified – containing focal calcifications significantly distorting valve surface, typical for late lesions ( Serial 10 Sections were fixed in 4% buffered formaldehyde for 5 Precise point spectra and two-dimensional maps of phosphorus, sulphur, calcium, iron, strontium, copper and zinc were performed using SR-μXRF at the bending magnet beamline L of the synchrotron radiation source DORIS III (DESY, Hamburg, Germany). The experiment was conducted in the air, at room temperature. The samples were mounted on a remotely controlled stage equipped with high-precision stepping motors allowing micrometric movement in The variables were expressed as median [lower–upper quartile values] or mean Microscopic examination of stenotic valve leaflets confirmed the occurrence of the three areas differing in histomorphology. The pathological changes: lipid-rich areas and focal calcifications were mostly located in the superficial fibrosa layer. Prominent lipid-rich areas were observed in early and late lesions. The early lesions showed the presence of fine granular calcifications, while the late lesions contained massive calcified deposits. In normal regions of stenotic valves (as well as in nonstenotic valves) lipid accumulations and calcifications were absent. In early lesions, lipid-rich areas were located superficially, along generally unaltered fibrosa. In late lesions, lipids were located within focal calcifications and in their vicinity ( Analysis of stenotic valves revealed significant differences in the elemental content of normal areas, early lesions and late lesions ( Generally, the examined elements showed a tendency to accumulate in early and late lesions, as compared to normal areas of the valves. Significantly higher concentrations of calcium, copper and sulphur were observed in early lesions, and of all studied elements except iron in late lesions. In case of calcium, phosphorus, strontium and zinc, late lesions showed significantly higher content of these elements than early lesions ( Since the normal valves were collected from significantly younger individuals than stenotic valves (49.5 The representative distribution of the studied elements in early lesion is shown in The other elements did not show significant correlation with age except from strontium which was positively correlated with age in lipid-free areas ( In both areas the calcium content was positively correlated with phosphorus and strontium (lipid-rich: The representative distribution of elements in late lesion is shown in In both areas of late lesions, calcium content was positively correlated with phosphorus and strontium (lipid-rich: Wilcoxon matched pairs test employed for comparison of calcium concentration in lipid-rich and lipid-free areas of early and late lesions showed not only higher concentration of calcium in lipid-rich areas as compared to lipid-free ones ( We analyzed the influence of age on the proportion of calcium located in lipid-rich and lipid-free areas ( Our study has demonstrated that changes in valve histomorphology reflecting the successive stages of the calcific degeneration are accompanied by substantial changes in the content of tissue-bound elements in the altered valves. In early lesions, characterized by valve thickening without macroscopically detectable calcification, SR-μXRF revealed not only substantial accumulation of copper and sulphur but also significant increase in calcium, reflecting the initial phase of diffuse calcification observed microscopically. In late lesions showing the presence of large focal mineral deposits, a strong increase in the concentration of calcium, phosphorus, strontium as well as zinc was found. Increased content of sulphur in early lesions can reflect matrix remodeling leading to accumulation of highly sulphated proteoglycans. Increased proteoglycan and decreased collagen content in early valve lesions were found in mouse model of aortic valve disease ( The increase in copper concentration in early lesions suggests significance of this trace element in early valve matrix remodeling. Formation of late lesions, however, was not associated with further accumulation of copper, suggesting a limited (if any) role of this element in the progression of valve degeneration. Decreased copper content in heavily calcified human aortic valves as well as atherosclerotic lesions in cholesterol-fed rabbits was found by others ( Since various forms of calcium phosphates including hydroxyapatites typical for bone are the predominant components of cardiovascular calcifications, the observed increase in calcium and phosphorus in late lesions can be expected. In both early and late lesions, calcium and phosphorus colocalized with strontium and zinc. Such colocalization was also observed in calcified atherosclerotic plaques of apoE/LDLR-double knockout mice ( The role of zinc seems to be more complex. This essential trace element is required for matrix mineralization in various tissues ( Macroscopically undetectable (diffuse) calcifications have been demonstrated by various modalities in early lesions of aortic valves ( Since potassium is the main intracellular cation, its higher concentration in lipid-rich areas indicates that calcification progresses in a milieu rich in cell debris (e.g. apoptotic vesicles) and/or matrix vesicles, both influencing calcification ( We showed that in early lesions calcification increased with age in both lipid-rich and lipid-free areas and that proportion of calcium deposited in these areas was not significantly modified by age. This may suggest that although in early phase of the disease lipids facilitate calcification, the process is regulated mainly by other factors, such as inflammatory cells and their mediators ( In late lesions, total calcium concentration as well as calcium content in lipid-rich and lipid-free areas was not significantly related to age, but proportion of calcium content in lipid-rich and lipid-free areas significantly increased with age, pointing to a lesser involvement of lipids in the calcification process in younger individuals. This is a seemingly confusing result, since age-dependent increase in calcium proportion should be accompanied by a similar increase in calcium concentration, at least in lipid-rich areas. It cannot be excluded that this discrepancy results from much higher dispersion of calcium concentration values in advanced lesions, requiring larger number of valve samples to achieve a reliable statistical evidence of the tendency for its increase with age, observed in lipid-rich areas. Moreover, calcium in lipid-free areas did not show such tendency at all ( These differences between early and late lesions suggest that in advanced lesions either new players are involved or the tissue response to factors acting in early lesions is substantially different. The latter possibility can be supported by results of In conclusion, we have demonstrated that aortic valve degeneration leading to formation of focal calcifications is associated with significant changes in the elemental content and that calcifications are preferentially located in lipid-rich areas. In early lesions, lipids seem to be less intimately associated with the progression of calcification than in the late ones, where (especially in older patients) lipid-rich areas accumulate much higher proportion of calcium. This suggests that calcification mechanisms are modulated with the progression of calcific aortic valve stenosis and with age. The research program including this study has received funding from the