Osteoblast maturation is a complex process and involves distinct genotypic changes that are accompanied by specific phenotypic alterations. To identify new bone-related genes in osteoblasts we utilized the high-density mouse GEM1 microarray gene chip from IncyteGenomics, Inc. (St. Louis, Mo). We examined the expression profiles of over 8700 genes during the proliferation (day 3) and the mineralization (day 34) phases of MC3T3-E1 development. More than 8600 genes provided measurable signals. Of these genes, 252 were found to be differentially expressed on days 3 and 34. A large number of these genes have never been previously recognized in the context of osteoblast development. Approximately, 60% of the genes with expressions that were dominant in proliferating osteoblasts consisted of growth-related genes such as TACC3 and Pr22. The expressions of TIS21/BTG2, and a novel gene EST350, were found to peak during the differentiation phase (day 12), suggesting that they may play important roles in osteoblast differentiation. The majority of the genes with expressions that were dominant during the mineralization phase consisted of signal transduction genes and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins such as lumican and cystatin-C. It is significant that lumican expression could not be detected on day 3, which indicates that this gene may serve as an important marker of postmitotic osteoblasts. The establishment of the expression profiles of these and other genes with various phases of MC3T3-E1 osteoblast development will allow us to distinguish the molecular events at different phases of osteoblast biology.Bone is a connective tissue, which along with cartilage, makes up the skeletal system. MC3T3-E1 cells represent a clonal osteogenic cell line commonly used to study the process of osteoblast maturation. The maturation of MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts involves the coordinate expression of many bone-related genes and transcription factors such as Ets1, Ets2, and CbfA1/Runx2. Recent advances in cDNA microarray technology allow for simultaneous monitoring of a large number of known and unknown genes in parallel. Thus, using microarray technology we have been able to identify and study the expression of various bone-associated genes, many of which were previously unrecognized in bone cell function, and some of these may represent potential targets of Ets1 and Ets2 transcription factors. MC3T3-E1 osteoblast-like cells were seeded at a density of 5600 cells/cm Poly(A) RNA was isolated from total RNA extracted from the MC3T3-E1 cells on days 3 and 34 using Dynabeads (Dynal AS, Oslo, Norway). cDNA probe synthesis using Cy3 and Cy5, hybridization with the mouse GEM1 cDNA microarray, and signal analyses were performed by IncyteGenomics, Inc., as described on the company’s website (http://www.incytegenomics.com). The controls used in this procedure include spiking the cDNA synthesis reaction with yeast RNA at increasing concentrations as a measure of the efficiency of the reverse transcription (RT) reaction, the presence of fluorescent elements having signals independent of the RT reaction, and inclusion of housekeeping genes at different concentrations as a measure of RNA quality (http://www.incytegenomics.com). cDNA hybridization and analysis was carried out on one occasion by IncyteGenomics. Total RNA was collected from MC3T3-E1 cells as described earlier and 7 or 10 μg of RNA was size fractionated using a 1.2% agarose gel containing 2% formaldehyde and transferred onto a nylon membrane using the capillary transfer method. Northern blot analysis was carried out using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-generated probes (1 × 10 RT-PCR analyses were done essentially as described with the following conditions: 94°C, 5 min; 94°C, 30 sec; 55°C, 1 min; 72°C, 1 min (repeated for 25 or 30 cycles); and 72°C, 10 min. The following oligonucleotides were used for RT-PCR amplification: TACC3, forward 5′ GATTTCTTGGGAGATTTGGA 3′; reverse 5′ ATTTAGTCTTCAGCTATTTC 3′, Pr22, forward 5′ ATATTCAGGTGAAAGAGCTG 3′; reverse 5′ CTTTGGATTCTTTGTTCTTC 3′, lumican, forward 5′ AACTTGAAAAGTTTGATGTG 3′; reverse 5′ TAAAGACTTAAGTTTAACGG 3′, C/EBP, forward 5′ CATGTGGTAGGAGACAGAGA 3′; reverse 5′ TCATTTCATTGGTCCTCTGG 3′, Mad2, forward 5′ CCGTCTGCGGTGAGGTTGGT 3′; reverse 5′ TCAAACTGCCATCTTTCAAG 3′, cystatin-C, forward 5′ AGGGGCGGGTCCCTAACGCT 3′; reverse 5′ ACAGTCAGTCAATTTGCTGG 3′, CRABPII, forward 5′ GCACGAAGATTGTCCTCCAC 3′; reverse 5′ TCAGCAGTTCTGGACCGGAG 3′; Hax1, forward 5′ GAGCCTGGCTATATCCGACA 3′; reverse 5′ TCTCTCACCAGGTGTTTCTG 3′, TIS21, forward 5′ ACAGCACAGAGCAAAGCAAA 3′; reverse 5′ GGAATGGGTTGGGGATTGCC 3′, MYD116, forward 5′ ACAACTTTTGTCTGTACTGGA 3′; reverse 3′ TCTGTGCCTGTACTGGCGAT 3′, EST350, forward 5′ CGGCGGCTCCTAGAGCGTT 3′; reverse 5′ CAACACCTGCATCCTCGGCT 3′; cyclin B1, forward 5′ TCCTCCCGGCGTGCTGCGGA 3′; reverse 5′ TTTTCAGAGACAATCTTGCC 3′, Ets2, forward 5′ AAGCGCCAGCCAGCCTTTGACACC 3′; reverse 5′ GGTGGCCCAGAGAAGCCACTG 3′, EST317, forward 5′ ACTGAAGCAGGTTGCATAAT 3′; reverse 5′ ACTGCTCAGGACTCGGGACT 3′; exportin 1, forward 5′ GAGGATCATTGGAACGGCTC 3′; reverse 5′ TCTGTAAGCCTGTATCTGCA 3′, GAPDH, forward 5′ TGTGAACGGATTTGGCCGTA 3′; reverse 5′ GGAAGGCCATGCCAGTGAGC 3′. MC3T3-E1 is a clonal osteogenic cell line that undergoes a maturation process that results in the formation of a mineralized bone matrix. This process is accompanied by dramatic changes in the expression of many bone-related genes Fifty known genes were found to be expressed at a higher level on day 3 compared with day 34. Of these genes, 12 were expressed at levels of 3-fold or higher; 10 were expressed at 2.5–2.9-fold, and 28 were expressed at 2–2.4-fold, inclusively. In addition, 66 known genes were expressed at higher levels on day 34. Of these genes, 17 were found to be expressed at levels of 3-fold or higher, 11 at 2.5–2.9-fold, and 38 at 2–2.4-fold. The highest differentially expressed gene noted on day 3 was a transcription factor, Genes with balanced differential expression of ≥two fold on day 3 or day 34 were considered for further study. Fifteen genes were analyzed for their RNA expressions using RT-PCR (data not shown). Of these, expression of ten genes was further confirmed by northern blot analysis. From the day 3 genes the expression profiles of growth-related genes, such as Pr22, Mad2, cyclin B1, TACC3, and EST317, were analyzed. We examined cyclin B1 expression by semiquantitative RT-PCR because it was found to be expressed at extremely low levels by the northern blot analysis Further study of the expression profiles of some of the day 34 genes revealed that they were also expressed at high levels during the differentiation phase (day 12) We earmarked the ECM proteins lumican and cystatin-C cDNA microarrays are rapidly becoming the method of choice to examine gene expression profiles in various specialized systems. cDNA microarray technology has previously been used to study expression of genes involved in 3T3-L1 preadipocyte differentiation, On day 3 of culture, MC3T3-E1 cells are actively proliferating. Not much is known about the function and targets of TACC3 transcription factor. The TACC domain has recently been shown to identify a family of centrosomal proteins that can interact with microtubules. Pr22 is a growth-related gene that was isolated from the human osteoblast cell line SaOS-2 by differential display cloning as a vitamin D-responsive gene. Proliferation of the MC3T3-E1 cells decreases significantly once the culture has reached confluency and the preosteoblasts will then start to differentiate (day 12). Not much is known about the genes expressed during this time. By means of a detailed expression profile of some of the genes identified by microarray analysis we observed that Hax1, TIS21/BTG2, and the novel EST350 were expressed most significantly on day 12. Hax1 is an effector of the src family of the tyrosine kinase signaling pathway and has never been discussed in the context of bone development and osteoblast differentiation. The majority of genes identified by our microarray analysis as day 34 genes are either part of a signal transduction pathway or ECM-associated products. Lumican and cystatin-C are two ECM proteins having high expression levels on day 34. Cystatin-C is a cysteine protease inhibitor that was previously reported to be expressed in mature osteoblasts. To the best of our knowledge, lumican expression has never been examined in osteoblasts. Lumican is a keratan sulfate proteoglycan, which binds to type I collagen. It is also possible that the expression of genes such as TACC3, cyclin B1, and Pr22, which are expressed predominantly during the proliferation phase, may be regulated in part by Ets1 transcription factor, because Ets1 is expressed mainly during the proliferation phase of MC3T3-E1 osteoblast development. It is also of interest to note that in comparing the magnitudes of the differential expression of genes as determined by the northern blot and cDNA array, we found that, in general, the cDNA array tends to underestimate the extent of differential expression levels By applying cDNA microarray technology to MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts we have identified several genes with expressions that have never been studied in bone tissue or osteoblasts. We have reported herein that genes such as TACC3, Pr22, and EST317 are expressed at high levels by proliferating preosteoblasts, whereas, in genes such lumican and cystatin-C expression peaks once during the differentiation phase and then during the mineralization phase, suggesting that these genes could play a role in both processes. Further studies of these and other genes identified through the array would undoubtedly lead to the discovery of new bone marker genes as well as new targets of Ets1 and Ets2 transcription factors The authors would like to thank Vincent Li for technical assistance. This study was supported by a CIHR group grant (MGC48376) and a CIHR grant to A. Seth (MOP37784).