Industrial activities lead to the contamination of large amounts of soils polluted by both inorganic and organic compounds, which are difficult to treat due to different chemical properties. The efficiency of a decontamination process developed to simultaneously remove mixed contamination of industrial soils was evaluated at the pilot-scale, as well as operating costs associated to that process to define the best remediation approach. The results showed that the treatment of the coarse fractions (>0.250 mm) of 40 kg of soil by attrition in countercurrent mode allowed the removal of 17–42% of As, 3–31% of Cr, 20–38% of Cu, and 64–75% of polychlorinated dioxins and furans (PCDD/F). Removals of 60% for As, 2.2% for Cr, 23% for Cu, and 74% for PCDD/F were obtained during the treatment of attrition sludge (<0.250 mm) by alkaline leaching process. However, the results of the techno-economic evaluation, carried out on a fixed plant with an annual treatment capacity of 7560 tons of soil treated (tst), showed that the estimated overall costs for the attrition process alone [scenario 1] (CAD$ 451/tst) were lower than the costs of the process, which additionally includes an alkaline leaching step to treat attrition sludge [scenario 2] (CAD$ 579/tst). This techno-economic evaluation also showed that the process becomes competitive with current disposal options (thermal desorption and landfilling – CAD$ 600/tst) from a certain treatment capacity, which is around of 3465 tst/yr for the scenario 1 and 6930 tst/yr for the scenario 2. On the other hand, the techno-economic evaluations are crucial to selecting feasible decontamination process for a soil remediation project, with considerations of the type of contamination, site characteristics and cost effectiveness.The contamination of soils by both metal(loid)s and organic compounds is one of the most important environmental problems as it negatively impacts the economy and threatens public safety ( Nowadays, the only available option for the remediation of industrial soils dealing with mixed contamination includes thermal desorption to destroy organic contaminants followed by the immobilization of inorganic contaminants or landfilling ( The chemical leaching process may be preceeded by a physical separation step to reduce the volume of contaminated soils requiring chemical treatment, significantly decreasing remediation costs. Soil washing is a physical separation based on mineral processing technologies such as flotation or attrition ( This article focuses on the techno-economic assessment of a physico-chemical decontamination process applied at pilot scale to treat soil contaminated by As, Cr, Cu, PCP and PCDD/F. Several decontamination scenarios have been simulated to define an efficient, robust and economically viable remediation strategy depending on the initial level of contamination of each size fraction. For confidentiality reasons, soil samples are only identified as coming from an industrial area and are referred to as S3. The industrial activity generated a spatially heterogeneous soil contamination by As, Cr, Cu, PCP and PCDD/F ( For the present study, a volume of soils of 2.4 m The attrition process applied to the coarse soil fractions (>12 mm, 4–12 mm, 1–4 mm, 0.250–1 mm) is composed of five attrition steps ([BW] = 0–2% (w/w), T = 25 °C, PD = 40% (w/w), t = 20 min), followed by a rinsing step (PD = 40% (w/w), T = 25 °C) ( The determination of total As, Cr or Cu concentrations before and after soil treatment was performed by ICP-AES (inductively plasma coupled to atomic emission spectroscopy, Vista Ax CCO simultaneous ICP-AES, Varian, Mississauga, ON, Canada) at the Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS) laboratory. The metal(loid) concentrations were determined after digestion of 0.5 g of dry soil samples in the presence of nitric and hydrochloric acids (HNO The PCP concentrations were determined at INRS laboratory after a Soxhlet extraction of 20 g of dry soil samples with 300 mL of methylene chloride followed by a liquid/liquid extraction step performed in the presence of sodium hydroxide at 20 g/L. Then, a PCP derivatization step was performed using anhydrous acetate and a solution of potassium carbonate (75%, v/v). After 12 h of agitation, a liquid/liquid extraction step was carried out using methylene chloride. A solution of surrogate standard (PCP– The analysis of PCDD/F concentrations was performed by the accredited Wellington Laboratory, Guelph, ON, Canada, following the CEAEQ method MA. 400-D.F. 1.1 ( All contaminant removal yields (RY) were calculated using the following equation (Eq. The initial and final concentrations of contaminants are expressed in mg/kg for As, Cr, Cu and PCP and in ng TEQ/Kg for PCDD/F. The pH of the attrition, leaching and rinsing solutions were measured using a pH-meter (Accumet Model 915, USA), equipped with a double junction Cole-Parmer electrode with an Ag/AgCl reference cell. Before each series of measurements, certified buffer solutions (pH = 2, 4, 7, and 10) were used to calibrate the pH-meter. The total solid contents were measured according to the APHA method 2540D ( For this study, a software was modeled to evaluate the direct and indirect costs of the process discussed in the previous section to treat soils contaminated by As, Cr, Cu, PCP and PCDD/F. This model includes more than 260 input variables used to define soil characteristics, processing steps, market parameters and exploitation, capitalization parameters, operating parameters, etc. This model was used to evaluate two different decontamination scenarios. These scenarios were considered under the most similar possible operating conditions, but for two different treatment options. Both treatment scenarios include wet-sieving. Scenario 1 consists of treating only the coarse fractions (>0.250 mm) of soil S3 by attrition and disposing of the fine fraction (<0.250 mm) and the attrition sludge (<0.250 mm) as HRM ( Prior to establishing the two scenarios to be tested, a preliminary alkaline leaching test on the fine fractions (<0.250 mm) of the soil S3 was performed applying the same leaching conditions used for the attrition sludge. Three leaching steps were carried out in the presence of a surfactant (PD = 10% (w/w), [BW] = 3% (w/w), [NaOH] = 0.85 M, t = 2 h and T = 80 °C) followed by two rinsing steps with clean water (PD = 10%, T = 80 °C and t = 15 min). The results showed that despite a removal yield of 37.5% of PCDD/F, alkaline leaching was not sufficient to reduce the levels of PCDD/F (18,815 ng TEQ/Kg) present in the soil to below the threshold (TH 4 = 5000 ng TEQ/kg for PCDD/F) ( The first step in the techno-economic evaluation of a treatment system is to draw up a complete process scheme describing all the stages of the treatment chain while identifying all the inputs and outputs. Inputs include the soil to be treated, water, chemical products, etc., while the outputs include the treated soil, final effluents, as well as attrition sludge, precipitation sludge, etc. A complete depiction of the decontamination process for soils contaminated with As, Cr, Cu, PCP and PCDD/F is shown in The development of a techno-economic evaluation model for a treatment system requires the definition of a large number of parameters (variables) that can be modified if necessary in order to evaluate their effect on the economic performance of the decontamination process. The variables to be defined first include operating parameters such as the operating period (d/yr), the processing capacity of the plant (tst/d), the number of hours of operation per day (h/d), the operating efficiency factor (%), as well as unit processing income ($/tst). Basic market parameters must also be identified as variables. The main parameters of this category are: annual inflation rate (%/yr), annual interest rate (%/yr), annual discount rate (%/yr), income tax (% of gross revenue), exchange rate (US$/CAD$), and the Marshall and Swift Equipment Cost Index. An exhaustive techno-economic evaluation must also consider certain parameters related to the initial investment (capitalization parameters) such as: the amortization period (yr), the useful life of equipment (yr) as well as the working capital (% of fixed capital costs). The evaluation of the direct and indirect costs of operation requires the definition of a set of parameters. The most common ones are taken from the actual Canadian market, as well as from literature ( Once the process scheme has been prepared and the variables have been defined, the next step is to prepare a table containing a mass and volume balance sheet, which is generated for a volume (m A value close to 100% is desired, although a difference of ±10–15% is often acceptable. Once the mass balance sheet has been established, it is then possible to switch to the dimensioning of the required equipment according to a specific scenario (e.g. for a given processing capacity). For this reason, it is necessary to specify the period of time used for each equipment per hour (TEHU) (min/h), the processing capacity of the plant (m This multiplicative factor identifies the factor to be applied for each cubic meter of soil matrix processed per hour. The sizing takes into account the mass balance sheet to calculate the capacity of different equipment, which must be established according to the equipment type to be considered. The capacity of the different equipment is calculated using Eq. Equipment capacity is expressed in (tst/h) for solids, in (L/h) for liquids and in (m The electricity cost is based on the electric consumption of each peice of equipment (kW) multiplied by the number of hours the equipment is in use (h/d), giving the energy consumption per day (kWh/d) for each piece of equipment. The total energy consumption is obtained by summing the individual consumption of each piece of equipment. This consumption value is then multiplied by the number of days of operation per year (FJOA) and the unit cost of electricity (FCUE), which makes it possible to obtain the annual costs in electricity (COAE) of the plant. Electric and thermal requirements were calculated separately using Eq. The energy consumption of some basic equipment in environmental technologies is based on Eq. The heat energy « Q Once equipment costs are established, the other components of the total investment costs are estimated using multiplying factors called Lang Factors. The sum of direct, indirect, construction management costs and the quota fees are combined to give the total capital costs (TCFC). Therefore, the total investment cost is obtained by adding the amount of working capital to the amount of TCFC.   Ten loops of the CCAP (4 kg of soil for each loop) with effluent recirculation were applied to 40 kg of the coarse fractions (>0.250 mm) in the presence of the BW surfactant resulted in the removal of 17–42% of As, 3.0–31% of Cr, 20–38% of Cu and 64–75% of PCDD/F. Although the coarse fractions, which represent the majority of the entire soil (87%), had low initial metal(loid)s concentrations, the CCAP was efficient enough to reduce them below the criteria to allow an industrial use of the remediated coarse fractions. In comparison,  The attrition process applied to the coarse fractions generated a highly contaminated attrition sludge (<0.250 mm), but representing only 8.2% of the entire soil treated. To reduce this contamination, attrition sludge were submitted to the alkaline leaching via the CCLP in the presence of a surfactant (BW) to improve the removal of hydrophobic contaminants such as PCDD/F. The average removal yields, calculated after five loops of the CCLP, were 60 ± 3%, 2.2 ± 0.9%, 23 ± 1% and 76 ± 2%, respectively for As, Cr, Cu and PCDD/F. The low removal rates obtained for Cr (2.2%) during alkaline leaching are in accordance with the results obtained by In soil rehabilitation, removal yields are not the most important parameters under considered when determining the efficiency of a decontamination process. Most industrial countries have defined different thresholds (TH) for both organic and inorganic contaminants below which particular uses of these soils ( According to the basic operating parameters presented in The soil remediation process comprises: i) a sieving step, ii) an attrition step to treat coarse fractions (>0.250 mm) and iii) a leaching step of the attrition sludge (<0.250 mm – Scenario 2 only) according to the different scenarios. The mass and volume balance sheets of inputs and outputs defined for each step are presented in The management of soil pollution is a major economic challenge worldwide (  Percentages of direct and indirect costs are presented in The depreciation period and the equipment service life included in the 10-year model also need to be considered. It is necessary to predict a recurrent tonnage during the entire period of operation of the plant. This would render the total costs of the decontamination process economically and comprehensively more attractive than thermal desorption. This study focused on a detailed techno-economic evaluation of a decontamination process applied to sites contaminated by both organic (PCP and PCDD/F) and inorganic (As, Cr and Cu) pollutants. For comparison purposes, two treatment options were considered within this study under the most similar conditions possible: one without leaching of attrition sludge and the other one with alkaline leaching. The technical feasibility of the proposed method for the rehabilitation of a site contaminated by both As, Cr, Cu, PCP and PCDD/F has been successfully demonstrated. Indeed, the results showed that for a plant with a processing capacity of 7560 tst/yr, the attrition of the coarse fractions (>0.250 mm) alone and the disposal of fine residues (<0.250 mm) as HRM was much more economic than the process including alkaline leaching of the attrition sludge (<0.250 mm). The technical and economic evaluations have shown that this decontamination process could be competitive to other soil decontamination methods already available on the market such as thermal desorption for a plant able to treat 3465 tst/yr for the scenario 1 and 6930 tst/yr for the scenario 2. This opens the door to the economically feasible application of this process into the market for the rehabilitation of contaminated soil.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at