Although uncommon, the management of ipsilateral pilon and calcaneal fractures is a challenging problem for foot and ankle surgeons. There are several issues that may affect the outcome. Aside from damage to the soft-tissue envelope, technical issues such as positioning of the patient, application of traction, and tourniquet time may complicate surgical intervention. The authors present their experience with 2 patients who sustained this fracture pattern and highlight the mechanism, management, and possible complications of these injuries.The treatment of isolated pilon and calcaneal fractures poses a quandary for many surgeons Pilon fractures are relatively uncommon, constituting less than 1% of lower-limb fractures The calcaneus is the most frequently fractured tarsal bone, with calcaneal fractures accounting for 2% of all fractures Given the high incidence of complications with these injuries when they occur in isolation, the presence of both fractures in the same extremity most likely would escalate the incidence of complications. The purpose of this article is to report on 2 such patients and the use of a standardized protocol for the management of this combination of injuries. A 32-year-old man was involved in a motorcycle accident and sustained an isolated injury to his left ankle and foot. The patient had a past medical history of cystic fibrosis and had undergone bilateral lung transplantation 10 years before. After advanced trauma life support evaluation, plain radiographs of the left ankle and foot were obtained and showed a pilon fracture and an ipsilateral calcaneal fracture A temporary external fixator was applied the next day to maintain stability while the initial swelling subsided. Thirteen days later, a definitive procedure was performed. A third-generation cephalosporin was administered for prophylaxis during induction of anesthesia, and 2 more doses were administered during the first 24 hours postoperatively. The patient was first placed in the lateral position for reconstruction of the calcaneal fracture. The surgery was performed under tourniquet hemostasis, and a lateral approach was used The patient was then placed in the supine position and the tourniquet was reinflated. The pilon fracture was exposed through an anteromedial incision, with care taken to minimize soft-tissue dissection. The fracture was reduced and fixed with an AO cruciate locking pilon plate In the postoperative period, the left lower limb was kept elevated and, after reduction of the swelling, a removable cast was applied. Mobilization of the ankle and subtalar joints was initiated once the incisions had healed. The patient received physiotherapy treatment for 6 months. After discharge from the hospital, the patient was followed up regularly for clinical and radiographic assessment in the outpatient trauma clinic. For the first 2 months, the patient was nonweightbearing on the left lower limb. He then gradually progressed to full weightbearing. By 3 months postoperatively, both fractures had advanced to clinical and radiographic union. At final follow-up, 2.5 years after surgery, the patient had full range of motion of both the ankle and the subtalar joints. There was no radiographic evidence of posttraumatic osteoarthritis A 39-year-old man fell off a digger that then overturned onto him. In the process, he sustained multiple injuries that included an open (grade I) fracture of right calcaneus, a closed right pilon fracture Definitive stabilization of the fractures was performed 12 days later, once the soft tissues had recovered from the initial injury. The patient was first placed in the lateral position and, under tourniquet control, the calcaneus was exposed via a lateral approach Subsequently, the patient was placed in the supine position. The tourniquet was reinflated and the fibula was reduced and held by an indirect reduction technique with a 3.5 dynamic-compression plate to maintain vascularity of the fragments and to minimize further soft-tissue trauma. The pilon fracture then was exposed through an anteromedial approach, with this second incision 7 cm from the fibular incision to preserve vascularity of the intervening flap. The fracture was reduced and fixed with lag screws and an AO cloverleaf plate (Synthes) Postoperatively, a below-knee posterior splint was applied and the right lower limb was strictly elevated. The posterior splint was replaced with a removable cast after 5 days. Ankle and subtalar joint exercises were encouraged as soon as the incisions had healed. The patient was kept in the hospital for 22 days. After discharge, he was followed up regularly in the outpatient trauma clinic for clinical and radiographic assessment. Physiotherapy was performed for 7 months. Both fractures united within 3.5 months. The cloverleaf plate was removed 1.5 years after surgery because it was causing soft-tissue irritation Considering that both calcaneal and pilon fractures may result from axial loads, it stands to reason that these fractures can occur simultaneously. In a cadaveric study, Yoganandan et al It is important to appreciate the extensive soft-tissue insult associated with these injuries and to allow adequate time for them to heal before attempting surgery. Within a few hours of sustaining these injuries, the soft tissues become edematous and may develop fracture blisters as a result of cleavage at dermoepidermal junction Trauma patients are also at a high risk of developing deep vein thrombosis, with the reported incidence ranging from 20–90% It is equally important to recognize the complex anatomic configuration of these fractures to achieve good reconstruction. In our tertiary level referral center, all pilon and calcaneal fractures are evaluated by computed tomography before a definitive treatment plan is determined. A computed tomography of the injured extremity is valuable in assessing the degree of fragmentation, the amount of displacement of the fragments, and the presence of articular impaction. Other important issues to be considered when formulating an surgical plan include the inability to insert a pin or universal distractor through the calcaneus to maintain reduction of the pilon fracture, the need for different patient positions to approach the 2 fractures, and the prolonged tourniquet time. During the past 4 decades, treatment options for pilon fractures have evolved from conservative treatment to internal and external fixation to 2-stage surgery We accept that percutaneous reduction and fixation of the joint surface and stabilization with external frames is a recognized treatment protocol for pilon fractures in some centers. However, we feel that these fractures are better treated either with external fixation or with open reduction and internal fixation techniques, depending on the surgeon’s preference and the fracture configuration. It is our unit’s experience that circular frame fixation is not without its own problems, including shifting of the relative position of the wires as edema resolves and skin shrinkage occurs. External fixation also carries the risk of pin-site infection. Furthermore, we believe that it is difficult to treat an ipsilateral os calcis fracture with a circular frame because anatomic reconstruction of the posterior facet necessitates open reduction and internal fixation. The protocol we followed provides the advantages of timely fracture union and good functional results without any complications of wound dehiscence, infection, deep vein thrombosis, malunion, or nonunion. Although larger studies are required, these cases offer a method to successfully manage these challenging injuries.