The removal of pollutants in saline medium by the Fenton’s reagent needs a more detailed investigation, since the presence of chloride may inhibit or retard degradation. Phenol was used as a model pollutant and the influence of some important process variables for the removal of total organic carbon and phenol were investigated, such as FeSO4 and H2O2 concentrations, pH and salinity. The reactivity of iron cations and alternative procedures of applying UV radiation (photo-Fenton) were evaluated.
                  Phenol was fast and completely removed by the Fenton’s process even in a high saline medium (50000mg NaCll−1). However, TOC was only moderately or poorly removed in saline media, depending on the salt concentration. When the photo-Fenton process was used, mineralization was improved and high TOC removals were observed in moderately saline media (NaCl concentration⩽10000mgl−1). For the highest NaCl concentration tested (50000mgl−1) only a moderate TOC removal was observed (50%).Advanced oxidation processes are characterized by their catalytic and photochemical properties and oxidative degradation reactions. Fenton’s reagent is a technical alternative for removing organic pollutants. It is a catalytic oxidative mixture that contains iron ions and hydrogen peroxide, producing extremely reactive and non-selective hydroxyl radicals, as can be seen in reactions Ferric ion acts as a catalyst in the decomposition of H H Generally, Fe The iron-complexes destruction rate and the possible complete mineralization of organic pollutants by the reactions of the Fe Photo-reduction reactions of the ferrous ion, reaction Photochemical reactions of the compounds formed between Fe Photolysis reaction of the hydrogen peroxide, reaction By using an efficient advanced oxidation technique, removal of the target pollutant and all the by-products may be achieved. This is an important goal, since the intermediate products formed can impart toxicity to the treated effluent. Some ions, like Cl The determination of the limiting chloride concentrations that render the oxidation processes inefficient is very relevant for the application and diffusion of these technologies. Thus, the aim of this work is to investigate the effect of chloride in high concentrations (up to 50 Ferrous sulfate, sodium chloride, hydrogen peroxide were reagent grade and were used as received from Proton Research, Riolab (Brazil) and Merck (Brazil), respectively. Reagent grade phenol from Vetec-Quı́mica (Brazil) was distilled prior to use to remove degradation products formed during the storage. Appropriate quantities of phenol, sodium chloride and iron sulfate were solubilized in distilled water to prepare the synthetic effluents. The amounts of these chemicals varied according to the selected reaction conditions. Phenol concentrations employed in the tests were in the range of 10–50 The oxidation reactions conducted without UV radiation were started when hydrogen peroxide and ferrous sulfate were added to the glass reactor (a standard Pyrex The solution was illuminated from the top using a high-pressure 250 TOC analysis was performed, using a Shimadzu The total phenols were quantified by the 4-aminoantipyrine method ( Phenol was determined by HPLC. 20 When phenol is determined by the 4-aminoantipyrine method, it needs time for sample collection, preparation and analysis. Since oxidation reactions occurred in a homogeneous medium, a method to interrupt the reaction had to be tested and used. Ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA), which acts as a complexing agent and methanol (MeOH), which works as a trap for hydroxyl radicals, were investigated according to procedures previously reported ( Phenol concentration drops very fast in the first minutes of reaction and practically vanishes, after 60 It seems that the small quantity of iron, which remains in solution after EDTA addition, is enough to keep the catalytic process going on, oxidizing phenol at low rates. These results indicate that methanol was more efficient to stop the oxidation reaction. Phenol determinations performed by chromatography also confirmed the experimental data presented in Oxidation experiments were performed varying the concentration of H The effect of FeSO No improvement on TOC removal was obtained even when higher FeSO The effect of pH on the extent of TOC removal was significant in non-radiated experiments ( The previous results indicate that the best oxidation conditions were attained when 200 As observed in As shown in  The effect of salt concentration on TOC removal is illustrated in The decrease on process efficiency can be attributed to the presence of chloride ions, since they are able to trap hydroxyl radicals, producing precursors of hypochlorous acid, as shown in reaction The results concerning phenol determination, shown in The concentration of Fenton’s reagent employed in the experiment was enough to overcome the restrictions imposed by the salinity, to a point that phenol was eliminated after 40 Although phenol has been completely oxidized after 40 Additional experiments were carried out in a medium containing 10 Taking into account all the results obtained in the non-radiated experiments, we may conclude that phenol removal is not concomitant with TOC removal. The discrepancy between these removals is intensified at salt concentrations higher than 2500  Up to NaCl concentrations of 10 The results concerning the irradiation procedure II (  The different results obtained when different radiation procedures are employed may be attributed to the complexity of the reaction system investigated. During the non-irradiated period, Fe Based on the experimental results, it can be stated that the removal of organic matter from effluents containing phenol and high NaCl content (50 Phenol oxidation in non-saline media by Fenton’s reagent was fast achieved. However, the oxidation and mineralization of the intermediary products was not accomplished, even when the best combination of reagents (H Phenol was completely oxidized by the Fenton’s process in saline media, when appreciable concentrations of reagents were used (200 Photo-Fenton process was effective to remove TOC in media with NaCl contents equal or lower than 2500 Authors express their gratitude to the financial support of the following Brazilian agencies: CNPq, FAPERJ, FUJB and CAPES.