A long-term field experiment utilising barley received four different treatments prior to sowing: municipal solid waste (MSW) compost at either 20tha−1 (C20) or 80tha−1 (C80); cow manure (MA) at 20tha−1; mineral fertilizer (MIN) or NPK (400kgha−1); and NH4NO3 (150kgha−1). The effects of these applications on soil enzyme activities and microbial biomass at crop harvest were measured after nine years. In comparison with the control (no amendment) MSW addition increased biomass C by 10 and 46% at application rates of 20 and 80tha−1, respectively, while MA treatment increased microbial biomass C by 29%. The ratio of soil microbial C to soil organic C was the lowest at the high rate of MSW application. Oxidoreductase enzymes, such as dehydrogenase and catalase, were higher in the MSW treatments by 730 (C20) and 200% (C80), respectively, and by 993 and 140% in MA treatments than in the unamended soil, indicating an increase in the microbial metabolism in the soil as a result of the mineralization of biodegradable C fractions contained in the amendments. The addition of MSW and MA caused different responses in hydrolase enzymes. Phosphatase activity decreased with MSW (±62% at both rates) and MA (±73%), to less than those in the mineral fertilization and the control treatments. Urease activity decreased by 21% (C20) and 28% (C80), possibly being affected by the heavy metals contained in the MSW. However, β-glucosidase and protease-BAA increased in all the organic treatments, especially with MA (by 214 and 177%, respectively). This is attributed to the microbial stimulation by the organic C and is correlated with the increase in dehydrogenase (r
                     2=0.882) and catalase (r
                     2=0.654) activities.One of the characteristics of soils in the south of Spain is their low organic matter content. The decrease in soil organic matter is paralleled by declines in soil fertility, as many authors have demonstrated ( In recent years, composted urban waste has been added to agricultural land for both waste disposal and to improve soil fertility. Compost is rich in organic matter and an important source of nutrients for plants ( Incorporation of organic materials, such as municipal solid waste (MSW) compost, into soil promotes microbiological activity. Microbial activity and soil fertility are generally closely related because it is through the biomass that the mineralization of the important organic elements (C, N, P and S) occur ( In many arable agricultural soils, the soil microbial biomass is related to the soil organic matter content ( The aim of the present research was to evaluate the changes in microbial activity that took place in an agricultural soil that has been amended with MSW compost at two different rates over nine years and to compare a manure treatment, a mineral fertilization and a non-amended control. The specific activity of some enzymes (dehydrogenase, catalase, phosphatase, urease and protease) and the microbial biomass C content were measured. The study was carried out in the experimental field “La Higueruela” situated in Santa Olalla (Toledo) in Central Spain. The environmental conditions define the area as continental semiarid with an average annual rainfall of 487 The field experiment consisted of plots in four blocks of five different treatments, arranged randomly. The treatments were: control without fertilization (CONT), compost applied at two rates of 20 One year after treatment, each plot was divided into two sub-plots of Soil pH and electrical conductivity in the residues were measured in a 1:5 sample:water extract after shaking for 30 Biomass C was determined by fumigation of the sample with ethanol-free CHCl Dehydrogenase activity was determined by the reduction of 2- Catalase activity was determined by measuring the O Urease and protease activities were determined in 0.1 Phosphatase and β-glucosidase activities were determined using The same procedure as for the enzyme assay was followed for the controls but the substrate was added to the soil after incubation and immediately prior to stopping the reaction. All data was subjected to an analysis of variance using the least significant difference test and comparing the differences between specific treatments. The correlation matrix between biological and biochemical parameters was made with the Statgraphics Plus 2.0. The highest contents of microbial biomass C were observed in the organic treatments of accumulative plots, particularly in the C80, followed by the MA and C20 treatments ( Enzyme activities varied widely among the treatments studied. The treatment in which the highest activity occurred was found to vary depending on the enzyme ( A correlation matrix ( The increase of microbial biomass in this long-term experiment with the organic amendments is mainly due to the microbial biomass contained in the organic residues and the addition of substrate-C, which stimulates the indigenous soil microbiota, as confirmed by prior analyses. Other authors have reported a similar dual influence on biomass ( Microbial biomass is a much more sensitive indicator of changing soil conditions than is the total organic matter content. There is accumulating evidence that heavy metals decrease the proportion of microbial biomass C in total soil organic matter ( Dehydrogenase and catalase are intracellular enzymes that are involved in microbial oxidoreductase metabolism. The activity of such enzymes basically depends on the metabolic state of the soil biota. Dehydrogenase activity was significantly correlated with soil biomass C in both accumulative and residual plots ( Catalase is an oxidoreductase associated with aerobic microbial activity ( Urease and protease hydrolyse nitrogen compounds to ammonium, using urea and low molecular weight protein substrates, respectively. Urease activity was negatively correlated with dehydrogenase ( Changes in soil phosphatase activities, which play an essential role in the mineralization of organic phosphorus, were also observed between treatments. Both phosphatase and urease activities were significantly correlated in the accumulative plots ( The additions of organic residues increased β-glucosidase activity in soil. This activity was greater in MA than in MSW treatments, due to the labile C continued in the fresh organic matter. There was a positive correlation between β-glucosidase and oxidoreductase enzymes ( Overall, our results have shown that the addition of organic residues to an agricultural soil has a variety of effects on microbial biomass C and enzyme activities. These two important soil properties respond to soil perturbation or restoration over a relatively short time. Soils amended with MSW compost can improve soil quality, increasing the organic matter content of degraded soils and improving soil biological and biochemical properties. However, the wide variety of substances such as heavy metals and other potential pollutants in municipal solid wastes limits the use of these residues in compost. Consequently, there must be a quality control of these organic amendments in order to minimise the risk of inhibiting essential biogeochemical processes as well as contributing to environmental pollution. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Comunidad de Castilla-La Mancha and CICYT (project n° AMB-0429) for their financial and technical support in this work and to Pilar Tere Velasco and Felisa Molina for their scientific collaboration.