The use of zinc, either in the form of dust or shavings, has been a well-known part of the Merrill–Crowe process incorporating zinc cementation for the recovery of gold and silver from pregnant solutions. The process is a classic cementation reaction involving oxidation and reduction. Normally applied to solutions generated either from a solid–liquid separation step downstream of a grinding and leaching operation, or from solutions originating from heap-leaching, it has also been used on eluates from carbon stripping and solutions from intensive cyanidation. Zinc cementation is performed in sloping boxes filled with bundles of coarse zinc shavings. Gold-bearing solutions were passed through sand filters ahead of this step to remove suspended solids. However, the coarse zinc shavings became coated and essentially passivated with insoluble zinc hydroxides so zinc consumption was high.The use of zinc, either in the form of dust or shavings, has been a well-known part of the Merrill–Crowe process, incorporating zinc cementation for the recovery of gold and silver from pregnant solutions, since 1888. The process is a classic cementation reaction involving oxidation and reduction. Normally applied to solutions generated either from a solid–liquid separation step downstream of a grinding and leaching operation, or from solutions originating from heap-leaching, it has also been used on eluates from carbon stripping and solutions from intensive cyanidation. The expensive solid–liquid separation step following grinding operations, which is required for the Merrill–Crowe process can now largely be avoided by the use of the carbon-in-pulp (CIP) process. However, the zinc cementation process still accounts for some 25–30% of world gold production ( Cementation is an electrochemical, precipitation reaction involving oxidation and reduction processes, sometimes referred to as a The electromotive series is a list of metals, whose order indicates their relative tendency to be oxidized or donate electrons. It begins with those metals most easily oxidized (Li, K, Ca, etc.) and ends with those most difficult to oxidize (Hg, Ag, Pt and Au). The order corresponds to an increasing oxidation potential, expressed in volts, and is a measure of how readily oxidation will take place. It is sometimes called the replacement series in that any metal with a lower oxidation potential will replace a metal in a chemical compound with a higher oxidation potential in the way that zinc (−0.76 It is interesting to note that lead has an intermediate oxidation potential (−0.126 As with most cyanidation reactions, the pH value should be maintained above 10.5 to inhibit the evolution of HCN gas. The optimum free-cyanide concentration corresponds with the typical residual level present after cyanidation leaching of 150–200 Although temperature increases the rate of reaction, the reaction is very fast even at low temperatures just above freezing. High temperature and increasing altitude reduces the equilibrium oxygen content of solutions. Dissolved-oxygen levels of less than 1 Soluble sulfides at less than 20 In practice, gold, silver and mercury are precipitated with high efficiencies, in excess of 99.5%. Some base metals, notably iron and some copper, nickel and cobalt are precipitated but at a much lower efficiencies. Copper precipitation can be inhibited by increasing the cyanide concentration; higher cyanide concentrations may be necessary to initiate effective gold precipitation in the presence of high-copper levels. The use of the zinc cementation process for gold recovery was first patented in Great Britain by J. MacArthur and Drs. R. and W. Forrest in 1888. Initial applications were at the Crown mine in New Zealand and Robinson Deep in South Africa during the 2 years following patenting. It soon became the preferred gold recovery step and an integral part of the cyanidation process. The first application in the USA was by C.W. Merrill at the Homestake mine in Lead, South Dakota. Zinc cementation was initially performed in sloping boxes filled with bundles of coarse zinc shavings. Gold-bearing solutions were passed through sand filters ahead of this step to remove suspended solids. However, the coarse zinc shavings became coated, and essentially passivated with insoluble zinc hydroxides, so zinc consumption was high. To alleviate this effect, three main improvements to the process were made ( The first improvement was the use of a lead salt; this was achieved by dipping the bundles of zinc shavings in lead acetate. The second was the substitution of zinc powder in place of the zinc shavings (C.W. Merrill). The third was the introduction of de-aeration through the use of a vacuum de-aeration tower (T.B. Crowe). The alternative processes, CIP or carbon-in-leach (CIL), have become the preferred process route over the Merrill–Crowe process for medium and large-scale gold processing plants since the late 1970s, owing to their lower capital and operating costs (see Chapter 23). These lower costs are mainly due to the non-requirement of the solid–liquid separation step inherent with the Merrill–Crowe process. Except in the case of heap-leaching, this step typically involves two-stage rotary-drum filtration or up to six stages of counter-current decantation thickeners. The solid–liquid separation step is necessary to separate the gold-bearing solution from the leached solid residue. In the carbon-based processes, the gold is adsorbed onto carbon granules during or following cyanide leaching. They can then be easily screened and washed from the leach slurries. However, despite these potentially higher capital and operating costs, the Merrill–Crowe process still finds application for certain specific applications. Merrill–Crowe is preferred over carbon-based processes when the silver/gold ratio in the leach solution is high. A number of papers address this subject, which is covered in more detail in Chapter 34, but consideration would be given to Merrill–Crowe process when this ratio exceeds 2 or 3. Under typical plant operating conditions, the presence of cyanide-soluble silver lowers the maximum gold loading of the activated carbon. This means that for a given concentration of gold in solution a higher amount of carbon must be moved through the leach tanks and screened out for subsequent stripping. This increases the capital and operating costs for the carbon-based processes and can result in the Merrill–Crowe process being selected for economic reasons. In both heap-leaching and agitated-tank leaching operations, mercury can be dissolved from the ore by cyanide. In plants using the carbon-based processes, soluble mercury–cyanide complexes are adsorbed onto the activated-carbon granules. The mercury is later removed during the elution process step along with the gold and silver. However, it can contaminate working areas during the various processing steps after elution, i.e., pregnant and barren strip-solution storage tanks, carbon-regeneration kiln and electrowinning cells. The cathodes can be retorted to recover residual mercury, but by that point in the process, significant mercury losses and contamination can have occurred. These losses and subsequent contamination are more controllable when the Merrill–Crowe process is used. The mercuric–cyanide complex is removed at >95% efficiency from clarified solution by zinc cementation. The precipitated mercury is recovered along with the gold and silver in the filtration step, immediately following precipitation. The precipitate is collected from the filter and transported directly to the retort furnace. The improved mercury management that is associated with the Merrill–Crowe process can lead to the selection of this process route over carbon in solution. This is particularly true for heap-leaching operations, where the Merrill–Crowe process or the alternative carbon-based gold recovery step from solution have similar capital costs, but the operating cost associated with carbon stripping can be higher than for Merrill–Crowe. Merrill–Crowe is less affected by flotation reagents and other organics than a carbon-based process and could be considered as an alternative when flotation concentrates are being leached. The activated-carbon granules adsorb the reagents and other organics and this can affect their gold-loading capability by tying up available sites. Costs for smaller, higher-grade plants using the Merrill–Crowe process can sometimes be lower than for plants using a carbon-based process, owing to the relatively high capital and operating costs of the carbon-stripping plant. The basic Merrill–Crowe flowsheet is shown in The main steps in the Merrill–Crowe process are: clarification, de-aeration, zinc cementation and filtration. Solution is received either from the pregnant-solution pond of a heap-leach operation or from the unclarified solution tank of a solid–liquid separation section. The solution must be clarified to around 1 This step can involve one or two stages depending on the clarity of the incoming solution. The first stage, if employed, is typically a rake clarifier or a hopper clarifier. This step improves the clarity of the solution to less than approximately 25 De-aeration or Crowe towers can follow a number of designs. More recent designs employ packed towers or cascade or splash towers fitted with offset plates. Early designs used a variety of wooden lattices or strips. A variety of solution-distribution launders, pipes or sprays are also used. The vacuum is typically applied to the top of the tower by a liquid-ring vacuum pump using barren solution as seal water. Operators often experience loose tower packing finding its way into the vacuum pumps. This can be prevented by installing a simple retaining grid. The tower should also include a vortex breaker at the solution outlet. Some plants include a barometric head tank located between the tower and the vacuum pump. This tank, with its associated barometric leg, prevents the possible carryover of gold-bearing solution to the vacuum pump, particularly during flooded conditions. It also acts as a vacuum receiver in the same way as an air receiver on a compressed-air system. The barometric leg typically sits in a solution-filled seal pot, which provides a vacuum seal. Once the solution has been de-aerated, it is imperative that air ingress to the solution be prevented. Welded pipe is recommended between the de-aerator and the filter press, and the pump suctions must be adequately designed or protected. The filter-press feed pump can be one of many designs, including vertical and horizontal centrifugal. A vertical in-line pump submerged in a bath has been found to be effective in excluding air, and hence oxygen, entering the de-aerated solution. However, horizontal centrifugal pumps with either packed glands or mechanical seals have also been successfully applied. Care must be taken to review the tower operating level to provide the required net positive suction head for the filter-press feed pumps and avoid cavitation. Sufficient residence time in the lower portion of the tower should also be provided to allow the level-control system to function effectively. Although instrumentation sensors and control valves are now typically used to control tower level, earlier designs used an overflow pipe, located below the packing, which returned solution from the tower to a small vacuum-seal tank located in the clarified-solution tank. This step can occur in a zinc cone or emulsifier that can be in line with the main process-solution flow, i.e., located under the de-aeration tower or alternatively located above the suction line of the filter-press feed pump, as shown in the flow diagram. Experience has shown that most precipitation actually occurs in the precipitate filter as the solution passes through the cake of precipitate, which contains excess zinc, rather than at the point of zinc addition. Early zinc feeders were slowly moving conveyor belts, which tended to add zinc in small batches as it fell off the end of the conveyor. A new generation of controllable vibrating or pulsed feeders are now available. The improved control has led to reduced overall zinc consumption and more reliable precipitation. Although zinc is typically added dry, some operations premix it with a cyanide solution. This can return any zinc oxides and hydroxides present back to the metallic state. A bleed from solutions circulating in a Merrill–Crowe plant is often required to control the build-up of zinc, iron and other base-metal cyanide concentrations. The treatment of this bleed stream in a cyanide-destruction plant should be considered during design. The plate and frame, or recessed-plate filter press is widely used to recover the precipitate. Although labour-intensive to empty and put back on line, it is relatively inexpensive to install. Recent improvements on the larger filter presses now available include plate shifters to progressively move the plates forward to facilitate emptying. The use of filter cloths or papers between the plates can make cake release and press cleaning easier. The main alternative equipment is a candle filter. These units have the advantage of being easy to automate and backwash. A disadvantage is that the backwashed precipitate is a dilute slurry and a second filtration step, such as a pre-coat rotary drum filter, is required. A recently proposed variation involves a polishing leaf-filter to initially recover the precipitate. The precipitate is then backwashed and recovered in a pressure filter similar to those used to dewater flotation concentrates. This has the advantage of being able to dry the precipitate to low moisture contents, reducing the load on downstream drying, calcining or retorting equipment. Other advantages are associated with security and materials handling. On some of the larger plants, precipitate volumes can be large and consideration must be given to facilitating material handling, particularly in the case of filter presses. Relatively simple conveyors, roller conveyors or trolleys and even storage bins can be employed to transport the precipitate to drying ovens, retorts or refining furnaces. Also, hygiene and dust control are important as the precipitates can contain mercury. In certain operations, precipitates can have a high base-metal content and a sulfuric, hydrochloric or nitric acid digestion step is employed to dissolve iron, copper and other base metals. If possible, this should be avoided, as the handling of the acids themselves, as well as the handling of the viscous acidic base-metal solutions produced is difficult and potentially dangerous, due to the evolution of hydrogen gas. However, recent advances in polymeric or fibreglass materials make design and specification of this equipment easier. If the precipitates contain mercury, then a mercury retort will be required; otherwise drying or calcining in a tray oven is employed. Calcining refers to oxidation of the base metals in the precipitate so that they report to the slag during refining. When correctly done and combined with an effective flux, this step can eliminate the requirement for acid digestion. The Merrill–Crowe zinc-cementation process has been applied on a wide range of metallurgical applications. The Merrill–Crowe zinc-precipitation process has been applied worldwide on a large number of operations, both large and small. The main geographic areas where it has found widespread, large-scale application are as follows. The South African gold industry underwent a large expansion during the late 19th and most of the 20th century. Until the early 1980s most of these plants used the Merrill–Crowe process. One of the last Merrill–Crowe plants constructed was at Anglo American's Elandsrand mine. It used two-stage rotary-drum filtration, hopper clarification and zinc cementation with candle filters. The flowrate was typical of South African operations at around 400 A large number of the gold-processing plants that were built in the early to mid-20th century in the Kirkland Lake, Timmins, Val d’Or and Red Lake areas utilized zinc cementation. In British Columbia, zinc cementation is represented by the Nickel Plate mine, which was built in the mid-1980s using a design developed a few years earlier. This operation was characterized by high soluble-copper values. The major US operations were heap-leach plants and milling operations, which were built mostly in Nevada such as Coeur–Rochester and Paradise Peak. The original Lead operation owned by Homestake used the Merrill–Crowe process, as did some of the early Californian operations. The Merrill–Crowe zinc-cementation process is mainly applied to silver ores. However, some gold is also recovered using this route. South America has numerous applications using zinc-cementation, particularly in Peru. Larger recent applications operating in the 1,200 to 1,500 In Africa, Merrill–Crowe process is represented by Ashanti in Ghana and numerous smaller operations. The Zarafshan–Newmont project uses the Merrill–Crowe process at 1,065 The three main improvements to the Merrill–Crowe process that were initiated in the 20 years following the initial patenting and introduction of the process were the use of a lead salt, substitution of zinc powder in place of the zinc shavings, and the introduction of de-aeration through the use of a vacuum de-aeration tower. Since these developments, the main improvements to the process have been equipment related. Ongoing refinements have simplified operations, reduced operating costs and increased the size of plants. As with other recent advances in mining and metallurgical technology, it is not only innovation that takes place but also application of an ever-increasing scale of operation. The use of the basic process has been expanded to include gold recovery from carbon-stripping eluates and solutions originating from the intensive cyanidation of gravity concentrates. The chemistry of these solutions can be similar. De-aeration is not required on hot eluates from carbon stripping, mainly due to their lower equilibrium oxygen content. Much higher cyanide solution strengths on the order of 2–5