Cocoa hull waste phenolic extract (CHWPE) was encapsulated by chitosan coated liposomes with 0.2% of concentration. Ayran (drinking yoghurt) system was employed as a vehicle for inclusion of phenolic loaded liposomes in dispersion and powder form. Antioxidant capacityand in-vitro bioaccessibility of both dispersion and spray-dried powder liposomal systems with CHWPE included in ayran samples were investigated during the storage period of 15 days. Compared to the ayran sample with CHWPE (0.05%), in-vitro bioaccessibility of encapsulated CHWPE in ayran was determined to be 5 fold and 2 fold higher in the form of liposomal powder (0.05%), and liposomal dispersion (0.1%) in terms of total phenolics and total flavonoids, and total antioxidant capacity (DPPH and CUPRAC assays). The bioaccessibility of catechin (50%) and ferulic acid (80%) of encapsulated CHWPE in liposomal powder showed no significant difference (p > 0.05) during storage. In dispersion of liposomes, bioaccessibility of individual phenolic compounds was variable. Vanillin showed the minimum bioaccessibility in liposomal powder (19%) and liposomal dispersion (16%) at the end of storage. In summary, the use of liposomal delivery systems in powder form should be recommended in ayran system. Although the psychochemical properties of enriched ayran were not monitored in this study, it is suggested that these properties be taken into consideration in determining the form of liposomes to be added to a food product.Polyphenols are the secondary metabolites of plants including cocoa. These compounds exhibit positive effects on human health. Due to their antioxidant; antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, anti-osteoporotic and hepatoprotective activity, they act as a protective agent against some chronic diseases such as cancer, type-II diabetes, cardiovascular disease or non-alcholic fatty liver diseases ( Ayran (drinking yoghurt) is one of the traditional yoghurt products which is prepared by addition of water to yoghurt or addition of yoghurt culture ( Cocoa hull waste was provided by a local chocolate factory in Turkey. After roasting of cocoa beans, cocoa hull waste was transported to the laboratory under vacuum package. Ayran was purchased from a local supermarket. Lecithin (Soybean phospholipids, 97%- Ultralec CHWPE was obtained by methanol/Milli-Q water (80%, v/v) according to Only coated liposome dispersions with and without CHWPE were spray dried since addition of MD to uncoated ones immediately caused extensive flocculation and a complete breakdown of the system ( Liposome suspensions were sized by a static light scattering instrument (Mastersizer 2000, Malvern Instruments). Average particle diameters was reported by using the volume mean diameter ( Ayran samples containing freeze-dried CHWPE (S1) (0.05%), spray dried CHWPE powder (S2) (0.05%), chitosan coated liposomal dispersion with CHWPE (S3) (0.1%), and spray dried liposomal powder with CHWPE (S4) (0.05%) were prepared freeze-dried and encapsulated liposomal systems were added into ayran with a ratio of 1:10 (freeze-dried and encapsulated liposomal systems with CHWPE/ayran) (w/v). To eliminate the possible interferences during experiments, blank samples (liposome dispersions without CHWPE and liposomal powders without CHWPE) were also added to ayran with the same ratio (1:10 w/v). The stability and Ayran samples (20 g) collected in the days of 1st, 5th and 10th and 15th were mixed with 30 ml of acetone-HCL solution (30% (v/v) acetone containing HCL 0.1% (v/v)), and kept at + 4 °C overnight. After filtration through Whatman No:2 filter paper, the aqueous phase was collected and aceton was removed by rotary evaporator at 40 °C (  TPC was measured according to Folin–Ciocalteu reagent test described by 250 μL of diluted sample was treated with 75 μL of sodium nitrite solution (5 g/100 mL) for 6 min. Then, 150 μL of aluminium chloride solution (10 g/100 mL) was added. At the 11th minute, 500 μL of sodium hydoxide (1 mol/L) and 2.5 mL of water were added and the mixture was shaken for 10 s. Absorbance was measured at 510 nm. All analyses were performed in triplicates. The results were expressed as mg catechins per L sample ( Cupric ion reducing antioxidant capacity (CUPRAC) assay ( Change in phenolic profile of both undigested and digested ayran samples were determined using an Ultra high pressure dispersion chromatography (UHPLC) (Shimadzu, CTO-10ASVP, 264 Kyoto, Japan) equipped with a SPD-M10A photodiode array detector (PDA) during storage. Reversed-phase chromatography was performed with 250 × 4.6 mm Kromasil 100 C-18 column packed with 5  μm particles (Teknokroma, Barcelona, Spain), fitted with a security guard C18 ODS (4 × 3.0 mm i.d). A gradient of mobile phase A (MQ water containing %0.1 formic acid) and mobile phase B (MeCN) was used for chromatographic separation ( IBM SPSS Statistics 24.0 software was employed for statistical analysis. All measurements were repeated at least three times using triplicate samples. Differences were analyzed by Tukey’s Test comparisons and p value of <0.05 was chosen to determine significant differences. Coated liposome dispersion with CHWPE with ζ –potential of +35.7 ± 0.92 mV at 300 nm particle size, and liposomal powder with CHWPE with ζ –potential of +34.9 ± 0.42 at 231 nm obtained in our previous study was prepared ( TPC, TFC and TAC values of CHWPE were determined at the 1st, 5th, 10th and 15th day in digested ayran samples where the results showed in Phenolic profiles of ayran samples before and after In conclusion, liposomal systems in dispersion and powder form were employed for the delivery of cocoa hull waste phenolics via ayran. It was observed that stability of CHWPE in ayran samples showed better results in liposomal powder form before and after