Given the differences in mineralization behavior between Mo and W, an assumption was made that W might be removed from Mo by the divalent ions whose tungstates have wolframite-like monoclinic structures rather than scheelite-like tetragonal structures. Through analyzing crystal behaviors of ABO4-type molybdates and tungstates, it was revealed that Mn2+, Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+ and Zn2+ could combine with WO4
                     2− to form monoclinic crystals and thus might be used as separation reagents. Experiments were carried out to investigate the precipitation behaviors of Mo and W with different divalent ions. The results indicated that the separation effects were in accordance with the predictions. Namely, the separation factors obtained with Ba2+, Pb2+, Sr2+, Ca2+ or Cd2+ did not exceed 8, while those obtained with Mn2+, Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+ or Zn2+ were more than 45. The XRD analysis showed that the former precipitates were the expected tetragonal structures. But the latter, with broad and low-intensity diffraction peaks, could not be confirmed as the expected monoclinic structures. The TGA data showed that the dehydrations of the latter were significantly higher, about 7–20% at below 400°C, indicating they may have not only adsorption water but also crystallization water. Even so, based on this study, more available reagents, such as Ni2+ and Zn2+, were found to be effective in separating Mo and W.As a result of the lanthanide contraction, Mo and W have almost identical ionic radii and resemble each other in many of their chemical properties ( Up to now, many methods have been proposed ( By analyzing mineralogical literatures ( Furthermore, it is significant to note that wolframite belongs to the monoclinic system, while scheelite crystallizes in the tetragonal system ( The crystal structures of oxides and oxysalts essentially depend on the properties of their constituent cations which can be characterized by various parameters such as ionic radius, charge number, electronegativity, ion stereo-structure, ionization potential and so on. While As for ABO All reagents used were of analytical grade and the solutions were prepared in distilled water. The mixture solution of Mo and W used for the present study contains 0.05 In each experiment, 12.5 The molar distribution coefficient of Mo and W was calculated as follows. Where: Separation factor was also calculated as follows.  By and large, the separation of macro amounts of Mo and W could be carried out by high-CX divalent ions (Mn The XRD patterns of the precipitates are shown in On the other hand, the XRD patterns of the precipitates obtained with high-CX divalent ions show weak and broad diffraction peaks indicating a low degree of crystallinity (see From the thermogravimetric analysis presented in On the whole, the crystal structures of the precipitates obtained with Ba An assumption was made that W might be removed from Mo by the divalent ions whose tungstates have wolframite-like monoclinic structures rather than scheelite-like tetragonal structures. Through analyzing crystal behaviors of ABO Experiments were carried out to investigate the precipitation behaviors of Mo and W with different divalent ions and thereby to verify the reliability of such assumption. The results indicated that the separation effects were in accordance with the predictions. Namely, the separation factors obtained with low-CX ions, such as Ba This work has been supported by the