The present work aims to study the hardness and wear resistance of electroless Ni–B coatings. An alkaline bath having nickel chloride as the source of nickel and borohydride as the reducing agent was used to prepare the electroless Ni–B coatings. The structure, microhardness and wear resistance of electroless Ni–B coatings, both in as-plated and heat-treated conditions, were evaluated using X-ray diffraction (XRD), Leitz microhardness tester and a pin-on-disc wear test apparatus. XRD patterns reveal that electroless Ni–B coatings are amorphous in as-plated condition and undergo phase transformation to crystalline nickel and nickel borides upon heat-treatment. The microhardness of the electroless Ni–B coatings increases with increase in heat-treatment temperature and exhibit two maxima in the hardness vs. heat-treatment temperature curve. The specific wear rate increases with increase in applied load from 20 to 40 N and at all applied loads, the specific wear rate and coefficient of friction are less for heat-treated electroless Ni–B deposits compared to that obtained for as-plated ones. The wear process of electroless Ni–B coatings is governed by an adhesive wear mechanism.Electroless deposition process has undergone numerous modifications to meet the challenging needs of a variety of industrial applications since Brenner and Riddell invented the process in 1946. Among the various types of electroless plating, electroless nickel has gained immense popularity due to its ability to provide a hard, wear and corrosion resistant surface Mild steel (30 mm diameter and 5 mm thick), copper (electrolytic grade; 40×20×2 mm) and stainless steel (AISI 304 grade) were used as substrate materials for the deposition of electroless Ni–B coatings. Copper substrate was employed to assess the plating rate of electroless Ni–B deposits. Stainless steel substrate was used to prepare foils for structural characterization by X-ray diffraction. Mild steel was used as the substrate material for evaluating microhardness of electroless Ni–B coatings. Mild steel substrates were surface ground, degreased with acetone, electrolytically cleaned in an alkaline solution and washed thoroughly with de-ionized water. A nickel strike using Watt's nickel bath was given to substrates prior to their immersion in electroless plating bath. An alkaline bath having nickel chloride as the source of nickel and sodium borohydride as the reducing agent was used to prepare the electroless Ni–B deposits. Besides nickel salt and borohydride, the plating bath also contained suitable quantities of ethylenediamine as a complexing agent. Thallium acetate was used as the stabilizer. The temperature of the bath was maintained at 95±1 °C. During plating the bath solution was agitated using a magnetic stirrer at 600 rev./min. The chemical composition of the plating bath employed and its operating conditions are given in The structure of electroless Ni–B deposits, in as-plated and heat-treated (350 and 450 °C for 1 h) conditions was assessed by X-ray diffraction (XRD). The coating hardness was measured on the surface using a Leitz microhardness tester with a Vickers diamond indenter under a 100-g load (0.98 N). The lap time for each indentation was 15 s and the values reported represent the average and standard deviation of a minimum of five measurements. The wear resistance of as-plated and heat-treated (350 and 450 °C for 1 h) electroless Ni–B coatings was evaluated under dry sliding conditions using a pin-on-disc apparatus (DUCOM, India). In this method, the pin and disc are arranged in such a way that the rotating disc served as the counterface material while the stationary pin served as the test specimen. Steel discs (composition conforming to EN 31 specification) of 100 mm diameter and 5 mm thickness were chosen as counterface materials to slide against the test specimens. These discs were fully hardened ( The plating rate of the electroless Ni–B deposits as a function of plating time is given in X-Ray diffraction pattern of the electroless Ni–B coating in the as-plated condition exhibits a single broad peak indicative of the amorphous nature of the coating ( The microhardness (HV The specific wear rate of electroless Ni–B coatings, both in as-plated and heat treated conditions, obtained at different applied loads, are given in The coefficient of friction recorded simultaneously during the wear test clearly reveals the characteristics of the wear process. The average friction coefficient, The mechanism of wear of electroless Ni–B coating depends on the attractive force that operates between the atoms of nickel from the coating and iron from the counter disk (hardened steel of EN 31 specification). Scanning electron micrographs of electroless Ni–B coatings subjected to pin-on-disc wear test clearly indicate the presence of torn patches and, in some places even detachment of the coating, in their as-plated condition ( Electroless Ni–B coatings of the present study are amorphous in the as-plated condition. Heat-treatment (350 and 450 °C for 1 h) results in the transformation of the amorphous phase to crystalline nickel and nickel boride (Ni Financial support given to this work by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), New Delhi, India was gratefully acknowledged. The authors are thankful to Prof. S.P. Mehrotra, Director, National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur and Dr S. Srikanth, Deputy Director, National Metallurgical Laboratory, Madras Centre, for their constant support and encouragement to carry out this research work.