The crystallization behavior and thermal stability of amorphous phases of Al65Cu20Ti15 alloy obtained by mechanical alloying were investigated by using in-situ X-ray diffraction and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) under non isothermal and isothermal conditions. The result of a Kissinger analysis shows that the activation energy for crystallization is 1131kJ/mol. The higher stability against crystallization of Al65Cu20Ti15 amorphous alloy is attributed to the stronger interaction of atoms in the Al-Cu–Ti system and formed of complicated compound like Al5CuTi2 and Al4Cu9 as primary phases. The isothermal crystallization was modeled by using the Johnson–Mehl–Avrami (JMA) equation. The Avarami exponents suggest that the isothermal crystallization is governed by a three-dimensional diffusion-controlled growth.High strength to weight ratio is one of the primary considerations for developing new materials for structural applications in the transportation and aviation industry. It is believed that further increment in the strength of age hardenable Al-alloys may no longer be feasible under the same strategy of strengthening by precipitation hardening of the crystalline matrix. Mosumoto The amorphous-to-crystalline transformation (i.e. crystallization) has been intensively studied over the past two decades In the present work we proposed an approach based on differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) data to determine the kinetics of the process involve with the crystallization of Al Elemental powders of Al, Cu and Ti, each having at least 99.5% purity and average particle size of about 50–100 The sequence of phase evolution after mechanical alloying for varying lengths of time was studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, using a Philips (PW1710) diffractometer with Cu Ka radiation. Mechanical milling was carried out for 25 Al   By integrating the exothermal peaks in The Avrami exponent can be deduced by plotting Absence of sharp peaks in XRD pattern ( It's clear from the DSC curve ( From the JMA plot ( Ranganathan and Heimendahl Based on the investigation of the crystallization kinetics of Al The activation energy for crystallization evaluated from the Kissinger equation is 1131 Complex crystallization mechanisms were found by analyzing the variation of Avrami exponents, which indicates that the nucleation rate increases at first and then decreases with time, the crystallization is governed by a three-dimensional diffusion-controlled growth. The authors express their sincere gratitude to Professor Indranil Manna, Director, CGCRI, Kolkata and Professor Rahul Mitra, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India for their valuable suggestion and discussion in connection to this research work.