In last couple of decades, consistent efforts in the materials community have been invested to develop tougher and stronger ceramic materials via cost effective processing techniques. In this perspective, the current work reports the development of ZrO2–ZrB2 composites via pressureless sintering. The sintering experiments were conducted on ZrO2–30vol% ZrB2 composites in the temperature range of 1400–1600°C for 1h in argon atmosphere. The influence of yttria content in the zirconia matrix, as well as the sintering temperature, on the densification, microstructure and mechanical properties of the composites has been investigated. Careful analysis of the indentation data has been made and such analysis has provided an estimate of the toughness properties of the ZrO2-composites. Our experimental results reveal that the composites, processed at 1400°C and 1500°C exhibit excellent combinations of hardness (∼12GPa) and fracture toughness (10–15MPam1/2). However, sintering at higher temperature of 1600°C is observed to degrade mechanical properties. The mechanisms leading to the achievement of superior toughness and the possible reasons for toughness variation with yttria content, as well as with sintering temperature, are critically analyzed. The systematic measurements of the amount of m-ZrO2 phase present on polished and fracture surfaces have been used to determine the t-ZrO2 transformability and it has been observed that the measured toughness correlates well with the calculated t-ZrO2 transformability.The global research efforts in the area of ceramics for several decades have been directed towards improving the fracture toughness by microstructural tailoring or adopting various effective toughening mechanisms. It is to be noted here that the necessity of research on similar lines arises from the fact that, inspite of possessing attractive properties like high hardness, strength retention at elevated temperature, elastic modulus, wear resistance and chemical inertness; poor fracture toughness (premature failure due to brittle fracture) restricts widespread application of ceramics as structural materials. In fact, the development of ceramic materials with improved fracture toughness has been a major challenge for material scientists. Among ceramics, zirconia, in particular yttria-stabilized tetragonal zirconia polycrystals (Y-TZP) is known to posses superior fracture toughness (≈2–20 In spite of the excellent toughness, Y-TZP materials posses rather modest hardness (∼10–11 Among various hard materials, ZrB In the present work, we investigate the feasibility of developing fully dense ZrO In the present investigation, the commercially available co-precipitated ZrO The dried powder mixtures were cold pressed in a cylindrical die at 60 The densities of all the pressureless sintered samples were measured using Archimedes principle (distilled water as the medium). The densification data, reported as % on theoretical densities, of the composites are calculated assuming theoretical densities of 6.10 The hardness was measured by Vickers indentation ( Pressureless sintering experiments with the ZrO From densification data ( XRD plots, obtained from the polished surfaces of the samples sintered at the three different temperatures are presented in SEM images of the fracture surfaces of the composites are presented in The mechanical properties of the sintered composites have been determined using the Vickers indentation method. The hardness values of all the developed composites are presented in either, or, 0.25 In Eq. The indentation data, as presented in The major influence of ZrB As far as the other mechanical properties are concerned, the Vickers hardness of the composites sintered at 1400 It has been observed that while the composites, densified to near theoretical density after sintering at 1400 Observation of It is observed that among the composites sintered at 1400 It is observed that the ZrO The present work demonstrates that ZrO ZrO The microstructure of the sintered composites is characterized by finer equiaxed ZrO Critical analysis of the indentation data reveals that the cracks generated by indentation follows palmqvist pattern. Based on careful use of toughness equations, high indentation toughness (upto 14 Systematic XRD analysis of polished and fractured composites confirms that retained t-ZrO The authors would like to express sincere gratitude for the financial support of the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India.