Earthworm activity and the composition of organic inputs are known to affect soil aggregate dynamics. How earthworm interacts with different organic residues, and how these interactions vary with time is still unclear. Earthworm processing of residues may modify their effectiveness as stabilising agents through changes in residue composition and disposition with regard to mineral particles. A mesocosm (2L) experiment was conducted to assess how Lumbricus terrestris L. and residues (grass-clover hay or wheat straw at 20gkg−1) affected aggregate stability (measured by wet sieving) over 40, 80 and 100 days; several microbial and organic carbon indices likely to affect aggregation were also measured to indicate temporal changes in stabilisation mechanisms. FT-IR analyses investigated relationships between kaolinite and specific organic fractions to indicate the degree of residue-mineral mixing in aggregates. In the absence of earthworms, straw was more effective than hay in promoting stability (+21% vs +13%), especially later in the incubations. Hay increased microbial biomass-C (MBC +73 vs +58mgkg−1) and K2SO4 extractable-C (KSE-C +44 vs −9mgkg−1) more than straw, but the converse was true for hyphal length (+6 vs +7.9mg−1). Earthworms reduced or eliminated these differences. Earthworms increased aggregation at 40 days (+17%), although aggregation at 100 days was not affected. Earthworms changed the organic composition of aggregates (e.g. a relative decrease in polysaccharides) and may have promoted adsorption of otherwise labile fractions onto clays. Soon after residue inputs, aggregation was more closely associated with MBC and KSE-C, whereas with time aggregation became more closely related to hyphal length. The extent and persistence of benefits associated with organic inputs of differing quality will be influenced by earthworms, with earthworm mediated incorporation of residues into aggregates particularly important for the effectiveness of readily decomposable residues.The maintenance of soil aggregation is important for sustainable land management since it helps to retain organic carbon and moisture, and promotes plant growth (  Evidence for the effect of earthworms on microbes is inconsistent. Water-stable aggregate formation involves the interaction of mineral and organic materials at micro-scales. Earthworms may enhance this process by ingestion of soil with residues, stimulation of microbial decomposition of residues, mixing of these fractions and production of casts. Moreover, through the ingestion of soil and residue, clay minerals and organic materials are mixed and become encrusted with mucus to create a nucleus for micro-aggregate formation ( The objectives of this study were to investigate the temporal dynamics of interactions between residue quality and earthworms as they affect soil aggregation and associated microbial indices. Although these factors have been investigated individually in previous studies, information on their inter-relationships is limited. It was hypothesised that high quality residue would have a more marked early effect on aggregation and that the reverse would occur with lower quality residue. Further, it was expected that earthworm enhanced stabilisation of aggregates with associated changes to the composition of aggregate organic matter and its disposition with regard to mineral particles, would mitigate varying residue quality effects. Soil (Rheidol series—Dystric Cambisol in the FAO system) under arable management was taken from a field located at Aberystwyth (52°20′N; 4°2′W), UK to 30 Dried (40 Mesocosm pots (15 Wet aggregate stability was measured using a method adapted from Microbial biomass carbon (MBC) was estimated by fumigation–extraction ( Total carbon was estimated by ignition at 400 FT-IR analyses have been used to characterise organic matter composition in a range of materials including soils (e.g. Due to access restrictions, FT-IR analysis of the organic composition of aggregates was undertaken for the 80 day incubation only; these samples were considered representative of a stabilised organic composition. Samples of air-dried aggregates (20 The data were analysed using Minitab version 14. ANOVA analyses (two-way ANOVA) tested for incubation period (40, 80 and 100 days) and treatment (control, hay, straw, hay Earthworm survival at each sampling period averaged in excess of 90%; although biomass was not measured, the condition of earthworms appeared healthy. At 40 and 80 days, significant amounts of both hay and, particularly, straw residues were observed in soils. By 100 days few hay residues, but some straw residues remained. The addition of hay and straw residues with and without earthworms significantly increased aggregate stability over the control ( MBC was significantly greater for all treatments compared to the control ( Mean hyphal lengths were significantly increased, approximately seven-fold in all treatments compared to the control ( Organic carbon content was significantly increased by all treatments compared to the control ( Overall, the addition of hay increased significantly KSE-C compared to control and straw treatments ( FT-IR data were subjected to Principle Component Analysis, with PC1 and PC2 accounting for >86% of the total variance. PC1 had strong positive loadings associated with carboxyl, aromatic and amide groupings; PC2 had strong positive loadings for kaolinite and polysaccharide compounds. All five treatments separated on either PC1 or PC2 ( In a further analysis of FT-IR data, absorbance at the wavenumber associated with kaolinite was correlated with those for various organic components both with and without earthworms ( Correlation coefficients ( As expected, all residue treatments increased aggregate stability compared with the control ( Over the full incubation period and in the absence of earthworms, the less easily decomposable straw produced more stable aggregates than hay and this effect became more pronounced with time ( Earthworms reduced differences between hay and straw, if anything favouring hay earlier in the incubations. This may reflect in part differences in the palatability of the different residues for earthworms (hay residues were less abundant than straw on each sampling occasion). Both Hay and straw increased MBC and fungal hyphal length as expected ( Over the full incubation period earthworms eliminated differences in microbial indices between the two residues but this was due to variations in their interaction with residues at different times. Earthworms significantly increased MBC at day 40 possibly by rendering residues more accessible to micro-organisms through their mixing and fragmenting action ( The addition of hay and straw significantly increased organic carbon in the bulk soil. Increases in soil carbon with residue inputs were inevitable ( Readily soluble carbon (KSE-C) was increased only with added hay and earthworms caused an increase only at day 40 ( There were clear differences between residues in aggregate characteristics based on FT-IR spectra, and substantial shifts in these spectra as a result of earthworm activity which varied with residue type ( Effects of treatments on microbial and organic indices were considered likely to have consequences for aggregation. Correlation analyses ( It may also be the case that earthworms change the nature of organic–mineral interactions mediating aggregate stability and affect the dynamics of aggregation responses to residues of differing composition. In their absence lower quality residues favouring fungi, rather than the general microbial populations and soluble carbon, had the greater benefit for aggregation. With earthworms, these differences were less apparent possibly because of more intimate mixing of mineral particles with otherwise labile organic materials ( Adding organic residues to soils in order to improve their physical condition is common practice in agriculture. Many research studies have concluded that higher quality, more labile residues have limited medium to long-term benefits. Findings reported here indicate that readily decomposable residues may be as effective as more resistant materials in the medium term stabilisation of aggregates and sequestration of organic carbon where earthworms are present. These earthworm effects probably arise in part from increased ingestion, mixing and physical stabilisation of otherwise labile organic fractions in aggregates. However, there was also evidence of earthworm-induced chemical changes in the organic composition of aggregates which varied with residue type and which may further explain the observed earthworm–residue interaction effects on aggregation. The authors have no conflicts of interest regarding this research. S. Al-Maliki acknowledges financial support from the