Without an intervening wall, the direct contact evaporator (DCE) has been already technically proven to improve the overall thermal efficiency of organic Rankine cycle (ORC) used to recover low-grade heat sources and transform them into power. In the estimation of volumetric heat transfer coefficient (VHTC) which is assumed to vary with flow rate, noises signals caused by various unstable factors (e.g., measurement errors) often corrupt the time series of VHTC. For forecasting the heat transfer performance of DCE in ORC more accurately, this paper proposes a novel approach (refers as EMD-RBF-NN), which combines multi-input radial basis function (RBF) neural network (NN) and empirical mode decomposition (EMD) method. Specifically, the original VHTC time series is firstly decomposed by EMD method that is fully data-driven. Then, the proposed method models the resultant decomposition series with flow rates of two fluids (dispersed and continuous phases) and VHTC by using RBF neural network. This simple technique was illustrated by using the ORC direct contact evaporator (ORC-DCE) and data processing system. Via using the experimental datasets of ORC-DCE, this paper demonstrates that the proposed EMD-RBF-NN model that associates flow rates of two phases with VHTC improves the forecasting accuracy of VHTC noticeably comparing with existing models.It is an undisputed fact that the energy crisis has become one of the greatest concerns today, which is mainly due to around two thirds of all used energy being lost as waste heat [ Several investigations on thermal energy utilization using ORC system have been carried out to improve thermal performance and reduce waste heat [ The existing experimental studies related to the heat transfer characteristics of boiling inside the DCE was mainly focused on volumetric heat transfer coefficient (VHTC). In view of the practical need to understand thermal performance and process stability of the already existing DCE available in the laboratory, a study through experiments and in-depth data analysis was needed [ In the recent years, the new technique, artificial neural network (ANN) or neural network (NN), was employed for developing the predictive models to estimate the needed parameters [ A new data analysis method, empirical mode decomposition (EMD), developed by Huang et al. (2003) [ The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section The thermal oil and organic working medium fluids used in the mixture were obtained from CRR Company (Guangzhou, China, The flow rates of both continuous and dispersed phases were controlled by by-pass regulation, as also shown in When heat is applied on the DCE, the working fluid vaporizes. The vapour travels through the adiabatic section to the condenser section. And the latent heat of vapour is transferred to the condenser section then the working fluid flows back to the DCE. Unlike the traditional shell and tube heat exchanger, the DCE has no constant heat transfer areas and its heat transfer process mainly happened on the two-phase contact areas. In order to investigate the evaporation mechanism of the droplet swarm in our research, it is difficult to obtain the heat transfer area in the DCE under the condition of droplets coalescence and breakage and flow pattern changing. Hence, the VHTC is adopted here and expressed as follows: In fact, there are eight input parameters, including height of continuous phase Neural networks has been widely used as a direct substitute for linear regression, multivariable regression, auto correlation, trigonometric and other statistical techniques in several applications. Among them, the RBF neural network is one of the most widely used NN architectures in literature for classification or regression problems. It is worthy to state that the RBF-NN has the great advantage in computing speed compared to multiple hidden layers. The basic architecture of an RBF neural network consists of three parts: the input layer, the radial grassroots level (the hidden layer), and the output layer with nodes completely connecting adjacent layers, as shown in Here, let In general, if the input value is close to the center value, the output value will be large, and as the distance between them increases, the output value will rapidly decrease to zero. Furthermore, in the case of one-dimensional situation and for Creatively, the RBF neural network is used here to accomplish the highly nonlinear mapping from the input space of the flow rates of working fluid and continuous phase to the output space of VHTC. Nevertheless, there is a serious problem concerning this type of RBF-NN, that is, how to add the information of short-range dependence of VHTC in the input layer in As a fully data-driven approach, EMD does not use any predetermined filter or wavelet basis function and adaptively decomposes complicated sequences into a series of IMFs and one residue through the sifting process. It picks out the highest frequency oscillation as the first IMF, and the frequency of the following IMFs decreases on each step. Each IMF component, quite distinct from others, represents only one mode of oscillation imbedded in the time series at a certain scale or frequency band. In terms of the time series of VHTC In the framework of frequency-time domain analysis, the proposed novel procedure generally consists of two different parts. It is, to some extent, a new hybrid combining EMD and RBF neural network. To begin with, using aforementioned EMD method, the information of the short-range dependence of VHTC data is considered by means of the first and second IMF components. Then, the two kinds of flow rates of hot and cold fluids and the first and second IMF components are inserted into the input layer of the RBF neural network as mentioned above. Therefore, the fairly complex and non-linear relationship between flow flied of two-phase mixing and DCHT performance is modelled without applying any assumptions. For better illustration, In this section of numerical simulation, the proposed model will prove to exhibit superior performance in dealing with the underlying nonlinear mapping from flow field to VHTC and the high frequency time series of VHTC. To begin with, the following simple simulation experiment is considered and carried out here to illustrate the usefulness and power of the EMD method. With the help of Matlab software (Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA, USA), a permanent data sequence In addition to this situation, to verify the effectiveness and feasibility of the technique presented in our study systematically, the analyzed data The primary aim of forecasting is to investigate the development trend of system in the future by determining the relationships among already-known data. In this part of study, RBF neural network is utilized to model the experimental results. More details of this kind of neural network are available in above section. The fundamental purpose of designed network is to predict the VHTC with input parameters of height of working fluid, logarithmic mean temperature difference, temperature of continuous phase outlet, flow rate of the steam, quantity of heat absorbed by the organic fluid, and volume of heat conduction oil. The statistical parameters of the original inputs and output data are listed in In this part of study, the EMD decomposition method and RBF neural network are utilized to model the experimental results, including six non-flow parameters, two flow parameters and one short-range parameter, as shown in In this part of the study, the basic architectures of ANN (in particular, RBF neural network) were also combined with EMD method for estimation of the VHTC. All data were first normalized and divided into two datasets such as training (88% of all data) and testing set (12% of all data). In this research, Matlab software was used in NN analysis with a three layers. As shown in Waste heat sources from industry and automotive sectors typically present a fluctuating behavior originated from their transient nature, making waste heat recovery a hugely challenging issue [ In general, to verify the feasibility and effectiveness of proposed method, it is necessary to carry out a comparative study by applying other artificial intelligence (AI) methods. The other models, such as RBF-NN, WT-RBF-NN, and EMD-RBF-NN with different IMFs have been used to illustrate the new model. To make the idea stronger and more comprehensive, in the present article, two methods are applied for comparison of the performance of the VHTC prediction procedures: back propagation neural network combined with EMD (EMD-BP-NN for short) and original RBF neural network which has been mentioned above. In order to evaluate the applicability of the proposed model, the VHTC in the testing dataset which accounts for 20% in size of the total dataset were predicted by EMD-BP-NN, RBF-NN, and EMD-RBF-NN methods respectively. It can be seen from By operating ORC systems more close to the maximum heat transfer coefficient, the output efficiency of ORC evaporators that play important roles in waste heat recovery can be improved. Using a hybrid of RBF-NN and EMD, which solves the problems of ill-considered short-range dependence of network input variables and forecasting information insufficiency of IMFs, the objective to approximate the VHTC of ORC system has been achieved accurately. This paper employed the actual experimental data obtained from the practical ORC system and with which the proposed VHTC prediction method was proven effective. Based on the detailed analysis presented in this investigation, the following conclusions are drawn as follows. (1) It is shown that the constructed ANN models of RBF and EMD exhibit a high performance than ANN model of RBF for predicting VHTC. (2) The performance comparison showed that the soft computing system is a good tool for minimizing the uncertainties in the ORC engineering projects. (3) The use of soft computing will also may provide new approaches and methodologies to minimize the potential inconsistency of correlations. Altogether, it is shown that the information contained in the flow rates of continuous and discrete phases and VHTC sequence can be complemented by the RBF neural network and EMD, respectively. Further examination of the relationship between the flow field and the characteristics of the VHTC is necessary for improve the model. The authors declare no potential conflict of interests with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. We wish to thank the referees for their numerous detailed questions and constructive criticism, which greatly improved the presentation. This work is partially supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at  enthalpy of dispersed phase, J VHTC, kW time series of VHTC, kW mass flow rate of dispersed phase steam, kg heat transfer quantity, J temperature, °C LMTD, °C inlet temperature of continuous fluid, °C outlet temperature of continuous fluid, °C inlet temperature of dispersed fluid, °C outlet temperature of dispersed fluid, °C flow rate of continuous phase, kg flow rate of dispersed phase, m volume of continuous phase, m height of continuous phase, m  absolute average deviation artificial intelligence artificial neural network average bias complementary ensemble empirical mode decomposition convective heat transfer coefficients direct contact evaporator direct contact heat transfer ensemble empirical mode decomposition empirical mode decomposition intrinsic mode function logarithmic mean temperature difference minimum maximum neural network organic Rankine cycle radial basis function root-mean-square signal noise ratio standard deviation wavelet transform volumetric heat transfer coefficient  continuous phase dispersed phase inlet outlet  average of difference between upper envelope lower envelope a permanent data sequence the number of nodes in hidden layer length of length of number of IMFs the number of times in sifting process termination criterion time parameter time parameter time parameter time parameter time parameter time parameter vector length of training dataset length of total dataset the input vector the output vector the analyzed data the investigated time series estimation of Euclidean norm between  center vector of the bandwidth vector of the one-dimensional situation of kernel function of the kernel function of the connecting weight vector between the