This work presents a method for the purification of technical-grade copper sulfate by precipitation with ethanol. We demonstrate a selective separation to the desired purity level, leaving impurities in solution. The effects of altering the volume ratio of ethanol to copper sulfate solution, the solution pH, and the initial concentration of copper and acid type were investigated. In this sulfate-based solution, ethyl alcohol was shown to remove water ligands from the copper(II) cations, leading to the precipitation of copper as copper sulfate pentahydrate. The developed method allows for the utmost purification, and the product can be used in various applications where highly pure compounds are required. The applied method was proven to be simple, straightforward and environmentally friendly.Copper sulfate has many applications, including the preparation of Bordeaux and Burgundy mixtures, copper electrolysis, the control of fungal diseases, and the correction of copper deficiency in soils and in animals ( Copper sulfate can be produced by the action of sulfuric acid on a variety of copper(II) compounds; for example, copper is oxidized to copper(II) oxide with the addition of hydrogen peroxide to the acid, and subsequently converted to copper sulfate ( Another method of producing copper sulfate is to place metallic copper in a solution of nitric acid, sulfuric acid and water. In this method, nitric acid acts as an oxidizing agent, allowing copper to be converted to copper oxide ( Ethanol or ethyl alcohol, with the formula C Most of the ethanol used in industry is made not by alcoholic fermentation but by an addition reaction between ethene and steam ( Ethyl alcohol has vast applications in the manufacturing of alcoholic drinks (e.g., vodka), ethanal (acetaldehyde) and ethanoic (acetic) acid, and fuel (e.g., gasohol). It is also used as a solvent for paint, varnish and drugs; as fluid in thermometers; and in preserving biological specimens ( Technical-grade copper sulfate pentahydrate (24.201% Cu) was procured from a copper sulfate plant, Metal-Kim, in Istanbul, Turkey. The composition of this sulfate is shown in The optimal precipitation parameters were determined by evaluating the effects of the following factors: initial copper concentration, ethanol/solution volume ratio, solution pH and acid type. For each experiment, 25 Solid/liquid separation was performed following each precipitation experiment. Atomic absorption spectrophotometer (Perkin Elmer AAnalyst 800 AAS) was used to measure the concentrations of the impurities present in the solution. Copper content was determined using 0.1 The efficiency of this precipitation method was calculated as the percentage of precipitated copper using the following equation: The method outlined in this paper can be used to precipitate copper sulfate with high efficiency and to remove impurities from copper sulfate so that the new copper sulfate pentahydrate can be employed for analytical purposes. In the following section, various experimental parameters are examined.  Ethanol precipitates sulfate compounds from the solution due to the fact that ethanol behaves as a water-removing or dehydrating agent when it is added to sulfate containing solutions ( The presence of ethanol lowers the thermodynamic activity of water and makes it less available as a ligand for Cu   To investigate the effect of acid type on copper sulfate precipitation, nitric acid, hydrochloric acid, and hydrobromic acid were employed. It was observed that addition of HNO Classical techniques for salt crystallization rely on simultaneous heating, water evaporation and crystal formation (nucleation). With ethanol precipitation, no temperature shift is needed, and the process is rapid and easy to implement. It is suggested that some of the impurities are carried away with copper sulfate during sulfate precipitation by ethanol. However, when the copper sulfate obtained was dissolved in water and reprecipitated by this method several times, the level of impurities was decreased to an appropriate level for analytical applications. Thus, the proposed method ensures a thorough purification and selective precipitation. Following the production of copper sulfate pentahydrate, it was washed with fresh alcohol and subsequently dried under a vacuum at 45 As shown in the table, the final product contained lower amounts of impurities than other commercially available products. It is also worth mentioning that the product produced in this work contained no acid at all, whereas other commercially available products invariably contain small amounts of free acid. In the present work, a novel precipitation method was developed to selectively precipitate copper sulfate, leaving impurities in solution. It was demonstrated that the obtained copper sulfate is of analytical grade. It is suggested that the concentration of metal sulfate should be near saturation in water if a higher degree of precipitation is desired. For instance, at a Cu concentration of 1.28 The advantage of ethanol precipitation over more classical techniques for salt crystallization is that no temperature shift is needed and contains no free acid. The ethanol precipitation method is rapid and needs no heat treatment, ensures purification, besides gives a product, particle size of which is lower than that of conventional methods. Copper sulfate that is obtained using this method can easily be filtered, never blocks the filter and contains no residue. Above all, using this method, many other sulfate compounds can be purified, including hafnium from zirconium and palladium from rhodium etc. It is possible to recover the ethanol by distillation using a rotary evaporator or classical distillation units. However, in the present work, the distillation of ethanol was not performed. Regarding disposal of the solution, a sodium hydroxide can be used to precipitate metal hydroxides. However, in industrial applications, Lewatite TP 207 resins are employed to adsorb copper (II) ions selectively. The author wishes to thank