In this paper, the flotation method has been used for the preparation and beneficiation of coal samples. The Plackett–Burman methodology has been applied to design of experiments and this experimental design method is based on Hadamard matrix and ash content and efficiency index have been considered as responses. The operating conditions were chosen based on some screening tests. Results showed that ash content and efficiency index could be 15.2% and 42.55 respectively when the values of collector, frother and solid percent were 5.29kg/t, 78g/t and 10% respectively. The effects of variables were studied by which increasing and decreasing of responses could be transparently observed. Coal flotation kinetic was studied and the results show that the optimum time is 2min to complete the flotation process. In this investigation, the coal flotation procedure was optimized and the time of flotation has been found by which energy consumption would be significantly reduced. Also, coal qualities could be improved by which needs of industry can be considerably satisfied.Coals are heterogeneous mixtures. The hydrophobicity of the former depends upon the type of material Many investigations about coal flotation have been done through which various methods and chemical materials have been introduced to perform the flotation procedure. Some investigations showed that if flotation is carried out with salt solutions, its performance could be dramatically improved One of the most effective techniques to study the process behavior is the factorial designed test with analysis of variance The Plackett–Burman design as one of the most important method of factorial design has been used as the experimental design. This method is based on Hadamard matrix by which this experimental design method has been created. In an 1867 paper on ‘simultaneous sign-successions, tessellated pavements in two or more colors, and ornamental tile-work’ Sylvester used self-reciprocal matrices, defined as a square array of elements of which each is proportional to its first minor In this investigation, the main aim was the optimization of coal flotation in which the optimum point for this procedure and influences of variables has been studied. For this purpose, the Plackett–Burman design experiment method has been used by which this optimization could be performed as correct as possible. For this investigation, a representative sample of coal was taken from the Hamkar mine, in Kerman province of Iran, and the entire sample was also crushed to a nominal minus 31.5 The experiments were carried out using a Denver type flotation machine with an impeller speed of 1000 In the first step of this investigation, needed chemical materials and the operating conditions were determined by which optimization and kinetic tests could be perfectly performed. For this purpose, different kinds of frother and collector and various solid percents were analyzed for which some primary tests were carried out. Consequently, needed materials and the operating conditions can be completely chosen to perform flotation tests. This stage was done step by step through which the first step and considered target have been completely satisfied. For doing this study, suitable kind and value of materials should be found for which some flotation tests were needed to be carried out. For this aim, the special condition was considered for doing tests and choosing materials. These tests were performed in natural pH, 10% solid percent and an impeller speed of 1000 In the first step of primary tests, the kind of frother must be chosen and some tests were performed based on operating condition that it has been exactly described in the previous paragraphs. As shown in When these figures were precisely studied, it is clearly obvious that the change of frother amount has not had a significant influence on ash content and yield, therefore, they cannot be considered for finding the value of frother. However, if the curve of efficiency index is maintained, it can be concluded that this factor has been importantly influenced by frother dosage. Therefore, frother dosage has been determined based on this curve and 78 Afterward, collector dosage was needed to be correctly determined; therefore some flotation tests were carried out. The same as previous tests, solid percent and pH were 10% and 7 respectively and 250 By studying these graphs, it was concluded that if the value of solid percent is considered to be close to 10%, satisfactory results could be transparently obtained and ash content and efficiency index could be better than other conditions significantly, although yield may be slightly declined in this condition when it is compared with the value of lower solid percent. Indeed, efficiency index and ash content have been prioritized to choose the best value of solid percent in optimization tests. To continue this investigation, finding optimum condition has been considered and the relationship between miscellaneous variables and optimum operating conditions has been illustrated by which the flotation procedure could be significantly optimized. For this purpose, Hadamard matrix was chosen as an effective method that it has been known to design experiments. Since, the Plackett–Burman (an experimental design method in DX7 software) design depends on Hadamard matrix based on using the same as mathematic theory; it was applied to optimize flotation tests. By using this experimental design method and three considered significant variables to perform tests; some experiments were designed. If all variables are assumed to be measurable then the Plackett–Burman can be expressed as  As shown in As The relationships between variables and ash content and efficiency index were studied and their effects on each other were found. In order to determine these effects, experimental results have been analyzed by software through which the model can significantly be selected and influences of variable were perfectly portrayed. It was concluded that the increase in solid content, collector dosage and frother has increased efficiency index. Moreover, interactions between variables and their influences on efficiency index were maintained in which some results could be obtained as demonstrated in If these interactions are studied, it can firmly be found that there are interactions between solid content and frother and solid content and collector dosage and these interactions happened when these variables are in high values. Indeed, it is clearly obvious that these interactions could have significant influences on efficiency index. Subsequently, influences of variables on ash content were determined. For this aim, solid percent and frother dosage were chosen as significant variables by which ash content could be changed. Results showed that when frother dosage was increased, ash content was obviously declined; however, the change of solid percent does not have an important effect on the amount of ash content. Furthermore, interactions among variables were maintained; it was found that there has been an interaction between solid content and frother dosage in the middle value of these studied variables approximately. Afterwards, for doing a more complete study of the relationship between variables, a 3D graph was needed to be portrayed in which this aim could be realized. For this purpose, variables versus ash content and efficiency index were plotted in a 3D graph. This kind of graph can show relationships between variables and more information can be provided to understand the mechanism of the flotation procedure. It should be explained that interactions among important variables have been seen in these 3D graphs. According to Finding optimum condition was one of the most important aims of this investigation through which the performance of the flotation procedure can be significantly improved. This possibility can be provided by the Plackett–Burman experimental design method which depends on Hadamard matrices. The flotation procedure could be optimized in which the value of variables have been identified to perform this procedure as ash content and efficiency index have been obtained in minimum and maximum values respectively as shown in Understanding the condition of the procedure in optimum point can help to describe flotation tests that can be used to find effective and significant variables in this process. For this aim, influences of variables on ash content and efficiency index were needed to be maintained by which increasing and decreasing of responses could perfectly be illustrated. According to significant interactions among variables and their influences on efficiency index and ash content, optimum point has been studied and relationships between interactions and responses have been portrayed in 3D plots as shown in If this figure is studied to understand the flotation procedure, anticipated optimum condition can be justified which can be predicted by software. It is clearly obvious that influences of interactions on responses can be understood and studied through which the enhancement of each variable has improved efficiency index and increasing frother dosage and decreasing solid content have increased ash content. From a practical point of view, the overall flotation process can be generally represented by a first order system with lumped parameters, assuming that the collection zone was perfectly mixed. Eq. This has allowed a flotation cell to be modeled using the chemical reactor analogy; whereby the removal of solids from the pulp phase is defined by a first order rate equation. This means that a bank of cells can be approximated by perfectly mixed CSTR's in series Determining the time of flotation has been one of the most substantial factors which should be known in every flotation procedure. In fact, it can be applied to find optimum time in which recovery could be when maximum value and time of flotation would be sharply declined. In this case, if the time of flotation is not exactly observed, more money and energy should be spent to perform flotation. Finding real flotation time could help to decrease costs, because it can definitely make spending time, consuming chemical materials and operating conditions decrease transparently. Due to these reasonable proofs, the kinetic of the flotation procedure was studied to determine the flotation time. For this purpose, one flotation test was carried out and operating conditions were chosen based on optimum condition which has been determined in optimization section. During the flotation procedure, several samples were taken to calculate yield in every sampling time by which the kinetic could be precisely found. Yield versus time has been plotted in one curve in which the trend of the kinetic has been portrayed perfectly ( Based on this curve, the kinetic rate constant (k) was 0.053 and it can be understood that recovery has been stabilized in 120 In this research work, the Plackett–Burman methodology has been used to optimize the coal flotation process and find important variables. Representative sample of coal was taken from Hamkar coal mine, in Iran. Experimental design, analysis of results, optimization and modeling of the process were done by DX7 software. Predicted values obtained using the model equations were in very good agreement with the observed values (R This research work was partly supported by