An environmentally-friendly route based on hydrometallurgy was investigated for the recovery of cobalt and lithium from spent lithium ion batteries (LIBs) using different organic acids (citric acid, Dl-malic acid, oxalic acid and acetic acid). In this investigation, response surface methodology (RSM) was utilized to optimize leaching parameters including solid to liquid ratio (S/L), temperature, acid concentration, type of organic acid and hydrogen peroxide concentration. Based on the results obtained from optimizing procedure, temperature was recognized as the most influential parameter. In addition, while 81% of cobalt was recovered, the maximum lithium recovery of 92% was achieved at the optimum leaching condition of 60°C, S/L: 30gL−1, citric acid concentration: 2M, hydrogen peroxide concentration: 1.25Vol.% and leaching time: 2h. Furthermore, results displayed that ultrasonic agitation will enhance the recovery of lithium and cobalt. It was found that the kinetics of cobalt leaching is controlled by surface chemical reaction at temperatures lower than 45°C. However, diffusion through the product layer at temperatures higher than 45°C controls the rate of cobalt leaching. Rate of lithium reaction is controlled by diffusion through the product layer at all the temperatures studied.Recycling of spent lithium ion batteries (LIBs) is not only in favor of the environmental regulations but also is economically desirable due to the growing price of cobalt ( To recover lithium and cobalt from spent LIBs, there have been some typical hydrometallurgical and pyro metallurgical processes ( In the hydrometallurgical processing of spent LIBs, it is necessary to remove carbon as the main component of anode materials to decrease acid consumption. Therefore, a pre-treatment process including crushing and calcination is expected ( Kinetic aspects of cobalt and lithium recovery from spent LIBs using sulfuric acid have also been studied. Conventional stirring is regularly used in metals extraction; however, recently the effect of ultrasonic agitation in comparison with mechanical stirring on the kinetics of the dissolution of phosphate rock in HCl solution and extraction of valuable metals from spent hydro processing catalysts have been investigated. Results indicated that the ultrasonic agitation is more efficient for the extraction of metals present in the both phosphate rock and spent catalyst ( In this study, recovery of lithium and cobalt from spent LIBs was explored by using four organic acids as leaching agents which imitate bioleaching processes. The effects of acid concentration, S/L, temperature and hydrogen peroxide concentration as reducing agent on the recovery of lithium and cobalt were investigated and the leaching parameters were optimized by response surface methodology. The effect of cavity action of ultrasonic agitation on the kinetics of the lithium and cobalt recovery in a wide range of temperatures was also investigated. For the first time the interactions between influential parameters was interpreted and the effect of ultrasonic agitation in comparison with mechanical stirrer on the leaching efficiency of lithium and cobalt was also surveyed. LIBs have been widely used in laptop computers, mobile phones, video cameras, portable music players, and electric vehicles ( The drastic increase in the waste stream causes a series of environmental issues which resulted in setting up strict policies in manufacturing, usage, collection, recycling and safe disposal of LIBs in Europe and USA ( To undertake these problems, the most practically reasonable remedy seems to be recycling of spent LIBs which is not only echo friendly but also consumes less energy and reduce demand for virgin raw materials. Nevertheless, this fact cannot be ignored that the collection process of spent LIBs is incompetent around the world ( For this purpose, suitable technologies for recycling of spent LIBs have been developed such as pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy ( Spent LIBs with different sizes from Lenovo and IBM laptops were used in this investigation. DL-malic acid (C To avoid self-ignition or short-circuit during dismantling process, the spent LIBs were completely discharged at the first stage. In this study, the spent LIBs were dismantled manually instead of using automatic mechanical pretreatments; because the automatic mechanical pretreatments lead to addition of impurities such as Fe, Al and Cu in the leaching system which increase the reagent consumption ( The black materials covered Al and Cu foils comprised mostly of LiCoO To completely leach the cathode materials and determine the lithium and cobalt contents before sieving, after sieving and after calcination using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES, VISTA-PRO, Varian Co.), a mixed solution of hydrochloric acid and nitric acid (HCl:HNO The cathode materials were qualitatively characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD, Philips-3040/60 PW) before and after calcination. After the leaching tests, the residue of the leaching was also characterized by XRD to specify existing phases in the leach residue after filtration. In addition, high resolution scanning electron microscopy (HR-SEM, Camscan) was utilized to analyze the surface morphology of the initial sample and that of the leaching residue. Besides, laser particle size analysis (LPSA, CILAS 1064) was used to compare the particle size of the cathode materials before and after leaching. Maximizing the recovery of lithium and cobalt is of great importance. Conventional methods to optimize leaching parameters (one factor at a time) neglect the interactions between parameters. Therefore, to create numerical relationships between various input parameters, statistical design of experiments (DOE) as an efficient procedure for planning experiments can be employed. Screening and optimization are the two essential applications of design of experiments. In screening, influential parameters on the experiments are identified and finally, the optimal conditions of an experiment are expressed in optimization. Design of experiments, not only do survey the interactions between parameters, but also it will decrease the number of experiments ( We performed the leaching experiments in 2 steps. At first, due to the large number of parameters, 16 screening tests were designed according to orthogonal array L16 (4 All experiments were performed in a 500 After leaching, the solution was filtered and washed with deionized water and the filtrate was characterized by ICP-OES to calculate recovery of cobalt and lithium as shown in Spent LIBs were dismantled manually as explained in the experimental section.   Based on the results obtained from the screening tests, temperature, hydrogen peroxide concentration and type of the acid used as the leaching agents were recognized as the most effective parameters in the leaching of LiCoO As a result, three moles of H On the other hand, acetic acid dissociates in one step: Therefore, two moles of H It can be observed that oxalic acid dissociates in two steps. Due to the formation of the cobalt oxalate precipitates, oxalic acid is an inappropriate reagent (   By further increasing the temperature, the lithium recovery decreases slightly to ca. 86%. Increasing the temperature from 60 Hydrogen peroxide is an appropriate reducing agent for this leaching system. The half reactions for hydrogen peroxide in acidic solutions and for reduction of Co The reaction between citric acid and the metal species in the presence of hydrogen peroxide are as follows ( The reaction of Dl-malic acid and metal species in presence of hydrogen peroxide are as follows ( From Eqs.  According to In the case of DL-malic acid, according to According to  Ultrasonic waves have been known to enhance leaching recoveries of lithium and cobalt by the use of cavitation bubbles (   Based on the optimum condition obtained from the optimization step, citric acid was chosen as the best leaching agent and 24 experiments were designed to investigate the effect of temperature and time of leaching on the leaching recoveries of lithium and cobalt. The samples were quantitatively analyzed by ICP-OES to determine the lithium and cobalt recoveries. Knowing that the particles size before and after leaching has remained constant, it can be concluded that the shrinking core model (SCM) for spherical particles of unchanging size can be applied to describe the kinetics of cobalt and lithium leaching during the recovery process. According to this model, the inner cores of the particles shrink with time while the size of particle remains unchanged. According to the shrinking core model, the rate of leaching is limited to the rate of slower step and there are 3 steps in the SCM occurring simultaneously during the process ( Step 1: Diffusion of the leaching agent within the liquid film surrounding the particle. Step 2: Diffusion of the leaching agent through the solid product layer of particle up to the surface of the inner core. Step 3: Chemical reaction of the leaching agent at the surface of the inner core. In order to specify the controlling mechanism of the leaching reaction, plot of various kinetic model formulas verses time should be drawn according to experimental data gained from the leaching experiments ( Share of each of the above mentioned steps in the kinetics of leaching can be revealed by fitting the experimental data to Eq. Minimize ϕ. Subject to τ Eq.   Leaching of lithium depends on the amount of H In this study, we tried to expand the knowledge of recycling with emphasis on an echo-friendly method including three main sections; optimizing of the leaching parameters, investigating the effect of ultrasonic agitation on the leaching recoveries of lithium and cobalt in comparison with the effect of mechanical stirrer and eventually, studying the leaching kinetics of cobalt and lithium based on constrained multi-linear regression analysis using the least square technique. Under the optimum condition of leaching (S/L ratio of 30 Based on the kinetic study results, the rate of cobalt leaching is controlled by diffusion of the reactant through the product layer, at temperatures greater than 45