A complex process for the recovery of copper and zinc from mining and metallurgical wastes has been investigated and proposed. It includes sulfuric acid leaching of old pyrite flotation tailings to produce ferric containing leach solution; followed by ferric leaching of copper converter slag flotation tailings with the leach solution. A sample of old pyrite flotation tailings from the concentrator containing 0.36% of copper and 0.23% of zinc was leached with 10% sulfuric acid in the column. Recovery of copper and zinc reached 47.1% and 47.2%, respectively. The pregnant leach solutions contained 15.9g/L of ferric iron. The subsequent ferric leaching of copper converter slag flotation tailings containing 0.53% copper and 2.77% zinc with the pregnant leach solution was conducted. The effects of various process parameters on the leaching dynamics of metals under batch conditions were investigated. Under the best conditions (temperature 70°C, pulp density 30%, ferric iron concentration 15.9g/L, initial pH of the pulp 0) the recovery of copper and zinc reached 79.6% and 43.7%, respectively. It was concluded that acid leaching of base metals from old pyrite flotation tailings with pregnant leach solution for the ferric leaching of copper converter slag flotation tailings is a prospective and promising technique for the complex treatment of mining and metallurgical wastes.Mining and metallurgical treatments of sulfide ores are presently characterized by significant losses of non-ferrous and precious metals into the various wastes. Flotation of sulfidic ores yields formation sulfide flotation tailings, whereas smelting produces slags. Sulfide mine flotation tailings, especially those containing large amounts of pyrite, are major sources of acid mine drainage. Although pyrite is the main mineral of the sulfide part of such tailings, other sulfides (such as copper, zinc, lead, and mercury) also may compose of significant part of these wastes. Biooxidation of pyrite is an important acid and Fe Metallurgical slag is waste produced in the recovery stages of pyrometallurgical processing of non-ferrous metals from sulfide raw materials. Slags are accumulated in heaps because of the absence of an accepted efficient technology for extraction of iron and non-ferrous metals ( The leaching of metals with ferric sulfate has been proposed for the treatment of the sulfide-containing slag flotation tailings ( Thus, sulfuric acid leaching of old pyrite flotation tailings is connected with the formation of ferric containing leach solution. At the same time, ferric containing solution is required to leach non-ferrous metals from the copper converter slag flotation tailings. In this work, it is proposed a new complex process for non-ferrous metals recovery from the mining and pyrometallurgical wastes products. It consists of sulfuric acid leaching of old pyrite flotation tailings to produce ferric containing leach solution followed by ferric leaching of copper converter slag flotation tailings with this solution. This approach can allow obtaining final pregnant leach solution with larger concentrations of non-ferrous metals. The goal of the present work was to investigate ferric leaching of the copper converter slag flotation tailings with ferric containing leach solution obtained after sulfuric acid leaching of old pyrite flotation tailings. The first type of waste, old pyrite flotation tailings, obtained on an industrial concentrator, was used. The XRD pattern revealed the presence of pyrite (41%), jarosite (3%), greenalite (3%), gypsum (13%), and quartz (29%) in the sample. Optical microscopic observations found copper was presented as chalcopyrite and oxidized compounds, and zinc as sphalerite and oxidized compounds. The P The second type of waste, copper converter slag flotation tailings, was obtained under industrial conditions during dressing of copper converter slag. Optical microscopic observations found the product mainly included magnetite Fe Leaching of the old pyrite flotation tailings with 10% sulfuric acid solution (10.0 Ferric leaching of the copper converter slag flotation tailings was carried out in a 2.0-L reactor containing 1.0 The leaching process yielded 7.5 Considering the mineralogical compositions of copper converter slag flotation tailings, the ferric leaching of non-ferrous metals would be mainly based on the following reactions: Reactions of dissolution of iron and zinc silicates may occur according to the following equation: Effects of temperature on the dynamics of leaching of iron and non-ferrous metals from copper converter slag flotation tailings were studied. Experiments were carried out at pulp density of 20% (w/v) for 2 Effects of pulp density on the dynamics of leaching were studied. The experiments were carried out at 70 Effects of ferric iron initial concentration on the dynamics of leaching were studied. The ferric content (15.9 The flow sheet of the sulfide ores treatment with the complex hydrometallurgical process of the wastes is presented in The work was supported by the president Grant of the