Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs) are efficient adsorbent and catalyst, however, the prepare of MOFs can be extremely time consuming. The rapid in situ microwave synthesis process offers the possibility of MOFs to a large-scale application. In this study, Fe3O4@MIL-100(Fe) was rapidly prepared via microwave in 30 min using Fe3O4 as metal precursor and applied as the adsorbent and photocatalyst to remove diclofenac sodium (DCF) from water. Fe3O4@MIL-100(Fe) exhibited an excellent adsorption effect to DCF with the maximum adsorption capacities of 400 mg/L. The presence of H2O2 could promote the removal of DCF during photocatalytic process. Approximately 99.4% of the DCF was removed in Fe3O4@MIL-100(Fe)/vis/H2O2 system via adsorption removal and consequent photocatalytic degradation. The high efficiency was attributed to the large BET surface area (1244.62 m2/g) and abundant iron metal sites (Fe(III) and Fe(II)) of Fe3O4@MIL-100(Fe). The adsorptive, photocatalytic property of Fe3O4@MIL-100(Fe) and the Fenton-like reaction were the main mechanisms for DCF removal. TOC analyzer was served to assess the mineralization of solutions treated by Fe3O4@MIL-100(Fe)/vis/H2O2 in 12 h. High elimination of TOC (87.8%) was observed during the DCF mineralization process. In addition, the major products were illuminated using HPLC-Q-TOF-MS and DCF degradation pathways were also proposed.Diclofenac sodium (DCF) is a typical representative of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSADs) [ Recently, adsorptive removal and photocatalytic degradation of persistent toxic organics in water have been emerged as energy- and cost-effective technologies [ Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are new functional inorganic-organic hybrid materials and more than 20,000 MOFs were reported within the past decade [ The synthesis of magnetic MOFs can generally be classified into either in-situ method or layer-by-layer strategy. The layer-by-layer strategy [ Microwave (MW) synthesis supply an effective way in fabricating MOFs due to its unique superiorities such as fast crystallization, high dispersion, less reaction time, and narrow particle size distribution [ Upon all these points, we in-situ fabricated Fe Ferric chloride hexahydrate (FeCl Fe Fe MIL-100(Fe) was synthesized by conventional hydrothermal method [ Fe Diclofenac sodium (DCF) was used as a target contaminant to test the adsorptive ability of Fe Fe The XRD pattern of Fe The FT-IR spectrum of Fe The BET surface area and pore volume of Fe The surface morphology of Fe Fe Adsorption kinetics describes the relationship between adsorption quantity and time. The adsorption amount increased quickly in the first hour, and it reached equilibrium within 250 min with q Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms were used to explore the adsorption process ( Fe The degradation efficiency was increased from 0.0% to 35.3% after H DCF removal efficiency by MIL-100(Fe), (37.5%)Fe The total DCF removal efficiency were 50.7%, 99.4% and 99.9% for (75%)Fe Fe Fe Fe The pseudo-first order kinetic constant was investigated to show the efficiency, and it gradually increased with increasing the dosage from 0.025 to 0.2 g/L (Fig. S6c). The constants were 6.6 × 10 The effect of H How the improvement performed after H The DCF removal by an integrated adsorption and photocatalysis process was also investigated to show the efficiency of Fe Total organic carbon (TOC) is a comprehensive index of the total amount of organics in water. The reduction of TOC was slower than the DCF degradation rate under the same conditions ( A reasonable mechanism was proposed in The intermediates were checked to explore the possible degradation pathway and eight photoproducts were identified in the reaction ( Fe This work was financially supported by the Fund for the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: