A new criterion is presented for prediction of intact rock and rock mass failure under polyaxial state of stresses. A comprehensive database of the results of uniaxial, triaxial, and polyaxial tests on intact rock was utilized for evaluation of the new criterion and comparison of its accuracy with the most accurate and frequently used criteria. Analysis of 195 individual data groups of brittle failure in the form of (σ
                     3,σ
                     1) for twelve different rock types showed that the proposed criterion lead to determination coefficients higher than 0.99 in most cases. It also gave the lower values of root mean squared errors relative to Mohr–Coulomb and Hoek–Brown criteria in fitting the normalized strength data for each rock type. The criteria were used to fit a typical series of triaxial strength data including brittle and ductile behavior. It showed that the new criterion can maintain its accuracy over a wider range of stresses. In the absence of rock mass strength data, applicability of the new criterion for rock mass was verified by fitting it to typical Hoek–Brown failure envelopes. Regression analysis of the polyaxial strength data in the form of (σ
                     3,σ
                     2,σ
                     1) for six rock types showed that the new criterion predict the strength more accurately than the Modified Wiebols–Cook and You criteria in all cases.Strength of rock is a very important parameter in the design of rock structures. Stability analysis of these structures requires a representative failure criterion. Each criterion has a few constants that have to be determined from regression analysis of test results. Conventional triaxial compression test, that is referred to as triaxial test, is an easy and common experiment in which, intermediate and minor principal stresses are equal and could be applied independent of major principal stress ( True triaxial or polyaxial test is a very difficult and expensive experiment in which all the three principal stresses can be applied independently ( In this paper, a new polyaxial criterion for brittle and ductile failure of intact rock and rock masses is presented. The criterion is empirical in nature and is derived in a trial and error process so as to satisfy the basic requirements of failure criteria and also show good agreement with test results. A comprehensive database of laboratory test results for different rock types is utilized for evaluation of the new criterion and comparison of its accuracy with the most accurate and frequently used criteria. Although the new criterion is proposed for general condition of polyaxial stresses, it must give good agreement with strength data under uniaxial and triaxial loading conditions. Hence, database of this study includes the results of uniaxial, triaxial, and polyaxial tests on intact rock. It was tried to collect all of the available and reliable strength data from worldwide sources to build a comprehensive database that could be representative of strength characteristics of various rock types in different states of stresses. It is believed that analysis of this data set can lead to representative and unbiased results. The values of tensile strength, The results of polyaxial tests are included in this database. Six considered rock types were KTB amphibolite Mohr–Coulomb and Hoek–Brown criteria are the most well-known, trusted, and frequently used triaxial criteria in rock mechanics and rock engineering This criterion is one of the earliest failure criteria for soils and rocks. It is assumed that material fails when the value of shear stress on a plane reaches a critical value, By setting The criterion can be applied for both intact rock and rock masses. However, there is no specific parameter for distinguishing between rock mass and rock material and taking into account the strength reduction effect of rock mass fractures. Hence, the corresponding values of constants must be used in each case. This is a very well developed empirical criterion that is proposed for failure of intact rock and rock masses. The final version of the criterion can be written as In the general case, Eq. The proposed empirical criterion for rock failure in triaxial loading condition can be expressed by the following relation between effective principal stresses: Hence, By setting The new criterion is applicable for isotropic rock masses. It can be assumed for rock masses containing several sets of closely spaced discontinuities of similar type. However, if there were dominant discontinuities such as faults and/or if the spacing of discontinuities was comparable with the dimensions of the rock structure, the behavior will be anisotropic and structurally controlled failures are expected. In these situations, application of the proposed criterion is not recommended. It is recognized that the minor principal stress has the main influence on rock strength. It has resulted in the common application of triaxial failure criteria in stability analyses. However, results of polyaxial tests have shown that the intermediate principal stress can also have a significant effect on rock strength Among the well-known and tried polyaxial criteria, Colmenares and Zoback This criterion is an extension of the Drucker–Prager criterion and can be expressed as This criterion gives the following equation for direct calculation of strength The proposed criterion for rock failure in polyaxial state of stresses can be expressed by the following relation between effective principal stresses:  The proposed polyaxial criterion of Eq. Although it is desirable to use the results of polyaxial tests for determination of the constants of the criterion, results of much easier triaxial compression ( In order to examine the capability of the new criterion in prediction of intact rock strength in triaxial state of stresses, it was applied to 195 data groups of different rock types. In the general case, the constants of the criterion have to be determined using non-linear regression analysis. However, it is possible to approximate these values using linear regression analysis. The proposed triaxial criterion of Eq. If the values of uniaxial compressive strength of intact rock, The results of analysis of individual data groups are summarized in After the analysis of individual data groups, the strength data of each rock types were investigated together. In order to analyze simultaneously all of individual data groups of a certain rock type with different values of uniaxial strength, the values of Mohr–Coulomb criterion predicted the most accurate values of normalized uniaxial compressive strength, Hoek–Brown criterion gave the best values of The proposed criterion led to the most accurate values of Failure envelopes of the different criteria are shown in An error index is required for quantitative comparison of the criteria. Different measures of error are used in literature, sometimes with the same name. In this paper, Root Mean Squared Error,  There is another remarkable point in On average, Mohr–Coulomb criterion showed 0.03 higher errors than the Hoek–Brown criterion, and the latter also gave 0.03 higher In preceding sections, the accuracy of the new criterion in prediction of brittle failure of intact rock under triaxial state of stresses was considered. However, the criterion can be used in more general conditions. The applicability of the new triaxial criterion for ductile failure of intact rock and rock mass failure is considered in this section using typical examples that were discussed by Hoek and Brown It is recognized that the behavior of most rocks changes from brittle to ductile. It is typically associated with a decrease in slope of the failure envelope near the brittle–ductile transition pressure As an example, brittle and ductile triaxial strength data of Indiana limestone Obtained parameters and The proposed criterion also gave the most accurate results in terms of Fitted solutions of the criteria to all data points are shown in The final aim of all rock failure criteria is their application in stability analysis of rock structures. Hence, each practical rock failure criterion has to be capable of predicting rock mass strength. Unfortunately, reliable strength data for rock masses are very limited and they are not easily accessible for research purposes. At this time, the most well-known and frequently used rock mass failure criterion is the Hoek–Brown criterion. Hence, in the absence of any available rock mass strength data, the capability of the proposed triaxial criterion was examined by fitting it to the typical Hoek–Brown failure envelopes. The selected curves are those obtained for a jointed mica schist from Himachel Pradesh in India The reported constants of the Hoek–Brown criterion and obtained parameters of the new criterion are shown in At this point, it is useful to compare Hoek–Brown and the proposed criterion in terms of the functioning of incorporated constants. In both criteria, the values of the three constants change by transition from intact rock to rock mass. However, while the parameters This division of functions has led to an interesting characteristic for the new criterion: the strength reduction factor Despite the attractive features of the new criterion and its potential applications, at this time, the Hoek–Brown criterion has a very important advantage over it in practical problems. In the absence of rock mass strength data, it is possible to estimate the values of The Modified Wiebols–Cook, You, and the proposed polyaxial criteria were used to fit the results of polyaxial tests. Microsoft Excel software was utilized to find the parameters of the criteria that give the least values of Obtained constants of the criteria are presented in   In this paper, a new empirical failure criterion was proposed for intact rock and rock masses under general condition of polyaxial stresses. A comprehensive database of results of uniaxial, triaxial, and polyaxial tests on intact rock was utilized for evaluation of the criterion and comparison of its accuracy with the most accurate and frequently used criteria. Analysis of ( For further examination of the new criterion, a typical series of triaxial test results including brittle and ductile failure data was utilized for evaluation of the applicability of the new criterion in ductile behavior. It showed that the criterion can predict the strength of rock over wide range of stresses with high accuracy. In the absence of rock mass strength data, applicability of the new criterion for rock mass failure was verified by fitting it to typical Hoek–Brown failure envelopes. Polyaxial test results in the form of ( The proposed criterion of this study has attractive features such as good agreement with experimental results, taking the effect of The author wishes to thank Evert Hoek for helpful discussion and guidance in collecting the required strength database. Valuable comments of Ahmad Jafari and Saeed Kariminasab on the earlier draft of paper are also warmly acknowledged.