We have previously reported a novel method for producing stable scorodite (FeAsO4·2H2O) under atmospheric conditions in which ferrous sulfate was oxidized by oxygen in the presence of high concentrations of arsenic(V). This work examines the effects of reaction temperature (95, 70, 50 °C) and the oxidizing agent (air, pure oxygen gas) to optimize scorodite formation in a practical process. Crystalline scorodite of low solubility could be prepared at 70 °C within only 7 h using either oxygen or air sparging and small particles were even formed at 50 °C using air oxidation.Arsenic is a common impurity in non-ferrous metallurgical processes (e.g. copper smelting), and the removal of arsenic still remains a major theme for research. As discussed in Part I ( To overcome these obstacles, we have investigated a new process for producing large-sized scorodite particles with improved filtration and washability properties under conditions of normal atmospheric pressure and at temperatures below 100 °C ( The materials, apparatus, and procedures for producing and examining the scorodite are the same as those reported in our previous study, with the exception that oxidation was partly performed with ambient air and the reaction temperatures were 50, 75, or 95 °C. The experimental conditions are summarized in The effects of changes in the temperature on pH, oxidation–reduction potentials (ORP's) and solution arsenic and iron concentrations were shown in   Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) of the scorodite samples produced at 50, 70, and 95 °C are shown in The results of environmental leach tests conducted at pH 5.1 on the precipitate samples that had been subjected to one re-pulp washing are shown in The results from air oxidation conducted for 7 h are illustrated in  The average particle size and BET specific surface area of the particles precipitated with air oxidation is shown in The SEM and XRD results for the scorodite produced by the air oxidation at 50, 70, and 95 °C are shown in The results of environmental leach tests conducted on the samples produced at 50, 70, 95 °C that had been subjected to one re-pulp washing are shown in The above experimental results showed scorodite precipitation under atmospheric pressure at low reaction temperatures of 50 to 70 °C. As discussed in our previous paper, these results are similar to the formation of iron arsenate at 25 °C as reported by A decrease in the reaction temperature causes increased dissolved oxygen content, reduced rates of Fe(III) hydrolysis and enhanced supersaturation associated with the precipitation kinetics. A controlled increase in supersaturation causes the crystal nucleus formation to be the dominant step in a precipitation reaction, thereby resulting in smaller sized particles. From our results, both the BET specific surface area and moisture content increased indicating that nucleus formation was indeed the dominant step in the precipitation of scorodite at lower reaction temperatures. The scorodite generated by pure oxygen reaction at 50 °C had larger average particle sizes, which were determined by a particle size analyzer, compared with other reaction temperatures. However, this resulted from agglomeration of very fine particles in the precipitation reaction. We assume the pure oxygen-gas reaction conducted at 50 °C gave a fast rate of iron oxidation and increased the degree of supersaturation thereby enhancing nucleus formation rather than crystal growth. Air oxidation, which gave a lower rate of Fe(II) oxidation, yielded better results at 50 °C. We have proposed that a slow oxidation rate is critical for achieving large-sized scorodite crystals at low reaction temperatures. The dissolved oxygen concentration in the vicinity of the precipitation boundary appears to play a key role, which is influenced by the partial oxygen pressure of the gas sparged into the reactor. A detailed examination, however, showed that scorodite particles produced by air oxidation gave higher arsenic dissolution than the corresponding particles generated with pure oxygen oxidation. The two oxidation processes resulted in different post-reaction pH and ORP values, with air oxidation giving a lower ORP around 350 mV — falling short of completely oxidizing Fe(II). Analysis on the effects of the reaction time indicated that the scorodite grains with low levels of arsenic dissolution needed longer reaction times and sufficient oxidation of Fe(II). To meet these mutually contradicting requirements, temporal control of the oxidation rate is required, involving a slow oxidation rate in the highly supersaturated initial stages and an enhanced oxidation rate in the later stages of the reaction where acid formation lowers the supersaturation. Controlling the oxidation rate throughout the reaction stages enables the formation of large-sized scorodite grains with low arsenic dissolution concentration. Possible means for controlling the oxidation rate include (1) changing the gas flow rate (2) increasing the temperature in the final stage of the reaction, (3) addition of copper ion catalyst and (4) addition of oxidizing agents (e.g. Mn(IV)) in the final stage. A two-stage oxidation process involving a slow initial oxidation rate and enhanced oxidation later in the reaction has been applied to magnetite synthesis ( It should be noted that air oxidation used in a practical industrial application may cause significant heat loss due to the large amount of remaining nitrogen gas removing steam from the system. The potential heat loss will be largely influenced by the reaction temperature, reaction time, and reactor design. The optimal conditions and choice of oxidant gas for any industrial application may depend upon the availability of low-cost steam. The effects of reaction temperature and oxygen partial pressure on the properties of the scorodite were investigated under atmospheric conditions using mixtures of ferrous ion and concentrated arsenic(V). Our results indicate that controlled synthesis at 70 °C achieved sufficiently stable scorodite particles and that air oxidation produced scorodite even at 50 °C. This study primarily showed that controlling the degree of supersaturation in the vicinity of the precipitation boundary is crucial for stable scorodite synthesis, which provides guidance for practical industrial operations. Dr. Kazuteru Tozawa and Dr. Kazuo Koike are thanked for helpful discussion and advice.