Chitosan, a natural biodegradable polymer, was studied as a selective depressant in copper–molybdenum sulfide separation by flotation. Although chitosan depressed both molybdenite and chalcopyrite in single mineral flotation, selective flotation was achieved during the flotation of molybdenum-bearing copper sulfide concentrate at pH 6; the recovery of molybdenum in the froth product was over 70% while the recovery of copper was less than 24%. Adsorption measurements showed that chitosan had a higher adsorption density on chalcopyrite than on molybdenite. FTIR and ToF-SIMS measurements were carried out to confirm the different degrees of interaction of chitosan with molybdenite and chalcopyrite and the results showed that chitosan mostly adsorbed on chalcopyrite via amide groups when both molybdenite and chalcopyrite were present in the suspension.The selective separation of copper–molybdenum sulfide minerals by flotation mostly relies on the use of various depressants. Sodium hydrosulfide, sodium sulfide, cyanide and Noke’s reagent (thiophosphorus or thioarsenic compounds) are routinely used as the selective depressants of chalcopyrite ( Chitosan, a natural biodegradable and non-toxic polyaminosaccharide, is made from chitin which is the main component of crustacean shells ( Chitosan has also been explored in the minerals industry, for example, chitosan could be used as a depressant to depress chalcopyrite selectively in the flotation separation of copper–lead and lead–iron sulfides ( Chitosan with a reported deacetylation degree of 80–95% and sodium sulfide were acquired from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., LTD, China. The molecular weight of the chitosan ranged from 200,000 to 320,000. The chitosan was dissolved by diluted acetic acid (1% by weight) before use. Kerosene, terpenic oil and sodium butyl xanthate were provided by Tieling Flotation Reagents Factory, China. Zincon monosodium salt, acetic acid and sodium acetate were obtained from Fisher Scientific Canada. The pure chalcopyrite and molybdenite were obtained from Yunnan Province and Tibet, China, respectively. The lumps of the molybdenite and chalcopyrite were crushed manually and hand-picked. The isolated high purity samples were ground in an agate mortar before sieving to −100 A copper–molybdenum ore sample was obtained from Jiama copper polymetallic deposit in Tibet, China. It contained 0.90% copper and 0.056% molybdenum. The mineralogical analysis showed that copper and molybdenum mainly existed in the form of chalcopyrite and molybdenite respectively and the gangue minerals were primarily quartz, chlorite and calcite. The chemical analysis confirmed that the molybdenum-bearing copper concentrate obtained from the copper–molybdenum ore bulk flotation test, conducted following the procedure shown in The flowsheet of the copper–molybdenum ore bulk flotation test is described in The flotation tests on single minerals and molybdenum-bearing copper concentrate were carried out using a model XGF-1600 flotation machine operating at 1600 The adsorption studies were performed in a SI-600 shaking incubator (Jeio Tech, USA) operating at 200 One gram of −45 ToF-SIMS are widely used to study the surface chemical of minerals subjected to flotation separation ( Recoveries of molybdenite and chalcopyrite in single mineral flotation tests with and without chitosan as a depressant at a range of pH values (4–12) is presented in As shown in Single mineral flotation tests using chalcopyrite and molybdenite only showed a marginal effect of chitosan as a potential selective depressant in copper–molybdenum sulfide separation. However, since the single mineral flotation tests could not demonstrate the competitive adsorption of chitosan on the two minerals, testwork was carried out on molybdenum-bearing copper concentrate to examine the potential to use chitosan as a selective depressant in copper–molybdenum separation. The molybdenum-bearing copper concentrate was obtained from the copper–molybdenum ore bulk flotation flowsheet as shown in  The recoveries of copper and molybdenum at different chitosan concentrations in molybdenum-bearing copper flotation are plotted in The adsorption densities of chitosan and xanthate on single mineral (chalcopyrite and molybdenite) surfaces as a function of reagent concentration are shown in As can be seen from The FTIR spectra of chalcopyrite and molybdenite before and after treatment with chitosan are presented in As shown in ToF-SIMS measurements were conducted to study the possible selective adsorption of chitosan on molybdenite and chalcopyrite surfaces from chalcopyrite–molybdenite mixtures. Positive ion maps of Cu To study the selectivity of chitosan on chalcopyrite–molybdenite mixtures further, positive ion mass spectra of the samples were used to determine the interacting moieties between the minerals and chitosan. As shown in In this study, chitosan was explored in the copper–molybdenum sulfide mineral flotation separation as a potential selective depressant. The main observations and conclusions are: Chitosan depressed chalcopyrite strongly in very low concentrations, while it also depressed molybdenite flotation to some extent as shown by single mineral flotation tests. However, the results of molybdenum-bearing copper concentrate flotation revealed that molybdenite was floatable while chalcopyrite was depressed by chitosan. Therefore, the selectivity of chitosan in the Cu–Mo sulfide flotation separation was observed when both Cu sulfide and Mo sulfide minerals are present in the pulp. Measurements of the adsorption densities of xanthate and chitosan on chalcopyrite and molybdenite indicated that both chalcopyrite and molybdenite adsorbed chitosan, but the adsorption density of chitosan on chalcopyrite was higher than on molybdenite. Meanwhile, molybdenite adsorbed more xanthate than chalcopyrite. The results of FTIR and ToF-SIMS measurements revealed that chitosan had higher affinity for chalcopyrite than for molybdenite, and chitosan adsorbed on chalcopyrite via both amide III (N The authors appreciate financial support from both the Key Projects in the National Science & Technology Pillar Program during the Twelfth Five-year Plan Period of China (Grant Nos. 2012BAB01B03) and Canada’s NSERC Discovery Grant program to this project. The ToF-SIMS measurements were taken at the Alberta Centre for Surface Engineering and Science (ACSES), University of Alberta. Mingyang Li also thanks to the China Scholarship Council (CSC) for the scholarship support.