Fractures of the coronoid were previously reported based on their size. More recently, a mechanistic approach has been taken to improve the way in which these fractures are managed. Coronoid fractures should be understood insofar as how they relate to other injuries in the elbow. The goal of this chapter is to educate the reader on the types of coronoid fractures based on their mechanism of injury and associated ligamentous and bony injuries. The body of the chapter describes the coronoid fractures identified in axial loading—posterolateral rotatory and posteromedial rotatory instability patterns. Next, a description of surgical technique based on the injury patterns is presented. Finally, the biomechanics, postoperative rehabilitation, and outcomes after coronoid fracture fixation are discussed. A specific section devoted to complications is found at the end of the chapter.The coronoid process, along with the radial head, plays an important role in elbow stability. Fractures involving the coronoid often result in elbow instability, which may lead to pain, poor function, and ultimately arthritis. The anteromedial (AM) facet of the coronoid is the primary restraint to varus stresses and, when fractured, can result in varus instability. The coronoid and radial head are both important anterior buttresses preventing posterior instability. The fracture patterns of coronoid fractures are now well documented to occur with specific mechanisms. Understanding these patterns and mechanisms will guide the surgeon as to which structures need repair to restore stability. Fractures of the coronoid need to be carefully clinically and radiographically evaluated to determine appropriate management. Fractures associated with elbow instability should be approached surgically to restore stability, permit early range of motion (ROM), and prevent the long-term sequelae of a painful stiff elbow. The osseous anatomy of the elbow is constrained; therefore, it imparts significant stability based purely on its design. The greater sigmoid notch is composed of the anterior coronoid process and the posterior olecranon process, separated by a bare area. The medial aspect of the coronoid is widened and forms the AM facet. The sublime tubercle on the medial aspect of the coronoid serves as the attachment site of the anterior bundle of the medial collateral ligament (MCL; Coronoid fractures may be subtle on plain radiographs, especially if they occur in isolation. Standard anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs of the elbow should be obtained. If a dislocation has occurred, then radiographs of the elbow need to be performed again after reduction to ensure a concentric reduction has been obtained as well as to assist in the identification of the origin of any fracture fragments. Coronoid tip fractures are often confused with radial head fragments on the lateral radiograph. The use of CT scans in the evaluation and classification of coronoid fracture patterns has led to the association of specific fracture patterns to mechanisms of injury. Tip fractures are associated with valgus posterolateral rotatory (VPLR) injuries, AM facet fractures with varus posteromedial (VPM) rotatory injuries, and basilar fractures with axial loading and resultant transolecranon fracture-dislocations ( Coronoid tip fractures result from a shearing injury due to a VPLR stress to the elbow. The mechanism occurs during a fall on the outstretched arm, when the hand is planted and the body rotates internally relative to the forearm. This causes a valgus and posterolateral force across the elbow, resulting in a rupture of the lateral collateral ligament (LCL) complex. The radial head typically fractures from the valgus load and then rolls posterior to the capitelleum. As the coronoid resists this posterior force, the tip is fractured from the shearing mechanism ( Fractures of the AM facet have been associated with a VPM force across the elbow. It is proposed to occur when a person catches themselves from a backward fall, the hand is planted, and the body rotates externally relative to the forearm. The varus force ruptures the LCL complex and drives the AM facet into the medial trochlea, fracturing the AM facet. As the force continues, the elbow posteriorly dislocates. Increasing force also results in extension of the fracture involving larger portions of the coronoid. It is also common for the tip to be involved. If the fracture extends to involve the sublime tubercle, then increasing instability of the elbow results from the loss of the MCL attachment. The radial head is usually not fractured in this injury pattern ( Coronoid fractures involving the base of the coronoid with a resultant large portion of the coronoid involved are usually the result of an axial load to the posterior surface of the proximal ulna with the elbow flexed. The distal humerus is driven into the sigmoid notch resulting in a pilon-type fracture ( The anterior transolecranon fracture-dislocation is not a Monteggia injury because the relationship of the proximal radioulnar joint remains intact. The forearm displaces anteriorly and the olecranon is displaced posteriorly by the pull of the triceps. The radial head is typically not fractured. The coronoid fragment is often a large fragment with the MCL still attached to the sublime tubercle, which remains intact with the fragment. Higher energy injuries may result in comminution of the coronoid with injury to the ligamentous attachments. Posterior transolecranon fracture-dislocations can be considered a variant of a Monteggia lesion ( The original classification of coronoid fractures by The Regan and Morrey classification divided fractures into three types, each of which was then subdivided into A and B subtypes, indicating the presence (A) or absence (B) of an associated dislocation. The classification is based on the height of the fracture on a lateral radiograph ( The O’Driscoll classification system is a comprehensive classification that better defines the fracture patterns and is correlated with the fracture mechanism ( The importance of the bony architecture to elbow stability has been demonstrated from the earliest studies on elbow biomechanics ( In the VPLR injury pattern, the coronoid is typically fractured in a transverse or tip fracture pattern. This usually occurs in combination with a radial head fracture, creating the terrible triad injury. A major question and area of controversy is when to fix the coronoid fracture. Some authors recommend always repairing the coronoid because the outcomes are unpredictable and the degree of soft-tissue injury leading to recurrent instability is difficult to assess (  Studies examining the VPM injury pattern have also noted an effect of increasing fracture size with increasing instability.  Management is again directed by the pattern of injury associated with the fracture pattern ( These fractures are transverse tip fractures associated with terrible triad injuries from a VPLR injury. This injury pattern requires treatment of the multiple components of the injury, including the LCL complex, radial head, and coronoid fracture as described in the protocol by The surgical technique addresses the deep structures first, then progressing to the more superficial. The coronoid is typically repaired first, followed by the radial head fracture, then the LCL complex, and finally the medial side is approached if necessary. The surgical incision can be either lateral or a midline universal posterior incision. The muscular interval is through an extensor digitorum communis (EDC) split as described The radial head is addressed next, either with ORIF or replacement. Results have not proven one technique better than the other ( The LCL complex is repaired next using a #2 or #5 nonabsorbable braided suture as a grasping suture. The extensor origin is often avulsed from the lateral epicondyle and can be repaired with the same suture. The author’s preference is to repair the complex to the lateral epicondyle through transosseous drill holes, although the successful The surgical approach for AM facet fractures is typically through a posterior midline incision, allowing access medially to repair the fracture and laterally to repair the LCL complex. The incision can be made with the arm across the patient’s chest and the arm can then be brought down to lie on a hand table after the skin flap is elevated. The medial side is approached first. The ulnar nerve is identified and released but need not be transposed unless a more extensile exposure is chosen. Three intervals in the flexor-pronator origin have been described for exposure of the coronoid fracture: the Hotchkiss over-the-top, the flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU)-splitting, and the Taylor and Scham posterior approach ( The FCU-split uses the anatomic split in the FCU where the ulnar nerve travels. Again, as in the Hotchkiss over-the-top, the flexor-pronator origin anterior to this is elevated. These are the two most common approaches. The over-the-top provides better access to the tip of the coronoid, allowing adequate access to capture the tip fragments in fractures that extend anteriorly. The FCU-split allows for better access Fixation is performed with implants in the 2.0- to 2.4-mm size range. These fractures are typically comminuted, making internal fixation with only lag screws tenuous. Lag screws combined with buttress plating using a T-shaped plate work well. Small anterior tip fragments may require additional suture-lasso fixation ( After fixation of the fracture, the LCL complex requires repair. It may be argued that repair of the LCL complex is not necessary if the bony injury is stabilized. No biomechanical studies have yet addressed this. In addition, AM facet fractures are typically comminuted and fixation is performed with small implants, leading to concern regarding stability. Repair of the LCL complex is straightforward, and the current recommendation is to repair it. The lateral skin flap is raised, and an EDC-splitting approach anterior to the lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL) is developed. The LCL complex is repaired using a transosseous suture through the lateral epicondyle, as described above for terrible triad injuries. Because these fractures usually have a transolecranon component, they are approached surgically through a posterior incision. The coronoid is accessed through the olecranon fracture. The olecranon may be mobilized by elevating the extensor carpi ulnaris muscle laterally and FCU medially, taking care to protect the ulnar nerve. If comminution extends anteriorly, then more extensive exposure can be attained by mobilizing the ulnar nerve and elevating the flexor-pronator origin, as described in The elbow is splinted in the position of stability, typically flexion, for no more than 7 Before the recognition and understanding of the terrible triad injury pattern, poor outcomes were frequently reported ( Multiple studies have demonstrated consistently good outcomes with Type III fractures provided that the trochlear notch can be securely restored with particular attention to stable fixation of the coronoid ( Potential complications include recurrent instability, stiffness, heterotopic ossification, malunion, nonunion, infection, ulnar neuropathy, and arthrosis. Recurrent instability occurs more commonly after a terrible triad injury. Treatment is directed to the original goals of surgery: repairing the coronoid, repairing or replacing the radial head, and repairing or reconstructing the LUCL. A hinged external fixator can be very helpful in cases of persistent instability. Heterotopic ossification is common after elbow trauma and, unfortunately, prophylactic treatment with radiation is associated with a high incidence of nonunion ( Ulnar neuropathy is problematic and common, being present in 25% in one series ( The contribution of the coronoid to elbow stability has been emphasized in this chapter. There are situations in which the coronoid is difficult to repair, either as the result of extreme comminution or delayed presentation. Reconstruction of the coronoid has been described using various grafts, including the tip of the olecranon, the radial head, costochondral and iliac crest autografts, and allografts (