Anaerobic digestion of thin stillage in a novel anaerobic baffled reactor (ABR) was evaluated with respect to the selected operating conditions including organic loading rate (OLR), hydraulic retention time (HRT) and recycle ratio (RR). The hybrid ABR achieved the chemical oxygen demand (COD) removal, sulfate removal and methane yield of 92.5-78.9%, 97-93% and 305-275 mL CH4 g−1 CODremoved, respectively at OLR of 3.5–6 kg COD m−3 d−1, HRT of 20-11.7d and RR of 15. However, the COD and sulfate removal and methane yield didn’t change significantly at the RR range of 10–20 and OLR of 3.5 kg COD m−3 d−1 (HRT of 20d). Results showed that, increasing RR from 10 to 20, increased the contribution of later compartments to COD removal from 9% to 16%. On the other hand, the composition of VFA changed in response to the change in OLR. The removal of nitrogen and phosphorus from thin stillage digestate was around 37% and 49% in the novel ABR, respectively due to struvite precipitation. Struvite precipitation from the effluent of novel ABR with the addition of magnesium led to further nitrogen and phosphorus removal of 44% and 81%, respectively, indicating the potential of digestate for nutrient recycling.Anaerobic digestion has gained a lot of attention due to its advantages over aerobic treatment. It is more cost effective compared to aerobic treatment since it doesn’t need aeration and produces a small amount of excess sludge. More importantly, anaerobic digestion generates methane as an energy source [ Thin stillage is an aqueous by-product from the distillation of ethanol in corn bioethanol plants. A common method for treatment of thin stillage is based on evaporation and drying, which is energy intensive [ Thin stillage has been treated in various types of anaerobic digesters including anaerobic fluidized bed reactor (AFBR), continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR), anaerobic membrane bioreactor (AnMBR), anaerobic sequencing batch reactor (ASBR) and anaerobic baffled reactor (ABR) with a COD removal range of 82–99% and organic loading rate (OLR) range of 2.9–29 kg COD m In addition to the configuration of ABR, the operating parameters such as hydraulic retention time (HRT) and recycle ratio (RR) can considerably affect the performance of ABR. Faisal and Unno [ The objective of this study was to develop an understanding on the effect of HRT, OLR and RR on the performance of the novel hybrid ABR for anaerobic digestion of thin stillage with respect to sludge washout, sulfate and COD removal efficiency and biogas production rate. The effect of operating condition on phosphorus and nitrogen removal was also investigated in this study. Moreover, the potential of further nutrient recovery in the form of struvite recovery was explored. Diluted thin stillage was fed to the conventional ABR at the stage of star-up. Then, in an attempt to enhance the performance and robustness of the reactor, the conventional ABR was modified to a novel hybrid ABR. The modifications include installing solid/liquid/gas separators and baffles to reduce the biomass washout from the reactor which improved the performance of the reactor significantly [ Acidification may occur in anaerobic digestion process because of the accumulation of VFA, which results in a pH drop and process failure [ Samples were collected from each compartment of the hybrid ABR and pH, VFA and alkalinity were measured. A titration method [ The liquid digestate from each compartment and effluent was collected at various HRT and RR and its characteristics such as COD, sulfate, total nitrogen (TN), total phosphorus (TP) and ammonia were determined by HACH analysis kit, and UV–vis spectrophotometer (DR6000, HACH). Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) was used at the Minerals Engineering Center at Dalhousie University (Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada) to determine the concentration of metals in the digestate. For sample preparation, 6 ml HCl and 2 ml HNO Elemental analysis of precipitants was conducted at the Minerals Engineering Center at Dalhousie University (Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada) using ICP-OES. For the sample preparation, 6 ml of HCl and 2 ml of HNO The struvite crystals were formed in the digestate of the reactor. For additional removal of the nutrient in the form of struvite, the digestate was collected at OLR of 5.5 kg COD m The biomass washout was measured by taking samples from the effluent of hybrid ABR. Also, for determining the biomass concentration inside the reactor, the samples were taken from the top, middle and bottom of the sludge blanket. The biomass concentration of samples were measured by volatile suspended solids (VSS) test based on standard method [ Visual features of the anaerobic granules were studied using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), which was conducted in the Department of Process Engineering and Applied Science at Dalhousie University (Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada). For sample preparation, a sample of the sludge granules from the middle of sludge blanket in each compartment was taken and washed three times with 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). The samples were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde solution (pH 7.2–7.4) for 4 h at 4 °C and then rinsed again six times with 0.1 M phosphate buffer. Sample dehydration was performed using 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 95% and 100% ethanol (15 min at each ethanol concentration) and air drying. The samples were sputter coated with gold and the morphology of granules was observed by a scanning electron microscope (Hitachi, S-4700 equipped with an Oxford Inca Energy Dispersive X-ray analysis system and a HKL Electron Backscatter Diffraction System). Moreover, ImageJ software ( 25L Tedlar Sludge washout is one of the main drawbacks of conventional ABRs especially at low HRTs and high upflow velocities, which can lead to lower biomass concentration and consequently lower stability, COD removal and biogas production [  Another important parameter which allows for higher SRT and biomass concentration in the hybrid ABR is granulation [ The morphology of granules from the hybrid ABR is shown in The single phase reactors such as upflow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) reactor, AFBR or CSTR have been widely used in treatment of different wastewaters. However, two-phase reactors such as ABR have gained a lot of attention due to high robustness and enhanced bacterial activity [ The profile of VFA in the hybrid ABR is shown in As As Besides total VFA, the concentration of individual VFAs such as acetic, propionic and butyric acids can also be considered as an early indicator of process failure [ In this study, the COD removal efficiency increased slightly from 91.2 to 93.5% when the RR decreased from 20 to 10 ( Unlike total COD removal efficiency, the contribution of each compartment to COD removal ( The operating condition such as RR can be adjusted to optimize the reactor design. For example, if the 4th compartment of the ABR is removed at RR of 20 and OLR of 3.5 kg COD m The effect of HRT on the profile of COD removal and biogas production is also shown in Thin stillage has been treated in different digesters. Unlike mentioned digesters above, conventional ABRs are able to provide two phase system allowing the acidogens and methanogens grow in their desirable condition. This causes enhanced protection against toxic materials as well as organic/hydraulic shocks [ Thin stillage contains a considerable amount of sulfate (2936 ± 76 mg L In the hybrid ABR, sulfate removal efficiency decreased from 97% to 93% in response to the decrease in HRT from 20 to 11.7d (SLR from 0.16 to 0.26 g L The nutrient such as nitrogen and phosphorus cannot be effectively removed from thin stillage with anaerobic digestion [ The mass of species present in the chemical structure of struvite is shown in The solids were also submitted for XRD analysis and based on the results, the precipitants were identified as struvite ( Moreover, the mass balance for the ammonia was done since the experiment occurred in a close system and the ammonia loss because of stripping was insignificant [ As shown in Different parameters such molar ratio of Mg:P and pH can affect the rate of precipitation. For example within the pH range 7.5–9.5, the higher rate of precipitation happens at pH range of 8.9–9.25 [ In this study, the effect of RR and HRT on the operation and performance of a hybrid ABR was investigated, with respect to biomass washout rate, phase separation, COD and sulfate removal efficiency and biogas production. The results showed that the hybrid ABR could effectively treat thin stillage under different HRTs and RRs. Under the experimental conditions in this study, the highest COD and sulfate removal were 94% and 97%, respectively at HRT of 20d and RR of 10. Decreasing the HRT and increasing the OLR, reduced the COD and sulfate removal efficiency of the hybrid ABR as well as methane yield. Even though increasing the RR slightly decreased the COD removal efficiency, it reduced the average concentration of VFA inside the reactor resulting in enhanced robustness of process. On the other hand, both RR and HRT could change the contribution of each compartment to COD removal. A pilot scale system must be built based on the results, obtained on the extent of the interaction of OLR, SRT, RR and removal efficiencies, prior to commercialization to full scale in order to understand the effect of scale up on the performance of this novel anaerobic digester. Removal of nitrogen and phosphorus up to 37% and 49% mainly in the form of struvite was observed in the reactor and the results showed that Mg was the limiting element for further formation of struvite and removal of nitrogen and phosphorus in the hybrid ABR. Further removal of nitrogen (44%) and phosphorous (81%) from effluent of hybrid ABR with Mg addition was achieved in a batch system. Recovery of struvite, which has application as fertilizer from the digestate of thin stillage will improve the economics of the corn bioethanol production process. Future research must focus on microalgae cultivation in digestate for nutrient recycling as the next step, following struvite recovery. Struvite recovery will result in reducing the concentration of ammonia and its subsequent inhibitory effect on microalgae. Moreover, the struvite recovery improved the nitrogen to phosphorus ratio for the growth of microalgae. The feasibility of using cheaper Mg sources such as seawater can be investigated, however, its effect on downstream process such as microalgae cultivation needs to be examined. This research was funded and supported by