This report describes the chewing patterns of individuals with normal occlusion and several types of malocclusion. Frontal movement patterns of the lower mid-incisor point were recorded during chewing of test foods in groups of subjects with Angle Class I normal occlusion, Class II malocclusion, as well as deep-bite and cross-bite malocclusions. Mandibular prognathic and retrognathic patients corrected to Angle Class I occlusions were also examined before and after orthognathic surgery. Chewing patterns were classified by using a catalogue of eight basic movement types. In none of the groups examined could chewing behavior be characterized by only one specific type of movement, but rather by different frequency distributions of pattern types. The Angle Class I, Class II, deep-bite, and presurgical retrognathism groups were characterized by chewing patterns with normal sequencing and grinding features and, to a minor extent, by self-crossing movements having no unique pattern of sequencing. Reversed sequencing did not occur in these four groups. In presurgical prognathic patients, drop-shaped patterns with steep closing movements predominated. Cross-bite malocclusion was characterized by drop-shaped and reversed sequencing patterns. The pattern distribution in prognathic patients did not change after surgery. In retrognathic patients the therapeutically altered occlusion caused a decrease in the frequency of grinding movements and an increase in the frequency of drop-shaped patterns.Orthodontic or surgical treatments of malocclusion and dysmorphology aim at restoring or improving patients’ functional abilities. Function has been typically assessed by examining jaw muscle activity, To specify the term Chewing patterns were first studied by Ahlgren, The sample of untreated subjects included 247 dental students selected using criteria recommended by Gibbs and Lundeen In addition to the untreated subjects, 20 patients with mandibular prognathism and 17 with retrognathism, who had undergone surgical setbacks or advancements of their mandibles, respectively, were evaluated before and 6 months after surgery ( For each subject in the untreated and treated groups, chewing movements were recorded using the Sirognathograph. This system has been described and its accuracy has been tested. The recordings of chewing movements started from maximum intercuspation, with the bolus placed on the tongue. The trajectories of each trial were recorded for 20 seconds. In all persons (except the cross-bite subjects) right- and left-lateral tooth-guided jaw movements were also recorded. The angles of the jaw movements with respect to the vertical were determined interactively from a computer screen by using tangents to the traces, starting in maximum intercuspation (topmost point of the laterotrusive pattern). These “border angles” reflected the aggregate guiding of all occlusal structures involved in a laterotrusion. They were compared with “chewing angles” obtained by using tangents enveloping the traces under which the incisor point in mastication approached intercuspation or departed from it. All chewing cycles of each person were first assessed visually on a computer screen. Abnormal cycles, distorted due to swallowing, bolus replacements, or incomplete mouth closings were removed. Distortions were defined based on having prolonged cycle durations, excessive lateral excursions, or no return of the vertical excursion to the zero line. The frontal chewing pattern of each 20-second registration was established by plotting the vertical excursions against the left-right excursions. Only the frontal projection was evaluated because, based on previous experience, this has proven to be the most informative. Depending on individual chewing rhythms, about 20 to 35 cycles were superimposed to form one chewing pattern. Each subject’s chewing pattern obtained with each texture and chewing side were compared with one of eight types of movement modes ( The pattern types are arranged according to the direction of jaw rotation and the degree of curvature of the opening and closing strokes. The arrangement for right-sided chewing ( Among the normal sequencing patterns, type A is characterized by pronounced edges indicating the beginning and end of the grinding phase. For each group listed in In the untreated subjects with Angle Class I normal occlusion, mastication of tough food was accomplished by normal sequencing for 82% of the subjects ( With soft food, type A appeared less frequently and the drop-shaped type C predominated. The frequencies of the mixed sequencing types ED and E1 were not affected by a change of the food texture. The E2 type and the completely reversed sequencing type I did not appear. The χ No significant differences were found between the pattern frequencies of Angle Class I, Class II, and deep-bite occlusions ( Of the 21 cross-bite subjects, 7 were right-sided, 8 left-sided, and 6 were bilateral, resulting in 27 lateral dental arches with cross bite available for evaluation. The frequency of the patterns when chewing on the side of the cross bite clearly differed from the frequency distribution of subjects with Class I normal occlusion ( Before surgery, mandibular prognathic patients showed distinctly different chewing patterns than subjects with normal occlusion ( In contrast to the prognathic patients, the presurgical pattern distribution in the retrognathic group did not differ significantly from that of untreated Class I normal occlusion group ( Classifying chewing movements in subjects with normal and malocclusion is complicated by the diversity of both the movement modes and the occlusal features. Assigning a person’s chewing mode to one of eight pattern types is subjective because smooth transitions actually exist between the different types. Likewise, a particular occlusion is accompanied by cofactors such as age, gender, occlusal details, and craniofacial morphology, and so forth that might influence the chewing mode. Age and gender could be neglected here because the examined groups did not differ much in age, and no sex-related difference was found in the chewing pattern distributions. No further subdivision by occlusal and craniofacial factors was attempted due to limited samples sizes. While the eight pattern types are rather universal, large sample sizes are required for statistical comparisons. Regardless of occlusal relationships and craniofacial morphology, the occlusal guidance reflected by border and chewing angles limits the movement space and influences chewing patterns in the intercuspal range. The relationship between occlusal guidance and chewing movements is strongly influenced by the consistency of the food. It is well established that tough foods more frequently provoke grinding-type patterns with flat chewing angles than do soft foods. In subjects with normal occlusion, the chewing angles of the closing strokes coincided well with the border angles ( In presurgical retrognathic patients, the chewing closing angles were slightly steeper than in subjects with normal Class I occlusion, while the border angles were flatter. The resulting gap of 21° suggests a reduction of tooth gliding and grinding, and thus, reduced chewing efficiency when compared with normal occlusion. This supports findings of lower bite forces and more limited chewing efficiency in retrognathic patients. In presurgical prognathic patients, their very steep chewing angles and flatter occlusal guidance implies that they compressed food mainly by chopping. Nearly vertical masticatory strokes have also been reported for prognathic subjects. The predominance of grinding type patterns A and B in the Angle Class I, Class II, and in deep-bite groups implies that occlusal guidance was used during chewing, and that different degrees of frontal overbite did not affect the ability to exert lateral jaw movements. A lack of correspondence between overbite and lateral jaw movements is supported by Alexander and coworkers. The relatively high frequency of grinding patterns ( The presurgical retrognathic patients showed approximately the same frequency of A and B grinding patterns as did the Class II group, even though the gap between their border and chewing angles suggested less grinding action. If the lower maximum bite forces found in presurgical retrognathic patients In prognathism, the low frequency of A and B patterns and the prevalence of chopping type D movements probably reflected avoidance of tooth gliding. This is suggested by the special form of the D type closing movement in these patients, which, after a swing to the chewing side, appears to depart from occlusal guidance. In fact, prognathic patients in the present study frequently had difficulties exerting tooth-guided lateral excursions because of gliding obstacles. Under the latter conditions, the type D chewing pattern may have been the ideal form of movement, although this was possibly achieved at the cost of reduced chewing efficiency. Reversed sequencing among cross-bite subjects is well established. Despite a close to normal occlusal guidance after mandibular advancement of retrognathic patients, a decrease of grinding and an increase of drop-shaped patterns occurred. The concomitant steepening of the closing chewing angles suggested avoidance of the new occlusal pattern, which could explain the unchanged or reduced masticatory performance often reported for retrognathic patients after surgery. In contrast to other studies In summary, neither normal occlusion nor malocclusion can be characterized by any one chewing pattern, but rather by characteristic pattern distributions. In general, normal occlusion is characterized by grinding type chewing patterns with normal sequencing (