This paper deals with the preparation of high-purity zirconia from Egyptian zircon using a selective anion-exchange resin. Egyptian zircon was decomposed with sodium hydroxide at 650 °C. Then it was cooled and leached with water. After filtration, the residue was digested with concentrated hydrochloric acid, the slurry was filtered and the residue leached with a (6 M HCl)–(1 M H2SO4) mixture. The slurry was further aged and finally filtered. The filtrate was passed through an anion exchange resin bed. The effluent was treated by using 1.57 M sulphuric acid and the resulting zirconium sulfate tetrahydrate was filtered, washed, dried and calcined at 1000 °C. This ion-exchange purification process has great potential for application in industry for preparation of high-purity zirconia powders because of its simplicity, low cost and capability to produce high quality powder.In recent years, zirconia has attracted considerable attention as a high-technology material for industrial applications because of superior mechanical, thermal, electrical, chemical and optical properties. Zircon (zirconium silicate, ZrSiO High-purity zirconia can be obtained by hydrothermal treatment To purify zirconium from most of its impurities, including hafnium In this paper, we report on a systematic study to purify zirconium by using an anion exchange resin with 6 M HCl and 6 M HCl–1 M H The impurities Fe, Ca, Mg, Ti, Al, Na, and Si in the zirconium feed solution were analysed by atomic absorption spectrometry. Uranium was analysed by spectrophotometer. Zirconium in various solutions was analysed by gravimetry using mandelic acid as the precipitant. The free acidities of the feed solutions were estimated by volumetric analysis. Purified zirconia was detected by scanning electron microscope. Zircon was decomposed by reaction with sodium hydroxide above 650 °C. Then it was cooled and leached with water. After filtration, the residue (wet cake) was used for further experiments. Analysis of the Egyptian zircon used in our experiments is shown in During leaching of the frit, sodium silicate is removed to a large extent and sodium zirconate is hydrolysed to hydrated zirconia: A typical analysis of the wet cake is given in Because of the complex nature of various silicates in the wet cake, long periods of ageing (3–4 days) are required for clear separation of silicic acid. Filtration of the slurry and washing of the residue at this stage helps in removing the impurities to a considerable extent. During ageing of the digested slurry, the separated silicic acid forms an intimate mixture with zirconium oxychloride. In the process of leaching the mixture, zirconium oxychloride dissolves in the solution, leaving behind gelatinous silicic acid. The silica content is at a very low level (50 mg/L) in the final zirconium feed solution, which is essential for loading into the ion–exchange column because silica often acts as a resin poison (its effect is more mechanical than chemical) and the silica coating upon the resin beads causes the diffusion rate to be reduced. This gives an apparent reduction in the resin capacity A wet cake was digested at 120–150 °C with commercial grade concentrated hydrochloric acid (∼10 M) for about an hour. The slurry was allowed to age at ambient temperature for 4 days. After ageing, the slurry was filtered and the residue was washed with concentrated hydrochloric acid. The residue was leached with demineralized water (DM) and the slurry was kept for 1 day for further ageing. It was then filtered. The free acidity of the filtrate was adjusted to 6 M by using concentrated hydrochloric acid. This final solution was used as a zirconium feed solution containing 16 g ZrO A commercial grade anion exchange resin (IRA-400) in the chloride form was washed with DM water. The resin was soaked in 6 M HCl for 2–3 h. The resin was then packed in a glass column bed height (25×2 cm) and conditioned with 6 M HCl. The zirconium feed solution (1150 mL) was passed through the conditioned anion exchange column at a flow rate of 2 mL/min. The effluent containing the zirconium was then distilled. The solid residue, after cooling to ambient temperature was dissolved in DM water to make a solution containing 16 g ZrO In this case digestion of the wet cake was done as before. However, the residue obtained after filtering the digested slurry was leached with a (6 M HCl)–(1 M H The anion exchange resin and glass column used for ion exchange were the same as before but the resin was conditioned with 6 M HCl–1 M H The zirconium feed solution was passed through the conditioned resin column at a flow rate of 4 mL/min. The effluent (1024 mL) obtained from the ion exchange column was treated with 1.57 M sulfuric acid (commercial grade). The precipitate was filtered, washed with a mixture of 70 volume of sulfuric acid, 5 volume of hydrochloric acid, 40 volume of DM water, and finally the precipitate was washed with acetone. The acetone-washed precipitate was dried and then calcined at 1000 °C. In 6M HCl medium, ferric and uranyl ion are usually present as tetrachloride anionic complexes such as [FeCl In the system of 6 M HCl–1M H The distribution ratio and the capacity of the resin for iron in the acid mixture also increases remarkably. The marked increase may be due to the formation of a mixed ligand complex of ferric ions. Zirconium from the effluent is precipitated with concentrated sulfuric acid (commercial grade). The optimum molarity of the sulfuric acid for precipitation is 1.57 M. At molarity less than 1 M, the rate of precipitation is low and the walls of the container have to be scratched to create nucleation centers for the initiation of precipitation. Second, zirconium losses in the filtrate are considerable. The process yields a zirconium sulfate tetrahydrate precipitate in the form of powder, which is easily filterable and washable. After a suitable of adjustment of acidity, the filtrate can be re-used in leaching another batch of wet cake. Upon calcination at 1000 °C, the zirconium sulfate tetrahydrate precipitate yields a fine ZrO The investigation allows the proposal of a general flowchart for the process of the production of the high-purity zirconia from Egyptian zircon