Emulsified water droplets (WD), dispersed solids (DS), and precipitated asphaltenes (PA) form aggregates when bitumen emulsions are treated with aliphatic solvents. The WD/DS/PA aggregates in solvent-diluted bitumen exhibit zone settling and the settling rate is strongly influenced by aggregate structure. In this work, procedures were developed for determining structural parameters of the aggregates. The average porosity of the aggregates was found to be 0.40–0.45 for a system using a 50/50 by wt light n-pentane/n-hexane solvent mixture (C5C6) at a solvent-to-bitumen ratio (S/B, by wt) of 2.0 and 0.70–0.75 for a system using heavier n-heptane (C7) solvent at S/B=3.0. Consequently, the effective aggregate density for the C5C6 solvent system (approximately 1.00 g/ml) is higher than that for the C7 solvent system (approximately 0.87 g/ml). The aggregates formed in the C5C6 solvent contain embedded or attached water droplets larger than 20 μm, while the water droplets in the aggregates using the C7 solvent are generally smaller than 10 μm. The average volume fraction of the aggregates in the hindered settling zone is 0.12–0.13 at all studied conditions. Higher temperature (e.g. 50–120 °C) for mixing of the bitumen emulsion and solvent leads to larger aggregates and results in a significant increase in the settling rate of the aggregates. Mixing at elevated temperature provides an efficient means of increasing settling flux in settlers that are used to treat the solvent-diluted bitumen emulsions, especially when the settlers are preferably operated at near-ambient conditions (e.g. about 30 °C and less than 350kPa).Bitumen froth is an intermediate material generated during oil sands processing It has been reported that a diluted bitumen product containing less than 0.1 The settling rate of WD/DS/PA aggregates in solvent-diluted bitumen is one of the most important process parameters, and dictates the size of the settler needed for bitumen froth treatment. It has been established that the settling rate of porous aggregates depends on their structure, e.g. compactness and size Significant effort has been made to understand the settling of flocculated aqueous suspensions of minerals related to water purification, waste treatment, hydrometallurgy, etc. For example, Owen et al. For bitumen froth treatment using aliphatic solvents, one possible approach to achieve high settling flux is to operate the entire process (mixing of bitumen froth with solvent and subsequent settling of the solvent-diluted froth) at elevated temperatures. However, this operation would have to be conducted at elevated pressure due to the volatility of the light solvents that are used. In this work, we studied the effect of mixing temperature on the structure and settling behavior of WD/DS/PA aggregates while maintaining the settling temperature at near-ambient values. As reported in Ref.  The actual WD/DS/PA aggregates possess a porous structure  It has been widely accepted that flocculated aggregates can be represented by fractal structures Veerapaneni and Wiesner Let us assume that the volume fraction of the primary particles in the system is  A bitumen froth sample was prepared from Athabasca oil sands using a procedure described in Ref. Reagent-grade Details of the experimental procedures were given in Ref. Bitumen froth and C5C6 solvent were combined and heated in a 4-l baffled autoclave (Zipper Clave from Autoclave Engineers). After the froth and solvent in the autoclave reached the desired temperature (30–120 °C), the contents were mixed using two Rushton turbine impellers at 600 rpm for 15 min. The pressure was maintained at 1 MPa with nitrogen supplied from a cylinder. The autoclave and its contents were then cooled to 30 °C by running 15 °C water through a cooling coil immersed in the autoclave contents while the impeller speed was kept constant. The cooling time was fixed at 15 min although less time would have been sufficient in tests where the differences between the mixing temperature and the final temperature were small or zero. The mixed and conditioned diluted froth was transferred into a 4.4 A light microscope (Zeiss Axiotech For studying the precipitated asphaltene aggregates, a solvent-diluted bitumen solution at S/B=0.5 was first prepared. A stream of the solvent-diluted bitumen solution and a stream of the same solvent were pumped, using syringe pumps, through a coil that had been immersed in a water bath at the desired mixing temperature (30–80 °C). The flow rates of both streams were adjusted to obtain the desired overall S/B. The coil discharge was connected to the flow-through cell and the structure of the asphaltene aggregates was monitored by microscopy. To study the WD/DS/PA aggregates, a solvent-diluted bitumen emulsion was prepared by starting a settling test with the glass cylinder at 30 °C. The suspension from the hindered settling zone was then transferred into a container as soon as the upper interface between the oil phase and the hindered settling zone reached 1.0 cm down from the surface. The container with the suspension was placed in a water bath at the desired mixing temperature (30–80 °C) and the contents were agitated using a marine-type impeller at 600 rpm. The conditioned suspension was pumped by a peristaltic pump into the microscopic flow-through cell through a coil immersed in a 30 °C water bath. The structure of the WD/DS/PA aggregates was monitored by microscopy. Images of the aggregates and the interfaces during settling tests were obtained using either the Zeiss (Axiotech The same analytical methods and procedures as described in Ref.   Bitumen froth treatment with aliphatic solvent rejects a portion of the asphaltenes from the bitumen while, at the same time, removing emulsified water droplets and solids The coefficient Following complete mixing of bitumen froth and solvent, the solvent-diluted bitumen froth was transferred into the glass cylinder. As soon as the upper interface had settled 1.0 cm and the free water and coarse solids had settled to the bottom of the cylinder, the suspension from the hindered settling zone was transferred into a glass jar. Diluted bitumen was also prepared using a similar procedure except that the settling time was 60 min in this case in order to obtain enough supernatant phase. The prepared suspension and diluted bitumen were then combined at various ratios to obtain a series of diluted suspensions. The diluted suspensions were mixed by inverting the container 10 times and allowed to settle. The interface was tracked and settling rate was calculated. According to Eq. Significant errors arose when the values of both  The fitted straight lines of The primary particles that form the WD/DS/PA aggregates are water droplets, dispersed solids, and precipitated asphaltenes. The average density of the primary particles, The composition of the suspension and the average density of the primary particles,  As shown in With the data for The effective densities of the WD/DS/PA aggregates, It was observed that the actual sizes of the aggregates varied considerably. However, the average diameter, Although a detailed description of the role of precipitated asphaltenes in forming the WD/DS/PA aggregates is not available, we have observed that the onset of water droplet and dispersed solids aggregation in terms of S/B always coincides with the onset of asphaltenes precipitation. In order to gain more insight into the structure of WD/DS/PA aggregates, we studied the precipitated asphaltene aggregates using microscopy with the 100-μm deep flow-through cell. Asphaltenes precipitated in bitumen diluted with aliphatic solvent were found to form aggregates that were similar to the WD/DS/PA aggregates. Emulsified water droplets (WD), dispersed solids (DS), and precipitated asphaltenes (PA) form aggregates during treatment of the bitumen emulsions with aliphatic solvents. We developed a series of procedures for determining structural parameters of the WD/DS/PA aggregates. The average porosity of aggregates was found to be 0.40–0.45 when the C5C6 solvent was used as solvent at S/B=2.0. The average porosity of aggregates for the heavier C7 solvent system at S/B=3.0 was 0.70–0.75. Accordingly, the effective aggregate density was higher for the C5C6 solvent system (about 1.00 g/ml) than for the C7 solvent system (about 0.87 g/ml). It was found that about 60% of the original total bitumen froth water ended up in the aggregates when the C5C6 solvent was used compared to only about 30% of the total water when C7 solvent was used. The aggregates for the C5C6 solvent contained embedded and/or attached water droplets larger than 20 μm; the water droplets in the aggregates for the C7 solvent were generally smaller than 10 μm. The average volume fraction of the WD/DS/PA aggregates was 0.12–0.13 at all studied conditions. It was observed that raising the mixing temperature (e.g. 50–120 °C) of bitumen emulsion and solvent leads to larger aggregates and results in a significant increase in the settling rate of the aggregates. This provides an efficient means of increasing settling flux in settlers used to treat solvent-diluted bitumen emulsions when the settlers are preferably operated at near-ambient conditions (e.g. 30 °C and less than 350 The authors thank Anita Jahn, Derek Chao, John Ioannides, and Tom Kratchmer for their help in performing laboratory experiments. We would also like to thank Conrad Gietz for his assistance in preparing this paper.