The effect of iron and manganese concentration on the morphology of complex intermetallics has been studied in an Al–12.7wt.% Si alloy containing 0.1wt.% Cr with three levels of iron (0.4, 0.8, 1.2wt.%), and five different levels of manganese ranging from 0.0 to 0.5wt.%. The intermetallic compounds form at high iron contents or at high concentrations of manganese and chromium with low iron. Star-like intermetallics form when the segregation factor is greater than 1.30. Chromium (0.1wt.%) with more than 0.2wt.% manganese are needed to convert all platelet phases to small star-like intermetallics. A power equation describes the relation between sludge formation temperature and iron content. The volume percentage of intermetallic compounds increases as the iron or manganese content increases. The amount of intermetallic can be estimated from a linear segregation factor.The amounts of iron and manganese play important roles in establishing the mechanical properties of aluminium–silicon casting alloys. It is therefore of special interest to study the precipitation of iron and manganese containing phases in those alloys. Iron, as one of the main impurities in aluminum, is always present in alloys made from commercially pure base material. The solid solubility of iron in aluminum is very low with the result that most iron present forms intermetallic compounds, the nature of which depends strongly on other impurities or alloying elements present The Al–Si–Fe eutectic composition occurs at about 0.8 A wide range of AlFeSi particle types is reported in the literature The equilibrium phases in low-alloyed Al–Fe–Si material are reported to be: Θ-Al Increasing iron from 0.50 to 1.20 Manganese is the most common alloying addition, which is used to neutralize the effect of iron and to modify the morphology and type of intermetallic phases When iron is present in aluminium–silicon alloys, it is usually as the FeSiAl The replacement of FeSiAl Binary and ternary phase diagrams have limited application when attempting to understand phase formation in commercial alloys of aluminum since those always contain appreciable amounts of other elements which substantially affect the structure. In According to Mondolfo Practically no commercial alloys fall within the fields in which FeAl As recycling of aluminum alloys becomes more common, sludge will be a problem of increasing importance due to the concentration of Fe, Mn, Cr and Si in the scrap cycle. Control of complex intermetallics in cast structures will require increased knowledge of and control of melt chemistry. The increasing importance of complex intermetallics in Al–Si alloy metallurgy and the relatively small amount of knowledge pertaining to them make this subject an important one for further research. In the present paper the effect of melt chemistry, particularly Fe and Mn concentration, on the formation of intermetallic compounds in an Al–12.7 The chemical composition of the alloys prepared for the present investigation is shown in To investigate the effect of iron content on the temperature of sludge formation, three alloys with nominal iron levels of 0.4, 0.8, or 1.2 All samples of the alloys listed in Metallographic study of the alloys revealed that the intermetallic compounds do not form when the level of iron, manganese, and chromium is low. In the alloys of batch 1 which contained 0.4 The segregation factor (SF) was calculated for each alloy based on the formula mentioned previously. To relate the effect of chemical composition to the microstructure and the phases, which form in the alloys, the segregation factor was plotted versus manganese concentration. The influence of iron concentration at each level of manganese on the formation of intermetallics is shown in The results of image analysis of the samples are shown in The effect of manganese content at each level of iron on the volume percent of intermetallics is shown in The volume percentage of intermetallics formed in each alloy as a function of segregation factor is plotted in Use of this equation allows an estimation of the volume percent of intermetallics from the segregation factor. It is seen from this equation that no intermetallics form in alloys with a segregation factor less than 1.20. In a comprehensive investigation reported elsewhere It was found from metallographic observations that holding the melt at temperatures of 800–850 The shape of sludge formed in these experiments was mostly star-like or exploded ( The intermetallic compounds that were observed in most alloys studied in the present work were star-like in shape.  The stoichiometry of the platelet morphology (β-phase) corresponds to Al  Sludge forms at a high content of iron e.g. 1.2 The volume percentage of intermetallic compounds increases as the iron or manganese content increases in any alloy. This increase has been found to be as a result of size and the number of star-like compounds. The amount of intermetallic compounds can be estimated from a segregation factor by a linear relationship at short holding time. The stoichiometry of star-like and exploded intermetallic compounds corresponds to Al