Sulfuric acid (H2SO4) is widely used as a depressant in the flotation of phosphorus minerals, usually in large dosages. This study used microflotation, flotation of the actual ore, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses, reaction thermodynamic analyses and adsorption experiments, to examine the effect of citric acid (H3Cit) and a combined depressant (H2SO4/H3Cit) on collophanite ore flotation. H2SO4 and H3Cit both exhibit selective depressive effects on apatite when they are used individually as depressants. When combined, the added H3Cit greatly reduced H2SO4 dosages above 30% and produced better flotation results. Closed-circuit reverse flotation results for tests on the actual ore also confirmed this. Mechanism analyses demonstrated that H3Cit adsorbs onto apatite surface via a chemical chelating reaction with Ca2+. H3Cit is selectively and largely adsorbed onto apatite, thus selectively depressing it. Compared with SO4
                     2–, the reactions of Cit3− and Ca2+ are thermodynamically favored at pH 5.5–13.0. Therefore H3Cit manifested a stronger inhibitive effect than H2SO4 and significantly reduced the required H2SO4 dosage. A rough economic evaluation suggests that the combined depressant exhibits economic advantages and shows potential for industrial application.Phosphate ore is an exhaustible, non-renewable, non-recyclable and irreplaceable mineral resource. In general, phosphate ore enriched to a P Collophanite, which is a most important phosphate ore, is a colloidal apatite usually occurring as intergrowths with gangue minerals such as dolomite, and is usually recovered by flotation. The difficulty of separating dolomite from apatite in collophanite ore is mainly due to their similar physical and chemical properties and the mineral compositions of both mineral surfaces. Both Ca and Mg are often the active sites, making flotation an arduous process ( Owing to its extensive sources and low unit cost, H H However, the effect of H The few reports on the use of H The samples used in the microflotation and mechanism analyses were very pure apatite and dolomite. The apatite sample mainly comprised fluorapatite (Ca The specific surface areas of the apatite and dolomite used in the adsorption experiments were determined by the Brunauer, Emmett and Teller (BET) test (3H-2000BET-A, Beishide Instrument Company, Beijing, China). The average of three measurements under the same conditions (experimental error <3%) are given in A sample of middle- to low-grade collophanite ore containing 22.77 Various vegetable oil fatty acids, alone or in mixtures, have often been used as collectors in collophanite ore flotation, especially in industrial-scale ore processing operations. The conventional collector sodium oleate (NaOL) was used in microflotation. H The microflotation tests were performed using an XFG-II flotation machine (Jilin Prospecting Machinery Factory, China). Stir speed was fixed at 1800 A self-aerating mechanical agitation flotation machine (XFD0.75, Jilin Prospecting Machinery Factory, China) was used for flotation tests on the actual collophanite ore, in which 0.25 XPS (XSAM-800, Kratos, Manchester, UK) was used to analyze the surface properties. The samples were prepared as for microflotation. H The adsorbance of H Dolomite is usually much more floatable than apatite for the same dosage of a fatty acid such as NaOL as collector ( The results for H  After the addition of 15 The floatability of apatite and dolomite were quite different for the mix of 100 As To better study the effect of the combined depressant on the flotation of apatite and dolomite, an artificial mixed-mineral flotation test was carried out. The results are shown in Thermodynamic analyses were carried out to interpret the effect and mechanism of H The coefficients of these side reactions should be considered when examining the chelating reactions between Ca The coefficient of the Ca Solution-chemistry theory and the ionization equilibrium of H Combining the ionic product constant with the relation between pH, the concentration of H Furthermore, since K An XPS analysis was carried out to further interpret the effect of H The main atomic concentrations on the mineral surfaces were further shown, as listed in The results of experiments to clarify the adsorption effect of H The mechanism analysis showed that the reaction between Cit The results of batch flotation testing (roughing stage) with H Following batch flotation, closed-circuit reverse flotation was carried out as described in the flow sheet, An approximate economic evaluation of the combined depressant was carried out. Normally, H The following conclusions were drawn from the above analyses and discussion: The reaction of Ca H The combined H H We greatly acknowledge the financial support provided by the