The quality with which water is released from desalination plants is continuously increasing. Since desalination permeates are slightly acidic, contain very low buffering capacity and are very soft, post-treatment is always required. This paper reviews the knowledge accumulated in the last decades on desalination post-treatment processes. It covers fundamental chemistry aspects, required water quality criteria, advantages and disadvantages of currently applied processes, engineering and cost considerations, recent full-scale project experience and up-to-date research trends.Aggressiveness Index CO H American Water Works Association Brackish Water Calcium Carbonate Precipitation Potential (mg/l as CaCO Total inorganic Carbon Driving Force Index Dissolved Oxygen Hydraulic Retention Time Electrical Conductivity Ion Exchange Langelier Saturation Index Larson Ratio Nephelometric Turbidity Units Post-Treatment Riddick Corrosion Index Sodium Adsorption Ratio Seawater Total Dissolved Solids (mg/l) Total Hardness World Health Organization In the last decades, the worldwide production of desalinated water has increased dramatically From this description it is clear that an increasing fraction of the world population is consuming desalinated water, either blended with other water sources, or as a main or sole water source. This trend is expected to continue and even increase in the foreseeable future. Desalinated water is currently used mostly for domestic consumption but in some locations it also serves for irrigation purposes The quality of unconditioned desalinated water can differ significantly, depending both on the type of desalination technology used for salt separation (Reverse Osmosis (RO) membrane or thermal desalination) and on the specific design and operation of the desalination process Surveying the relevant literature reveals that (a) water quality standards, specific for desalinated water, which take into account the abovementioned issues, have been set thus far only in Israel The limited understanding of the alternatives available for post-treatment of desalinated water and the general lack of knowledge in this field has often led to unfavorable results. Examples include corrosion and other product water quality related problems in a number of projects worldwide e.g. Israel The aim of the current review is to provide a detailed overview of existing knowledge on PT processes, including theoretical background, advantages/disadvantages and main challenges of commonly practiced PT processes, newly developed water conditioning technologies, and recent research trends. In order to determine the required quality of desalinated water (following PT) for a given use, the following aspects should be considered: The need to stabilize the water so that it would not enhance metal corrosion and concrete dissolution has been recognized for decades. Corrosion of system pipes is associated with health hazards due to unwanted release of metal ions such as lead, copper and zinc into the drinking water Two water quality aspects may be directly related to the consumer's health: (1) Bio-stability of the water in the distribution system, or in other words the efficiency of disinfection, as well as minimization of bacterial re-growth in the distribution system. (2) Lack of important minerals, such as calcium and magnesium ions: an important issue, with a potential to directly affect consumers' health. Calcium and magnesium ions are minerals of key importance for human health and agricultural and horticultural water uses. These minerals are practically absent from the unconditioned desalinated water. This issue is related to the biological wastewater treatment for ammonia and nitrate removal, and has been recognized only recently. If a complete removal of nitrogen compounds is required, then high alkalinity in the wastewater is necessary in order to restrain the pH drop and maintain biological process stability Reclaimed water (i.e., highly treated secondary or tertiary effluent from wastewater treatment plants) is often used for agricultural irrigation in the same location where desalinated water is a major source of freshwater. Certain quality characteristics of the reclaimed water are directly dependent on the quality of the desalinated water. The most disturbing problem appears to be the high to very high Sodium Adsorption Ratio (SAR) values expected to develop in wastewaters generated from pure desalinated water origin. SAR, a quantitative indicator for soil sodicity hazards, should, according to recent Israeli legislation, not exceed a value of 5 The following parameters are usually used to determine the required water quality of soft waters: [Ca      Addition of corrosion inhibitors (e.g. poly-phosphates, mono-phosphates, zinc orthophosphate and silicates) is a common technique for conditioning of soft and low buffering capacity waters. It is typically used in addition to post-treatment but sometimes it is practiced as a stand-alone corrosion protection alternative To conclude, it is possible that phosphate inhibitors actually enhance iron corrosion rate, as shown in several studies (e.g. The apparent conclusion that arises from the discussion in Researches and engineers have reached this conclusion several decades ago (e.g. PT processes are sometimes termed re-carbonation-, re-mineralization- or potabilization-processes. Re-carbonation can be defined as "the elevation of the C Disinfection, fluoridation, boron removal and aeration are occasionally referred to as part of the PT process. However, these issues are not discussed in the current review, which solely addresses PT processes designed to control water's buffering capacity, TH (i.e. Ca The carbonate system is the main (usually even the only) weak acid system in natural fresh waters, hence it is also the only weak acid system present in desalinated product waters. The carbonate system is a di-protic weak acid system, comprising three species: H In actual fact, there are four carbonate species present in the aqueous pase since H Note that according to the equilibrium constant of Eq. Each of these species can release a proton to the water according to its own equilibrium constant. However, for the sake of simplicity, the sum of the concentration of the two species, i.e. H The second protonation reaction of the carbonate system is:  Understanding the characteristics of the carbonate system forms the basis for understanding the terms alkalinity, CCPP and buffer capacity, and obviously also for the design of most PT processes. Such understanding appears sometimes to be lacking. For example: a fairly highly used calcite dissolution kinetic model developed by Yamauchi et al. The carbonate system has an important component in gaseous phase—carbon dioxide (CO Where H is Henry's constant for CO The partial pressure of CO When the water is in contact with the atmosphere, from the practical point of view there are two initial water qualities of interest: (1) water characterized by a dissolved CO When CO Several steps in the PT processes can include deliberate or unintentional emission/absorption of CO The term "Alkalinity" in drinking water typically refers to the value of H Where alkalinity is expressed in units of meq/l, and [ ] stands for concentrations in mmol/l. The concentration of each of the species of the carbonate system is a function of C Note that the Alk concentration of a given solution (Eq. Buffer capacity is defined as the ability of water to withstand changes in pH when a strong base or a strong acid are added to it. The Buffer capacity, Where From Eq. When a strong acid, for example, is dosed to a water containing a weak acid (e.g. the carbonate system), the proton accepting species of the weak acid (i.e. CO Supplying well buffered water ensures that the pH value remains fairly constant, regardless of processes the water might be subjected to in water treatment facilities, in the distribution system, and in downstream wastewater treatment plants. Examples of its importance include the fact that high buffer capacity inhibits potential pH drop in distribution systems as a result of chlorination and fluoridation. In the context of PT, buffer capacity has an important effect on the rate of dissolution of minerals such as dolomite and calcite (see pH, the negative logarithm of the active H Thermodynamically, the dissolution of metal carbonates can be described by the following parallel reactions, which occur at the solid/water interface Where, Note that as a result of the dissolution process either bicarbonate (as described in Eqs. Water is defined as over- or under-saturated with respect to CaCO In most raw desalinated waters the influence of ionic strength and formation of ion pairs can be neglected and thus analytical concentrations can be used rather than activities. Accordingly, the dissolution/precipitation propensity of CaCO From the stoichiometric standpoint, CaCO Busenberg and Plummer The second step, which is the slower and thus rate limiting step, is described by Eq. The stoichiometric addition of Ca Kinetics wise, at similar water quality and operational conditions, the dissolution of dolomite is much slower than that of calcite Beyond these reports the information on dolomite dissolution within water treatment works is very limited, as further discussed in As corrosion in distribution systems poses a significant economic and health problem, determining the potential corrosivity of given water is perceived important, as reflected by the large number of aggression-related indices developed over the years. The most commonly used and investigated indices are listed in It is commonly hypothesized that deposition of a thin layer of CaCO In the context of PT processes, the kinetics of the dissolution of both calcite and dolomite in packed bed reactors has not yet been sufficiently quantified. Although the dissolution kinetics of these minerals, under the conditions found in nature, is well defined, this data cannot be used directly in the water treatment field because the chemical and hydraulic conditions prevailing in dissolution reactors are completely different than those prevailing in nature. Consequently, the precise water quality at the outlet of the dissolution reactor as a function of the reactor's operational parameters cannot be predicted with reasonable accuracy, to-date Dolomite dissolution, on the other hand, is less commonly practiced as means of improving water quality. Thus, relevant data on this subject is even scarcer. Water quality attained when dissolving dolomite for the purpose of water de-acidification under several operational conditions is shown and discussed in Birnhack et al. In addition to these gaps in knowledge, it should be noted, that surveying the published PT literature shows that even the knowledge that is already well established, is often overlooked or misunderstood. The aim of the current review is to bring together all the relevant knowledge including the relevant theoretical background, the advantages and drawbacks of commonly practiced PT processes as well as PT processes which are still under development. Direct dosage refers to direct injection of chemicals to the water. The chemicals may be either in a slurry form (usually hydrated lime, Ca(OH) The main advantages of applying a direct dosage of chemicals are simplicity, the relatively low capital cost and required space, and the flexibility with regard to product water quality, i.e. the wide range of water qualities that can be attained. Lime (Ca(OH) Using Na This process is based on simple dissolution of chemicals, and no handling of slurries or gases is required. Hence, from the engineering point of view, it is simpler than the first two options discussed in Note that in the scientific literature the following combinations are also mentioned: CaCl These alternatives are also mentioned in the literature and even practiced in a few desalination plants, although they do not involve the addition of Ca Blending of SW or BW may be considered a low-cost method to increase the concentration of some desired ions in desalinated water, but it invariably adds other, undesired species, to the water. The concentrations of all the introduced salts are a function of the blended water composition and the dilution fraction. Thus, control over product water quality is limited. Consequently, blending is not recommended for water intended for domestic use Unlike direct dosage, calcite and also dolomite dissolution processes are conducted in reactors, in which the retention time is in the order of minutes (typically < Two acidic substances are typically used to lower pH: H From the water quality standpoint, the main difference between applying H Thus, The 1:1 ratio attained in the CO Note that the dissolution rate of calcite at pH Calcite dissolution enhanced by a combined dosage of CO As mentioned, calcite dissolution results in pH values slightly lower than pH7.0. Arriving at the final pH value in drinking water applications typically involves controlled addition of NaOH. However, in some cases it can also be carried out by controlled CO Often, following the stripping step, the pH and CCPP values are still not sufficiently high. In such cases further pH elevation is realized by NaOH dosage, as practiced, for example, in Kuwait CO Dissolution of quarry dolomite (CaMg(CO High flexibility and efficiency (with respect to water quality, process costs, engineering aspects and more) may be attained through combining two or more of the treatment approaches introduced above. A few examples of such combinations are described below: Calcite dissolution followed by direct dosage of Ca(OH) CO Application of a direct dosage method combined with SW or BW blending. CO CO Two parallel trends led to recent development of new PT methods: (1) the increasing acknowledgment for the need for efficient PT solutions capable of producing water complying with new and more stringent quality criteria; and (2) the recently accumulated evidence on the importance of Ca In The method is shown schematically in The calcite dissolution-IX process can be operated with either SW or BW as the loading solution. In case SW is available, it is preferred over BW, since both the Mg The use of different loading solutions and different acidification alternatives i.e., CO The use of a combination of resins may be needed in case a stringent restriction on the TH is imposed in addition to a demand for a substantial SO As mentioned in As mentioned before, the effluent of a dolomite dissolution reactor is characterized by low pH, very negative CCPP but also by a high CO In this section, the engineering, water quality and economic aspects of several PT processes are compared. The PTs investigated in this comparison are direct dosage, calcite dissolution (CO The water qualities attained in the various PT processes are similar in the sense that they are all characterized by a certain Ca Attaining a Ca To conclude, from the point of view of addition of unwanted species, the processes can be graded as follows: blending SW Any PT that relies on H As explained before, most of the PT processes do not enrich the water with Mg The concentration of Mg The buffer capacity attained in the water varies significantly between the PT alternatives and also within each PT, depending on the final product water (which can differ within a certain range, for a given PT). Thus, comparing the methods from the buffer capacity perspective is difficult. As stated in the beginning of this section, the baseline water quality of all compared PTs was [Ca Note that the addition of lime (Ca(OH) When desalinated water is blended with other water sources (either SW or BW) there is practically no flexibility since it is impossible to attain control over more than one quality parameter. In the other discussed processes flexibility is higher. Nevertheless, there are several restraints on the quality of the water that can practically be attained in each of the processes. The percentage of treated water is a significant parameter when comparing PT processes that rely on calcite dissolution. Operating the PT plant in a by-pass mode is favorable from both operating and capital cost points of view Generally speaking, as the addition of 1 Literature survey on the actual %split flow used in desalination plants resulted in only a handful of examples: A PT plant in Ras Laffan is designed to dissolve 220 Kettunen and Keskitalo At present, the most commonly used post-treatment system in desalination plants worldwide is the sequential addition of lime and carbon dioxide. The most frequent challenge with the operation of such re-mineralization systems is maintaining low turbidity in the finished drinking water because lime can cause turbidity increase, often exceeding 5 NTU. Another re-mineralization process which at present is fairly common for small and medium size plants and is gaining more attention and popularity for larger desalination plants over the past five years is the use of calcite dissolution reactors (often termed "calcite contactors") preceded by addition of carbon dioxide and followed by pH adjustment with sodium hydroxide or controlled CO Most of the existing large SW desalination plants in Australia, the USA, the Middle East, Spain, and North Africa have adopted conditioning of desalinated SW using a combination of lime and carbon dioxide. The capital costs of lime/carbon dioxide systems vary between US$50 to US$100 The major cost component of post treating desalinated water is the cost of chemicals. Due to nonlinearity of pH and CCPP a reduction in the percentage of treated water leads to elevation in the consumption of acid and base in the calcite dissolution based PT. on the other hand, treating less water results in reduced capital costs expenditure. To conclude, the most cost-effective percentage of treated water is a function of the chosen PT, the cost of chemicals and the required water quality. Most existing desalination plants with low pH target of the finished water (i.e., pH of 7.5 or less) usually are designed to process 100% of the RO permeate through the calcite filters, especially when the cost of sulfuric acid or carbon dioxide used for permeate acidification before the calcite contactors is relatively high. However, for desalination plants with higher target pH range of the finished water (8.0 to 8.5) the optimum split between RO permeate treated in the limestone contacts and that bypassed for blending is typically 20% to 50%. Breakdown of the capital and O&M costs of a typical lime/carbon dioxide post-treatment system for a hypothetical SWRO desalination plant of fresh water production capacity of 100,000 The lime/carbon post-treatment system for this example uses hydrated lime which is delivered periodically to the plant as powdered lime and stored in two (2) 40-ton lime silos. The lime feed system also includes slurry tanks, mixing and dosing systems and limewater clarifiers. The limewater from the clarifiers is conveyed to a limewater feed tank and from there it is dosed into the SWRO permeate. Sludge from the limewater clarifiers is removed and processed along with the sludge generated by the spent filter water from the pretreatment filters. Polymer is added to enhance limewater clarification. Carbon dioxide is delivered by 25-ton tankers in liquid form and stored on site in two 50-ton steel storage tanks. This chemical is passed through evaporator and introduced into the lime-conditioned permeate to add alkalinity. The capital costs presented in The total cost of drinking water production associated with post-treatment (re-mineralization) for protecting human health and the integrity of the distribution system for a hypothetical 100,000 Considering that a conventional facility for feeding magnesium sulfate or magnesium chloride is added to the PT stage, the additional capital cost for such facility would be approximately US$500,000 for a 100,000 The additional annual O&M cost for chemical of feed of 10 It should be pointed out that lime/carbon dioxide conditioning usually is the most costly technology for re-mineralization of desalinated water. For comparison, the capital cost for a post-treatment system for 100,000 Typically, most desalination projects target addition of 80 to 120 Analysis of Use of hydrated lime instead of quick lime is usually two to three times more costly for the same amount of alkalinity and TH increase of the desalinated water. Soda ash and sodium bicarbonate are the most costly chemicals for delivery of target alkalinity to the desalinated water. Because in general the cost of soda ash and sodium hydroxide are comparable in terms of unit costs, and because sodium hydroxide is easier to handle, it is more commonly used than soda ash for final pH adjustment of the finished desalinated water. The financial support of Levy Eshkol's excellence Scholarship for PhD students (Liat Birnhack), from the