Introduction
                  Dorsal fracture-dislocation of the proximal interphalangeal joint is an unstable fracture that associates the anterior marginal fracture of the second phalangeal base and the dorsal dislocation of the proximal interphalangeal joint under the influence of the median band traction of the extensor apparatus. Stiffness and residual pain are frequent sequelae. Treatment involves choosing between the various methods with the objective of providing stable reduction allowing early mobilization.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  We relate our experience concerning treatment by proximal interphalangeal extension-block pinning. It consists in reduction by external manipulation and stabilization by extension-block pinning.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  This technique was used in 22 Trojan-type fractures. The average age of our patients was 36 years, with a predominance of males. In half of the cases, the fracture involved more than 40% of the second phalangeal articular surface.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up in this series was 2 years and 7 months. Assessed based on functional, clinical, and radiological criteria, the results were good in 82% of the cases. The proximal interphalangeal joint was painless and the active mobility sector mean was greater than 85°.
               
                  Discussion
                  The dorsal dislocation fracture of the proximal interphalangeal joint is an unstable lesion. Its treatment must provide stable reduction allowing early mobilization. Various therapeutic means are described. We opted for extension-block pinning, a simple and reproducible technique with encouraging results.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV retrospective study.The proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint is a true epicenter of finger movement, whose position in the digital chain, between two long lever arms, makes it a particularly vulnerable joint. Dorsal fracture-dislocation of the PIP is an unstable fracture associating dorsal dislocation of the PIP with avulsion of an anterior marginal fragment damaging the base of the phalanx. This is a relatively difficult fracture to treat. Different techniques The objective of this study was to analyze, through a retrospective study of 22 cases, the results of the extension-block pinning technique for these dorsal fracture-dislocations of the PIP joint and to compare the different techniques described in the literature. We report a series of 36 cases of dorsal Trojan-type fracture-dislocation of the PIP We included in this study patients who were operated on in an emergency setting by the same posterior extension-block pinning technique and by the same operator. We excluded cases with lateral instability and those with less than 12 months of follow-up. The patients’ mean age was 37 years (range, 16–50 years). Thirty-two of the 36 patients were male. In 31 cases, they were manual laborers. The dominant side was affected in 24 of the 36 cases. The ring finger was affected in 27 out of 36 cases. All of the patients were operated on in an emergency setting, or deferred 2 days, in the operating room under general anesthesia with fluoroscopic guidance. A closed reduction of the dislocation was performed with an external manipulation. Stabilization was attained with a no. 12 Kirschner wire inserted in the head of the first phalanx, with the PIP flexed and slightly lateralized to prevent injury to the median band of the extensor system. The wire thus provided a posterior block preventing it from dorsal redislocation. A forearm splint with the hand in the intrinsic position was placed immediately postoperative. The wire as well as the splint was kept for a mean 21 days (range, 19–30 days). Rehabilitation was initiated the day after the intervention and included active-passive motion in flexion of the PIP joint protected by the wire. These fractures were classified preoperatively using the Schenck classification Fracture grade: type I: less than 10% of the surface; type II: between 11 and 20%; type III: between 21 and 40%; type IV: greater than 40%. Dorsal dislocation grade: grade A: less than 25%; grade B: between 25 and 50%; grade C: greater than 50%; grade D: total. According to this classification, we found mostly type III grade B fractures. All the patients were examined at revision by an independent examiner. The analysis of the results was based on the clinical, radiological, and subjective criteria described in Our patients were seen with a mean follow-up of 2 years and 7 months (range, 1–4 years). Out of 36 patients operated on with this technique, only 22 responded to the request for a visit. No early complication was reported (infection, reflex sympathetic dystrophy). No secondary displacement or iatrogenic lesion of the median band of the extensor system was found. The mean duration patients were off work was 2 months. All the patients returned to the same work position or the same level of activity. At the follow-up, according to the criteria adopted, we found 18 good results ( The PIP joint was painless in 12 cases out of 22. Pain upon physical effort was found in nine cases. The original arc of motion was found in nine cases. The mean arc of motion of the PIP was 85°, satisfactory for digitopalmar grip. The mean overall extension deficit was 11.8°. Complete rolling of the fingers was possible in all cases with a good result. For the four cases judged to have a fair result, the PIP was painful but only in a single case was the pain constant. The arc of motion was 65°. A normal joint space was found in 16 cases; in the six other cases, a step less than 1 The distribution of the results according to the preoperative lesional stage showed that all the fair results occurred after stage III and IV fractures ( The objective of extension-block pinning, a simple, effective, and easily reproduced technique, uses its posterior block to reduce the fracture and correct the dislocation, while allowing early motion the 1st day after surgery with the PIP in flexion. It is a first-choice therapeutic method in the treatment of dorsal fracture-dislocation of the PIP of the fingers. We used this technique for 22 PIP fracture-dislocations, and despite sometimes insufficient reduction of the fracture or the appearance of degenerative changes, we were able to obtain a mean 85° arc of motion, a painless PIP, and an absence of functional discomfort. This technique, published for the first time by Inoue and Tamura The orthopaedic treatment When the palmar fragment is large, certain authors recommend internal fixation using a mini-screw Three broad therapeutic processes have been described The dynamic traction system The Suzuki-type assembly has undergone several modifications. The most recent has been described by Körting et al. Advancement of the volar plate is a technique proposed by Eaton and Malerich We find that it is logical to use a simple method that allows active postoperative flexion movement while maintaining an extension block. The stop PIP splint described by McElfresh Dorsal fracture-dislocation of the PIP is an unstable lesion and can compromise digitopalmar grip. Stabilization should not be obtained at the expense of painful stiffness. Extension-block pinning, a simple and reproducible technique, provides stabilization and early movement of the PIP joint, giving highly satisfactory functional results. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.