Aerodynamic properties of coffee cherry and beans for two varieties, viz., Coffea arabica (cv Catuaí) and Coffea canephora (cv Conilon), were studied for moisture content ranges of 9–54% w.b. and 8–56% w.b., respectively. The increase in both moisture content and true density affected the aerodynamic properties of the product by promoting an increase in the terminal velocity and a reduction in the drag coefficient for both cultivars. The values of terminal velocity of the naturally preprocessed coffee cherries did not exhibit significant changes for the analysed cultivars. The values of terminal velocities for the washed coffee beans of cv Conilon were higher than those found for the beans of cv Catuaí. The values of the drag coefficient for both coffee cherries and beans slightly changed during the drying process. However, the variation in the drag coefficient as a function of the moisture content and true density was more evident for the washed beans of Conilon coffee than for Catuai coffee.Knowledge about the aerodynamic properties of coffee cherries and beans is fundamental to the designing of the machines and structures used in coffee production (harvesting, sorting, cleaning, drying, storage, processing and classification of the product). Most of the equipment to calculate uses either air or water to transport or separate the desirable and high-quality product from either the impurities or lower-quality materials. This information may also be used in the improvement of those operations related to the handling and different preprocessing stages of the material. Terminal velocity has previously been determined as a function of moisture content from a number of aerodynamic tests with different agricultural products (  The drag coefficient as a function of the mean geometric diameter for bean was investigated by Tiwari (1962), reported by The present study was carried out to determine and analyse the behaviour of the terminal velocity and drag coefficient of coffee cherries and coffee beans of different species which were preprocessed by natural and washed methods, respectively. The effects of the moisture content, true density and the preparation method were examined. To evaluate the operation performance and options involving the presence of airflow, it is necessary to determine the terminal velocity of the product. When freely falling and immersed into an ascendant airflow, the object is subjected to the action of two kinds of forces: gravitational force and resisting drag force. When these vector magnitudes are balanced, the object begins a movement at a constant speed so-called terminal velocity that is given by ( For the spherical bodies with an effective dimension According to Combining Eqs.  Because most agricultural products do not have an exactly defined geometric form, many solutions are obtained by assuming the product to be spherical, which involve a series of considerations and approaches. The present study was conducted in the Preprocessing and Storage of Vegetal Products Laboratory at the Agricultural Engineering Department, Federal University of Viçosa, as well as in the Laboratory of Physical Properties and Agricultural Products Quality Evaluation at the Storage Training National Center (CENTREINAR), Viçosa, Minas Gerais State, Brazil. Coffee berries of the species To obtain the different moisture contents of the products used in this study, an air-conditioning unit (model Aminco-Aire 150/300 CFM, manufactured by the American Instrument Co. Inc.) equipped with devices for controlling the temperature and relative humidity of the drying air were used. To accomplish the drying process, the airflow, temperature and relative humidity of the drying air were kept constant at 13 To experimentally determine the terminal velocity of the coffee cherries and beans, a centrifugal fan was connected to a transparent acrylic tube 150 The product was placed on the central part of the perforated screen, and the airflow was controlled until the beginning of the product flotation process and the rotational movement of the product was lowest. At this moment, the readings of the air speed were made using a calibrated hot-wire anemometer with a resolution of (0.5±0.003) × The values of the terminal velocity for all treatments were determined using 10 replicates for each moisture content using a single coffee cherry or coffee bean. For each test, the values of the three orthogonal dimensions of the coffee cherries and beans ( To determine the true density, the volume of the product was calculated by assuming a spherical form for coffee cherries and a semi-spherical one for the coffee beans. The same consideration of shape was adopted for the theoretical calculation of the terminal velocity starting from a rearrangement of Eq. To estimate the sphericity of both coffee cherries and beans, Eq. The data were subjected to regression analysis for fitting the experimental data to models that predict the terminal velocity or the drag coefficient as a function of the moisture content and true density. For adjusting the models to the experimental data, the STATISTICA The mean and standard deviation values of the true density, sphericity, experimental and theoretical terminal velocities, and drag coefficient of the coffee cherries and beans for each moisture content are shown in A trend also observed in the calculated values of the terminal velocity was to overestimate the observed values, except for the coffee beans of the cv Conilon, where the theoretical terminal velocity values were similar to experimental values ( For an improved evaluation of the aerodynamic properties of the coffee cherries and beans some regression equations were modified to predict average terminal velocities and drag coefficients as a function of moisture content and true density. The prediction equations are presented in An increase in terminal velocity values with increase in moisture content and true density is apparent in Although the pulped coffee beans of the The drag coefficients for both coffee cherries and beans presented small changes for different moisture contents and true densities, mainly for the cv Catuaí beans ( An investigation of the terminal velocities and drag coefficients of Conilon and Catuaí cultivars of coffee preprocessed by two different methods revealed the following: Considering the coffee cherries and pulped beans as a spherical and semi-spherical products, respectively, the increase in moisture content and true density affected the aerodynamic properties of the product, leading to increases in terminal velocity and a reductions in drag coefficient for both the studied species. The values of terminal velocity of the cv Conilon pulped beans were greater than those found for the cv Catuaí pulped beans. The values of the drag coefficient for coffee cherries and pulped beans slightly changed during the drying process; however, the modifications as a function of moisture content and true density were greater in the pulped beans of the cv Conilon. This research was sponsored by EMBRAPA (PNP&D/CAFÉ) and FAPEMIG. The authors have been sponsored by the Brazilian Agencies CNPq. All the mentioned supports are gratefully acknowledged.