We investigated the properties of guided wave propagating in grouted rock bolts and the formation of the interface wave through theoretical analysis along with experimental and numerical simulations. Experimental and numerical simulations reveal that the wave propagating in anchorage structure is related to boundary conditions within the range of excitation wave frequencies. Waves with different frequencies have different propagation velocities and attenuation characteristics. The optimal excitation wave occurs in grouted rock bolts with minimized attenuation and maximized propagation distance, and the end reflection of grouted rock bolts can be observed clearly. Longitudinal wave propagating in rock bolts is very sensitive to anchorage strength. With the increase of anchorage strength, longitudinal wave gradually attenuates and eventually disappears. Subsequently, interface wave appears and the velocity of wave propagating in the grouted part becomes that of the interface wave. Based on these studies, ultrasonic guided wave was used to study the end reflection of embedded rock bolts with different anchorage strengths and bonding lengths. The relationships among anchorage strength, bonding length and attenuation coefficient K, as well as the means to inspect the bonding quality of the embedded rock bolts were also evaluated.As an important component of the support systems, rock bolts are widely used for reinforcement and support of slopes and underground tunnels ( At present, stress wave method and ultrasonic guided wave method are often used to carry out non-destructive testing of the bonding quality of rock bolts ( We investigated the propagation properties of guided wave propagating in anchored rock bolts and the formation of interface wave through theoretical analysis with experimental and numerical simulations. At first, the frequency dispersion equation of interface wave propagation in the grouted rock bolt was established, and the dispersion curve was generated. Subsequently, an optimal excitation wave within a range of excitation wave freqencies was determined for the non-destructive testing of the bonding quality of rock bolts. Concretes at different curing times were used to simulate anchorage medium with different physical mechanical properties, and numerical simulation and experimental studies were employed to investigate the formation of interface wave in the grouted rock bolt. Finally, in order to simulate the site testing of rock bolts further, an experimental model of end anchored rock bolts was constructed, and ultrasonic guided wave was used to test rock bolts with different anchorage strengths and different bonding lengths. The experimental results were used to further improve the method. The excitation wave employed in the testing of the bonding quality of rock bolts is generally an easily coupled Eq. The wave propagating in the anchored rock bolt is a guided wave and the influence of the boundary on the propagation properties of the wave in the rock bolt has to be considered. In order to increase the testing length, it is necessary to determine the optimal excitation wave by taking into account of the structural attenuation caused by the boundary of rock bolt and the attenuation caused by material viscosity. The fully grouted rock bolts were employed in the experiment (Wu et al., As shown in When the excitation wave frequency is 25 kHz with 1 cycle as shown in Numerical simulation is conducted using ANSYS. The dimension of numerical model is the same as the experimental model, and the material parameters used in the model are shown in When a  Substituting Eq. For cylindrical waves propagating in the When the wave propagating in the rock bolt The components of displacement vector Based on the Hooke' s law, normal stress When the wave propagating in the concrete The radial displacement Based on the Hooke' s law, normal stress The displacements and the stresses are continuous at the interface between rock bolt and concrete. For a boundary of radius equals to Combining Eqs. Substituting the dimension parameters of sample 2 in Concrete at different curing times is used to simulate the anchorage medium with different physical and mechanical properties, and experimental method is used to identify the formation of interface wave in the grouted rock bolt.     The elastic modulus and Poisson ratio of concrete increase with the curing time of the concrete. Because the Poisson ratio stays relatively constant, only the elastic modulus changes in numerical calculation. The calculation is divided into three stages according to different elastic modulus of concrete: the elastic modulus for the first stage is 2.5–10 GPa; that for the second stage is 12.5–17.5 GPa; and that for the third stage is 19.5–37.9 GPa. The numerical results for a grouted rock bolt at different stages are illustrated in The figures show that when the elastic modulus of concrete is increased to some extent, the interface wave forms in the rock bolt. At the first stage, only longitudinal wave propagates in the rock bolt, which is very sensitive to the variation of the strength of concrete. With the increase of concrete strength, longitudinal wave attenuates quickly. At the second stage, the interface wave occurs and the amplitude of the interface wave is roughly equal to that of longitudinal wave. At this time, the interface wave overlaps with longitudinal wave. The wavelength of the interface wave is larger, and its velocity is much slower than that of longitudinal wave. At the third stage, longitudinal wave almost disappears due to attenuation, and the wave propagating in the grouted rock bolt is mainly the interface wave, which is insensitive to the concrete strength. The concrete strength has no effect on the attenuation of the interface wave, and the propagation velocity of the interface wave will increase with the increase of the elastic modulus of the concrete. Two transducers are used in our experimental studies, one for transmitting signal and one for receiving signal. But in site testing, rock bolt has only one exposed end and only one transducer can be used for transmitting and receiving. Therefore, the Pulser–Receiver method (P–R) is employed. The equipment set-up is illustrated in Attenuation coefficient The end anchored rock bolts with different bonding qualities have been simulated by concretes at different curing times ( Five anchored rock bolts with bonding length of 100, 200, 300, 400, and 500 mm are tested using the guided wave after the concrete has completely cured and a free rock bolt with the same bolt length is also tested. The purpose of this experiment is to find out the attenuation of guided wave in the rock bolts with different bonding lengths. We investigated the properties of guided wave propagating in grouted rock bolts and the formation of the interface wave through theoretical analysis along with experimental and numerical simulations. The velocity dispersion equation of interface wave is established, and the experimental result agrees well with the theoretical result. The wave propagating in the grouted rock bolt is a type of guided wave. Waves with different frequencies propagate at different velocities in a waveguide structure, and the lateral attenuation properties of their energy are different, too. As for the grouted rock bolts, a type of excitation wave exists, which enables the least energy of the wave to be transferred to anchorage agents and the surrounding rocks. Using this excitation signal to evaluate the bonding quality of the rock bolts, end reflection can be obtained clearly. In our experiment, the excitation wave at 25 kHz is adopted, which has a testing length of 2.4 m. Meanwhile, a larger number of cycles of excitation wave can increase the energy coupled to anchorage system, and thus improve testing length. However, because the interaction between excitation wave and end reflected wave affects the correct identification of end reflection, the number of cycles of excitation wave cannot be too large. Whether it is a single-pulse low frequency (5 kHz) or a multiple-cycle high frequency (25 kHz) excitation wave, longitudinal wave mode and the interface wave mode exist in the grouted rock bolt. During the initial curing stage of concrete, longitudinal wave predominates. With the increase of the concrete strength, longitudinal wave attenuates and ultimately disappears and the interface wave appears. During the late curing stage of the concrete, the interface wave predominates. Therefore, during the testing of the bonding quality of rock bolt, what is obtained is the interface wave propagating in the rock bolt instead of longitudinal wave. Clearly, the parameters of the interface wave should be used in locating the position of defect and evaluating bonding quality. The variation of the guided wave attenuation in rock bolts of different anchorage strengths demonstrates that the attenuation coefficient The work is supported by the