Zinc ferrite is a major constituent of the steel-making dust and sludge. In the present work the hydrometallurgical extraction of zinc from this material was studied. ZnFe2O4 and the sludge were leached in hydrochloric acid at atmospheric and elevated pressure using the microwave heating. More than 90% of zinc can be extracted with diluted acid when the temperature is 250 °C retaining iron in the new oxide matrix. The product resulting from the synthetic zinc ferrite contained 91% of hematite and 9% of zinc ferrite. Dried sludge from an oxygen open hearth furnace was converted into hematite containing 0.18% of zinc and 0.05% of lead. This material can be directly recycled or used as a pigment. Over 99% of the zinc was extracted from the sludge with 0.3 M HCl solution but the amount of iron in the solution was higher than for the pure ferrite treatment because the sludge contained also some magnetite and wustite.Steel-making wastes such as Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) dust and tandem furnace sludge (TFS) contain up to 30 wt.% zinc and 60 wt.% iron, which can be recovered from these materials by hydrometallurgical leaching or pyrometallurgical treatment. Mineralogical analysis shows the presence of zinc in oxide forms as zincite ZnO and zinc ferrite (franklinite) ZnFe Waelz kiln process is often used in pyrometallurgy. After the carbothermic reduction of zinc oxide and zinc ferrite at temperatures higher than 1500 K, zinc is evaporated, re-oxidized, and leached ( Both alkaline and acidic leaching can be used in hydrometallurgy. Sulphuric acid is often used for EAF dust leaching because of its low cost ( Hydrochloric acid has been found to be a very effective lixiviant for the leaching of zinc ferrite. The process of the acid attack can be described by the following reactions which occur in parallel: Hematite can be formed also by precipitation from FeCl It is desired to suppress reaction (2) in favour of reaction (1) (in other words, to shift the equilibrium of reaction (3) to the right). Fe Hence it follows that the diluted acid must be used in order to minimize FeCl The kinetics of dissolution of synthetic zinc ferrite samples in HCl was studied ( The process developed by Terra Gaia Environmental Inc. ( Prior to zinc electrolysis, iron must be removed by hematite precipitation ( The aim of this study was to extract zinc from zinc ferrite retaining iron in the new oxide matrix, to minimize the iron content in the leach liquor, and to obtain pure hematite. Hydrochloric acid was chosen because the thermodynamic data indicate much more intensive reverse dissolution of hematite in case of sulphuric acid. Two types of material were used — synthetic zinc ferrite and the dried sludge from the oxygen open hearth furnace (tandem furnace). Synthetic zinc ferrite was produced in EPCOS Šumperk in the Czech Republic. It was prepared from the mixture of pure ZnO and Fe The particle size of both samples was less than 0.18 mm. The content of the monitored elements was determined by AAS and is shown in The phase composition of samples was determined by the powder diffraction RTG analysis by means of Seifert ID 3003 apparatus at CoKα radiation, single-step mode, step 0.05° 2Θ, step time 3 s. The Rayflex Analyze programme was used for the qualitative evaluation, and the semi-quantitative diffraction data processing was carried out by the Rayflex Autoquan programme. The quantification is based on Rietveld analysis ( The atmospheric pressure leaching experiments were carried out at 20 °C. 1 g of the sludge was mixed with 50 mL of HCl solution in PET flasks and leached for seven days in order to reach equilibrium. They were shaken up once a day. The values of pH were measured after filtration. These experiments were carried out only with the sludge because the acid neutralization capacity (ANC) curve was necessary to be obtained. For the pure zinc ferrite, no buffering was expected. The pressure leaching was performed in the microwave reactor ERTEC MAGNUM II with the power consumption of 600 W and water cooling. The work volume of the Teflon crucible was 108 cm At first the experiments were performed with the tandem furnace sludge at atmospheric pressure. The acid neutralization capacity (ANC) curve is shown in Considering the thermodynamic analysis, selectivity was expected to improve with increasing temperature; therefore, subsequent experiments were carried out at elevated temperature and pressure. Both synthetic zinc ferrite and TF sludge were investigated. The liquid/solid ratio and the concentration range result from ANC curve, stoichiometry, thermodynamic analysis, and from the observation obtained at preliminary experiments. On the basis of these results the temperature of 260 °C was chosen. The optimum initial concentration of hydrochloric acid (0.3 M) was determined from Higher temperatures enable the use of higher acid concentration comparing with ANC obtained at 20 °C. About 93% zinc was extracted at 260 °C after 100 min whilst more than 98% of iron remained in the solid residue. It can be seen from The conversion rates are presented in The extraction rate is related to the mineralogical structure of the zinc ferrite. The original materials and solid residues from the synthetic zinc ferrite and sludge treated under the same conditions were also subjected to X-ray diffraction as shown in The results of the semi-quantitative mineralogical analysis can be seen in The samples also differ in the mean size of the crystal domains ( Selective leaching of zinc from zinc ferrite in hydrochloric acid was studied. Synthetic zinc ferrite and the dried sludge from a tandem furnace were used. Selective leaching required > The present study was supported by the Grant Agency (GA 104/06/1606) and by the Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic (MSM 6198910016).