Metastable β-titanium alloys offer the highest strength of any class of titanium alloy due to their ability to be precipitation hardened. In this work, Ti–3Al–8V–6Cr–4Mo–4Zr was produced through wire arc additive manufacturing and the mechanical properties and microstructural response to heat treatments were investigated. In the solution treated condition, the alloy was primarily composed of the body-centre cubic β phase with very high ductility and moderate strength (σyield ≈ 860MPa). However, with post-build age hardening it was possible to control the size and spacing of hexagonal close-packed α-precipitates allowing highly customisable properties and very high strengths (σyield > 1600MPa).Titanium alloys are strong candidates for Additive Manufacturing (AM) and considerable effort has been devoted towards advancing applications of this technology. Overwhelmingly, most of this research effort has concentrated on understanding how Ti–6Al–4V, the most commonly used structural titanium alloy, responds to AM including understanding its crystal phases, microstructure and mechanical properties. After solidification and during cooling to room temperature, Ti–6Al–4V adopts lamella microstructures that are not easily modified other than via manipulation of the cooling rate through the β-transus, which determines diffusion-controlled microstructural features such as the α-colony size and lath size [ In contrast, metastable-β Ti alloys typically do not form α’ martensite during rapid cooling and instead retain the β body-centred cubic (bcc) phase when cooled rapidly from above the β transus temperature. Consequently, metastable-β alloys offer more options for heat treatments to manipulate properties over α+β alloys and could therefore be promising materials for applications in airframe structures produced by AM. These alloys offer deep hardenability and have long been used in aerospace applications requiring high strength such as springs and landing gears [ There are only limited published studies considering metastable β-Ti alloys for additive manufacturing. Research to date is split between the development of biocompatible, low modulus alloys for medical devices (typically containing high Niobium [ One concern with any β-Ti alloy produced by solidification processing is the formation of segregation defects, known as β-flecks. These defects are prevalent during primary ingot production on account of the relatively slow cooling rate and large segregation lengths (dendrite arm spacing) but an inherent advantage in AM is that the fast solidification rates restrict formation of these defects. Recent research by Aziz et al. [ Given the lack of development and capacity to customise microstructures and properties afforded by metastable β-Ti alloys produced by AM, this research investigates the potential for AM of the Ti–3Al–8V–6Cr–4Mo–4Zr alloy. The authors recently demonstrated that this alloy is manufacturable through AM (i.e. there was no hot tearing or solidification cracking) but as yet no mechanical behaviours or response to ageing have been reported [ In this study, Ti–3Al–8V–6Cr–4Mo–4Zr components were first fabricated by Wire Arc Additive Manufacturing and then subjected to post build heat treatments and mechanical property characterisation. An advantage of this class of material is that solution treatment can be performed post build to eliminate any undesirable metastable phases that may form during thermal cycling experienced during AM. Ti–3Al–8V–6Cr–4Mo–4Zr ø = 1mm wire (actual composition given in Specimens were prepared for metallographic analysis (JEOL JSM-IT100 InTouchScope™) using conventional techniques, followed by Vickers Hardness testing (1kg load for 10s, Struers Duramin). Samples were prepared for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis via electropolishing. Specimens were cut from machined pieces and thinned to a thickness of approximately 100μm, finishing with a 5μm polish. Wafer specimens were then cut and electropolished at 15V using a solution of 10% nitric acid in methanol maintained at −40 °C. Wafer specimens were then cleaned and imaged on both a JEOL2100 and JEOL2200 TEM operating at 200kV, using a double tilt holder. Samples for compression testing were machined with diameter 5.5mm and height 11mm, tested with a Shimadzu AGS-100kN machine fitted with video extensometer at a crosshead rate of 1mm/min in the transverse build direction according to ASTM Phase analysis was undertaken from x-ray diffraction (XRD) measured using a Bruker Advanced D8 Diffractometer equipped with a LynxEye detector, Cu tube and operated at 40 kV and 40 mA. Conditions of analysis were as follows: 15 rpm rotation, 2θ of 20–90° (start and end angles), 0.02° increment, 230.4 s/step time per step and 0.26° fixed divergence slit. XRD spectra are presented in After pre-ageing for 24 h at 300 °C, Following duplex ageing treatments, Variances in the lattice parameters for the different forms of α can be attributed to the primary α phase having formed at higher temperatures, whereby enhanced diffusion enables formation of a nearer to equilibrium composition. Meanwhile the α phase formed during low temperature ageing has a composition which is constrained by lower rates of diffusion and inherit chemistry which must evolve directly from the β phase after the pre-ageing so that it is further from equilibrium [ A series of SEM micrographs showing the α precipitate morphologies for the various duplex ageing temperatures are shown in The formation of the α-phase during duplex ageing at all temperatures investigated creates deep hardening as evidenced by With continued, i.e. duplex, ageing at higher temperatures the α phase precipitates significantly and this has a major influence on the alloy properties. A remarkable improvement in yield strength to 1622 ± 13 MPa is achieved after final aging at 450 °C/24 h. This is almost twice the yield strength of the β-annealed condition and considerably higher than Ti–6Al–4V produced through wire + arc additive manufacturing (see All duplex aged Ti–3Al–8V–6Cr–4Mo–4Zr test pieces failed by fracturing at an orientation of approximately 45° to the compressive loading axis which is characteristic of compressive shear failure in ductile metals [ The fact that the microstructure and phase fractions of α and β in metastable β-Ti alloys can be more readily tailored through post-build heat treatment compared to α+β Ti alloys may give this alloy class an advantage if property optimisation is desired in additively manufactured parts. It is well known that the strength and ductility of α+β alloys such as Ti–6Al–4V is strongly dependent on the α-colony size and α-lath size which in turn is dependent on the cooling rate during the β→α transformation. A Hall Petch type relationship has been demonstrated between the yield strength and the inverse α-grain/lath size of Ti–6Al–4V produced by both Selective Laser Melting and Wire + Additive Manufacturing [  Ti–3Al–8V–6Cr–4Mo–4Zr, also known as Beta C or ASTM Grade 19, was produced by Wire Arc Additive Manufacturing and subjected to post-build heat treatments. The microstructure and mechanical properties were investigated. The following conclusions can be made: Solution treated Ti–3Al–8V–6Cr–4Mo–4Zr has moderate strength (σ Duplex ageing can promote the formation of α precipitates which greatly increase hardness and a wide range of strengths depending on ageing temperature and time (σ This work has shown that metastable β-Ti alloys are promising candidate materials for additive manufacturing processes. Their ability to be deeply hardenable through post build solution treatments and ageing can permit superior strength or ductility compared with additively manufactured α+β Ti–6Al–4V. The raw data required to reproduce these findings are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge to Mr Sean Coutts and Mr Robert Dendle for assistance with sample preparation and testing, as well as the support of the University of Queensland's School of Mechanical and Mining Engineering and the Queensland Centre for Advanced Materials processing and Manufacturing. M.B acknowledges the support of the