This paper focused on the germanium recovery from an Integrated Gasification with Combined Cycle fly ash (IGCC FA). The global process comprised the leaching of the IGCC fly ash with an aqueous solution containing tartaric acid, retention of the germanium-tartaric chelate onto a conventional anionic resin (IRA-900) and elution of germanium. The last step consisted of the germanium precipitation which was accomplished with tannic acid. The leaching experiments were performed with tartaric aqueous solutions and with the raffinate from the subsequent ion-exchange (IX) step. Raffinate from the IX step can be reintroduced in the process as leaching solution. When the contact between FA and leaching solution was maintained for 3 h at pH = 1, the Ge leaching efficiency achieved 86%. The effect of pH, resin dosage and tartaric acid dosage on the Ge retention onto the IRA-900 resin was investigated employing a centered composite rotatable design (CCRD) for experimental design and analysis of results. The retention of Ge-tartaric acid complex onto IRA-900 was optimized using design-expert software and the optimum predicted efficiency and loading capacity were 90–98% and 3.0–3.5 mg·g−1. The experimental affinities that IRA-900 showed for the elements extracted (leached) were: Ge >> Sb > V > Ni > As > Sn > B > Zn. Different eluting solutions were tested, and more than 90% of Ge elution was achieved with 2 M HCl. Final solutions contained Ge, Sb and V. Precipitation tests focused on the optimum pH for Ge precipitation adding tannic acid to the elution solutions. A 99.3% of Ge was precipitated from eluting solution, adding 33.3 g of tannic acid per g of Ge. V also precipitated in some extent along with Ge but the rest of elements practically remained in solution.The estimated germanium (Ge) in the Earth's crust concentration is within the 1–7 ppm range, but its extraction is not easy, since it is quite dispersed and is concentrated only in some minerals. Since its application is extended to new and high valued fields, the germanium recuperation from residual products is an interesting issue. One of these raw materials containing low contents of germanium (sometimes only a few ppm, except in rare cases) and considerable quantities of other elements is coal fly ash ( Another process widely used for Ge recovery from aqueous solutions is precipitation. For instance, Hollness published in 1954 the precipitation of germanium by tannin addition form oxalate solutions, In previous research works (Arroyo and Fernandez-Pereira, 2010; Regarding the leaching stage, it must be borne in mind that Ge in fly ash is in the form of germanium oxides and sulphides ( Based on this background the present study focused on the evaluation of a global process of Ge recovery from IGCC FA. For this purpose, each of the stages that comprise the hydrometallurgical process has been studied within the global process. Firstly, the leaching procedure was evaluated comparing the Ge extraction yield using tartaric acid solutions and the IX raffinates as leaching agents. In a second stage, the possibility of recovery the Germanium-tartaric complex from the leachates employing commercial anionic resin was evaluated, and finally, the precipitation of a germanium bearing solid was tested using tannic acid as precipitation agent. All reagents were analytically pure and used without further purification. IRA-900 in chloride form (from Rohm-Haas) was chosen according to a previous published work ( Fly ash was produced in Puertollano IGCC power plant in 2009. An exhaustive characterization of IGCC fly ash has been carried out and the results have been published elsewhere ( The process proposed consists of four stages: leaching, sorption, elution and precipitation ( Leachates were obtained by contacting coal fly ash with different leaching solutions at room temperature. The leaching procedure was performed in 500 mL agitated flasks at 20 °C. The liquid/solid ratio was chosen to be 5 and contact time was varied throughout the study. The leaching agent was aqueous solutions containing tartaric acid and raffinate from the ion exchange step. Tartaric acid content and pH were varied through the study. pH adjustment were performed adding 1 M H All experimental tests were performed using a batch technique. In each experiment, 50 mL of pregnant solutions (containing [Ge] In the above equations Co and Ce (mg L Conventional methods of experimentation do not depict the combined effect of all factors involved and do not assure the determination of optimal conditions, but these limitations can be avoided by using a properly statistical technique for designing experiments such as response surface method (RSM). In this study RSM based on a five-factor level, two-level factorial central composite rotatable design (CCRD) was employed. CCRD is a standard factorial design (2 k), increased by 2 k axial points (±α, 0, 0, …, 0), (0, ± α, 0, …, 0), (0, 0, 0, …, ±α), and n The space of interest was defined by pH (0.5–2.5), fresh TA dosages (1–4 g L The experimental data obtained in the tests were fitted by a polynomial equation. The predicted responses in the model are retention and capacity. Description of both is analogous. The quality of the fit polynomial model was expressed by R The experimental efficiencies and loading capacities of Ge retention onto IRA-900 (E The adequate precision of the model measures the signal to noise ratio and the value allows quantifying the range of the predicted signals relative to fluctuations that are outside experimental control. The adequate precision of the model can be seen as well in the normal probability plot of the residuals ( The calculated ratios for the modified models ( The relationship between the dependent and independent variables was studied using response surface and contour plots as shown in Using the ANOVA program, the optimum Ge retention efficiency onto IRA-900 resin and loading capacity can be combined into a general function of desirability. There may be two or more maxima due to the curvature in the response surfaces and their combination in function of convenience. The set targets were: minimizing the TA and resin dosages; and maximizing pH and Ge retention efficiency. The results generated by the program indicated that the optimum ranges are: resin IRA-900 = 2–2.5 g L In a first set of experiments, the leaching of Ge with aqueous solutions containing tartaric acid (2, 3 and 4 g L In a second set of leaching experiments ( In addition to Ge, other potentially interfering elements that are also leached are As, Ni, Zn and Sb. The rest of elements in FA are only present in leachates in negligible amounts. Following the designed process, the retention of the Ge-tartaric acid complex present in FA leachates onto IRA-900 resin was investigated as described in In the retention tests of real leachates, the maximum retention of the Ge-TA complex was 93% when the pH of the pregnant solution was adjusted to 2 and 4.1 g L Equal aliquots of pregnant resin were contacted with different eluting solutions as in the sorption stage ( As can be seen, high eluting yields were obtained using 2 M, 3 M or 4 M HCl. The lower volume of eluting solution was used the higher Ge concentration was reached in the final stripping solution and the lower consumption and cost of reagents. However, the yield decreased when low eluting solution/leachate volume ratios were used. The stripping solution obtained with 2 M HCl using a volumetric ratio of 0.5 was analyzed ( The possibility of achieving a selective germanium precipitation from the stripping solution was tested adding different amounts of tannic acid to equal volumes of the stripping solution as described in The reuse of raffinates from the IX stage has two objectives: reducing the necessity of water in the process and costs of wastewater treatment and reintroducing in the process the not-retained Ge and the tartaric acid remaining in solution. Six different leaching solutions were obtained mixing the raffinate described in The use of raffinate improves the Ge recovery as compared to the use of a fresh TA solution because the former contains the Ge not retained in the IX stage. Moreover, the reason could also be related to the presence of a certain amount of chloride in raffinate coming from the HCl addition employed to adjust the pH before the IX step and the release of Cl produced by the resin exchange. According to the literature ( The global process designed for the Ge recovery from IGCC fly ash comprised the following steps: Germanium can be recovered from fly ash putting in contact the solid with a pH = 1 leaching solution containing tartaric acid (L/S = 5) for 3 h at room temperature in an agitated vessel. Raffinate from IX retention stage can be recycled as leaching solution. A leachate with a Ge content of 72 mg L Reuse of raffinate from IX has two objectives: reducing the necessity of water in the process and therefore decreasing costs of wastewater treatment, and also making economies by reintroducing the not-retained Ge and any tartaric acid present in solution. In addition to Ge, other elements potentially interfering that are also leached are As, Ni, Zn and Sb. Other elements in FA are not released in significant amounts. The pH of leachate was close to the optimal for the subsequent IX stage, so that minimal pH adjustment would be necessary in the IX stage. In this step, the most influencing variable is pH. For achieving an optimum Ge retention pH should be 2–2.5. Addition of fresh tartaric acid is not necessary in this step. When Ge standard solutions were used almost 100% of the Ge-tartaric complex was retained by IRA-900, but when real leachates were tested, maximum retention was 93% due to the competitive effect of interferences. The experimental affinities shown by IRA-900 for Ge and main interferences were: Ge >> Sb > V > Ni > As > Sn > B > Zn. When 2 M, 3 M or 4 M HCl solutions were used eluting yields higher than 95% were obtained, for eluting solution/pregnant solution ratios equal or higher than 1. The lower the volume of eluting solution used the higher the Ge concentration reached in the final stripping solution and the lower consumption and cost of reagents. However, the yield decreased by using low volumes of eluting solution. The final (stripping) solution is enriched in Ge, but also contains significant amounts of Sb and V. On the other hand, it has been demonstrated that a high percentage of Ni is retained in the resin and has not been eluted. Although there are many precipitation systems available for Ge precipitation, in this case, tannic acid was studied, achieving a Ge precipitation yield of 98.7% (for natural pH of stripping solution and 8.3 g of tannic acid per g of Ge). Practically the rest of elements remained in solution with the exception of V, for which a 20% was precipitated. Vanadium can be removed from wastewaters using methods such as precipitation, adsorption or solvent extraction ( Further research includes improving the purity of the final Ge product mainly decreasing its vanadium content through a previous removal step, optimizing the consumption of water and reagents in the process by means of the raffinate recycling in the leaching stage and finally considering the treatment of the wastewater produced, with the aim of minimizing the global environmental impact of the process. In conclusion, the experimental findings of this research indicate that germanium can be selectively recovered from IGCC-fly ash using an integrated process with a low environmental impact achieving a theoretical global yield of 70%. A complete Ge recovery process as the one described in this paper, from coal fly ash to a solid Ge concentrate, in which the leaching of the ash is carried out a room temperature without using any organic solvent and in which the IX raffinates is used as leaching agent, has interest and can contribute to the development of the production of Ge from secondary sources.