As cemented paste backfill (CPB) plays an increasingly important role in minerals engineering, forecasting its mechanical properties becomes a necessity for efficient CPB design. Machine learning (ML) techniques have previously demonstrated remarkable successes in such task by providing black-box predictions. To express the non-linear relationship in an explicit and precise way, we employed genetic programming (GP) for the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) prediction of CPB. The influence of sampling method, training set size and maximum tree depth on the GP performance was investigated. A detailed analysis was conducted on a representative GP model and the relative variable importance was investigated using the relative variable frequency, partial dependence plots and relative importance scores. The statistical parameters show that a satisfactory performance was obtained by the GP modelling (R
                     2 > 0.80 on the testing set). Results of this study indicate that cement-tailings ratio, solids content and curing time were the most three important variables for the UCS prediction. The predictive performance of GP modelling was comparable to well-recognised ML techniques, and the trained GP model can be generalised to entirely new tailings with satisfactory performance. This study indicates that the GP-based method is capable of providing explicit and precise forecasting of UCS, which can serve as a reliable tool for quick, inexpensive and effective assessment of UCS in the absence of adequate experimental data.cemented paste backfill cement-tailings ratio decision tree expression tree gradient boosting machine genetic programming GP models with a 5, 10 and 15 maximum tree depth Willmott’s index of agreement iterative random sampling Kennard-Stone sampling machine learning normalised mean value (Non-)significant input variables in Eq. particle size distribution random forest representative GP_5 model root-mean-square error solids content standard deviation and Normalised SD curing time uniaxial compressive strength X-ray diffraction coefficient of uniformity and curvature coefficient of variance specific gravity slope of regression lines correlation coefficient coefficient of determination input and output values for the normalised minimum and maximum values Cemented paste backfill (CPB) is gaining attention in both academia and industry because of its potential as an environmental way of tailings management ( In spite of the importance of CPB and its exciting advantages, a throughout understanding of its mechanical properties is still lacking. This research gap is especially evident when all chemical and physical variables of CPB mechanical properties are considered, such as the mineralogy and type of the processing tailings. For example, the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) is one of the most important mechanical properties of CPB, which plays a crucial role in its engineering designs and successful applications. However, cumbersome and costly experiments are required for each type of tailings and the CPB process parameters (i.e. cement-tailings ratio) are often determined by inspection (see Recent progress in machine learning (ML) suggests that it is possible to construct an ML model that can learn the relationship between CPB mechanical properties and their influencing variables ( Genetic programming (GP) has emerged as an explicit and precise modelling technique, which is still a missing component in CPB design. It expresses the non-linear relationship as an expression tree (ET) and is regarded as the developed version of genetic algorithms ( The objective of this study is to apply GP modelling to forecast the UCS of CPB samples ( A dataset with accurate experimental values and wide distribution is a prerequisite for the successful application of the GP modelling. In this paper, extensive UCS experiments were performed on 11 types of tailings. The distribution of mine sites is shown in No. 325 Portland cement and tap water were used as the binder agent and the mixing water, respectively. The CPB materials, including mine tailings, binder agent and mixing water, were homogeneously mixed using a concrete mixer (JJ-5, Hongda, Hebei). The mixed CPB materials were poured into bottom-drained plastic moulds (50 mm diameter and 100 mm height) and then placed in a curing box (YH-40B, Qingdao, Tianjin) at 25 ℃ and 90% humidity. Three replicates were conducted for each experimental scheme, leading to a total of 1545 CPB specimens. The authors note that ‘specimen’ was used to represent CPB specimens prepared for UCS tests while ‘sample’ was used to represent a pair of inputs and output in the dataset for GP modelling. Based on the literature review, the main influencing variables were selected to be tailings type, cement-tailings ratio (CTR), solids content (SC) and curing time (T). As the tailings type is a nominal variable, namely a discrete data type with 11 categories, it was represented by its physical and chemical properties. The particle size distribution (PSD) was determined using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 laser analyser and the X-ray diffraction (XRD) was measured using a Bruker SIMENS D500. The qualification of mineralogical compositions from XRD results was performed using the Rietveld method. The physical and chemical properties of tailings are provided in Table S2. An SHT-4206 SANS testing machine was used to perform UCS tests following the procedures in ASTM GP is one of the most popular data-driven algorithms that can be used to find the relationship between inputs and outputs automatically. It is proposed and modified by Cramer and Koza ( The GP modelling starts from an initial population generated randomly by grow, half (ramped-half-and-half) or full method ( The preceding introduction about the GP procedure suggests that there are several parameters for the GP modelling, including: (i) a function set and a terminal set; (ii) a fitness measure; (iii) GP parameters for the generation and evolution of ETs. In this paper, the arithmetic, trigonometric, exponential and logarithmic functions were included in the function set and the input variables and the constant were included in the terminal set. The remaining GP parameters are provided in As discussed in  The entire dataset is divided into two subsets after the dataset normalisation, in which one is used for GP training (the training set) and the other is used for verification (the testing set). In this paper, two different dataset splitting methods were compared, namely the iterative random sampling (IRS) and the Kennard-Stone (KS) sampling. The IRS picks the data points randomly in the whole dataset and the dataset splitting is performed for several times to reduce the randomness. In contrast, the KS sampling is designed to select the data points evenly in the space of interest ( A sensitivity study was conducted to investigate the influence of training set size (40–80% with a 10% interval) and maximum tree depth (5, 10 and 15) on the performance of GP modelling. A detailed performance evaluation was then conducted on one representative GP model, followed by a relative importance investigation of the input variables. The authors note that all dataset splitting using the IRS was performed ten times to reduce randomness. Similarly, all GP modelling using the same training and testing sets was performed three times as there is also randomness involved in GP modelling (i.e. initialisation and mutation). To evaluate the reliability of the trained GP models, the following statistical descriptors were calculated between the predicted and experimental UCS values. Coefficient of determination ( Root-mean-square error (RMSE): RMSE is the standard deviation of the error between experimental and predicted UCS values. It is often used to find the unexpected large differences. RMSE is defined as: Slope of regression lines ( Willmott’s index of agreement (IA): IA is widely used to measure the degree of model prediction error. The IA value is ranged between [0, 1], in which 1 indicates a perfect prediction and 0 indicates an ineffective prediction (no better than randomly guessing). IA is defined as:  The results of the sensitivity study about the training set size and the maximum tree depth are illustrated in The maximum tree depth is one of the most crucial GP parameters that control the complexity of each ET. In this paper, 5, 10 and 15 were selected to be the maximum tree depth to investigate its influence on the modelling performance. GP models with a 5, 10 and 15 maximum tree depth were referred to GP_5, GP_10 and GP_15 in this paper. An evident performance improvement was observed when the maximum tree depth was increased from 5 to 10. To be more specific, the average When the maximum tree depth was further increased from 10 to 15, a subtle increase (0.21%) was observed of the average In general, the results from Having discussed the influence of sampling method, training set size and maximum tree depth on the performance of GP modelling, we now turn our attention to the detailed performance evaluation of the developed GP models. To make the analysis more straightforward, we used a GP_5 model with a training set size of 60% as an example. It should be noted that 10 GP_5 models have been constructed with the IRS method to reduce the randomness in   The performance of the RGP_5 model can be further demonstrated by the histogram plot of the deviation between the predicted and experimental UCS values ( As indicated in (  As discussed before, partial dependence plots are calculated by measuring the output variation with the change of input values for each variable. That means the change of NSIV values would not modify the predicted output as NSIV were not included in Eq. The importance score was calculated based on the relative variable frequency from 10 GP_5 models. As the optimum GP_5 model was not obtained, at least in most cases, at the maximum generation, we took into account the relative frequency from all generations. Moreover, we employed GBM method using the same procedure as provided in ( The GP_5 and GBM both ranked In this section, we address two important questions that involved with GP modelling or ML algorithms in the UCS prediction. The first one is whether the performance of GP modelling is comparable to well-recognised ML techniques? The second one, and probably the most important one, is that can the trained model be generalised/used to entirely new tailings? In this paper, an entirely new tailings is the one without any data samples from this tailings being used during model training. To address the first question, we compared the predictive performance of the GP modelling with three ML techniques (DT, GBM, and RF) employed in the literature. We followed the same procedure in ( The average The second question is about the generalisation capability of trained GP or ML models to entirely new tailings. Though there has been a series of papers about the UCS prediction using ML techniques ( In this following, we turn our attention to the generalisation capability of the trained GP model to an entirely new tailings. To achieve this objective, we performed another 11 modelling scenarios using the GP_5. In each scenario, one type of tailings from T1–T11 was selected and all its data samples were included in the testing set. The data samples in the training set came from all other types of tailings (except the selected one). In other words, we trained the GP model using ten types of tailings and tested its generalisation capability using the remaining one type of tailings in each scenario. The generalisation capability of GBM to an entirely new tailings was also investigated for comparison purposes.  As a whole, above discussion shows that the performance of GP modelling was similar or even better compared with well-recognised ML techniques on CPB UCS prediction. The trained GP model could be generalised/used to entirely new tailings with satisfactory performance. Though it has been shown that the UCS prediction using GP or ML techniques is quite promising, challenges still remain. First, the dataset was collected from mine sites in China, resulting in a high possibility that the trained model cannot be generalised to CPB materials from other countries. This challenge is mainly due to the difference in cement classification and CPB preparation procedures. Another important challenge is about improving the accuracy and reliability of predictions, which involves delicate feature engineering, careful model selection and efficient algorithms proposing. For the past 30 years, the UCS development of CPB has been investigated by experts from both industry and academia. The utilised methodology is still mainly experimental study and a large number of trial tests are needed for each CPB application. Instead, we anticipate that AI techniques that can autonomously learn from the rich history of experiments will be crucial for efficient and intelligent CPB design in the near future. To realize this objective, a multinational, continuously-updated and highly-accessible database would be the ‘Armstrong step’. The next concern would be how to incorporate such prediction in the whole backfill system and whether AI techniques can be applied to other aspects during CPB design. The final step would be the establishment of an ‘Intelligent Mining for Backfill (IMB)’ system by integrating all standalone applications together. In this study, a genetic programming-based method was proposed for the UCS prediction of CPB. An enlarged dataset was collected using the results of 1545 UCS tests performed on 11 types of tailings. Two sampling methods, namely the IRS and the KS, were compared for dataset partitioning. A sensitivity study was performed to investigate the influence of training set size and maximum tree depth on the performance of GP modelling. We conducted a detailed analysis of the predictive performance of the RGP_5 and investigated the relative variable importance using multiple methods. Moreover, we compared the predictive performance of GP modelling with well-recognised ML techniques and discussed the generalisation capability of such prediction to entirely new tailings. Based on the results of this study, the following conclusions can be drawn: The IRS was found to be more suitable for UCS prediction as it produced a higher average The best performance of the GP modelling was obtained using a training set size of 60% and a maximum tree depth of 10. The statistical parameters obtained by the RGP_5 were The GP_5 modelling ranked CTR, SC and T as the top-three influencing variables with their corresponding importance scores of 0.33, 0.23 and 0.20 respectively. The predictive performance of GP modelling was comparable to well-recognised ML techniques and the trained GP model could be generalised/used to entirely new tailings with satisfactory performance. This study was financially supported by the None. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: