Ammonium production is the key process for N nutrition of lowland rice because the mineralization process stops at ammonium in submerged soils. We studied the changes in ammonium N in the solution of 15 diverse wetland West African soils. Soil samples were held under flooded conditions in the greenhouse pots for 15 weeks, and anoxic solutions, drawn weekly, were monitored for the changes in ammonium N concentrations. The soils differed in the pattern of ammonium accumulation, and had a wide range of ammonium N mobilized in soil solution with mean values ranging from 0.3 to 7.4 mg N kg−1 soil. Ammonium N released in solution was related to organic C and total N contents of the soils. The pattern of ammonium N release in solution of the 15 soils, with the exception of two soils, was well-described by an exponential model. The fit to the linear log model was also good for most of the soils but the prediction was less consistent than with the exponential model. Our results indicate that the pattern of ammonium accumulation in soil solution of flooded West African soils can be described by an exponential model.Mineralizable N pools in wetland rice soils play a dominant role in the N nutrition of rice even in well-fertilized paddies The soil solution of flooded soils is a dynamic phase and its composition relative to plant nutrients including N, can be a useful tool for fertility evaluation We report the first result describing the pattern of ammonium release in soil solution of diverse West African submerged soils. Such information is helpful in assessing the indigenous soil N supply which is an important component of research for N management in wetland rice. Little information are available about the N supplying capacity of soils used for wetland rice production in West Africa Fifteen soils used in the study were surface (0–15 cm) samples collected from different rice growing locations in five countries of West Africa Background information about the location, classification and characteristics of the soils were described in an earlier paper Samples (10 kg dry soil) were kept submerged in distilled water in glazed pots, fitted with a system at the base of each pot for collecting the soil solution under gravity. The system consisted of a rubber stopper with a sintered glass tube passing through it, bent vertically downwards to allow the collection of soil solution under gravity. A layer of 3–5 cm standing water over the samples was maintained throughout the period of study. Samples of soil solution were collected under anoxic conditions from the flooded soils at weekly intervals, using 250 ml Erlenmeyer flasks fitted with glass tubes in rubber stoppers, designed to allow for the displacement of air by N The data on ammonium N content in soil solutions of soils collected weekly during 12 weeks of flooding were fitted to exponential and linear log models A fit to the exponential model was tested using the following equation: The linear log model was fitted using the following equation: The data fitting to the two models was done using the SAS statistical package The soils used in the study have a wide range of pH values (4.3–7.7), clay (45–510 g kg Changes in the concentration of ammonium N in the solutions of 15 soils Ammonium N content in soil solution was significantly correlated to organic C and total N but not with CEC and Clay contents of the soils The ammonium N released in the solution attained a dynamic equilibrium within about 2 weeks of flooding and this can be conveniently used for predicting the N supplying capacity of soils using short-term tests. These results are in accordance with the work done at the IRRI which indicated that almost all the mineralizable N in submerged soils were converted into ammonium within 2 weeks of submergence provided that the temperature was favourable For fitting the two models, the data on ammonium in solution for 12 weeks only were used because the results were not significantly affected by including data beyond 12 weeks. The equations describing the changes of ammonium N in soil solution, based on the exponential model, are shown in The fit to the model was also tested for the data on ammonium N in solution for shorter periods: at 4, 6 and 8 weeks of flooding. In general, the fit to the model was best described with the data collected at 4 weeks of flooding for all soils, with the exception of soil 13. There was a good agreement in the fit to the model run using the ammonium in soil solution data for 4, 6, 8 and 12 weeks with the exception of soil 8. While soil 8 showed a poor fit ( The equations describing the pattern of ammonium N in soil solution for the 15 soils, according to the linear log model, are shown in It is important to note that the fit of the data to the exponential and linear log models peaked when data on ammonium in soil solution for 4 weeks was used indicating again that the short-term flooding of soils achieve a relatively stable trend in the release of ammonium in solution. Moreover, increase in the temperature can further shorten the time needed to reach such a steady state (e.g., see The fit of the data to the linear log model compared to the exponential model seemed less consistent in predicting the accumulation of ammonium N in soil solution. More importantly, the results of our study clearly support the conclusion drawn by Based on the release of ammonium release in soil solution, the 15 soils examined can be divided into the following three groups. (i) The soils that released greater than 5 mg N kg soil (ii) The soils that mobilized ammonium in solution between 1.5 and 5 mg N kg (iii) The soils that released less than 1.5 mg N kg In summary, the results of our study indicate that the West African studied soils differed widely in their capacity to mobilize ammonium in solution and the release of ammonium was well-described by an exponential model. We thank Dr. Abdoulaye Adam, Biometrician, for his assistance in the statistical analysis of the data and the African Development Bank for financial support through a research fellowship to LTN.