Process engineering focuses on the design, operation and maintenance of chemical and material manufacturing processes. As of today, process engineering and process engineers are found in diverse industries, including the Chemical Process Industries (CPI), Mineral Process Industries (MinPI), Material Process Industries (MatPI), Food Process Industries (FPI), Biotechnological Process Industries (BPI), Petroleum Process Industries (PPI), Environmental Process Industries (EPI), and the Energy Conversion Industries (ECI). Process engineering also involves automation and covers the application of engineering and information technology approaches, techniques, and tools for construction of process models. Consequently, process modeling and simulation, numerical computation, optimization, process control, data modeling and analysis are all aspects of process systems engineering. Some of these models may not have a solid theoretical basis; rather, they rely mainly on empirical and extensive experimentation. Automation in process engineering involves automating a process, which often is a combination of a number of sub-processes that need to be coordinated and controlled. The sub-processes can be at a number of levels. At the lowest level are the instruments that monitor, sense, and manipulate process variables. The instruments are connected to a control structure, which can consist of devices such as single-loop instruments, programmable logic controllers, and distributed control systems. At the next level is the supervisory host computer, which maintains the database and the applications that are integrated with the control layer. Applications of artificial intelligence typically reside in the supervisory host computer, and can involve intelligent software that perform a variety of functions such as supervisory control and optimization, simulation, process control, scheduling, alarm management, operator decision support, computer aided instruction and training, configuration, plant planning and optimization, design, and maintenance ( Substantial research effort has been ongoing since the early 1980s to bring ideas and methodologies from artificial intelligence into the scope of process engineering problems in both academic and industrial communities. For example, the First International Conference on Intelligent Systems in Process Engineering was held at Snowmass, Colorado in July 9–14, 1995. The significant business challenges and change that the process industry is undergoing has provided an enormous impetus for the utilization of information technology and new approaches and solution methods so as to improve manufacturing efficiency, product quality, and customer responsiveness. Advanced computing technologies such as artificial intelligence technologies are key to helping industry face these challenges. Often, decision support systems provide the linkage between the two fields of artificial intelligence and operating problems in process engineering. The design of decision support systems requires an in-depth understanding of a process, which can be expressed in the form of an integrated view or framework. The framework maps out all the static and dynamic entities and relations implicit in processes. This detailed understanding of processes that occur in a plant is prerequisite for determining the appropriate information processing tools and techniques for helping the practising engineer solve a whole range of problems that were previously intractable. It is essential at this stage of development to pause and critically examine the state of the art in order to determine future direction and goals. Within this context, this Special Issue serves as a forum to delineate and critically examine the present state of affairs in this field. The Special Issue was successful in attracting a large and diverse audience from around the world. The works included in the issue reflect substantial vitality in the field of applications of artificial intelligence in process engineering. The studies demonstrate remarkable diversity in terms of tasks and problem domains tackled, artificial intelligence techniques employed, scope and depth of analysis, and stage of intelligent system development addressed. The studies discuss research work on applications of artificial intelligence in process engineering currently ongoing across three continents and in eight countries: Canada, China, Germany, India, Iran, Lithuania, Malaysia, and USA. A brief summary of the papers illustrates this diversity. Uraikul et al.'s “Artificial Intelligence for monitoring and supervisory control of process systems” presents an overview survey of some research work that has been conducted on development of intelligent systems for monitoring, control, and diagnosis of process systems. The survey presents the three main solution approaches in developing intelligent systems for monitoring, control, and diagnosis of process systems: the data-driven, analytical, and knowledge-based approaches. These approaches are integrated and employed in different frameworks that tackle a given problem domain, and research efforts of four research groups that propose such frameworks are presented. The four research groups include the Laboratory of Intelligent Systems in Process Engineering (LISPE) at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the Laboratory for Intelligent Process Systems (LIPS) at Purdue University, the Intelligent Engineering Laboratory (IEL) at the University of Alberta, and the Department of Chemical Engineering at University of Leeds. These four research groups have been selected for detailed discussion because all four groups have done extensive work in integrating the three solution approaches into comprehensive frameworks for building intelligent systems for monitoring, control and diagnosis. The approaches and frameworks of the four groups are compared and their strengths and weaknesses are also discussed. This paper can serve as a good overview of the state-of-the-art in the field of application of artificial intelligence for monitoring, control, and diagnosis of process engineering. Maurya et al.'s “Fault Diagnosis Using Dynamic Trend Analysis: A Review and Recent Development” gives an overview of some of the existing methods for trend extraction and similarity estimation. Dynamic trend analysis, also known as qualitative trend analysis (QTA), is an important technique for extracting useful features from measured signals for fault detection and diagnosis. The technique involves hierarchical representation of signal trends, extraction of the trends, and their comparisons or similarity estimations to infer the state of the process. The objectives of the paper are threefold: (1) to review the research work in the area of dynamic trend analysis, and establish a framework for the analysis of dynamic trend-based fault diagnosis, (2) to discuss some of the popular and important approaches of trend analysis, and (3) to propose the novel interval-halving and fuzzy-matching-based approach for QTA and show its application for fault diagnosis of the Tennessee Eastman process and an industrial case study. Effectiveness of the proposed method on the Tennessee Eastman process is shown through simulation studies, and some outstanding issues are also discussed in the paper. Morbach et al.'s “OntoCAPE-A large scale ontology for chemical process engineering” presents the process of developing and applying a large-scale ontology for chemical processing engineering, called OntoCAPE. The paper describes the methodology for developing OntoCAPE to show how the ontology has evolved from a skeletal and informal to a complete and formal specification. The ontology has a modular and layered structure, which enhances usability and reusability while also supporting further development in the future. Usefulness of the ontology is demonstrated by its applications to three domains: (1) selecting suitable process modeling components for a given modeling task, (2) computer-aided modeling of chemical processes, and (3) semantic annotation of contents of information sources. The authors also emphasize features in the ontology, which support ontology evolution and reuse over the long term. Kaklauskas et al.'s “A Multiple Criterion Decision Support On-Line System for Construction” presents development of information technology in the construction industry. The emphasis has been on a variety of web-based information systems that incorporate the technologies of neural networks, expert and decision support systems, and e-commerce. The objective of most of these on-line systems has been to support economic decision-making. However, construction alternatives need to be evaluated not only from the economic perspective, but also in terms of their qualitative and technical characteristics. The multiple criteria analysis methods constitute a useful approach for supporting this integrated analysis, and the paper presents a multiple criteria decision support system that has been built based on analysis of the various on-line systems. The developed system is shown to assist decision makers in identifying the most efficient and effective alternatives in construction. Venayagamoorthy et al.'s “Particle swarm based optimal partitioning algorithm for combinational CMOS circuits” presents a swarm intelligence based approach to optimally partition combinational CMOS circuits for pseudo-exhaustive testing. The partitioning algorithm reduces the number of test vectors required to detect faults in VLSI circuits. The algorithm is based on the circuit's maximum primary input cone size and minimum fanout values to decide the location and number of partitions; and particle swarm optimization (PSO) is used to determine the optimal values of input cone size and minimum fanout to minimize the number of test vectors, partitions, and the increase in critical path delay due to the added partitions. The proposed algorithm has been applied in two case studies, one with and the other without critical path considerations, and the results show that the PSO partitioning algorithm generates results which are about one order of magnitude faster than other partitioning approaches. Dash et al.'s “Mining for similarities in time series data using wavelet based feature vectors and neural networks” introduced a new approach for feature extraction from non-stationary time series using S-transform. The proposed method was compared with two other well-known wavelet methods and applied on nine classes of power signal time series data that were obtained in an electricity supply network. In order to compare the performance of the three methods, three types of neural networks, namely the back-propagation neural network (MLP), radial basis functional link net (RBFLN), and probabilistic neural network (PNN) were used for computing classification accuracy of the feature vectors extracted. The neural networks were trained with the features obtained from simulated and experimental power signal disturbance data. The results showed that the new approach presented in the paper outperforms the other techniques in terms of both accuracy and sensitivity to noise. Tan et al.'s “A hybrid neural network model for rule generation and its application to process fault detection and diagnosis” proposed using a hybrid neural network model based on the integration of Fuzzy ARTMAP (FAM) and the Rectangular Basis Function Network (RecBFN) for classification and fuzzy rule extraction. FAM is capable of forming a multi-dimensional map between an analog input space and an analog output space, both of arbitrary dimensionality. The RecBFN, on the other hand, is capable of extracting the learned rules in an easy way. The hybrid network combines the advantages of these two types of neural network and was applied for fault detection and diagnosis of a circulating water system in a power generation station. Experiments were conducted to compare the performance of the proposed FAM-RecBFN and FAM alone coupled with a symbolic rule extraction algorithm. The results showed that rules extracted with FAM-RecBFN have lower redundancy and higher levels of interpretability, conciseness and comprehensiveness than those extracted with FAM alone. The rules produced from FAM-RecBFN are also in good agreement with human experts’ opinions. Yang et al.'s “Optimizing the distribution of shopping centers with parallel genetic algorithm” presents a study that focuses on optimizing distribution of shopping centers in urban centers in China. Since an effective method to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from cars is to decrease the amount of driving that needs to be done, the objective of the optimization is to satisfy vendors and customers and shorten the distance that need to be traversed by cars for purposes of environmental sustainability. The optimization model includes an optimization function which has been developed based on estimates of the split between car and transit use, and modeling land-use and transportation in the context of determining shopping center destinations. The solution method adopted is parallel genetic algorithms, and some problems that arose in application of genetic algorithms are presented. The optimization model was applied in Dalian City, which has a population of over 2 million in North China. Some results from the application helps to illustrate effectiveness of the developed optimization model. Hu et al.'s “Multi-objective optimization for process control of the in-situ bioremediation system under uncertainty” presents development of a simulation model-based, dynamic, and multi-objective predictive control system for generating cost-effective control strategies for a bioremediation process that involves substantial uncertain data. The work involves developing an optimized linear interpolation method for handling the substantial uncertainty in the changes of the hydraulic characteristics in groundwater transport simulation, and an interactive decision support tool for multi-objective process control. The solution involves generating a set of optimal control strategies and costs to satisfy different efficiency requirements. The solution method requires normalization of the costs and efficiencies, and designing an optimal control strategy to account for the decision maker's particular preferences concerning tradeoffs between cost and efficiency. The developed system was applied to data obtained from both a laboratory experiment and a hypothetical site. The results indicate that the optimized linear interpolation function could model uncertainties in the chosen sampling data and enhance accuracy of the simulation model. The developed control system can generate a set of control strategies that assign different priorities to the objectives according to the decision maker's preferences. Su et al.'s “Modeling research on the sorption kinetics of pentachlorophenol (PCP) to sediments based on neural networks and neuro-fuzzy systems” presents research work on the sorption behaviors of pentachlorophenol (PCP) in sediments of eight different lakes in South China, which have been modeled in batch experiments using the radial basis function neural network (RBFN) and an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS). A comparison of the two modeling approaches is presented in the paper. Although the physical and chemical characteristics were different, the modeling results showed that the sorption behaviors of the different sediments were similar. Both RBFN and ANFIS could make highly accurate predictions of the sorption behaviors, and both models reflected the internal principle of the sorption process better than the traditional model based on Fick's Second Law. The observation was made that the RBFN approach can model the sorption kinetics of PCP to the lake sediments as well as make highly accurate predictions under noisy conditions. It was also shown that instead of being affected by only the concentration of PCP in the aqueous phase alone, the sorption kinetics of PCP to the sediments were similarly affected by all three factors of (a) the concentration of PCP in the aqueous phase, (b) the reversible fraction and (c) the irreversible fraction. Singh et al.'s “ANN based estimator for distillation using the Levenberg–Marquardt approach” has the objective of enhancing purity of a distillate by developing an estimator that can perform automated predictive control of a distillation process. The estimator has been developed based on the Levenberg–Marquardt approach, which combines the Gauss–Newton and Steepest Descent methods. The developed estimator predicts the future composition of distillate in a distillation column, using column pressure, reboiler duty, reflux flow, and the temperature profile of the distillation column as inputs to train the neural network. The estimated results are observed to be better than the results obtained using the Steepest Descent Back Propagation algorithm alone. Song et al.'s “Inter-relationship between preparation methods, nickel loading, characteristics and performance in the reforming of crude ethanol over Ni/Al Ghaffari et al.'s “Identification and control of power plant de-superheating using soft computing techniques” presents a systematic approach for the design of control strategies for high-order non-linear power plant subsystems. In order to design the integrated genetic algorithms-based PI controller for optimized control of turbine steam temperature, an effective neuro-fuzzy model of the de-superheating process has been developed based on recorded data. Tight turbine steam temperature control is necessary for obtaining long lifetime, high efficiency, high load following capacity, and high availability in power plants. The simulation results obtained show that the implementation of the genetic algorithm based controller significantly improves performance of the steam temperature controller. These articles demonstrate the advancement that artificial intelligence technologies have made for supporting problem solving in diverse real-world process engineering domains; the information can provide insights to engineers, scientists, and decision makers who work in the areas of information technologies and process engineering. We would like to express our gratitude to the many reviewers for their hard work; we would also like to thank the authors for their contributions to the Special Issue. This Special Issue could not have been completed without their dedication and support.