The gas permeability of porous materials largely depends on pressure, with the intrinsic permeability typically being determined using Klinkenberg's model, which is valid when the gas flows under viscous conditions. However, measurements performed on refractories with the outlet at atmospheric pressure often reveal inertial effects. Therefore, gas permeability is assumed to be flow-rate dependent; an alternative approach is proposed to determine the intrinsic properties using the Forchheimer number. A gas permeameter has been developed to improve measurement accuracy. It allows for the conduction of a test in viscous flow conditions or with inertial effects. The improved gas permeameter was used to compare the different approaches to the evaluation of the intrinsic permeability of four refractory materials with permeabilities ranging from 0.03 to 6 darcies. Combining a modified pressure drop method with Klinkenberg's model proved to be a reliable method for consistently evaluating refractory material permeability.Permeability is a very important property of refractory materials. Some examples include, the key role of permeability to gases in the dewatering of refractory castables Permeability could be measured under steady state or unsteady state conditions using a gas or a liquid. In practice, the steady-state permeability measurement method is well suited for characterising refractories, even for materials with very low permeability. It is time-consuming, however, it yields results with better accuracy than unsteady-state techniques In the refractory field, permeability tests are usually performed with a gas as proposed in the industry standards There are two usual methods to conduct steady state gas permeability measurements. In the first method, the outlet is maintained at atmospheric pressure and the inlet pressure is progressively increased while the flow rate is determined from Eq. When the gas velocity increases, inertial effects may arise on a microscopic scale and the equation attributed to Forchheimer is used to consider these effects The objective of this work is to compare the different approaches proposed in the literature to determine the intrinsic permeability from steady-state gas permeability measurements. A gas permeameter has been developed to control the flow regime. Tests and analyses were conducted on four different refractory materials using the newly developed gas permeameter. The steady-state multiple-point gas permeability measurement yields a set of triplets of measures ( Depending on the apparent shape of the plot, straight or parabolic, two strategies are used to derive the intrinsic permeability from the measures. If a straight line fits the Darcy plot well, the flow regime is assumed to be viscous and the linear integrated form of Darcy's law is applied according to Eq. According to Eq. The intrinsic permeability and the slippage factor are derived from the linear fitting of the Klinkenberg plot where the gas permeability, Assuming viscous flow with gas-slippage effects, combining Eqs. Drawing the Klinkenberg plot ( If the Darcy plot shows a parabolic shape ( Innocentini et al. proposed the derivation of the intrinsic permeability using a ‘pseudo Klinkenberg plot’ where an apparent permeability is derived from Forchheimer parameters Another method for the intrinsic permeability determination is to apply the Klinkenberg plot using only the measures obtained before the inertial effects become significant, i.e. for a low Forchheimer number, Points deviating from the linearity are used to determine the inertial factor, The The gas permeameter ( Atmospheric mode (AM): used by setting either the flow rate or the inlet pressure and letting the exit remain at atmospheric pressure. The control valves are completely open. Backpressure mode under a constant mass flow rate (BM): used by directly setting the flow rate using the flow controllers and adjusting the downstream control valves. This makes it possible to control the reciprocal mean pressure while maintaining viscous flow conditions The cylindrical specimen is secured by means of a rubber gasket and a gasket holder ( The method described above was applied to four different refractory materials ( The first material was a pure alumina Degussit AL25 The second refractory was a high-alumina No Cement Castable (NCC) constructed using boehmite sol-gel as a binder in place of cement. The dry composition was composed of 14.5 The third tested material was a low-alumina content refractory (BA60) composed of 61 The final insulating refractory (RI30) was primarily composed of alumina (70 The specimens were dried for more than 24  Gas permeability measurements in backpressure mode were then performed at a constant mass flow rate. For the samples AL25 and NCC, no inertial effects arose. The mass flow rate could be chosen within the entire range of flow with a maximum of 1.7 NL/min. The AL25 sample was tested at 1.7 NL/min. The NCC sample was tested at 1.30 and 1.7 NL/min. On the contrary, it was necessary to limit the mass flow rate for samples BA60 and RI30 since the tests performed in AM on these materials exhibited inertial effects. The maximum mass flow rate used in BM was then defined from the Darcy plot within the part exhibiting a linear curve shape, i.e. for the low flow rate at the beginning of the curve. The mass flow rate was set at 0.174 NL/min and 6.90 NL/min for BA60 and RI30, respectively. This mode enabled the application of an inverse mean pressure ranging from 2.99 to 1.55 Following the method presented in Regarding the refractory AL25 ( Two mass flow rates were used to test the refractory NCC in backpressure mode (1.74 NL/min and 1.30 NL/min) in order to study the effect of mass flow rate on the Klinkenberg parameters. The modified Darcy plot ( It was more difficult to determine which points were obtained under viscous flow conditions for refractory BA60 ( In the modified Darcy plot of refractory RI30 ( The apparent permeability was calculated from every measurement that was used to draw the Klinkenberg plot for the refractory AL25 ( The Klinkenberg plots ( As mentioned in the previous section, the Klinkenberg plot completes the analysis for refractory BA60. It is clearly seen in the inset in The Klinkenberg plot for refractory RI30 intensifies the results obtained with BA60 ( It is possible to determine the inertial coefficient of Forchheimer's model by plotting the corrected Forchheimer pressure function versus the corrected mass flow rate based on Eq. We have developed an improved permeameter that allows for gas permeability measurements in both atmospheric and backpressure modes. The objective was to compare the various methods used to derive intrinsic permeability from analysis of the measurements. Tests were performed on four refractories with intrinsic permeabilities ranging from 0.03 to 6 darcies. Various plots were used to analyse the results: a Darcy plot, modified Darcy plot, Klinkenberg plot, and modified Forchheimer plot. It has been demonstrated that the modified Darcy plot plays a key role in the procedure because it allows for the identification of data points that could be used for either the Klinkenberg parameters or the Forchheimer parameters. Although various inertial effects occur when measurements are performed in atmospheric-mode, the tests performed in backpressure mode in this study made it possible to avoid inertial effects. The results indicate that Klinkenberg effects could explain the pressure dependence of the gas permeability. A consistent intrinsic permeability was derived for each material. Additionally, using the Forchheimer parameters, A permeability cell was designed based on the ASTM C577-07 standard due to its simplicity. By replacing it with a cell like the one proposed by ISO 8884-91, the effect of the confining pressure in the sleeve could be studied and tests could be conducted in the turbulent flow regime without the risk of bypass. The next challenge in the field of refractory materials will be to measure permeability at high temperatures, between 600 and 1500 The authors thank the