Two-step sintering (TSS) was applied on nanocrystalline yttria tetragonal stabilized zirconia (3Y-TZP) to control the grain growth during the final stage of sintering. The process involves firing at a high temperature (T1) followed by rapid cooling to a lower temperature (T2) and soaking for a prolonged time (t). It is shown that for nanocrystalline 3Y-TZP (27nm) the optimum processing condition is T1=1300°C, T2=1150°C and t
                     =30h. Firing at T1 for 1min yields 0.83 fractional density and renders pores unstable, leading to further densification at the lower temperature (T2) without remarkable grain growth. Consequently, full density zirconia ceramic with an average grain size of 110nm is obtained. XRD analysis indicated that the ceramic is fully stabilized. Single-step sintering of the ceramic compact yields grain size of 275nm with approximately 3wt.% monoclinic phase. This observation indicates that at a critical grain size lower than 275nm, phase stabilization is induced by the ultrafine grain structure.Yttria stabilized zirconia ceramics display high fracture toughness that makes them suitable for a wide range of structural applications such as cutting tools, valve guides, extrusion dies, abrasive tools, etc. It is known that, the grain growth during pressureless sintering depends on the shaping method and firing temperature. By the wet shaping methods, e.g. slip and gel casting, Krell and Blank Recently, Chen and Wang To further study the effect of TSS on the densification and grain growth of nanocrystalline 3Y-TZP, different TSS regimes are designed and applied to 3Y-TZP (27 ZrO The powder was compacted in a cylindrical die at 150 Single-step sintering (SSS) was carried out at 1100–1500 The density of the sintered sample was measured by the water displacement (Archimedes) method according to ISO Standard 39231/1-1979(E). Microstructure of the sintered compacts was observed by SEM (Philips XL30, Netherlands) after sequential mechanical polishing using diamond pastes (3, 1 and 0.05    Further study was concentrated on changing T2. Cycle TSS3 was conducted at T2 To further study the effect of TSS on the densification and grain growth of the nanocrystalline 3Y-TZP powder compact, two other cycles were applied. In the both cycles, T1 was set at 1300 X-ray diffraction patterns of dense compacts (>0.98 TD) sintered under SSS and TSS3 schedule are shown in The effect of TSS on the densification and grain growth of nanocrystalline 3Y-TZP ceramic was investigated. The findings can be summarized as following. The grain growth rate of nanocrystalline 3Y-TZP in conventional sintering route is significantly lower than that of other ceramics such as ZnO and Al To further decrease the grain growth rate, two-step sintering can be used. It was shown that the critical density which densification can proceeds without remarkable grain growth is 83% TD. The pore instability at this density level is obtained by 1 Full density compacts with an average grain size of 110 Full stabilized tetragonal zirconia (3Y-TZP) ceramic can be obtained at grain size <275