Nanoparticles can be produced by wet grinding in stirred media mills if agglomeration is prevented by stabilization of the particles. Since the fracture mechanisms at the lower nanoscale are not yet understood, we studied the evolution of the microstructure within tin dioxide particles. Electrostatic stabilization allows the formation of tin dioxide with a mean particle size of 25nm as measured by dynamic light scattering. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images show particles well below 10nm and mean crystallite sizes of 9nm were obtained from X-ray diffraction by applying the Rietveld refinement method. Additionally, TEM and HRTEM analyses were conducted to gain detailed insight into the microstructural effects governing the grinding process. Microscopy revealed surprisingly rich phenomena including the formation of shear bands, twinning and stacking faults that directly affect the grinding behavior. Interestingly the ceramic nanoparticles showed not only fracture patterns expected from brittle fracture but also many traces of plastic deformation. For comparison the uniaxial compression of particles up to 30nm in diameter was simulated using molecular dynamics. The simulated particles shared microstructural details with the real samples, most importantly the shear bands which lead to significant plastic deformation. The internal microstructure produced during multiple particle stressing events in the mill and also observed in the simulations is directly linked to the fracture mechanism and the experimentally observed grinding limit.Nanoparticles are increasingly used in many areas of the chemical and pharmaceutical as well as the ceramic and microelectronic industries. In addition to the direct synthesis of these materials by chemical methods, wet grinding in stirred media mills is a suitable technique for the production of nanoparticles in the liquid phase with high solid concentrations. The manufacturing of fine particles is influenced by particle breakage and interparticle interactions. These interactions become relevant, especially for particles smaller than 1 In principle, size reduction in liquids can also be initiated by mechanochemical effects as observed by Stenger et al. for alumina in water It is obvious that the microstructure of a particle and its evolution during mechanical stressing plays a key role in the process of comminution. While the fracture pattern of ceramic particles in the micrometer range was already investigated some time ago, along with the mechanisms that enable particle breakage In this paper we present grinding results of tin dioxide particles milled in water under stable conditions. By means of XRD analysis the samples were analyzed to determine microstructural changes such as the evolution of crystallite size and microstrain inside the particles. By using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), the mechanisms leading to breakage in the nanometer range could be visualized at different milling times. The experimental findings are completed by MD simulations, which reveal rich structural phenomena inside mechanically loaded nanoparticles. Tin(IV) oxide (extra pure) powder (cassiterite) with 99% <5 Sodium hydroxide with a purity >99% was purchased from Carl Roth GmbH & Co. KG. A 1 Wear-resistant commercially available yttrium stabilized zirconia (ZrO The milling experiment was carried out in aqueous suspension in a six-disc stirred media mill with a content of 0.95 The experimental set-up provides a circuit mode comminution of the product. The suspension is pumped with a hose pump from the grinding chamber into a stirred vessel, where samples can be taken and stabilizers added. From the vessel the suspension flows back into the mill. The grinding chamber is equipped with a double wall for cooling, which is connected with an internal cooling water system. The particle size distributions of the milled samples were obtained by measuring the intensity fluctuations of the scattered light of a 3 The XRD data was collected using a Siemens D 5000 powder diffractometer with a graphite secondary monochromator using Cu TEM images were taken using a Phillips CM30 TWIN/STEM, equipped with an energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) detector for analytical analyses. The images were recorded on negatives and afterwards scanned for digital storage. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) was performed using a Phillips CM300 UltraTWIN at Scherzer defocus, having a nominal point resolution of 0.17 The samples were dispersed in H The scope of the simulations was the investigation of the microstructural effects that govern the comminution of particles in the lower nanometer size range. In order to fully resolve these effects, it was necessary to carry out MD simulations on an atomistic level and a temporal resolution well in the range of the Debye frequency. The open source MD code LAMMPS, developed by Sandia National Laboratories, was chosen as fitting the purpose best, since it allows the parallel computation of fast Fourier transformations required for calculating the long-range term of the interatomic interaction potential The material as it is used for the MD simulations is described by its lattice parameters as listed in These potential parameters were used in conjunction with a P3M k-space solver as developed by Eastwood et al. From tensile tests and hydrostatic compression tests with a 10 The deviation between empirical and calculated elastic properties was found to be rather small for the bulk modulus and the elastic modulus in the [0 For the simulations, single spherical particles were stressed between two “milling beads”, modeled as rigid spheres as described below. The particles were cut out from a predefined supercell and therefore required a neutralization of the total charge caused by the production of a free surface. This was realized by the deposition of counter-ions on the particle surface. In addition, the system energy of the spheres was minimized with the conjugate gradient method of Polak–Ribiere after applying a microcanonical ensemble (NVE). A stepwise heating of the particles from 0 to 300 In order to save computational resources, the milling beads were not modeled atomistically, but as rigid spheres with radii of 2.5 The investigation of the microstructure and the production of the corresponding images were performed within the visualization program AtomEye To manufacture nanoparticles in a stirred media mill the newly created fragments have to be stabilized against agglomeration. Stenger et al. have previously investigated the electrostatic stabilization of tin oxide particles in water The milling suspension had a solid content of 20 XRD analysis was used to determine microstructural changes inside the particles during the milling process. Under the assumption that particle breakage occurs at the domain interfaces, which are the weakest points in a crystalline material, the development of the crystallite size can be used to explain the breakage process. The crystallite sizes and the microstrain in the crystal lattice were determined from the X-ray patterns with Rietveld refinement As shown in  Three different samples were investigated: initial state, and after 1.5 and 55  Of course, the major fraction of particles is bigger than shown in  Highly deformed particles and particles with cracks are present. Additionally, very fine particles in the lower nanometer size range surround the larger particles.    The crystallite size rapidly decreases with time as shown by the results from XRD measurements. The agglomerates observed after 55 The images of SnO Spherical particles 2.5, 10 and 30 The principle of the simulation is explained in  The appearance of the pressure cones marks the end of the elastic part of the deformation caused by the applied force. Unlike bulk ceramics, however, the particles do not rupture, but deform plastically upon further stressing. Shear bands enable the mutual gliding of the particle parts below the contact area against each other at an angle of ∼45°. Although bulk tin dioxide is a material of relatively high brittleness, the shear bands in the nanoparticles allow high degrees of plastic deformation as can be seen in From While shear bands in bulk materials generally result in the formation and growth of cracks at grain boundaries, particles behave differently. Here a gliding of particle sections is possible due to the proximity of the particle’s surface and the lack of internal obstacles such as grain boundaries. Therefore, the constraints from a surrounding matrix are missing in single or polycrystalline nanoparticles. In addition, the density of lattice flaws and grain boundaries generally decreases with decreasing particle size. The breakage mechanism can be described as follows: a combination of compression and shear exposure results in a change in the internal microstructure of SnO The mechanism that enables the formation of shear bands in brittle ceramics as well as the twin-like structures found in MD simulations and in HRTEM observations requires further investigation. The measured angle of 54° and the mirror plane found in MD differ from those observed in the HRTEM images (67°) or in literature for bulk materials (60°). These differences might be attributed to the initial shape of the particles. In the experiments the particle’s initial shape is quite irregular, whereas the simulations used spherical particles. Furthermore, it has to be noted that fracture has not yet been initiated in the simulation. This observation is in agreement with the experimental experience that breakage of nanoparticles must be considered a fatigue process that requires multiple deformation cycles. This is the reason why media mills are ideal for nanogrinding: these mills provide numerous collisions between the grinding media, thus the number of stressing events in the experiment is very high. In summary, the studies here have proven that MD simulations are suitable for the investigation of microstructural effects occurring during comminution. The lattice defects observed in the simulations were in good qualitative agreement with those observed by TEM. The interaction potential did reproduce the macroscopic elastic material properties. MD simulations may become a strong tool in future to investigate the physical reasons for the observed grinding limit based on defect formation in oxide nanocrystals. For the time being, any quantitative comparison between intraparticulate structures produced in a real mill and those observed in the MD simulations are not possible. The reasons are twofold. Firstly, the stressing conditions in the mill are complex and not yet known in sufficient detail in terms of number, direction and intensity of the occurring stressing events. Secondly, due to constraints from limited computer capacities, several simplifications in the model were made. Most notably the loading case is limited to a single compression only, while in the laboratory experiment particles are exposed to an yet unknown number of stressing events which are a combination of compression, shear, impact and friction. A multiscale model which takes into account fluid mechanics, motion of milling beads, including stressing events, as well as MD simulations for the stressed product particles is not yet within reach. Nevertheless, both experiment and simulation show surprisingly rich phenomena within particles, opening new directions for the mechanics of stressed nanoparticles. Both TEM analyses and MD simulations of stressed particles show microstructural changes inside nanoparticles being stressed in stirred media mills. The significant plastic deformation of the particles seen during MD simulations is traced back to the nucleation and propagation of shear bands under the applied load. TEM also indicates deformation by shear bands and the formation of twins. Furthermore, the evolution of an internal grain structure is seen and the microstructures obtained in the simulations were also observed in the experiments in particles down to 10 The authors gratefully acknowledge the funding of the German Research Council (DFG), which, within the framework of its ‘Excellence Initiative’, supports the Cluster of Excellence ‘Engineering of Advanced Materials’ at the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg. Also we would like to thank the International Fine Particle Research Institute (IFPRI) for their financial support. Prof. Neubauer and Christoph Hesse of the Institute of Mineralogy, University of Erlangen are gratefully acknowledged for their support in interpreting the XRD patterns.