The preconcentration of nickel (Ni) laterite ores ahead of Ni recovery by hydrometallurgical processing makes good economic sense. Since Ni-bearing minerals are often finely disseminated through laterite ores, liberation of minerals either high and/or low in Ni content is a prerequisite prior to any form of separation process. It is the purpose of this paper to investigate the use of flotation to generate products either high or low in Ni-bearing minerals from a sample of Ni laterite with the generic description of “siliceous goethitic”. Previous attempts showed that upgrading of Ni laterites has only been conducted in laboratory or pilot plant scale, not adopted commercially. A number of feed preparation techniques ahead of flotation were attempted at laboratory scale on a sample of Ni laterite containing predominantly goethite and quartz. Flotation tests even on closely sized particles (38–75μm) failed to yield significant Ni upgrades using the reagents tested in this study, based on those used commercially for processing iron oxide ores. The best result was an increase in Ni content from 1.0% to 1.4% at a Ni recovery of 43%. This was obtained using 400g/t of an amine collector and 300g/t of starch at pH 10 on a sample of hydrocyclone underflow. This paper was designed to provide some lessons learnt for future researchers from laboratory flotation testing of a complex Ni laterite ore.The physical beneficiation of nickel (Ni) laterite ores is clearly a potential method to improve nickel recovery and processing efficiency. Since nickel-bearing minerals are often finely disseminated throughout the ore, it has been difficult to economically upgrade the nickel content in ores without substantial losses. In general, Ni values within laterite ores are associated with goethite, magnesium silicates and nontronite minerals with other gangue minerals containing very little nickel ( This section is structured to give a brief chronological review showing the development of flotation techniques at laboratory scale to the upgrading of Ni laterites from various deposits. A patent by Patents by      These same authors ( Further research on the recovery of Ni from Sukinda chromite overburden has been reported by An abstract by Another paper describing the research conducted on Sukinda chromite overburden has been reported by An additional paper describing flotation tests conducted on the Sukinda chromite overburden has been published by In summary, it can be seen that flotation has only been investigated at laboratory and pilot plant level, with no industrial application to commercial operations located by the authors. According to The Ni laterite selected was a sample being studied as a part of a larger CSIRO Minerals Down Under (MDU) supported Ni laterite beneficiation program of research. The sample was designated “siliceous goethitic” (SG) as suggested by its generic mineralogy. A summary of its chemical and mineralogical characteristics is given in Samples of 2 A 300 Details of the reagents tested, their corresponding pH, Ni concentrate grades and recoveries, and mass recoveries are shown in Prior to flotation, a 2 The flotation procedure was the same as described above. The pH of the flotation feed was increased to 10 using lime. From previous mineralogical studies ( Since the pretreatment described in the previous section produced fine particles by the mechanical action of the pump, hydrocyclone and Denver flotation cell, water recovery and therefore particle entrainment remained high. It was therefore decided to use a flotation column without agitation instead of the Denver cell and use particles in a narrow size range (38–75 Mineral samples of 5 Further characterisation techniques were used to investigate reasons behind the poor selectivity between Ni in concentrate and tailing samples produced by attritioning and wet screening. These included mineralogical analysis by Quantitative X-ray Diffraction (QXRD), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) and Time of Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (ToF-SIMS). The XPS measurements were performed using a Kratos Axis-Ultra X-ray photoelectron spectrometer equipped with a delay-line detector. A monochromatised Al Kα X-ray source was used, operating at 300 Flotation data obtained after the preliminary series of tests showed that the minerals associated with SG laterite had little natural hydrophobicity, with very low mass and Ni recoveries (< ∼5% after 8 Other collectors used in this preliminary series of tests were sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and cetyl trimethlyammonium bromide (CTAB). The results for testing these reagents are also given in The feed preparation procedure described above resulted in the removal of 38% of the mass of the original <2 QEMSCAN analysis was conducted on a sample of 38–75 The 38–75 Results are given in Results for QXRD and ToF-SIMS analysis on samples of concentrate and tailing produced from 38 to 75 Preliminary testing showed that mass and Ni recoveries using frother only were very low, proving that the natural hydrophobicity of Ni-containing minerals was very low. Using 100 The results for flotation tests conducted using various collectors indicated that although the recoveries of the elements increased with increasing collector addition, these increases were not linked to an increase in Ni grade, or indeed to the grade of any element analysed. Since this sample contains a lot of fine particles and the recoveries of the various elements were similar to water recoveries, it was concluded that the increased recoveries were solely attributed to increased particle entrainment, not true flotation. Sizing tests conducted using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 with sonication showed the following cumulative volume% passing: 80% passing 35 The incorporation of a desliming stage ahead of flotation was an attempt to reduce the amount of fine particles that consume reagents and stabilise the froth resulting in very persistent froths which carry particles non-selectively by entrainment. Analysis of the particle size distribution of the hydrocyclone underflow using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 indicated that a significant amount of fines had been removed. It was also found that a good dispersion of the particles remaining in the flotation feed sample was obtained after screening and hydrocycloning. Several Clariant reagents have been used in commercial trials in the reverse flotation of silica from iron ores in the presence of starch as a hematite depressant. From  The objective of the series of intensive agitation and screening for the attritioned sample was to break up any aggregates in the ore and to remove the <38 Results of the QXRD analysis showed that the goethite was partially depressed to the tailing by the corn starch at pH 10, and the quartz was preferentially floated in the concentrate by the EDA as expected. The reduction in goethite in the concentrate corresponded with a slight reduction on Ni grade of the concentrate (0.9% compared with a feed grade of 1.2% (see The ToF-SIMS results ( We are confident that the combination of several cycles of attritioning plus wet screening to disperse the particles and remove the <38 The literature review conducted demonstrated that the preconcentration of Ni from Ni laterites has been very challenging, with only minor Ni upgrades being reported. This is associated with the complex mineralogy of these laterites, where the Ni is extremely finely distributed within many of the phases, and the absence of either a high Ni-bearing phase or a phase always barren in Ni. Nickel values also tend to concentrate in soft minerals which tend to report to the fine sizes during milling, making their selective recovery by flotation very difficult. A number of feed preparation techniques were used ahead of laboratory batch flotation testing. Flotation reagents were chosen to either selectively concentrate the iron ore minerals (predominantly goethite) or the silicates, based on commercial iron oxide flotation practice. In all cases, even for close size fractions, selective recovery of Ni into high iron products using anionic reagents, or into the tailing from the flotation of silicates with the iron minerals depressed with starch was very poor. The best result was an increase in Ni content from 1.0% to 1.4% with a Ni recovery of 43% using 400 The authors wish to thank CSIRO through their Minerals Down Under National Research Flagship for their in-kind and generous financial support for the Nickel Laterite Cluster Project. The authors acknowledge the facilities, and scientific and technical assistance of the Australian Microscopy & Microanalysis Research Facility at the South Australian Regional Facility (SARF), University of South Australia, a facility that is funded by the University, and State and Federal Governments. The authors also acknowledge the contribution of Christopher Bassell for the XPS data and John Denman for the ToF-SIMS data.