Bioleaching is an important process in metallurgy and in environmental sciences, either for the acquisition of metals or for the formation of acid rock drainage. In this study the implications of the processes during bioleaching of a pyritic chalcopyrite concentrate were analysed regarding its Cu and Fe isotope fractionation. The development of the redox potential during the bioleaching experiment was then simulated in an electrochemical cell in the absence of microorganisms to investigate the effect of microbial activity on the Cu and Fe isotope fractionations. The leaching experiments were performed for 28days at 45°C with a solid content of 2.5% (w/v) at pH1.5. It was found that Cu dissolution efficiency was similar in both experiments and the leaching curves were linear with no sign of passivation due to the presence of pyrite. The heavy Cu isotope (δ65Cu) was leached more easily and as a result the leachate was enriched with the heavy Cu isotope at the beginning of both experiments and as the leaching progressed δ65Cu values in the leachate became similar to the ones of the chalcopyrite concentrate, confirming an equilibrium fractionation happening in a closed system. There was no distinct difference in the Cu and Fe isotope fractionations in the absence and presence of microorganisms. Finally based on Cu and Fe isotope signatures, a simplified method is suggested for the estimation of the leaching extent during the oxidisation of sulphide materials in natural systems.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS Bioleaching is defined as the mobilization of metal cations from ores by biological oxidation and complexation processes. Heap bioleaching of secondary copper sulphide minerals including chalcocite (Cu The overall general reaction for chalcopyrite oxidation by ferric ion is presented in reaction The dissolution mechanism of different sulphide minerals in the presence of acidophile microorganisms has been the subject of much research. The results of most of these works are summarised in a recent review ( Cu has two stable isotopes Most of the studies related to Cu and Fe isotope fractionation during (bio)leaching are performed using mono-mineral solids or sulphide rich rocks, taking into account factors such as pH, mineral recovery and microbial activity among others ( The material used in the leaching experiments was a Cu concentrate from the Kristineberg mine in northern Sweden (Boliden Mineral AB). The chemical analysis of the concentrate was 23.6% Cu, 34.7% Fe, 37.5% S, 2.1% Zn and 0.7% Pb. XRD analysis confirmed only the presence of chalcopyrite and pyrite in the concentrate. Before the addition to the leaching reactors, the concentrate was ground to a particle size with d In the bioleaching experiment, a mixed culture of moderately thermophilic acidophiles was used. The culture contained clones related to In the bioleaching experiment, 2.5% (w/v) of the concentrate was added to a 2 An electrochemical cell was used to carry out a controlled redox potential leaching experiment ( Solution samples were analysed for dissolved Cu and Fe by Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS; Perkin Elmer, Analyst 100). Total iron concentration was determined by AAS after dissolution of iron precipitates in 6 Samples for isotope analyses were taken from the bioleaching experiment at different stages of microbial activity: at redox potential 395 All samples were diluted to a concentration of 1 The online data processing included baseline subtraction, calculation of the ion beam intensity ratios and filtering of outliers by a 2-σ test. Further statistical treatment was performed offline. Through this study, δ-notation is used and defined by Eqs. Statistical analysis was performed using OriginPro 9.0.0 (OriginLab Corporation, Northampton, MA 01060, USA). The data were analysed through analysis of variance (ANOVA) to detect the statistical significance of differences at P Redox potential during the control experiment did not exceed 440 The total recovery of Cu was below 2% in the control experiment as there was no bacterial activity in the reactor. But in the bioleaching and electrochemical experiments Cu recoveries were almost similar reaching 47% and 50%, respectively after 28 Iron concentrations in the bioleaching and electrochemical leaching experiments are shown in The Cu isotope composition of the concentrate was 0.17‰ which is in agreement with the range of the reported values for chalcopyrite ores ( Plots of Cu fractionation in the leachate related to the bioleaching and electrochemical experiments against leaching time and recovery are presented in In the bioleaching and electrochemical leaching experiments the residues got enriched in the heavy Cu isotope as leaching progressed due to the increase in the redox potential, whereas the leachates got enriched in the lighter Cu isotope ( The concentrate used in the experiments had a δ  One feature in the copper dissolution curves shown in Another feature in the copper dissolution graphs is the similar recoveries of copper during bioleaching and electrochemical experiments. This implies that irrespective of the mechanism of ferrous to ferric oxidation (microbial versus chemical oxidation), the copper recoveries remained the same and that the leaching efficiency was similar in the presence and absence of bacteria. This also means that the copper dissolution was more a function of redox potential rather than the presence or absence of microorganisms. A detailed discussion regarding the leaching behaviours during the experiments can be found elsewhere ( During the bioleaching and the electrochemical experiments variations in the Cu isotope fractionation were visible versus leaching time, and Cu recoveries. At the start the heavier Cu isotope was released from the concentrate into the leachate ( Enrichment of the leachate at the start of the leaching with the heavier copper isotope and then release of the lighter isotope in later stages has been reported previously ( From The mechanism regulating the leaching of chalcopyrite in the bioleaching and electrochemical leaching experiments was similar. This is confirmed by statistical analysis and also by the similar copper dissolution curves shown in A plot of the relationship between the isotope signatures of Cu and Fe is shown in  Redox potential development in a bioleaching of a pyritic chalcopyrite concentrate was successfully simulated in an electrochemical cell in the absence of microorganisms. Results showed no differences in efficiency of copper leaching, irrespective of the absence or presence of microorganisms. The heavy Cu isotope was oxidised at the beginning of the experiments and as the leaching time progressed the Cu isotope fractionation reached equilibrium. The Fe isotope composition is mainly regulated by the formation of secondary minerals such as jarosite that would be enriched in the heavier Fe isotope. Regardless of the presence or absence of microorganisms the Cu and Fe isotope fractionation had a similar behaviour. The analyses of Cu and Fe isotopes in natural systems could be used as an indicator of the oxidation stage. This research was sponsored by the