Microwave heating is a promising non-aqueous technology in coal seam enhancement. Recently, it has been considered as an alternative technology to hydraulic fracturing and Enhanced Coal Bed Methane recovery, which may be inapplicable due to environmental and geological restrictions. In this paper, a critical review of microwave heating (MH) applications in coal permeability enhancement is presented. The mechanisms of both microwave heating and microwave-induced permeability enhancement are explained. Most of the experimental studies and numerical simulations in the related area are reviewed. The influencing factors for microwave heating/fracturing effect are then discussed in detail. After discussing the challenges in applying microwave on-site, potential field applications were suggested. As no field application is reported till now, further studies, especially experiments in the field-scale are in badly demand to test its technical and economic feasibility.Coalbed methane, mostly exists in the micropores of coal body, is recognized as a promising cleaning fuel resource of worldwide importance and has already achieved commercial success in North America The current gas recovery enhancing methods can be divided into two categories according to whether they increase the permeability of coal seam. Enhanced coalbed methane recovery (ECBM), which replaces coalbed methane with injected CO Nowadays, interest was devoted to microwave heating (MH) to overcome these problems because of its advantages of non-contact volumetric heating, economical and environmentally friendly. The main purpose of microwave heating is to selectively heat the coal seam, which not only promotes coalbed methane desorption but also induces thermal fractures. Microwaves are electromagnetic waves ranged from 300 MHz to 300 GHz (wavelength ranging from 1 to 300 mm) Although successful research results were achieved on investigating the petrophysical variation of coals under microwave treatment, the studies in this area still remain in the preliminary stage. Most of the laboratory experiments were conducted using commercial microwave ovens with a fixed frequency of 2.45 GHz as higher frequencies are not very safe due to the possible interference with other instruments in the laboratory. Even though numerical simulations have been conducted to investigate influencing factors for microwave heating/fracturing, most of these numerical models either have unrealistic assumptions or haven’t been fully verified due to the lack of experimental data. Most importantly, on-site applications or field tests were not found in the literature. Even though microwave heating is proved to be effective in the lab, it could be totally different when applying on-site as the penetration depth of microwave is very limited within the coal reservoir. The aim of this article is to review the studies of coal permeability enhancement using microwave heating and to discuss the feasibility of its on-site applications. At first, the mechanism of microwave heating/fracturing was presented, and the advantages of microwave heating were highlighted. Then, the literature review of both experiments and numerical simulations in studying MH’s effect on coal was presented, following by the influencing factors on microwave fracturing effects. After discussing the outstanding challenges for on-site applications of MH, the conceptual design for potential field applications was proposed. This paper not only reviewed the current research status of microwave-induced permeability enhancement but also discussed the weakness of present studies and provided new angles for future research. Therefore, this work provides comprehensive knowledge in microwave-assist coal seam enhancement technology for other researchers, which could be very helpful for developing microwave applications in coalbed methane exploitation. Microwaves can be transmitted, reflected or absorbed, depending on the material’s dielectric properties ( Insulators are transparent to microwave and therefore can transmit microwaves with no energy conversion. Metals with high conductivities, which has no significant heating effects under MH, reflect microwaves. Materials with median conductivities, especially from 1 to 10 S m Dipolar polarization is considered as the most important mechanism in microwave heating Interfacial polarization also induces microwave heating. It occurs in a non-conducting medium with conducting material dispersed in it The increase of coal temperature enhance the extraction of coalbed methane in two ways: On one hand, higher temperature accelerates gas’s molecular thermal motion and thus facilitates its transformation from the adsorbed state into the free state Due to selective heating, components such as pyrite heat much faster in the electromagnetic field compared to the surrounding coal matrix, which leads to a thermal gradient between the heated phase and the coal matrix Water in coal greatly influences gas storage and flow behaviour Microwave heating is especially effective in water removal due to volumetric heating and selective heating Due to the unique feature of the microwave, microwave heating has the following advantages over conventional heating. Rapid, non-contact and volumetric heating: Most traditional heating methods rely on convection, where heat is applied to the surface and gradually transferred to the inner part Selective heating For an object with heterogeneous dielectric properties, the microwave will selectively heat the adsorbing phase while passing through the transparent phase unaffected. The loss factor of coal as a bulk material is less than 0.25 at 2.21 GHz and 25 ℃ Massive moisture loss Resulted by the volumetric heating and selective heating, significant internal evaporation occurs for water-bearing materials, which results in additional moisture transport during MH Wide applicability Microwave heating is widely applicable to all the coal seams with different geology conditions as long as it contains minerals or water. For the coal seam with low moisture content, microwave showed great fracturing effects Environmentally friendly Microwave stimulation does not consume a huge amount of water, nor contaminate the underground water system. Beyond that, less greenhouse gas will be emitted using MH Easy to control Unlike traditional heating methods, microwave can be switched on and off instantly, and its thermal effect will not continue once turned off Economical Microwave energy can be derived from electrical energy, which is easily accessible. It can be transported through a hollow non-magnetic metal tube (waveguide) without the requirement for storage Experimental studies of microwave-assisted coal permeability enhancement are conducted through comparing pore structure before and after MH. The methods in determining pore structure in coal can be generally divided into two categories, direct and indirect experimental techniques ( As shown in NMR is a frequently used technique with the advantages of non-destructive, less time-consuming and wide aperture range (see As long as water fills in all the pores and fissures within coal samples, NMR is capable to obtain their full range of pore size distribution. With the benefit of non-destructive and wide aperture range, NMR has become the most frequently used method in comparing coal structure before and after MH under various experimental conditions, including microwave power, irradiation time, coal rank, water saturation. Meaningful results were drawn from these NMR experiments and the effect of these influencing factors on MH were made clear, which will be discussed in detail in It is worth to note that, NMR can only accurately detect pore structure when it is saturated with water. For instance, macropores with residual water on the wall will be mistaken as micropores when using NMR to measure the irreducible water existed in coal fissure. In a similar manner, NMR is not suitable to measure large cracks and gaps where water cannot be reserved under gravity. X-ray CT is a non-destructive technique that has been widely used to investigate the internal structure of coal SEM is a method to observe small surface features and structures through scanning a high energy electron beam on the surface of samples SEM experiments have been applied to compare the surface micro-topography of coal before and after MH, whose results suggest that MH smoothens coal surface, induces fissures and alter the angularity and surface properties of coal particles Even though SEM provides detailed information on coal samples, it has several major weaknesses. Firstly, it is almost impossible for SEM to capture the exact same spot again after removing the sample from the device. Even though the SEM images were taken for the same sample before and after MH, the images are most likely from different positions due to the challenges of identifying the exact spot. As coal is anisotropic, the conclusions drawn from the comparison of different spots before and after microwave treatment is not solid. Secondly, SEM images can only be taken on the surface, while not able to provide any information about the internal structures. Finally, as SEM only focus on a very small part of the surface, it cannot be used as a quantitative analysis to determine microwave’s effect on fissure development. N Except for the above-mentioned limitations, past studies have shown inconsistent findings with N Another N Finally, another similar N In conclusion, the use of N Numerical models were first established to study microwave heating on coal in the early 1990s. These 2D models made it possible to simulate the electromagnetic and thermal field distribution of coal sample as a function of microwave power, frequency and irradiation time. However, these preliminary models were simplified to reduce computation time and none of these models was verified with experiment results. Chatterjee Finite element analysis software including COMSOL Multiphysics and ANSYS are the current mainstream research software in simulating microwave systems Even though COMSOL Multiphysics is powerful in simulating microwave heating, it has a major limitation in establishing large-scale reservoir models. COMSOL requires extensive memory when solving models with large grid numbers, and therefore difficult to simulate the large model with very high grid numbers ANSYS is a similar finite element software, which requires more complicated operations but has the capability to handle the model with large grid numbers. Therefore, ANSYS is more suitable for simulating microwave heating in reservoirs. Wang Numerical models have also been developed to simulate microwave-assisted breakage. Whittles The volumetric adsorption of microwave energy (in units of W/m Higher power level is not only more effective but also more energy efficient in microwave fracturing. Simulations were conducted under different microwave powers but at the same energy input to compare the energy efficiency of various microwave power Even though larger microwave power is more efficient and economical, it is worth to mention that large microwave power leads to a rapid temperature rise in the nearby coal seam. The heat conductivity of coal is extremely low (especially for coal with low saturations) and thus not able to transfer heat rapidly to adjacent areas, which may result in overheating and causes a fire. Therefore, due to safety concerns, suitable microwave power is vital to on-site applications for preventing overheating. Before application, a safe microwave power level needs to be determined based on the measured microwave heating rate and the heat transfer rate of the specific coal seam. The industrial, scientific and medical (ISM) radio bands are limited to certain frequencies as powerful emission of microwave energy may disrupt radio communication using the same frequency. International Telecommunication Union (ITU) designated the following frequencies for ISM, including 6.78, 13.56, 27.12, 40.68, 433.92, 915, 2450, 5800 MHz and 24.125, 61.25, 122.5, 245 GHz Microwave frequency affects MH performance in three ways: First of all, microwave frequency determines its penetration depth in coal, which further influences the effective range of microwave heating. This factor is insignificant in the microwave oven but especially crucial for large-scale on-site applications. The discussion regarding microwave frequency’s effect on penetration depth will be further elaborated in Secondly, different microwave frequencies lead to various electromagnetic field distribution in a confined space, which is vital for microwave oven performance. Numerical simulation has shown that different microwave frequencies create diverse electric field distributions within the microwave oven Finally, microwave frequency may influence the dielectric properties of coal and thus changes its microwave adsorption capability Coal temperature increase under MH can be divided into two stages. In the first stage, the temperature increases rapidly to a certain value (almost linearly with time). In the second stage, the heating rate decreases over time because of vaporization and decomposition, and the temperature remains constant after reaching a certain point. It was found with the increase of load of mass, the heating rate decreases significantly, and it takes much longer time for the first stage of microwave heating. Till now, no field experiment in microwave-assisted coal seam enhancement was reported. However, it can be speculated that the heating rate of the coal seam is very limited when applying MH on-site and the temperature of coal seam will increase linearly with treatment time for a long period. With the extension of time, the thermal conduction, convection and radiation of coal body and pore liquid can achieve effective heating on a large scale Most researchers believe microwave has more significant fracturing effect on coal with longer treatment time. Experimental studies have shown that porosity and permeability increase with microwave treatment time for all types of coal samples Coal rank affects the moisture, volatile matters and fixed carbon content, which will ultimately influence the capability of coal to absorb microwave power Some researchers believe the dielectric constant increases with coal rank Water’s loss factor is as high as about 12 at 25 ℃ and 2.45 GHz, which is considerably higher than most materials within the coal body Both numerical simulations and experiment results suggest microwave have better fracturing effect for the coal with low moisture saturation compared to the dried coal. For coal seam with low moisture content, moisture is unevenly distributed within the coal body. Heated moisture imparts thermal stress, which further promotes the generation of new fractures and changes at the grain level. In an experimental study, the total porosity after MH was found to increase exponentially with water contents from 1% to 15% Even though microwave has better fracturing performance in the coal with low moisture saturation over the dried coal, moisture is not always beneficial to microwave fracturing of coal seam. With the continuous increase in saturation, more and more pores and fissures are filled with water, leaving little space for gas to flow. The increase in the saturation of the reservoir may result in water blocking and lead to diminished gas production Minerals are another major absorber of microwave energy in coal. The heating effect of a number of minerals and reagent grad inorganic compounds under 2450 MHz microwave irradiation were investigated by the US Bureau of Mines Many scholars have found fractures are easily induced in samples containing good microwave absorbers in a poor absorbing matrix. Rapid heating of ore minerals in the non-heating gangue matrix can effectively produce flaws and cause embrittlement Coal exhibits great attenuations of microwave propagation, especially for that with high moisture content Penetration depth ( Equation Field measurement of penetration depth for heavy oil reservoir was performed with 8 microwave frequencies ranging from 13.54 to 2450 MHz Comparing to the heavy oil reservoir, coal seam has a relative larger dielectric constant and thus has even smaller penetration depth. When applying microwave heating on coal reservoir, microwave mainly effects on the surface layer of coal as microwave attenuate quickly after entering coal body. With the increase of temperature of the surface layer, the heat gradually transfers to the inner part. Therefore, in contrast with the instant heating of the microwave oven, it takes a long time for microwave heating to take effect on reservoirs. To achieve a larger effective heating range, lower microwave frequency seems to be more suitable for on-site application. The lower frequency is also more competitive from the perspective of energy efficiency. It was reported that the conversion efficiency from electricity to microwave energy is about 50% for 2450 MHz but increases to 85% for 915 Hz As most of the main rock-forming minerals are insensitive to microwave, its application to coal seam should have little impact on the stability of roadways. However, human tissue is very sensitive to microwave and thus must be protected against over irradiation. Till now, there is no universally adopted regulation for exposure to radiofrequency (RF) radiation. Guidelines proposed by International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) is recognised as an international standard and has been widely accepted by lots of countries and organizations, including the European Union, New Zealand and the World Health Organization (WHO) As for the environmental impact, although MH does not have any polluting by-products, it may still have damage to the ecosystem depending on the electromagnetic field strength, frequencies, modulation and duration of exposure Microwave heating has been studied and applied in the petroleum industry since the early 1970s A microwave heating system consists of a microwave radiator, a control system, a waveguide and several antennas. A gas extraction system composed of a floral tube, a gas extraction tube and a pump. A safety guarantee system consists of a monitoring sensor, a casing pipe, a sealing for electromagnetic shielding. Microwave can deal with the regular problems in borehole such as “borehole blocked” and “borehole full of water”. In Australia, extensive gas drainage boreholes were drilled in gassy seams prior to production. However, the gas drainage efficiency is low in coal seam with high water saturation Microwave can also address the water blocking in the near-wellbore area, which has huge damage to gas production There were other potential on-site applications based on microwave’s fracturing characteristics. It can potentially reduce the drill diameter and still achieve the same production by using microwave fracturing, thus reducing the drilling cost A critical review concerning microwave heating in coal permeability enhancement was provided in this paper. Numerical simulations and experimental studies have suggested that microwave heating is a feasible and promising technology for coal seam enhancement. To assist researchers in understanding current research status, Experimental studies suggest that microwave has a great influence on the petrophysical property of coal, whose pore size, pore connectivity, permeability and porosity increase significantly after MH. However, it still remains controversial whether microwave fracturing increases the number of pores in coal or not. Some researchers believe macropores collapse into the micropore system under the shrinkage forces caused by the rapid evaporation of the inherent moisture in the brown coal To optimize the energy efficiency and to achieve the best microwave heating/fracturing effect, microwave parameters require custom design based on the dielectric properties and geological conditions of the specific coal seams. Firstly, the mono-mode microwave system that generating specific frequency and power has much higher energy efficiency comparing to the multimode microwave systems. It was reported that the energy efficiency of a pilot and full-scale mono-mode type systems are over 80%, while the efficiency for multimode type applicator can be as low as 40% The main research shortage in microwave-assisted coal seam enhancement is the lack of on-site experiment and field applications. As encouraging laboratory experimental results cannot ensure good performance on-site, further field-scale experiments are required before the on-site application of microwave heating. Numerical models for coal reservoirs also need to be modified or verified based on the field test. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is supported by the