Amine-functionalized mesoporous silica is one of the most promising solid sorbents for CO2 capture. The pore structure of sorbents plays a crucial role in enhancing sorption and desorption kinetics. In this work, mesoporous silica nanosphere (MSN) with inverted cone-shaped pore structure was synthesized and examined as the support for polyethyleneimine (PEI). The unique pore structure of MSN support for PEI resulted in significantly faster sorption and desorption rates and higher sorption capacity within short sorption time when compared to the benchmark support SBA-15 with the same amount of PEI loading. With 65 wt% PEI loading, 65PEI/MSN sorbent showed about 50% higher working capacity, together with 27% faster rate of CO2 sorption and 71% faster rate of CO2 desorption, compared to that with 65PEI/SBA-15 in sorption/desorption cycles. PEI/MSN sorbents have great potential for practical applications in CO2 capture.Carbon dioxide (CO The rational design of the structure of supports in amine-functionalized mesoporous silica plays a crucial role in improving the adsorption performance. Previous studies poured huge amount of efforts on optimizing the structure of supports and elucidating the relationship between structure of supports and their CO The present work focuses on improving the adsorption/desorption kinetics of amine-functionalized mesoporous silica by using a novel nano-structured support with inverted cone-shaped pore structure. Based on our prior studies Tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) was purchased from Xilong Chemicals Co. Ltd. (Shantou, China). Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) was purchased from Kermel Chemicals (Tianjing, China). Aqueous ammonia (NH MSN was synthesized by aldehyde-modified Stöber method SBA-15 was synthesized according to the method previously reported in the literature PEI/MSN sorbents were prepared using wet-impregnation method N CO Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were taken on a JEM-2100F instrument (JEOL Company) with an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. The samples for TEM were prepared by dipping copper grids into the ethanol solution of the samples and drying under ambient conditions. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were taken on a Hitachi S-5500 instrument with an acceleration voltage of 3 kV. Thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed on SDT Q600 (TA Instruments, USA) over the temperature range of 30–800 °C either in air or N The composition of samples was identified by Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR, Nicolet iS50, Thermo Fisher) spectrometry in attenuated total reflection (ATR) mode with the wavenumber range of 500–4000 cm CO Four sorption kinetic models were considered to study the sorption kinetics of PEI/MSN sorbents including pseudo-first order, pseudo-second order, avrami’s fractional order and double-exponential model (DEM). Pseudo-first order: Pseudo-second order: Avrami’s fractional order: Double-exponential model: The structure and morphology of MSN before and after PEI impregnation were observed by electron microscopy, as shown in To confirm the composition of PEI/MSN sorbents, the FTIR spectra of MSN and PEI/MSN sorbents were collected, as shown in N Thermal stability is an important parameter for sorbents. For post-combustion capture, the sorption temperature is in range of 50–75 °C In order to determine the CO When the PEI loading increases from 30 wt% to 65 wt%, the sorption rate increases and then reaches the maximum (83.5 mg g In order to understand the impacts of sorption temperature on PEI/MSN sorbents, CO Sorption/desorption kinetics are critical parameters for CO Both 50PEI/MSN and 65PEI/MSN show better sorption kinetics and desorption kinetics compared to that with the SBA-15 counterparts, which indicates that the unique structure of MSN is beneficial for improving sorption/desorption kinetics. With 65 wt% PEI loading at sorption temperature of 80 °C, 65PEI/MSN sorbent shows 27% faster rate of CO To gain some insights on the relationship between the structure of PEI/MSN sorbents and their sorption/desorption kinetics, the sorption/desorption kinetics data were discussed in detail. For sorption kinetics at 30 °C, the peak sorption rate and the sorption amount of both 50PEI/MSN and 65PEI/MSN are almost the same. However, when sorption temperature further increases, both peak sorption rate and sorption amount of 65PEI/MSN are higher than that of 50PEI/MSN. Increasing PEI loading from 50 wt% to 65 wt% introduces more sorption sites as well as higher diffusion resistance. At low sorption temperature of 30 °C, the diffusion resistance of 65PEI/MSN cannot be mitigated sufficiently thus CO Moreover, though higher desorption temperature is preferred for faster desorption rate, given the thermal stability, the optimal desorption temperature should be lower than 120 °C to avoid deactivation of amine groups To further study the sorption kinetics of 65PEI/MSN at 80 °C, four different kinetic models including pseudo-first order, pseudo-second order, avrami’s fractional order, and double-exponential model (DEM) were applied to fit the sorption curve. The activation energy of adsorption was determined by Arrhenius equation: The fitting plot of The heat of sorption is an important parameter to determine the strength of the interaction between sorption sites and CO The isosteric heat of sorption was also calculated from isotherm data at multiple temperatures by the Clausius-Clapeyron equation, as shown in Generally, heat of sorption is in the range of 60–90 kJ/mol for chemisorption and 25–50 kJ/mol for physisorption For post-combustion capture, CO  In order to study the cyclic performance of the PEI/MSN sorbents, 65PEI/MSN sorbent was tested in five sorption/desorption cycles. For comparison, 65PEI/SBA-15 was also tested under the same conditions. The working capacity of 65PEI/MSN is 126 mg/g, about 50% higher than that of 65PEI/SBA-15 (80 mg/g), as shown in The desorption energy of sorbents is a key criterion to determine cyclic performance besides working capacity. It can be calculated from the Amenomiya equation The fitting plot of Mesoporous silica nanospheres with inverted cone-shaped pore structure was synthesized and examined as the support for polyethyleneimine. It is found that the unique structure of MSN is beneficial for the dispersion of PEI and the diffusion of gas molecules resulting in fast CO The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.  The author declares no competing financial interest. This work was financially supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: