Frederick M. Azar Anna Cohen-Rosenblum and Quanjun Cui Osteonecrosis of the femoral head most commonly arises from trauma or corticosteroid and alcohol use but is also associated with blood dyscrasias and metabolic and coagulation disorders. Initial evaluation includes a history and physical examination and plain radiographs. Early-stage osteonecrosis is best evaluated by MRI. The Ficat and Arlet classification system is the most widely used. Nonoperative treatment has been studied using bisphosphonates, anticoagulants, vasodilators, statins, and biophysical modalities. Operative treatment includes core decompression with or without adjuvants, such as autologous bone marrow, whereas total hip arthroplasty is reserved for advanced-stage osteonecrosis in older patients or those who have failed joint-preserving treatment. Hayeem L. Rudy, Jorge A. Padilla, Jonathan A. Gabor, Richard Iorio, Ran Schwarzkopf, and Jonathan Vigdorchik Hip dislocation remains a major concern following total hip arthroplasty due to its high frequency and economic burden. This article evaluates the cost-effectiveness regarding dual mobility as an alternative to standard implant designs. A review of literature analyzing the PubMed Central database was undertaken using the following terms in the primary query: dual mobility, cost-effectiveness, cost-analysis, or economic analysis. Dual mobility systems may be a cost-effective alternative when the price of the implant does not exceed the traditional system by $1023. Dual mobility cups may be an essential component for the future success of value-based total hip arthroplasty. Graham J. DeKeyser, Patrick J. Kellam, and Justin M. Haller The incidence of osteoporotic fracture is increasing with the aging US population. Because osteoporosis leads to a decrease in bone mineral density with a decrease in both trabecular and cortical bones, osteoporotic fracture presents fixation challenges with standard plate and screw constructs. Locked plating has been developed to create a fixed-angle plate-screw construct that is more resistant to failure in osteoporotic bone. Endosteal replacement, additional plates, and cement augmentation have all been demonstrated to further supplement osteoporotic fracture fixation. Technologies on the horizon to treat osteoporotic fracture include SMV screws, hydroxyapatite-coated implants, and far cortical locking screws. Samantha Nino, Sandeep P. Soin, and Frank R. Avilucea Active assessment and management of hypovitaminosis D among orthopedic patients is low-risk and low-cost while retaining significant potential to improve patient care. Vitamin D has an established role in musculoskeletal development and calcium homeostasis, and vitamin D deficiency is pervasive in orthopedic trauma populations. Clinical guidelines for screening and supplementation for hypovitaminosis D are lacking. Literature on the effects of vitamin K on bone health is limited. Anabolic hormone analogues may have a future role in delayed union or nonunion treatment. Vitamin D deficiency and other endocrine abnormalities should be considered in orthopedic trauma patients presenting with fracture nonunion of uncertain cause. Michael P. Horan, Kevin Williams, and Daniel Hughes Understanding the role of vitamin D is an important component of the proper care of the pediatric orthopedic patient. Vitamin D is an essential component of bone metabolism in the growth and development of the pediatric skeleton, which can be acutely affected by changes to the body's vitamin D, calcium, and phosphate levels, resulting in pathologic conditions such as rickets or fractures. This article reviews the main areas in which vitamin D relates to pediatric orthopedics and highlights some of the areas where future research is being directed. Jeanne M. Franzone, Suken A. Shah, Maegen J. Wallace, and Richard W. Kruse Osteogenesis imperfecta is a genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous disorder related to a defect or deficiency in the production of type I collagen. It is characterized by brittle bones, fractures, spine and extremity deformity, and a host of extraskeletal manifestations. Type I collagen is present in bone, tendons, ligaments, skin, dentin, and the sclera of the eye and other connective tissues. Osteogenesis imperfecta includes a multitude of disease manifestations that may be present at birth or develop over time and vary depending on the severity of the disease. This article describes the disease presentation and management considerations from a pediatric orthopedic perspective. John C. Wu, Carson D. Strickland, and James S. Chambers Distal radial fractures account for up to 18% of all fractures in patients over 65 years of age, and osteoporosis is a predominant factor in these fractures. Fracture treatment may include closed reduction and casting/splinting, external fixation, and open reduction and internal fixation. Michael A. Stone and Surena Namdari Proximal humerus fractures in the setting of osteoporosis can be technically challenging. Intraoperative challenges include comminution, thin cortical bone, and crushed cancellous bone that lead to difficulties in obtaining and maintaining a reduction and hardware fixation. Loss of fixation and varus collapse continue to be problems despite the utilization of modern locking plate fixation. A clearer understanding of predictors of fixation failure and the encouraging early results of reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA) have resulted in increased utilization of RTSA for the primary treatment of proximal humerus fractures. Vahid Entezari and Mark Lazarus Osteopenia and osteoporosis are common in older adults and are associated with increased risk of fragility fractures. Vitamin D deficiency caused by chronic disease, poor nutrition, and inadequate sun exposure affects bone quality. Chronic rotator cuff tears can deteriorate the bone mineral density of the greater tuberosity and have been linked to reduced anchor pullout strength and high re-tear rate after repair especially in older patients with larger tear size. This article summarizes the current evidence on rotator cuff tear and bone quality and provides treatment strategies for rotator cuff repair in patients with poor bone quality. Raymond Y. Hsu, Jose M. Ramirez, and Brad D. Blankenhorn As the geriatric population and associated ankle fractures continues to increase, fracture surgeons should be prepared to surgically manage osteoporotic ankle fractures. There are abundant challenges in management, soft tissue care, and fixation of ankle fractures with poor bone quality especially in elderly patients who have difficulty limiting weight bearing. This article summarizes several different surgical techniques that can be used to optimize outcomes of these fractures. Kenneth DeFontes III and Jeremy T. Smith Vitamin D deficiency affects nearly one-sixth of the world’s population and is common in patients undergoing foot and ankle surgery. Vitamin D is critical for calcium homeostasis and plays an important role in the maintenance of bone health. Patients undergoing foot and ankle procedures can be evaluated preoperatively with vitamin D level testing, and deficiencies can be addressed with either preoperative or postoperative supplementation. Current data suggest that patients with adequate vitamin D levels may have better outcomes, but the details are not yet clear. Vitamin D supplementation is well tolerated with rare side effects.