Liquid–liquid extraction experiments were carried out to recover and partition Ir(IV) and Ru(III) from chloride solutions using Cyanex 923 (C923) dissolved in kerosene. The efficacy of the extraction was studied under various experimental conditions, such as concentration of H+, Cl− in the aqueous phase, concentration of C923 in the organic phase and temperature. The organometallic species extracted in the organic phase were elucidated to be a mixture of IrCl4·2C923–HIrCl5·C923 and HRuCl4·C923 for Ir(IV) and Ru(III) respectively. Increasing the experimental temperature led to a decrease in the distribution ratios of both Ir(IV) (D
                     Ir) and Ru(III) (D
                     Ru). The relative decrease of D
                     Ir was greater than that of D
                     Ru. Ir was quantitatively stripped with distilled water. Ascorbic acid was found to be the most suitable of several stripping solutions tested on Ru. Experimental data related to the separation of Ir and Ru from their 1:1 mixture are presented with the respective decontamination factors obtained in various streams. The extraction behaviour of metal impurities normally associated with Ir and Ru, such as Rh, Cu, Ni, Pb, Pd, Pt, Bi, Te, Fe and Sn, was examined at different concentrations of HCl in the aqueous phase.The commercial importance of precious metals lies in the manufacturing of jewellery, catalysts, electronic components, etc. The great aesthetic value and technological qualities of these metals have created a never-ending demand, and due to limited resources the gap between supply and demand is still increasing. Recycling them after their main use has become an important means of closing this gap. Conventionally, precious metals were extracted and purified using pyrometallurgical methods ( Recent research used different extractants for extracting Ir, Ru and Rh ( Cyanex 923 (Cytec Canada Inc) and kerosene (Fluka) were used without any purification. Cyanex 923 is a mixture of four phosphine oxides with the general formulae R The stock solution of Ir(IV) (1 Ten millilitres of aqueous phase containing 100  The possible existence of ionic and non-ionic species of Ir(IV) in the aqueous chloride solutions is explained by the following equilibriums: The Ir(IV) species, which can be extracted using the neutral extractant C923, are IrCl    The logarithmic value of the equilibrium constant observed for this reaction is − The quantitative ratio of the above two species extracted depends on the concentrations of Cl Iridium was stripped from the loaded organic phase using distilled water, Na  The ionic and non-ionic species of Ru(III) that may exist in the aqueous chloride solutions are explained by the following equations: Eqs. The extraction of Ru(III) increased as the concentration of H   Comparatively less Ru(III) than Ir(IV) was extracted for the given concentrations of C923 ( It was difficult to strip Ru from the loaded organic phase. The extraction of Ir(IV) and Ru(III) at different temperatures is shown in Partitioning of Ir and Ru from 50 mg/L of each metal from a 1 M HCl solution was tried using 5% C923/kerosene. The formation of a third phase at high [H Two favourable properties of Ru were exploited, its low distribution ratio compared to Ir(IV) at 1 M HCl; and its poor back-extraction using distilled water. Finally, after the tenth stage of extraction and stripping, the organic phase was treated three times with an equal volume of 1.5% ascorbic acid in 1 M HCl to back-extract accumulated Ru. At the end of this extraction process, three aqueous phase streams were generated: (1) a raffinate, which mainly contained Ru, (2) the combined stripping solution from each stage containing Ir with a small amount of Ru, and (3) a final solution from back-extraction of Ru using 1.5% ascorbic acid  The extraction of metal ions that are normally associated with Ir(IV) and Ru(III) – such as Rh(III), Cu(II), Ni(II), Pb(IV), Pd(II), Pt(IV), Bi(III), Te(IV), Fe(III) and Sn(IV) – at different concentrations of HCl using C923 was studied.  From the above results at 0.1 Ir(IV) can be extracted from aqueous solutions containing a low concentration of HCl by using C923. The extraction of Ir(IV) increases as the concentration of HCl increases in the aqueous phase. The organometallic species extracted are probably IrCl Ru(III) is best extracted from an aqueous phase containing more than 1 The separation of Ir(IV) and Ru(III) was demonstrated using multistage extraction and stripping experiments. Under controlled experimental conditions, Fe(III), Ni(II), Cu(III), Te(IV), Bi(III), Pd(III) and Sn(III) can be eliminated in the process of extracting and stripping Ir(IV). This work was financed by the European Commission (contract CRD-CT-2000-00300) in the framework of the Growth Programme and MEC (CTQ 2005-09430). C.S. Kedari acknowledges the financial support of the DURSI (2003PIV-00093) (Generalitat of Catalonia).