This study used an immunohistochemical method to examine the expression of osteopontin (OPN) in 30 ameloblastomas and of integrin αv and CD44v6 in 20 of these 30 ameloblastomas. We found that the positive staining rate in ameloblastomas was 87% for OPN, 45% for integrin αv, and 90% for CD44v6. Both ameloblast-like and stellate reticulum-like cells showed a high expression of OPN and CD44v6. There was also a strong integrin αv immunostaining on the cell membrane of osteoclasts. Binding of OPN to osteoclast cell membrane receptor integrin αv can activate the osteoclast and increase its osteolytic activity. In addition, binding of OPN to ameloblastoma tumor cell membrane receptor CD44v6 can enhance tumor cell migration, invasion and spread. Therefore, we suggest that the local aggressive behavior and high osteolytic ability of ameloblastomas in the jawbones can be explained by the high expression of OPN and CD44v6 in ameloblastoma cells and the high expression of integrin αv in osteoclasts.The ameloblastoma is the most common epithelial odontogenic tumor, constituting 11–18% of all odontogenic tumors. Osteopontin (OPN) is an extracellular matrix protein of mineralized tissue with RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp) tripeptide. Binding of OPN to osteoclast cell membrane receptor integrin α After approval by the Hospital Review Board, we obtained formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue blocks from 30 patients (19 men and 11 women, mean age 32.8 Each tissue section was cut at 4 In this study only the percentage of cells showing positive stain, but not the intensity of staining, was quantified as suggested by Hall and Lane. The expression rates of each protein in different subtypes of ameloblastomas were analyzed by Fisher’s exact test. A Positive control sections of OPN revealed a strong immunostaining in the cytoplasm of osteoblasts and in the osteoid tissue at the site of new bone formation ( The positive control sections of the peripheral giant cell granuloma revealed a strong membranous integrin α Diffuse and strong membranous CD44v6 staining was found on the basal and spinous cells of the positive control skin section except the basal keratinocyte cell membrane facing the basement membrane ( OPN is associated with bone remodeling and plays an inductive role in mineralization process. This study showed a high positive OPN staining rate of 87% in ameloblastomas. The OPN protein was majorly expressed in stellate reticulum-like cells; OPN immunostaining was found in only a few ameloblast-like cells. We also observed positive OPN staining in the peri-tumor nest connective tissue in 77% of OPN-positive ameloblastomas in this series. Our findings suggest that the OPN protein is probably synthesized and secreted by stellate reticulum-like cells, picked up by ameloblast-like cells, and released into the peri-tumor nest stromal tissue (transcytosis in the ameloblast-like cells) in ameloblastomas. The possibility that a small amount of OPN is produced by the ameloblast-like cells cannot be completely ruled out. Further studies, such as in situ hybridization for OPN mRNA, are necessary to elucidate this hypothesis. This study also examined the expression of integrin α OPN is a chemoattractant to precursors of osteoclasts. Binding of OPN to osteoclast cell membrane receptor integrin α None declared.