Background
                  Locking compression plate (LCP) fixation of juxta articular and diaphyseal fractures of upper limb is a new modality of operative management.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty-five consecutive cases of juxta articular and diaphyseal fractures of upper limb were fixed with LCP and results were analyzed.
               
                  Results
                  All fractures healed in good anatomical position in 6–8 weeks with good functional outcome.
               
                  Conclusion
                  LCP is a reliable fixation device for juxta articular and diaphyseal fractures of upper limb.Juxta articular metaphyseal fractures of upper limb are routinely managed with open reduction and internal fixation to ensure good articular congruence. Diaphyseal fractures are managed to ensure good alignment. Available fixation devices include buttress plate of L or T or Spoon shape, and configurations of Ellis T-plate for juxta articular osteo synthesis. Diaphyseal fracture fixation is done routinely with DCP or LC-DCP. Newer concepts in bone fixation have led to introduction of Locking Compression Plates where screws are locked to the plate and unicortical fixation holds smaller fragments well as an internal fixator. Selected cases of metaphyseal and diaphyseal fractures of upper limb were managed by ORIF with 3.5 Selection criteria Displaced fractures Metaphyseal fractures Minimal comminution Upper end of humerus, lower end of radius, lower end of humerus, shaft of radius and ulna Exclusion criteria Gross comminution Undisplaced Open fracture Routine orthopedic principles were followed. Per-op antibiotic prophylaxis with Omnatax Post-operative follow up was done with X-rays at 6 weeks, 3 months and at 6 months. Active physiotherapy was done to regain function. Twenty-five cases were done in the period of the study. Details are as follows. Case distribution is given in Increasing consideration is being given to biological factors in fracture care by internal fixation. Preservation of periosteal blood supply, avoidance of extensive dissection and stripping of fracture fragments and more rapid fracture healing in biological fixation are currently accepted in routine orthopedic practice. Delayed collapse is common in juxta articular fractures and technique of ligamentotaxis and external fixators are in vogue, to prevent this delayed malunion. External devices need removal at 6–8 weeks usually. More prolonged maintenance of position without pin related complications is more desirable and a new concept of internal fixator (LCP/PC-Fix) utilizing locking screws has been devised. It does not rely on interfragmentary compression, and healing with callus formation is expected to be quicker and more effective than primary healing. In this series all 25 cases went on to union by 9 months. Delayed union was noticed at 6 months in two cases of diaphyseal fractures of ulna. They went on to union without additional intervention. Both had comminution and this was the probable cause of delay. One grossly comminuted distal radial fracture had loss of reduction with collapse and intra articular screw penetration and malunion. Screw was removed and wrist mobilized. There were no other complications. In 1975, Anderson et al In a prospective multi-center study on 144 patients with 169 fractures fixed with LCP was reported by Sommer et al in 2003. 45 were humeral and 19 radial fractures. After 1 year, results were 86% union, 18 revisions for implant failure, nonunion and secondary fractures. Expert analysis commented that problems were due to technical errors. New LCP system was concluded as a mature fixation system with proven worth in complex fracture situations and revision situations. To conclude, LCP fixation of metaphyseal fractures of upper limb gives good and stable fixation even in the presence of comminution and osteoporosis. In this series of cases all the patients showed satisfactory union. Proper attention to technical details is essential. Study concept: Lt Col P.P. Manoj Kumar (Retd), Maj Gen K.R. Salgotra, vsm. Drafting and manuscript revision: Lt Col P.P. Manoj Kumar (Retd). Statistical analysis: Lt Col P.P. Manoj Kumar (Retd). Study supervision: Maj Gen K.R. Salgotra, vsm, Lt Col P.P. Manoj Kumar (Retd). This study has been funded by research grant from