Diamond-like carbon (DLC) films were deposited by pulsed filtered cathodic vacuum arc (FCVA) deposition. The microstructure, mechanical and optical properties of DLC films have been investigated as functions of the variation in the substrate negative direct current bias voltage (V
                     bias) from 0.0 to 1.5 kV. Raman and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy results show a correlation between the I
                     D/I
                     G ratio and the microstructure in terms of the sp
                     3/sp
                     2 ratio to V
                     bias. This fact shows that a significant change in the sp
                     3 content, which is attributed to the transformation from graphite-like to diamond-like, is accompanied by a decreasing I
                     D/I
                     G ratio. The relatively high mass density of the films in the range of 2.51 to 2.79 g/cm3 can be obtained with biasing. The mechanical properties, i.e., the hardness and elastic modulus, were 13–25 and 114–145 GPa, respectively. The improvement of the mechanical properties is due to the formation of the compressive residual stress and the local density depending on V
                     bias. The relationship between the refractive index and the I
                     D/I
                     G ratio agree well with the microstructure and mechanical properties of DLC films. All of these results indicate a vital role of V
                     bias in determining the DLC properties.Diamond-like carbon (DLC) films have been receiving much attention in recent years due to their unique properties, such as high hardness, high wear resistance, low friction coefficient, thermal conductivity, optical transparency, chemical inertness, and biological compatibility [ The mechanical and optical properties of DLC films strongly depend on their microstructure, especially the In this study, we investigate optical, mechanical and physical properties of DLC films deposited by pulsed FCVA at various First, the A laser Raman microscope spectroscopic device (HORIBA, Jobin-Yvon, LabRAM Infinity) was used to study the microstructure of the amorphous carbon films. The Raman spectra of the films were obtained in the backscattering mode using an Ar The XPS apparatus (JEOL, JPS-9010TR) was utilized to obtain the surface chemical composition and the The The hardness ( The  The variation in the Furthermore, the variations in the G band position as a function of  A similar trend of the FWHM(G) and the G band position is observed for variations of the disordered structure and  As mentioned previously, it is interesting to further investigate the change in the structure and property of the films with different  From the measurements, DLC-0 should not be used because film delamination is observed. Hence, its     Taking into account the relationship between the Regarding these observations, the established correlation between the DLC films were deposited on Si (100) substrate by the pulsed-FCVA deposition at various The