The majority of the candidate drug entities exhibit solubility-limiting absorption. Nanocrystal suspensions with particle size in the nanometer scale (nanonization) can increase aqueous solubility and improve oral bioavailability. Regarding the importance of nanosuspension solidification, this study intended to study the critical parameters on redispersed particle size of dried nanocrystals as pretabletting material during spray drying process, such as supporting agents, inlet temperature and feed rate. Fenofibrate with poor water solubility and low melting point was used as a model drug. Nanocrystals of fenofibrate were prepared by a bead-milling method. Five types of hydrophilic excipients in combination with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) were studied as supporting agents during spray drying. The resultant products were characterized by particle size analysis, scanning electron microscopy imaging, differential scanning calorimetry, X-ray powder diffraction and dissolution testing. Spray dried powder with a mean redispersed particle size of 699nm was produced by using mannitol and SDS as supporting agent. Weight ratio (R
                     F/m) of fenofibrate:mannitol and inlet temperature strongly influenced the particle size of the nanocrystals. The optimal inlet temperature and feed rate was optimized as 75°C and 4mLmin−1, respectively. Partially transformation of fenofibrate crystalline to the amorphous form was observed. The dissolution profiles of tablets prepared with the spray dried powder were similar to the commercial nanocrystal formulation Lipidil™ ez, and faster than that of the micronized formulation. The relative bioavailability of the spray-dried formulation was determined to be 89.6% taking Lipidil™ ez as the reference. There were no significant statistic differences of AUC0–72 and C
                     max between the two formulations.It was estimated that about 40% of the promising drug candidates are poorly soluble due to much emphasis on high throughput screening of receptor-binding affinity ( Nanonization is an effective way to improve aqueous solubility by increasing surface area. Additionally, reduction in the particle size can improve dissolution rate according to Noyes–Whitney equation, and in turn rapid drug action ( Many studies have been taken to investigate particle size controlling of nanoparticle suspensions during spray drying process and then redispersed particle size in aqueous solution. Dry powders of nanoparticles with desired redispersion in aqueous medium were prepared by adding hydrophilic excipients into suspension prior to spray drying. But most of the nanoparticle materials investigated in the literature are used for inhaled drugs, such as silica ( Fenofibrate, a lipid lowering agent, is mainly used to reduce cholesterol levels in patients. It is used alone or in combination with statins in the treatment of hypercholesterolemia and hypertriglyceridemia. Fenofibrate is a typical BCS class II drug (low aqueous solubility and high permeability), with a relatively low melting point of 79–82 In this study, we focused on the changing and controlling of fenofibrate nanocrystal particle size during spray drying by investigating the supporting agents and spray drying conditions and then redispersed particle size in aqueous condition. The nanocrystal suspension of fenofibrate was prepared by a bead milling method using combination of hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose (HPMC-E5, viscosity of 5 Fenofibrate was purchased from Kaifeng Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Kaifeng, Henan, China). HPMC-E5 was purchased from Huzhou Zhanwang Pharm. Co., Ltd. (Huzhou, Zhejing, China). SDS was purchased from Beijing Fengli Jingqiu Commerce and Trade Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). Sucrose and mannitol were purchased from Bodi Chemical Holding Co., Ltd. (Tianjin, China). Granulac A laboratory bead mill was used for preparing nanocrystal suspension of fenofibrate. Briefly, 30 Spray drying was performed in an YC-015 type Spray Dryer (Yacheng Instrument Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China), which has a nozzle orifice of 1.0 In this study we have investigated the influences of five types of hydrophilic excipients (lactose, sucrose, maltose, glucose and mannitol) in combination with SDS, used as supporting agents. Types of supporting agents, fenofibrate: mannitol weight ratio ( In this process, the final spray dried powder, MCC, Granulac The micronized tablets was prepared with micronized fenofibrate (mean particle size of 13.40 The particle size was determined by laser diffraction method using a Coulter LS230 Particle Size Analyzer (Beckman Coulter, Inc.). The optical model was set at Fraunhofer and polarization intensity differential scattering technology (PIDS) included. The run length was 90 A TGA 50 Thermogravimetric Analyzer (Shimadzu, Japan) with nitrogen as atmosphere was used to determine the water content of the product. Each run was performed from common temperature to 150 For observation of the global morphology of the samples a Motic DMBA 450 Light Microscope (MoticChina Group Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) was used. And a magnification of 400-fold was chosen. The bulk drug and spray dried powder were dispersed with deionized water prior to the observation. A transmission electron microscope (TEM) (H-600, Hitachi, Japan) was used to observe the individual particle morphology. The diluted dispersions were negatively stained with 1% phosphotungstic acid before observation. DSC data was measured for fenofibrate bulk drug, spray dried powder, physical mixture of spray dried powder, blank excipients of spray dried powder, tablets, physical mixture of tablets and blank excipients of tablets using a DSC 1 STARe System (Mettler Tolelo, Switzerland). The samples were exactly weighed in aluminum pans and heated from 30 X-ray experiments were performed for the same samples of DSC measurements using a D\Max-2400 X-ray instrument (Rigaku, Osaka, Japan). Samples were scanned from 3° to 45° with a step size of 0.04°. Standard runs were performed with 56 In this section, we have determined the equilibrium solubility of fenofibrate and its spray dried nanoparticles in SDS solutions of various concentrations using the shake-flask method. An excess amount of bulk drugs were added into 8 The concentration of fenofibrate was analyzed using an ACQUITY HPLC system (Waters Corp, Milford, MA, USA), which consists of a Quaternary Solvent Manager, a Sample Manager-FTN and a TUV Detector. A reverse phase Thermo-C18 column (4.6 Dissolution studies were performed for the commercial Lipidil™ ez tablets, spray dried formulation (mean redispersed particle size of 699 The animal experiments in this paper were all approved and carried out in accordance with Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. The pharmacokinetic study was carried out in a two-period crossover experimental design using six male beagle dogs which were divided into 2 groups randomly with a washout period of one week. The dogs were fasted for 12 The pharmacokinetic parameters of the test preparation were calculated according to non-compartment model using a DAS 2.0 version (Mathematical Pharmacology Professional Committee of China, Shanghai, China) and compared with that of the reference preparation, Lipidil™ ez. The area under the curve to the last measurable concentration (AUC With SDS and HPMC-E5 as stabilizer, the fenofibrate nanocrystal suspensions were prepared by a bead milling method. After optimization of formulation and processing parameters, the original mean particle size of the milled fenofibrate nanocrystal suspension was 606 Five types of hydrophilic excipients, in combination with SDS, were studied as spray drying supporting agents. The particle sizes of nanocrystal suspensions before and after spray drying were determined without or with different hydrophilic excipients ( Weight ratio ( To reduce static electricity created during the spray drying process, a small amount of surface active agent, SDS, was added to the formulation. The effects of SDS concentration (SDS%, w/v) on the redispersed particle sizes had been studied. It can be seen from Redispersed particle sizes of the spray dried powders obtained with different fenofibrate concentrations at a fixed Because fenofibrate has a relatively low melting point, the inlet and outlet air temperature were equally important to the final drying product. The outlet temperature was most influenced by the inlet temperature, and the next was the feed rate. That is, the outlet temperature would increase when the inlet temperature increases or the feed rate decreases ( All the runs with inlet temperatures above 75 Feed rate mainly influenced the yield and water content when the formulation and inlet temperature were fixed. Water content could not evaporate thoroughly and the liquid adhered on the drying chamber if the feed rate was above 9 The microscopical images of particle morphology of the nanosuspensions and redispersed spray dried powders are shown in DSC and XRPD were performed to evaluate the crystal form of the samples. DSC thermograms of fenofibrate bulk drug, spray dried powder, physical mixture of spray dried powder, blank excipients of spray dried powder, tablets, physical mixture of tablets and blank excipients of tablets are presented in XRPD patterns for the seven samples are displayed in The experimentally determined solubility of fenofibrate and its spray dried nanoparticles in different concentrations of SDS solutions is shown in Dissolution behavior of commercial Lipidil™ ez tablets, tablets prepared with nanonized spray dried formulation and micronized formulation with a mean particle size of 13.4 Fenofibrate is virtually completely metabolized to fenofibric acid by intestinal, plasma and tissue esterases, after orally administration ( In this work, the nanosuspension formulation and operating spray dried condition were optimized for tailormaking redispersed particle size of fenofibrate nanocrystals. The redispersibility of the spray dried powders was highly dependent on the type of supporting agents and the This work was financially supported from the