Aqueous titanium (IV) chloride solutions were neutralized to different terminal pH (2.5 to 6.0) with magnesium oxide as base at 95 °C and were found to yield nanosized titanium dioxide. The produced materials were compared to those obtained by simple forced hydrolysis. The techniques of XRD, TGA–DTA, FT-IR, BET, SEM and TEM were applied for the characterization of the produced materials. Honeycomb-shaped uniform nanosized crystalline TiO2 powders with aggregate particle size of about 50 nm were successfully obtained by neutralization with magnesium oxide. Phase-pure rutile or mixed rutile and anatase crystalline TiO2 powders were precipitated with proper selection of conditions. It was found that forced hydrolysis at 95 °C favors the formation of rutile TiO2. Rutile TiO2 powders with different crystallite sizes between 11 and 18 nm were obtained from aqueous TiCl4 solutions with Ti concentration ranging from 0.5 mol/L to 2.0 mol/L. Neutralization with MgO at 95 °C, on the other hand, favored the formation of mixed anatase and rutile materials. The anatase fraction (ranging from 0 to 70%) increased with pH elevation (from 2.5 to 6.0). The neutralization method yielded much higher titanium precipitation efficiency (up to 100%) than simple forced hydrolysis. The magnesium content in the TiO2 products was found to increase with a rise in the final pH due to partial hydrolysis of magnesium. It was less than 0.1% when the final pH was kept at or below 3.3.Titanium dioxide is been widely used or advocated for use in pigments, photocatalysts, coatings, semiconductors, etc., due to its excellent whiteness, opacity, tinting strength, photocatalytic activity and photosensitivity as well as chemical stability. Titanium dioxide pigments with typical particle size in the order of 200–400 nm represent over 80% of the world pigment production. In recent years, nanosized TiO In recent years, some research involving production of TiO The precipitation of TiO The above reaction is not only of interest from the standpoint of nanosized TiO Nanosized titanium dioxide powders were prepared from aqueous titanium chloride solution by controlled precipitation: forced hydrolysis or neutralization. A flow chart of the followed procedure is shown in Liquid titanium tetrachloride was used as the starting material for the preparation of titanium dioxide. An aqueous titanium tetrachloride solution was prepared by dropwise adding the desired amount of liquid titanium tetrachloride (99.9% purity, from Fisher Scientific Inc.) into de-ionized water under magnetic stirring in an ice-water bath. The concentration of the prepared aqueous titanium tetrachloride solution was varied from 0.5 mol/L to 2.0 mol/L. The precipitation tests were performed in magnetically stirred conical flasks containing 80 mL solution and placed in a temperature-controlled water bath. Forced hydrolysis was conducted by heating the aqueous titanium tetrachloride solution to 95 °C and stirring it for 3 h. Neutralization was carried out by slowly adding a certain amount of magnesium oxide (MgO, 99.5%, from American Chemicals Ltd.) till the mole ratio of Mg/Ti The crystalline TiO The identification of crystalline phases was achieved by X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD, Phillips PW1710 machine) using Cu-Kα radiation. The intensities of the strongest peaks of anatase (101) (2 The primary crystallite size of the obtained powders was estimated using the Scherrer equation ( Fourier transform infrared spectra (FT-IR) were recorded with a BRUKER IFS66 FT-IR spectrometer in the range of 4000–400 cm The preparation of titanium dioxide from aqueous titanium tetrachloride solution using forced hydrolysis or neutralization with a stoichiometric amount of MgO can be expressed by the following reaction:  Rutile and anatase are two different structures of TiO Compared with the materials obtained by forced hydrolysis, the formation of the mixture of rutile and anatase shown in The XRD patterns in The nanostructured character of the produced titania powders was verified by employing the Scherrer method, TEM (and SEM) examination and BET measurements. Thus estimation of the crystallite size of the rutile phase precipitates ( The specific surface area measurements ( The FT-IR spectra of the TiO Thermal analysis of the powder precipitated by neutralization at final pH 3.3 ( Neutralization with MgO resulted in essentially 100% precipitation efficiency (the residual amount of Ti(IV) left in the solution was ∼ Nanosized TiO The authors wish to thank Dr. Wang Xiaoming for his help with TEM characterization. This work was supported via a NSERC (Canada) research grant, while Dr. Y. Li was the recipient of a Chinese Government Visiting Scholarship. Finally, Dr. V.I. Lakshmanan of Process Research Ortech, Inc. is particularly thanked for proposing this research to Dr. G.P. Demopoulos.