Molybdenum was bioleached from molybdenite-containing mine waste samples and from high purity molybdenite in solutions amended with ferrous sulfate. Bioleaching of Mo occurred when solution Eh exceeded 750 mV to 800 mV (s.h.e.). The rate of bioleaching of high purity molybdenite increased with decreasing particle size, averaging 3.22 mg Mo/m2/d at 24 °C. This surface area-based rate is less than 1% of the bioleaching rate of pyrite. Molybdenite bioleaching increased with temperature by a factor of approximately 2.5 for each 10 °C increase in leaching temperature up to 40 °C. Apparent activation energies were 61.2 to 73.4 kJ/mol for bioleaching of high purity molybdenite and for molybdenite from mineral processing waste streams, respectively. Thermophilic bioleaching at 65 °C did not improve the rate or extent of Mo extraction. Molybdenum extraction was about 50% from mineral process waste stream samples after the first month of bioleaching, and slowed thereafter. Ultimate Mo extraction was approximately 85% after 6 months of bioleaching. High concentrations of ferric iron in bioleach solutions allowed iron-oxidizing microorganisms to grow, oxidize iron and bioleach molybdenite at dissolved Mo concentrations as high as 4.4 g/L. There was no evidence for selection of microbial populations with increased Mo resistance.Molybdenite was among the earliest of metal sulfides reported to be bioleached ( Molybdenite is extremely resistant to bacterial attack ( These early studies concluding that bioleaching of molybdenite was impractical were recently reinforced by Molybdenite is oxidized by Fe Microbial attack on molybdenite requires use of organisms able to generate high solution redox potentials, i.e., leach solutions where virtually all iron occurs as ferric iron. Not all iron-oxidizing microorganisms are equally able to produce such high potentials. For example, the iron-oxidizing system of The reported slow biooxidation rate of molybdenite suggests fine particle sizes may be required for reasonable biooxidation rates. Successful bioleaching of molybdenite also requires Mo-resistant organisms or manipulation of leach solution characteristics to reduce Mo toxicity. This paper provides heretofore unreported properties of molybdenite bioleaching, including effects of particle size and temperature on bioleaching rates. We also describe how leach solution chemistry, especially the presence of ferric iron, affects molybdenum toxicity toward ore leaching bacteria. Lubrication grade, high purity (> Molybdenite-containing solids were obtained from waste streams from a copper concentrator plant in the Western United States. These materials included a sample of first cleaner tails containing 4% molybdenite, 53% chalcopyrite, and < Chalcopyrite was removed from mine waste samples by bioleaching at 65 °C with a mixture of iron- and sulfur-oxidizing extreme thermophiles including The microbial culture used in bioleaching tests was an enrichment culture of iron- and sulfur-oxidizing acidophiles obtained from acidic waters from metal sulfide mining operations. It was grown and maintained in shaken and aerated vessels at room temperature (ca. 24 °C) on a mixture of ferrous sulfate, pyrite, sulfur, chalcopyrite and molybdenite added to “2X MKM” mineral salts solution containing 0.8 g/L ammonium sulfate, 0.8 g/L magnesium sulfate heptahydrate, and 0.08 g/L potassium dihydrogen phosphate adjusted to pH 1.4 to 1.6 with sulfuric acid. The mixed culture under these conditions produced acid and high solution Eh (> Molybdenite bioleaching rates were determined by adding molybdenite (2.0 to 20 g/L) to flasks containing 2X MKM solution plus 6 g/L ferrous iron as ferrous sulfate heptahydrate. The pH was adjusted to 1.4 to 1.6 with sulfuric acid. Flasks were inoculated with active cultures of bacteria pregrown on iron plus molybdenite and were shaken (180 rpm) at various temperatures. Solutions were sampled periodically for the determination of pH, redox potential and dissolved metals by ICP spectroscopy. Long term tests of ultimate Mo extraction from reground mining waste stream samples were performed at 2.0 g/L solids in 0.1X 9K mineral salts solution containing 0.3 g/L ammonium sulfate, 0.01 g /L potassium chloride, 0.05 g/L monobasic potassium phosphate, 0.05 g/L magnesium sulfate heptahydrate, and 0.002 g/L calcium nitrate tetrahydrate adjusted to pH 1.4 to 1.6 with sulfuric acid. Ferrous iron (5 g/L as ferrous sulfate heptahydrate) was added as an energy source. Microbial cell numbers were determined with a Petroff Hausser counting chamber and phase contrast microscopy. The iron-oxidizing microbial culture growing on molybdenite slurries was inoculated (10%) into 2X MKM solution plus 6 g/L Fe(II). No Fe(III) was added other than that present in the inoculum. One day later, various Mo chemical species were added to the flasks: sodium molybdate (MoO The effect of Fe(III) on biooxidation of Fe(II) in the presence of molybdate was evaluated in flasks containing 2X MKM plus 5.5 g/L Fe(III) generated from biooxidation of Fe(II) and filtered (0.45 μm). Ferrous sulfate was added to give a final Fe(II) concentration of 5.5 g/L. Sodium molybdate was added to a final concentration of 1.0 g/L Mo. Fe(III) was omitted from some flasks and Mo omitted from others. All flasks were inoculated (10% volume) with an active culture growing on 2X MKM Tests of bioleaching of M5 molybdenite at high concentrations of dissolved Mo were done with in flasks containing 2% solids and high concentrations (21 g/L) of ferric iron in 2X MKM, produced from biooxidation of ferrous sulfate. Sodium molybdate (0.5 and 1.5 g/L Mo) was added in some cases. To test for selection of Mo-resistant strains, microorganisms attached to molybdenite solids in one of the flasks were removed. This was done by allowing the flask to stand 5 min. The solution phase (50 mL) was removed, leaving damp solids (ca. 1 g). The solids were transferred aseptically with minimum agitation to a sterile screw capped tube containing 25 mL sterile 2X MKM salts. Solids were allowed to settle 5 min and the solution phase, containing no microscopically visible cells, was discarded. An additional 25 ml of sterile 2X MKM solution was added to the damp solids and the tube was shaken vigorously for 2 min to dislodge the cells. The solution phase, after 5 min settling, now contained 1.7 Reagent grade ferric sulfate was obtained from Mallinckrodt, molybdenum trioxide from Fisher Scientific, silicomolybdic acid and phosphomolybdic acid were obtained from Aldrich Chemical Co. Redox potentials of bioleach solutions were measured with a combination platinum electrode and silver:silver-chloride reference electrode filled with saturated KCl electrolyte. Solution samples were removed from test flasks and reactors and measured at room temperature. The accuracy of electrode response was determined to be +/− Molybdenite shake flask bioleaching tests were conducted at low solids concentrations in solutions initially containing several g/L of ferrous iron. After inoculation of the slurries and a lag period, typically of a few days, iron was rapidly biooxidized and solution Eh increased to 900 mV or higher. In all cases, Mo extraction from molybdenite was not significant until the Eh exceeded approximately 750 mV to 800 mV. Because shake flask tests were done at low solids, the iron-oxidizing microorganisms were able to maintain an Eh of 900 mV and above. At these potentials, greater than 99.9% of the dissolved iron is ferric. This requirement of high Eh for molybdenite bioleaching could account for some of the difficulties with bioleaching molybdenite reported in the literature. There was a clear correlation ( Bioleaching rates of molybdenite also increased with temperature, by a factor of about 2.5 for a 10 °C rise up to 40 °C ( To determine whether thermophiles could further accelerate the bioleaching of molybdenite, batch bioleaching tests were conducted with decopperized composite (1.0 g/L) in stirred reactors at 65 °C with extremely thermophilic iron and sulfur-oxidizing microorganisms. However, the bioleaching rate was only 3.8% per day, about the same as observed at 30 °C, and Mo bioleaching stopped after 15 days at about 50% Mo extraction. These lower rates were attributed in part to Mo precipitation—20% of the Mo in the residue was extracwith a carbonate-bicarbonate solution and 23% was extracted with hot 3 N HCl (only 0.4% of Mo in the feed was extracted by hot HCl). This would bring total Mo extraction to 64%. It is also possible the somewhat lower solution Eh of 846 mV observed at 65 °C contributed to the lower rates. Eh values typically exceeded 900 mV with mesophiles. High chemical oxidation rates of pyrite in biooxidation experiments were attributed to high redox potentials of the solutions of up to 700 mV (Ag/AgCl-Pt cell) maintained by iron-oxidizing The maximum extent of Mo extraction from mine processing samples and from high purity molybdenite was determined in long-term tests at low solids concentrations of 0.60 to 2.0 g/L. Low solids tests facilitated maintenance of high redox potentials by the organisms and helped to avoid toxicity from dissolved Mo. Mo extraction from finely ground (10 μm to 13 μm), decopperized waste stream molybdenite was 50% after 1 month, but slowed after this time ( Mo extraction from high purity molybdenite also was faster initially, with rates decreasing after about 60% Mo had been extracted from M5 and after 20% had been extracted from M50 ( Bioleaching of Mo from all these molybdenite samples initially followed shrinking particle kinetics. The subsequent slowing of leaching rates may indicate formation of a surface layer. An extended lag period was observed in flasks containing M5 molybdenite before iron was biooxidized and Mo bioleaching began ( Phosphomolybdate and silicomolybdate species were as inhibitory as sodium molybdate in microbial toxicity tests. These three forms of Mo all were inhibitory to iron biooxidation at 56 to 101 mg/L ( Experiments were performed to determine if Fe(III) may play a role in microbial Mo resistance. Microbial cells inoculated into flasks containing 1 g/L Mo (as sodium molybdate) and 5.5 g/L Fe(II) were able to oxidize all the iron within 4 days if the solution also contained 5.5 g/L of added Fe(III). In the absence of added Fe(III), iron was not biooxidized even after 2 week ( Eh-pH reaction diagrams in Mo–S–Fe-water systems ( An additional test was performed at 24 °C in culture solutions containing a very high concentration of ferric iron (21.4 g/L) produced from biooxidation of ferrous sulfate. These tests were done to determine if molybdenite could continue to bioleach at high dissolved Mo concentrations. Molyform M5 (2% solids) was added to each of four flasks. Two flasks also were supplemented with 0.5 g/L and 1.5 g/L Mo (as sodium molybdate). Mo was bioleached at a linear rate of approximately 0.8%/day in all flasks. This rate of bioleaching of M5 molybdenite is about one-fifth that observed at low solids and 6 g/L Fe at 24 °C. The solution Eh was also slightly lower at a relatively constant value of 860 to 870 mV. Under these conditions, dissolved Mo concentrations in solution reached 3.4 to 4.4 g/L. Fewer than 10 The microorganisms dislodged from the molybdenite solids were tested to determine if they had acquired Mo resistance. The dislodged microorganisms were diluted into fresh culture medium containing 5 g/L Fe(II), no added ferric iron, and various concentrations of sodium molybdate. Cells grew and completely oxidized Fe in a few days at 20 mg/L dissolved Mo, but failed to grow and oxidize iron at 97 mg/L dissolved Mo. Consequently, there was no evidence for selection of microbial cultures with significantly enhanced Mo resistance. Though we did not compare bioleaching rates of molybdenite by pure cultures of microorganisms (i.e., Basic information on bioleaching of molybdenite is lacking in the literature due to the reported difficulty in bioleaching molybdenite. Such information includes the intrinsic molybdenite biooxidation rate, activation energy, and ultimate extraction of Mo. The bioleaching rate of molybdenite was found to be less than 1% of that reported for pyrite. Nonetheless, Mo can be bioleached at a rate of a few percent per day from molybdenite when the microbial culture produces high Eh and at very fine particle sizes of molybdenite. A clear relationship occurred between surface area and biooxidation rate of molybdenite, as occurs in bioleaching of other metal sulfides. Bioleaching rates increased significantly with increasing temperature up to 40 °C. Apparent activation energies determined for high purity and waste stream molybdenite indicate the bioleaching reaction involved the breakdown of primary chemical bonds. The ability of the microbial culture to resist dissolved Mo correlated with high concentrations of ferric iron. There was no evidence for selection of microbial cultures with significantly enhanced Mo resistance. Bio-oxidized iron, peroxide-oxidized iron, or reagent ferric sulfate was protective of cells toward Mo. Ferric iron in culture media permits bioleaching molybdenite in the presence of relatively high concentrations (g/L) of dissolved Mo. These observations help to define operating parameters and limits for potential molybdenite bioleaching processes. Specifically, feeds must be very finely ground and operating temperatures ideally would be in the high mesophilic range (40 °C). Ferric iron in solution should be present at sufficient concentrations relative to dissolved Mo to reduce inhibitory effects of Mo. Though bioleaching of molybdenite may occur at very high concentrations of dissolved ferric iron and molybdenum, rates will be comparatively slow under such conditions. Feed sulfide content, including molybdenite and associated sulfides with lower rest potentials, would need to be considered so that microorganisms could maintain iron in virtually 100% ferric form. This may be more difficult in stirred tank reactors compared to heaps. Finally, a mixed population of iron-oxidizing microorganisms that includes A promising application of molybdenite bioleaching would be bioheap leaching of waste stream molybdenite agglomerated on support rock ( We thank H.C. Starck for funding these investigations and for permission to publish the findings.