Due to the current and future environmental legislation there is a need to develop cleaner technologies for separating materials in the mineral and recycling industries. This paper discusses the use of vertical vibration to recover valuable materials from electrical wastes. Under vertical vibration granular materials segregate by size and/or density. Previous studies have shown that glass/bronze mixtures [Burtally, N., King, P.J., Swift, M.R., Leaper, M., 2003. Dynamical behaviour of fine granular glass/bronze mixtures under vertical vibration. Granular Matter 5, 57–66] and mixed-plastics/bronze mixtures [Mohabuth, N., Miles, N., 2005. The recovery of recyclable materials from Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) by using vertical vibration separation. Resour. Conserv. Recy. 45, 60–69] can be separated under vibration. This new separation technique is now extended to recover copper from electrical wires and computer circuit boards. The materials were reduced to a granular state and fed into a specially designed semi-batch cell consisting of two chambers. The cell was placed between a pair of sinusoidally driven loudspeakers which induced vibration. Under vibration the denser materials were found to concentrate into the adjacent chamber leaving the rest of the materials in the original chamber. The separation behaviour was studied at different combinations of frequencies and dimensionless accelerations. Assays were also carried out to assess the efficiency of separation. Understanding the separation behaviour in the batch cell will possibly lead to the design information for the future development of a continuous separation system.The amount of electronic scrap in the world is growing rapidly. In 2003 it was estimated that 939,000 tonnes of domestic equipment were discarded in the UK and out of which 68,000 tonnes were IT equipment ( This study involved the use of vertical vibration to recover a concentrate of metal from the electrical and electronic waste. The waste materials were first mechanically processed to liberate the metallic from the non-metallic components and then vertically vibrated to recover the metals. Vertical vibration separation could be a potential technique for separating metals from shredded waste materials. Since, the materials were physically separated in their dry state no water effluent was produced at the end of the process. When granular materials are vibrated they segregate by size and/or by density. Similarly, granular materials of different densities were also observed to segregate under vibration. In this paper, the shredded electrical and electronic wastes were vertically vibrated into a specially designed partition box to recover a concentrate of metals. The separation of copper wirings from electrical cables was initially assessed since it was considered to be a simpler material consisting of two components only: copper wirings and plastic insulation. The experiments were then extended to the separation of metals from shredded printed circuit boards which had a more complex composition. The experiments were carried out on the same vibratory apparatus used in The shredded materials were filled on the left hand side partition of the rectangular partitioned cell (chamber C1) shown in The electrical cables and computer printed circuit boards used for the experiments were collected from damaged and obsolete equipment from the IT department of the University of Nottingham, UK. Two kilogram of electrical cables and 5 The first sets of experiments were carried out on the electrical cables. They were shredded in the Retsch mill with a sieve of 0.5 The second sets of experiments were carried on computer printed circuit boards. The batteries from the circuit boards were manually removed and the circuit boards were then cut into smaller pieces using an electrical saw. To liberate the different components, the printed circuit boards were comminuted in a Retsch mill. The materials collected were then sieved through a set of sieves of 600, 425, 300, 212 and 150 This section describes the results for the separation of the shredded electrical cables and computer printed circuit boards when subjected to vertical vibration at frequency, The separation of the shredded electrical cables was assessed using heavy liquid analysis, since it consisted only of copper wirings and plastics insulation. An example of the separation of the copper wirings from the 106–212 The copper wiring separated from the mixture and concentrated into chamber C2 within 2 The experiments were repeated using three samples of each size fractions in the partition cell. After each experiment the materials from each partition of the cell were emptied into separate beakers so that heavy liquid analysis can be carried out to determine the amount of copper wirings and plastics insulation particles in each partition and thus assessing the separation. The mean percentage error for the separation of the three samples considered for each size fractions was only 3%. The results showed very successful separation of copper wiring from the electrical cables for both size fractions considered. The 106–212 Similarly, the 212–425 The above results confirmed that a concentrate of copper wirings can be separated from shredded electrical cables under vertical vibration. The copper wirings being denser than the plastic insulation, confirmed the observation of The chemical composition from the ICP-AES analysis of the different size fractions of the shredded computer circuit boards is presented in After careful analysis, the chemical composition of the computer circuit boards was found similar to the one carried on different size fraction of shredded printed circuit boards in The chemical compositions of circuit boards are very complex and they vary from manufacturers to manufacturers. However, these results can provide us with necessary guidelines to recover the most concentrated metal from the circuit boards. Therefore, this study focused on the recovery of copper, lead, tin and aluminium. The rest of the metals were not considered as they were not present in significant amount. Three size fractions (300–425 The results in  The 212–300 The use of vertical vibration was found to be an efficient method to obtain copper from electrical cables and metal concentrates from scrap computer circuit boards. It was found that a 90% grade of copper wirings was obtained from the shredded electrical cables. A total average of 85% metal concentrate was recovered from the computer circuit boards out of which more than 50% were copper. The yield of the separation was found to be better when size fractions were in the size range of 150–300 The authors are grateful to D. Mee, C. Somerfield and D. Clift for their support while carrying the experiments. N. Mohabuth was supported by the Developing Solutions Research Scholarship, University of Nottingham, UK.