This review paper investigates the synthesis of porous structures with controlled hole pattern and provides an overall view of the various factors involved when synthesizing such porous materials. The following factors are discussed: 1) various methods of synthesis to produce the porous structures; 2) materials which the porous structures are made of; 3) control of the pore structure; 4) various applications of such porous materials. The materials of the porous structures and the control of the pore structure will also be discussed separately under each different method, as these two factors are closely dependent on the method of fabrication.Porous materials with ordered hole structure have received increasing interest in recent years because of their potential application in the fields of electronics, photonics and life sciences In the synthesis of porous structures, a templating approach based on self-assembly is advantageous if the materials of the porous structure do not self-assemble into the desired pattern or structure Colloidal crystals are colloid-sized particles that can be self-assembled into crystalline structure with regular arrangement of the particles. The procedures involved in this templating method can be summarized into 4 steps, as shown in       Biological materials are characterized by unique structures and morphologies that cannot typically be replicated through laboratory synthesis. A wide variety of biological structures with complex morphologies have been used as sophisticated templates to prepare porous materials with tailored structures. Typical examples of natural biological templates include bacterial threads However, most of the porous structures fabricated using natural biotemplates do not exhibit ordered hole structure; many of them are just comprised of irregularly-shaped fenestrations formed from interconnected wire-like fibres without any ordering. The only exceptions were when using bacteria threads Davis et al. In this method (refer to In addition, the formation of ordered pores in the MCM replica on both mesoscopic and macroscopic length scales illustrates how supramolecular (filaments) and supercellular (cells) properties of bacterial templates could be combined for the fabrication of inorganic materials with structural hierarchy (hierarchical porosity on both mesoscopic and macroscopic scales in route II). This feature was later demonstrated in 2000 by Velev et al.    Ram Seshadri and Fiona Meldrum The CaCO    Another important development is the use of emulsion droplets as templates for the formation of macroporous inorganic materials with pore sizes ranging from 50 nm to several micrometers. Imhof and Pine The steps in      Simplicity, economical and speed of fabrication are the hallmarks of the breath figure method that utilizes the condensation of monodisperse water droplets on polymer solution to prepare honeycomb structures as pioneered by Francois et al.    In 1999, Samson A. Jenekhe and Linda Chen In this Jenekhe's proposed mechanism, the rod-coil diblock copolymers consist of two parts: the rod-like polymer and the flexible coil-like polymer. When the rod-coil diblock copolymers are dissolved in a selective solvent for the coil-like polymer, they have the ability to self-organize into hollow spherical micelles having diameters of a few micrometers. The long-range, close-packed and self-ordering of the micelles subsequently produced highly iridescent periodic microporous materials. In  There were some evidence for breath figure mechanism. Duan et al. provided evidence that the formation of hexagonal patterns in Jenekhe's papers was due to the breath figure mechanism A block copolymer is a heterogeneous polymer that is covalently linked with two or more different types of chemically distinct monomer and the similar repeating monomer units occur together in blocks of long sequences. Phase separation in block copolymer solutions has attracted great interests in recent years due to its potential in fabricating porous periodic patterns on a nanoscale. In a copolymer system, the repulsive interaction between the incompatible heterogeneous polymer blocks induces microscopic phase separation in the copolymer system. However, the connectivity of the copolymer chains due to the covalent bonds prevents further macroscopic phase separation. As a result of these competing trends, the block copolymer systems spontaneously self-organize into different domains that exhibit ordered morphologies at equilibrium. For simplicity, this review will only consider diblock copolymers (two chemically different polymers) since diblock copolymers had been used in most of the applications. For a diblock copolymer, the system will self-assemble into two different domains after microphase separation: an ordered nanometer scale domain embedded within a matrix domain. The polymer with the larger block length will form the matrix domain while the smaller chain length polymer will assemble the nanodomains (some articles used a different term-microdomain). In addition, the relative chain lengths of the two different blocks will determine the resulting morphology of the nanodomains. For diblock copolymers, the morphologies of the nanodomains can primarily be classified into three different types of structure The application of the porous block copolymer as templates is possible due to the formation of ordered periodic phases after microphase separation of the block copolymer. The simplest form of ordered morphology is the lamellae phase; it is typically formed when incompatible diblock polymer is annealed as thin films and each type of polymer segregates into alternate layers stack on top of each other. However, the lamellae phase has almost no practical applications and instead, the hexagonally packed cylinders phase or BCC spheres phase are necessary to be used as templates. In a typical transition from a metastable lamellae phase to a stable hexagonal cylindrical phase or BCC sphere phase, the metastable state decays and nucleation materializes via the thermally activated formation and subsequent growth of droplets of the equilibrium phase. However, the hexagonal cylindrical nanodomains generally lie parallel to the substrate surface due to preferential interactions of the copolymer blocks with the air and substrate interfaces     Hierarchical mesoporous (2–50 nm)–macroporous (more than 50 nm) materials have attracted considerable attention due to the wide scope of applications In the fabrication of hierarchical mesoporous–macroporous materials, a double template system is generally required. Supramolecular system based on self-assembly such as surfactant or micellar templates ( In air–liquid foam templating, the foams produced by a bubbling process act as a template to produce the macroscale morphologies while supramolecular templating is used for mesoporosity. Carn et al. first reported the preparation of macrocellular silica Suzuki et al.   The capability to control the texture of the scaffold walls will be beneficial in applications such as tissue engineering as cell attachment, proliferation and differentiation are affected by topology of the scaffold used. In the final issue    A summary of various templating methods for fabricating porous materials with ordered hole structures is given in The formation of porous materials with ordered hole structures is an interesting and intellectually challenging problem with a wide variety of potential applications. Porous materials possess unique properties which can find potential applications in catalysis One of the most useful applications is in photonics Besides photonics, porous materials with controlled hole structure also have many potential applications in catalysis. In simplified terms, catalysis refers to the acceleration of the reaction rate of a chemical reaction induced by the presence of a substance called a catalyst that is itself unchanged chemically by the overall reaction. Negative catalysis denotes the slowing down or inhibition of a chemical reaction or process by the presence of such a substance. In chemical reactions, catalysts can also be intended for other possible functions: to control a reaction by directing the process, to improve the conversion yield, to improve selectivity by reducing the amount of unwanted by-products, to provide milder reaction conditions such as lower temperature or pressure and to reduce waste (e.g. detoxification of harmful gases, such as NO Typically, in the application of porous materials for catalytic processes, the porous material can act as the actual catalyst that reacts with gases/liquid/fluid that passes through the porous material or the internal surface chemistry of the porous material can be modified to attain catalytic properties. The advantages of using porous structures in catalysis are the large surface area for the catalytic processes and the tailored hierarchical porosity for regulating the flow of diverse molecules based on size and shape. Familiar porous materials that have been reportedly used in catalysis include zeolites Porous materials are also called molecular sieves because their unique pore size allows the distinction of molecules based on their size and shape. Porous materials with uniform pore size serve as a good filter to separate molecules of different sizes and shapes or to separate molecules of different phases (e.g. separation of liquid and gas hydrocarbons and water). Furthermore, chemical modification of the porous materials enables modulation of surface chemistry and polarities for improved adsorbency to enhance separation processes With the advent and rise of the life science industry worldwide, porous materials with ordered hole structure has become increasingly relevant with numerous potential applications. The potential of porous materials in life science includes but not limited to applications in biointerface as cell culture substrates for cell adhesion In recent years, the fabrication of porous materials with ordered hole structure using a variety of templating methods has become a rapidly growing field. Nearly all classes of inorganic, organic and organic–inorganic hybrid materials have been used to produce such porous ordered structures. For materials that do not self-assemble into the desired ordered pattern, fabrication using templating methods based on self-assembly strategy provides a convenient and effective solution. In most methods, the drawback stems from the additional procedure to remove the template material to give the final porous product. However, in the breath figure method, this drawback is eliminated due to the self-removing water droplet templates by evaporation. The control of pore structure is another important factor in the fabrication of porous materials as the pore size is often associated with the type and range of applications. This factor represents another advantage for the breath figure method due to the ease of control of pore structure as compared to other templating methods. With these advantages, the relatively new breath figure method is envisaged to have further potential developments for a wide range of applications. This work was supported by a NUS research grant.