This paper presents a review of factors affecting the agglomerate formation and growth mechanisms in melt agglomeration in high shear mixers. The agglomerate formation occurs either by distribution or immersion or by a combination of both mechanisms. Distribution is promoted by a low binder viscosity, by a high impeller speed, and by a small binder particle size. Effects of the liquid saturation of the agglomerates, impeller speed, particle properties, binder viscosity, and electrostatic charging on the subsequent agglomerate growth are discussed, and experimental results are presented. The agglomerate growth becomes controlled by the balance between the agglomerate strength and the shearing forces. If the agglomerate strength is sufficiently high to resist the shearing forces of the rotating impeller, the dominant agglomerate growth mechanism will be coalescence. The shearing forces will give rise to breakage if the agglomerate strength is too low, and then agglomerate growth will occur by a simultaneous buildup and breakdown of agglomerates, possibly combined with growth by layering of fragments upon larger agglomerates. Provided that the liquid saturation is sufficiently high, a higher agglomerate strength is primarily caused by a higher binder viscosity, a smaller particle size, an irregular particle shape, and by densification of the agglomerates.Melt agglomeration is a wet agglomeration process by which agglomeration is obtained through the addition of either a molten binder liquid or a solid binder, which melts during the process. The product temperature has to be kept at a temperature above the melting point of the binder or within the melting range of the binder by external heating of the equipment and/or by a development of heat caused by friction. The agglomerates are formed by an agitation of the mixture, and a cooling to ambient temperature results in dry agglomerates due to solidification of the binder. A binder suitable for melt agglomeration is a material having a melting point typically within the range of 50–100°C. A lower melting point might cause a risk of melting or softening of the binder during handling and storage of the agglomerates, whereas a higher melting point might cause stability problems in case of melt agglomeration of heat sensitive materials, e.g. many pharmaceuticals. Polyethylene glycols, fatty acids, fatty alcohols, waxes, and glycerides are examples of meltable binders that are applied for melt agglomeration of pharmaceuticals. Melt agglomeration is advantageous because of the simplicity of the process. When compared with a conventional wet agglomeration process, the drying step of the process is eliminated, and if the meltable binder is added in a solid state, the liquid addition step is also eliminated. Further, melt agglomeration might be favourable as an alternative to the use of toxic solvents for agglomeration of water-sensitive materials. Melt agglomeration has been shown to be a simple way of producing pharmaceutical dosage forms with prolonged release properties The term melt granulation is used when the process results in agglomerates of a rather wide size distribution, typically within the range of about 0.1–2.0 mm. If the final agglomerates are spherical and of a narrow size distribution, typically within the size range of 0.5–2.0 mm, the process is called melt pelletization process, and the agglomerates are called pellets. Since the size, the size distribution, and the shape of the agglomerates normally will change gradually during an agglomeration process, it will not be possible to distinguish clearly between a granulation and a pelletization process. Thus, a melt pelletization process might be defined as a melt agglomeration process that is controlled in order to obtain pellets. Melt agglomeration has been carried out in a coating pan The interpretation of the results of many aqueous wet agglomeration experiments is complicated by the fact that water evaporates during the process. Consequently, the melt agglomeration process is particularly suitable for fundamental studies of the mechanisms of agglomerate formation and growth in wet agglomeration, because no evaporation of binder liquid occurs. The aim of this paper is to give a review of factors affecting the agglomerate growth mechanisms in melt agglomeration in high shear mixers based upon the work carried out in the laboratory of the author. The nucleation phase of a wet agglomeration process is the initial phase where small agglomerates (nuclei) of a loose structure are formed because of a formation of liquid bridges between the primary particles. The initial droplet size might be controlled by an atomization of the binder liquid or by a pouring procedure. When melt agglomeration occurs by an addition of a solid binder that melts during the process, the initial droplet size will depend on the particle size of the solid binder. Normally, the droplet size becomes reduced by comminution in the initial stage of the process if shearing forces are active. In a high shear mixer, therefore, the distribution mechanism will be the typical mechanism of agglomerate formation. In a conventional fluidized bed, however, the agglomerate formation has been shown to be controlled by the droplet size of the binder liquid By melt agglomeration in a high shear mixer, the distribution mechanism is promoted by a small particle size of the solid binder, by a low binder viscosity, and by a high impeller rotation speed. The effect of binder viscosity on agglomerate formation in an 8-l high shear mixer is illustrated in The effect of the binder particle size on the initial agglomerate formation has been found to interact with the binder viscosity  In the nucleation phase, the tendency for coalescence between initial particles, or between an initial particle and a nuclei will be larger than the tendency for coalescence between two nuclei as the potential for agglomerate growth is inversely proportional to the size of the particles/agglomerates According to the agglomeration model developed by Ennis et al. If the agglomerate strength is high, agglomerate growth by coalescence will be the dominant agglomerate growth mechanism. The agglomerate strength is affected by the choice of raw materials, a high agglomerate strength being primarily caused by a small particle size, an irregular particle shape causing interlocking, a high viscosity of the binder liquid, and—to a certain point—by a higher liquid-to-solid ratio. Further, the agglomerate strength becomes increased if the shearing forces give rise to densification of the agglomerates. In case of weak agglomerates, a marked breakage will occur simultaneous to coalescence. Consequently, agglomerate growth by layering on surviving agglomerates of particles and fragments formed by breakage will also be a growth mechanism. In a melt agglomeration process, a large amount of large agglomerates of a loose structure will normally be formed immediately after the melting of the binder owing to the sudden liquidification. The strength of these agglomerates is low because of their loose structure, and they will be broken down, therefore, during massing The agglomerate size distributions become narrower during massing  The agglomerate growth by coalescence depends on the liquid saturation of the agglomerates since a higher liquid saturation causes a higher deformability of the agglomerates and an increased thickness of the surface liquid layer. The liquid saturation is defined as the ratio of the pore volume occupied by binder liquid to the total volume of pores and voids within the agglomerate. The intragranular porosity of the agglomerates, The porosity value calculated from The liquid saturation can be increased either by an increase in the amount of binder liquid added Agglomerate growth by coalescence will normally occur in the capillary state, i.e. at a liquid saturation of about 80–100%. In the droplet state, the liquid saturation exceeds 100%, and this will cause a risk of overwetting and uncontrollable agglomerate growth. The correlation seen in In order to produce large agglomerates of a spherical shape, i.e. pellets, the deformability of the agglomerates and consequently the liquid saturation have to be so high that the agglomerates are close to becoming overwet. An uncontrollable growth will occur if the amount of free surface liquid becomes too high. In an aqueous pelletization process, the agglomerate growth can be controlled by removing the excess surface liquid by a controlled evaporation of water In a high shear mixer, the shearing forces acting on the powder mass depend on the inclination  As can be seen from It has been found in many melt agglomeration experiments in high shear mixers that a higher impeller speed gives rise to a higher agglomerate growth rate, e.g.  After the initial breakage and densification of agglomerates, the further agglomerate growth has not been found to be significantly affected by breakage and comminution of agglomerates irrespective of the impeller speed if a PEG was applied as the meltable binder Normally, a lower intragranular porosity is to be expected at a higher impeller speed as well as a higher temperature of the heating jacket of the mixing bowl, because densification of the agglomerates is supposed to be eased by higher collisional forces and by a lower binder viscosity A higher impeller speed will normally result in more spherical agglomerates, because higher shearing forces will promote a spheronization A smaller size of the solid particles has generally been found to increase the liquid-to-solid ratio to be used in order to obtain a given agglomerate size  In case of cohesive materials, i.e. powders having a mean particle size smaller than 10–20 μm, there will be a risk of an uncontrollable agglomerate growth and a formation of clusters consisting of overwetted agglomerates On the other hand, if the particle size of the powder becomes too large, the agglomerate strength might be so low that no agglomerate growth can occur, because breakage will dominate. It has been shown in melt agglomeration experiments that a material having a mean particle size of 100 μm was unable to agglomerate The effect of the size distribution of the solid particles on agglomerate growth is supposed to be closely related to the effect of the size distribution on the densification. A narrower size distribution will result in a looser packing of the initial particles within the agglomerates. Accordingly, a narrow size distribution was found to cause weak agglomerates in wet agglomeration experiments in a drum granulator The agglomerate strength is affected by the particle shape of the solid. Interlocking between particles of an irregular shape will increase the strength and might reduce the need of binder Anhydrous dicalcium phosphate alone resulted in rather strong agglomerates  A regression analysis of the linear correlation between time and log mean granule size A lower viscosity gives rise to a wider size distribution The agglomerate strength becomes markedly increased at a higher binder viscosity In case of a meltable binder that has a much lower viscosity than the PEGs, e.g. stearic acid, the agglomerate growth mechanisms will be clearly different since the agglomerate growth will be markedly dependent on the balance between coalescence of agglomerates and breakdown of agglomerates It appears from The binder viscosity has also been shown to affect the agglomerate shape as illustrated in Melt agglomeration in high shear mixers provides good conditions for generation of static electricity because of the high shearing and frictional forces combined with a low air humidity within the bowl due to the non-aqueous binder liquid. Electrostatic charging might disturb the agglomerate growth by causing build up of material on the wall of the bowl. With the PEGs, the amount of adhesion to the bowl has generally been found to be low, and the PEGs, therefore, were found to be suitable for the production of pellets  The results in The agglomerate growth mechanisms in melt agglomeration in high shear mixers are dependent on the viscosity of the meltable binder. If the meltable binder has a high viscosity, the agglomerate strength will be so high that breakage of agglomerates becomes insignificant and coalescence, therefore, will be the dominant growth mechanism. A binder viscosity larger than approximately 100 mPas will normally cause an agglomerate strength that is sufficiently high to counteract breakage, but the agglomerate strength depends on an interaction between binder viscosity and particle size of the solid. Agglomerate growth by coalescence is closely related to the deformability and the surface plasticity of the agglomerates, which primarily depend on their liquid saturation but also on the cohesiveness of the primary particles. A higher impeller speed will increase the agglomerate growth rate by increasing the densification rate and consequently, the liquid saturation. Further, a higher impeller speed will promote coalescence by augmenting the deformability at collisions between agglomerates. The agglomerate growth mechanisms become more complex if the viscosity of the meltable binder is so low that the agglomerate strength becomes insufficient to resist the shearing forces of the impeller. Then the agglomerate growth will depend on the balance between coalescence and breakage. Breakage will result in agglomerate fragments. These fragments might form new agglomerates by coalescence or might become layered upon larger agglomerates. At a prolonged massing, the agglomerates might gain sufficient strength by densification, resulting in a subsequent growth by coalescence or a simultaneous growth and breakage might continue. A higher impeller speed will increase breakage. If the agglomerate strength is so low that a marked breakage continues, the agglomerate size distribution will typically become bimodal. The continuous buildup and breakdown of agglomerates will cause agglomerates having a wide size distribution, a rather high intragranular porosity, and an irregular shape. Geometric mass mean diameter Mass of granules Liquid saturation of granules Geometric standard deviation Volume of granules True volume of granules Binder-to-solid mass ratio Intragranular porosity Corrected intragranular porosity Density of molten binder True density of solid binder Density of granules True density of solid particles True density of granules