The nonlinear response of an oscillatory bubble in a complex fluid is studied. The bubble is immersed in a Newtonian liquid, which may have a dilute volume fraction of anisotropic additives such as fibers or few ppm of macromolecules. The constitutive equation for the fluid is based on a Maxwell model with an extensional viscosity for the viscous contribution. The model is considered new in the study of bubble dynamics in complex fluids. The numerical computation solves a system of three first order ordinary differential equations, including the one associated with the solution of the convolution integral, using a fifth order Runge–Kutta scheme with appropriated time steps. Asymptotic solutions of governing equation are developed for small values of the pressure forcing amplitude and for small values of the elastic parameter. A study of the bubble collapse radius is also presented. We compare the results predicted by our model with other model in the literature and a good agreement is observed. The calculated asymptotic solutions are also used to test the results of the numerical simulations. In addition, the orientation of the additives is considered. The angular probability density function is assumed to be a normal distribution. The results show that the model based on the fully aligned additives with the radial direction overestimates the tendency of the additives to stabilize the bubble motion, since the effect of extensional viscosity occurs due to the particle resistance to the movement throughout its longitudinal direction.A single bubble behaves like a non-linear oscillator when immersed in a fluid undergoing external acoustic pressure field. Bubble dynamics has been a subject of several studies in different areas. For instance, in sonochemistry We propose a study of a spherical oscillating bubble immersed in a viscoelastic fluid. In this work, the ambient fluid is characterized as a substance composed of a Newtonian liquid and a dilute volume fraction of additives as long fibers or few ppm of macromolecules. As in a previous work by the authors Consider a spherical bubble immersed in a Newtonian incompressible fluid of viscosity The general governing equations for the motion of an incompressible fluid are given by the continuity equation and the momentum equation, as follows The boundary conditions on the bubble surface are specified as following. Consider fluid 1 in the bubble side and fluid 2 in the complex liquid side. The interface between the fluids is For a radial flow i.e., The Maxwell model is represented in Considering We shall make use of dimensionless variables indicated by asterisks, namely Using the Leibniz’s formula, Eq. As a preliminary test of our numerical code, it was verified by using the exact collapse time for a cavity given analytically by Rayleigh solution in term of incomplete Gamma functions. From this test the error in our numerical integration was less than 0.1%. We also made a comparison, under several conditions of the physical parameters, between the predictions of the bubble motion given by an adaptive time step. Again, the computed error in our integration was smaller than 0.1%. Other test of the integration scheme was to make it able to reproduce the periodic solutions at different conditions without noticeable change of the amplitude over more than 5 cycles. At this point, the numerical verification was relevant especially because of the adaptive method used. We need to optimize the parameters that control the timestep increase/decrease and in addition ensure its accuracy. One way to deal with this matter is to compare results with different formulations. In order to start this validation, the classical theoretical solution given by Rayleigh  The present numerical simulations have also been validated by comparing results with Kim In this section we propose an asymptotic solution for Eq. By the same proceeding above, we find the  In order to save computational time, an efficient way of dealing with bubble dynamics is first to establish a minimum radius It should be important to note that the limit We derive an asymptotic solution for the convolution integral in Eq.   The second case, Another point to be observed from the behavior of The numerical simulations use the following initial conditions: Another way to investigate the influence of the additive orientation on the bubble oscillations is to study the behavior of the maximum bubble radius amplitude ( Therefore, the results show that the model based on the fully aligned additive with the radial direction and a lower variance overestimates the tendency of the additive to stabilize the bubble nonlinear oscillations. One immediate explanation for this inhibition of the bubble radius amplitudes may be given in terms of the strong extensional viscosity associated with the high resistance for stretching the flow offered by the anisotropic additive when oriented along the radial streamline. For The motion of an oscillating bubble in a complex fluid and the influence of anisotropic particles orientation were investigated. The integro-differential equation was solved and an analytical solution was proposed. A rigorous study on the eminence of the bubble collapse was explored, including the development of an asymptotical theory for the bubble minimum radius. We use the theory in order to validate the numerical integrations at the limit of small Deborah numbers. The results have shown that the nonlinear response of a cavitating bubble is strongly affected by the orientation of anisotropic additives suspended in the ambient liquid as rigid fibers, for instance. The additive orientation function investigated here The authors wish to acknowledge the support of this work by CNPq-Brazil and CAPES-Brazil.