This study compares the effect of heating mode on the microstructure and mechanical properties of 92.5W–6.4Ni–1.1Fe alloy. The compacts were sintered at 1500°C in a radiatively heated (conventional) furnace and in a 2.45GHz microwave furnace. Microwave sintering results in about 75% process time reduction, which leads to less W grain coarsening. Furthermore, a lower W concentration in the matrix and lack of intermetallic phase formation results in better mechanical properties in microwave sintered compacts. To avoid thermal shock, processing of WHAs in conventional furnace involves heating at a slower rate (<10 One of the techniques to achieve fast and relatively uniform sintering is through microwaves Besides resulting in grain growth, a long sintering time also results in precipitation of brittle intermetallic phases in W–Ni–Fe alloys. To avoid this, the matrix composition is restricted to an optimal nickel to iron ratio of 7:3 For the present study, the W powder ( The green compacts were sintered in a conventional furnace and a microwave furnace. The conventional sintering of green compacts was carried out in a 4.5 The sintered density was obtained by dimensional measurements. To monitor the shape distortion, the diameters were measured at various locations from top to the bottom of the samples. The microstructural characterization was done using an optical microscope (Leica, Germany) with digital image acquisition capability. It is well established that mechanical properties of WHAs are dependent upon their microstructure The bulk hardness of sintered alloy was measured by a Vickers tester (V-100C1, Akashi Corp., Japan) at 2 Phase determination was done using a X-ray diffractometer (Seifert GmbH, Germany) with Cu target and at a scan rate of 3°/min. The elemental analysis was performed using a WDS-equipped EPMA (JXA-8600SX, JEOL, Japan) with 2  Both the conventional- and the microwave-sintered samples attained >98.5% density.  The differences in the W concentration in the matrix imply that the interfacial solid–liquid energy is varying as a function of the heating mode. Consequently, microwave sintering results in a higher dihedral angle in the liquid-phase sintered 92.5W–6.4Ni–1.1Fe alloy ( Based on the above results, it is evident that microwave sintering offers a potentially viable means to consolidate tungsten heavy alloys for structural and high performance applications. In summary, this study compares the sintering behavior of 92.5W–6.4Ni–1.1Fe compacts consolidated in a microwave furnace and in a conventional furnace. The W–Ni–Fe alloys were sintered to equivalent level in microwaves with 75% reduction in the sintering time and at significantly lower power input. The alloy in the present study had non-stoichiometric binder composition, yet – unlike conventional sintering – no intermetallic phase formation occurred during microwave processing. The microwave-sintered W–Ni–Fe microstructure shows significantly lower coarsening of the W grains. Stereological quantification of the sintered microstructure reveals high contiguity, connectivity and dihedral angle in compacts consolidated in microwave furnace. Microwave-sintered compacts have higher hardness and tensile properties than their conventionally sintered counterparts. The authors thank Mr. G. Swaminathan of BHEL, Hyderabad and Professor D. Agrawal of Penn State for providing interesting insights on microwave sintering. The funding from Defense Research and Development Organization (DRDO) and BHEL Corporate R&D is gratefully acknowledged.