The microstructure vis-a-vis electrical transport behavior of Ag–Cd and Ag–Sn binary alloys in the temperature range 70–300K has been studied. The 22.2wt.% Cd and 29.4wt.% Cd alloys were both found to have a single-phase structure made of solid solution of Ag. The lattice parameter however increased with increasing Cd content in the alloy. The microstructure of 17.7wt.% Sn and 23.5wt.% Sn alloys however is made of two phases Ag4Sn and Ag3Sn. The resistivity of Ag–Cd alloys increased with increasing Cd content and the temperature coefficient of resistivity (TCR) decreased to 1560ppmK−1 for the 29.4wt.% Cd alloy compared to 4100ppmK−1 for pure Ag. The lowest TCR however was obtained for the 17.7wt.% Sn alloy, 375ppmK−1, which has a room temperature resistivity of 23.93μΩcm.Materials with a low temperature coefficient of resistivity (TCR) are used in a wide variety of applications such as resistors in high precision electronic measuring systems, temperature and flow sensors in automobiles, and in thermoelectric devices In the present work, Ag–Cd and Ag–Sn alloys with low TCR coupled with low resistivity have been developed which will be suitable for electronic devices. The main advantage of these alloys is that they are Ag-based which means they will have relatively high conductivity coupled with good oxidation and corrosion resistance. The mean time of failure and the activation energy for electromigration failure for Ag are also high The Ag–Cd and Ag–Sn alloys were made from pure (99.9%) Ag, Cd and Sn by melting in a flux cover. The flux, B The microstructure of the Ag–Cd and Ag–Sn alloys as seen in an optical microscope is shown in The electrical resistivity The equilibrium solubility of Cd in Ag can be as high as 40 The microstructural development in Ag–Sn alloys however is very different compared to Ag–Cd alloys. The alloys undergo several phase transformations on cooling to room temperature from the liquid state. In the case of 17.7 The solidification sequence of 23.8 The electrical resistivity of substitutional alloys depends on the extent of substitution and the resultant disorder introduced into the host lattice due to the size difference between solute and solvent atoms The variation of TCR with room temperature resistivity The electrical transport behavior of bulk Ag The authors wish to acknowledge the Indian Space Research Organization for financial support.