In this study, ethanol produced by osmophilic yeasts, Zygosaccharomyces bailii and Z. rouxii, in apple juice preserved with mint essential oil (MEO), carvacrol and natamycin instead of synthetic preservatives was modeled. Some processing parameters such as sodium benzoate (SB, 0–0.1%) used as a positive control, storage temperature (4–20 °C) and storage time (1–41 days) were selected in the study. Box-Behnken design in response surface methodology was used to evaluate the effects of processing parameters on ethanol levels of apple juice and three models were created for three preservatives for each yeast. Preservative type affected the ethanol formation in apple juice for both yeasts studied. Increase of preservative concentration decreased the ethanol formation during the storage period. The best effective preservative was determined as MEO and Z. bailii was found to be quite resistant yeast against to the preserving agents for three models as compared to Z. rouxii. Ethanol level increased with the increase of both storage temperature and time for both yeasts. The results showed that apple juice could be preserved by these three preservatives, but the MEO was the most effective agent for apple juice during the storage.Foodstuffs generally spoil with the impact of various physical, chemical and microbiological factors after a certain period. Microbiological spoilage is a significant issue in fruits and vegetables and it is closely related to many other physical and chemical changes in fruits and vegetables. Through such changes, significant quality losses occur, taste and structure are lost and ultimately fruit and vegetables turn into inconsumable foodstuffs. Microbiological spoilage also results in significant economic losses and spoilage microorganisms could produce serious toxins ( Many synthetic preservatives are used in food industry to prevent the microbial spoilage thereby extend the shelf life of the final products. In recent years, because of the increasing consumer demand for “healthier” food products having no chemical preservatives, there is a trend for using the natural preservatives and environmentally friendly technologies ( Natamycin is a preservative having an antifungal activity and it is a polyene macrolide antifungal agent used in the food industry. It is also known as pimarisin produced by aerobic fermentation of Carvacrol is one of the main constituents of common essential oils produced by oregano and thyme which gives a distinctive odor ( Carvacrol is accepted as a safe food additive and it is used as a flavouring agent in baked goods, sweets, beverages and chewing gum ( Essential oils extracted from the many medicinal and aromatic plants are natural, complex, multicomponent systems composed mainly of different compounds namely terpenes and some other nonterpene components ( Number of studies conducted with two strains of Apple juice (Cappy, 100% natural, 12.14 brix) in tetra pack packaged having no food additives was purchased from a local market in Kayseri, Turkey. To prepare the inoculation of the yeasts, firstly apple juice was divided into the 100 mL of glass bottles. And then reactivation of As a result of the response surface methodology principle, the experimental designs were firstly based on preliminary tests and then the actual trials were performed. Box Behnken design was used with four different processing variables namely storage temperature (4, 12 and 20 °C), storage time (1, 21 and 41 days), preservative concentrations (MEO 0, 500, 1000 ppm; carvacrol 0, 375 and 750 ppm and natamycin 0, 30 and 60 ppm) and a positive control (sodium benzoate, (0, 0.05 and 0.1% w/v). The experimental design was given in Ethanol level of the samples produced by the osmotolerant yeasts was detected using gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC–MS) equipment (Agilent 7890 gas chromatograph (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) coupled with Agilent 5975 mass selective detector operating in electron impact mode (ionisation voltage, 70 eV). A CP-Wax 52 CB capillary column (50 m length, 0.32 mm inner dia, 1.2 μm film diameter) was used. The temperature program started from 50 °C, then programmed at 3 °C/min to 240 °C, which was maintained for 1 min. Injector, interface, and ion source temperatures were 250, 250, and 230 °C, respectively. Injections were performed in split mode and helium (1 ml/min) was used as the carrier gas. The mass selective detector was operated in the scan mode between 20 and 400 In this study, a 4-factor-3-level Box-Behnken experimental design ( Apple juice samples inoculated with  Natamycin, one of the most effective natural food preservatives for preventing the growth of yeast and mold, was the other antimicrobial agent tried to prevent the ethanol formation by inhibiting the inoculated yeasts in apple juice during storage. Change in ethanol levels of apple juice samples preserved with natamycin was given in  The research results showed that ethanol produced by Authors would like to thank to the Scientific Research Project Unit (Project code: