This book chapter aims to provide a general overview of the different solvent-based extraction methods that has been used for the analysis of plastic food contact material migrants in foods, paying special attention to the analysis of those substances intentionally used in the manufacture of food packaging, though many migrating compounds remain unidentified. Thus, this book chapter has been divided into liquid–liquid extraction and solid–liquid extraction methods, attending to the nature of the sample. Moreover, since solvent-based methods are not normally used alone, different combinations of these methods with sorbent-based extraction methods have also been discussed.Acetonitrile Accelerated solvent extraction Acetyl tributyl citrate Butylbenzyl phthalate Bisphenol-A Octadecylsilane Diode array detector Di- Dibutyl phthalate Dicyclohexyl phthalate Dichloromethane Di(2-ethylhexyl) adipate Di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate Diethyl phthalate Dibenzofuran Di- Di-isononyl cyclohexane 1,2 dicarboxylate Direct immersion-solid-phase microextraction Dispersive liquid–liquid microextraction Dimethyl sulfoxide Di- Dipropyl phthalate Dispersive solid-phase extraction Epoxidized soybean oil Ethyl acetate Ethanol Food contact material Flame ionization detector Green analytical chemistry Gas chromatography Graphitized carbon black Gel permeation chromatography Acetic acid High-performance liquid chromatography Head space–solid-phase microextraction Ion mobility–mass spectrometry Internal standard Liquid–liquid extraction Limits of detection Liquid-phase microextraction Methanol Mass spectrometry Nonintentionally added substances Nonylphenol Tert-octylphenol Phthalic acid esters Polybrominated dibenzo-p-dioxin Polybrominated diphenyl ether Polycarbonate Polydimethylsiloxane polyethylene terephthalate Polypropylene Primary secondary amine Quadrupole Relative standard deviation Stir bar sorptive extraction Short-chain chlorinated paraffins Solidification of floating drop microextraction Solid–liquid extraction Specific migration limit Solid-phase extraction Solid-phase microextraction Tetrahydrofuran Ultrasound-assisted extraction Ultra high-performance liquid chromatography Ultraviolet J.G.S. and B.S.R. would like to thank the Canary Agency of Economy, Industry, Trade and Knowledge of the Government of the Canary Islands for the FPI fellowship (cofinanced with an 85% from European Social Funds). One of the first references of the synthesis of a plastic material is the invention of Parkesine (the first celluloid as a bulk material) in 1856 by Alexander Parkes, an English metallurgist. In the modern life, the use of plastics is a phenomenon of doubtless transcendence. Their versatility and easy processing have made them an omnipresent material in the society, up to the point that there is not a substitute material for many of their applications. As it is well known, plastics are constituted by polymers in which the order of the monomers, the nature, and shape that the polymeric chains adopt provide a material characterized by their great variability in their properties, some of which are exclusive of their polymeric nature but others are a result of their size and chain structure. Among the different varieties of plastics available, five of them are the ones most commonly employed, in particular, in the food field: polyethylene and their variants (polyethylene terephthalate (PET), high-density polyethylene, low-density polyethylene), polystyrene, polycarbonate, polypropylene (PP), and polyvinyl chloride. Among them, PET is the one most frequently used by far. In the past, most of the starting material used for plastic synthesis came from petrochemical sources; however, alternative plastic monomers coming from renewable sources like plants are also used. The term From a toxicological point of view, such polymers are inert structures of a high molecular weight that cannot be normally absorbed by the human body. As a result, the potential health risk of the polymer itself is extremely low. However, since additives of low molecular weight, catalyzers, and solvents are used for their manufacture Understanding the leaching of chemicals from plastic-type FCMs into food is an important task for food packaging risk assessment, that is why in certain countries there currently exist specific legislations to control FCM composition and uses. As an example, in Europe, Regulation No. 1935/2004 Migration studies involve, in most cases, a solid–liquid extraction (SLE) procedure with a solvent or a solution which composition depends on the characteristics of the food product that will be in contact with such material. In such cases, it is very frequent to evaporate the solvent and to determine the amount of the whole extracted material by a simple gravimetry, Despite the efforts, the truth is that FCMs are generally an underestimated source of chemical food contaminants (xenobiotics) and a potentially relevant route of human exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals, The analysis of migrants of plastic FCMs in foods is a very complex and challenging task that provides information of high relevance since once migration studies have been developed with the food simulant, it is not so frequent to analyze the migrated substance in the food product after a long exposure time. The complexity of the procedure is also derived from the complexity and variety of food products composition and also from possible contamination during their analysis, since plastic materials are also used in analytical laboratories. The aim of this article is to provide an overview of the different solvent-based analytical methods that have been used to determine plastic FCM migrants in foods focusing on the analysis of substances known to be or to have been legally used in food packaging. However, many migrating compounds remain unidentified. For this purpose, and attending to the nature of the sample (liquid, solid, or semisolid), the article has been divided into liquid–liquid extraction (LLE) and SLE methods. Furthermore, since 100% solvent-based methods are not the only ones used in this field, a general vision of their combination with sorbent-based extraction methods is also provided. Despite the extensive use of simulants in migration studies, some authors have also carried out the development and validation of new analytical procedures directly in real samples. Among them, extraction with solvents has been one of the most applied for both fatty and nonfatty foods In terms of liquid food samples, only few articles have been reported in the literature in which LLE has been used (see The QuEChERS method (standing for Concerning LPME procedures, their use has suffered a sharp increase as alternative to conventional LLE since they are based on a extremely low solvent consumption, which has transformed them in environmental friendly methods with high preconcentration factors. In this case, the extraction is carried out using only several microliters of a water-immiscible solvent (that acts as extractant or acceptor phase) and several milliliters of an aqueous phase (donor phase) which contains the analytes of interest. Respect to the matrices analyzed and, although a large number of beverages and other liquid foods are currently commercialized in plastic packaging, only milk, Regarding the solvents used, ACN is the most common, especially for QuEChERS applications, The analysis of real samples using LLE was also carried out by Fasano et al. As previously commented, when the QuEChERS method is applied, apart from the LLE or the SLE procedure (depending on the nature of the sample), an additional d-SPE cleanup is carried out. In the case of FCM analysis in liquid food samples, diverse sorbents such as C The assistance of the extraction In the case of the manuscript of Han et al., In the same way that happens with liquid samples, the analysis of organic analytes in solid or semisolid matrices normally requires an extraction step prior to their determination (generally by chromatographic techniques). In this sense, SLE is one of the most extended methods for the analysis of organic compounds, including plastic migrants. This technique is based on the same principles of LLE: putting in contact the matrix with an extraction agent (generally an organic solvent) to weaken analyte–matrix interactions. However, it should be taken into account that the extraction process in SLE is more difficult than in LLE since the extraction solvent has to impregnate the sample perfectly. Afterwards, the target compounds have to pass through the organic matter of the matrix surface to be dissolved in the extraction solvent to finally reach the solvent outside of the matrix.  In relation to the analyzed matrices, it should be highlighted the high number of samples of different nature that have been studied. Thus, it can be found solid matrices with different backgrounds, being able to distinguish between samples of animal origin such as meat, It is well known that a suitable selection of the extraction solvent is very important to achieve a good extraction efficiency. In this sense, there is a wide variety of organic solvents which have been selected for SLE processes for plastic migrant analysis in foods, including ACN, The extraordinary easy handling of SLE has made this option one of the most extended. However, and especially when complex matrices like foods are analyzed, it is also frequent to find that SLE does not provide sufficiently clean extracts and a simple filtration after the extraction is not enough for their direct analysis. As a result, some papers have proposed the inclusion of an additional LLE of the extract A clear example of the application of sorbents after an SLE procedure is the use of the QuEChERS method, As it was mentioned earlier, the simple addition of the extraction solvent to the homogenized sample is not enough and the process has to be assisted in a certain way. Trying to solve this problem, some modified methods based on a temperature increase have emerged, since higher temperatures improve the extraction solvent capacity to dissolve the analytes and also to increase the diffusion coefficients. In this sense, the traditional Soxhlet method was also applied by Iino et al. As can be seen in As it has been shown, SLEs have allowed the successful extraction of a high number of plastic migrants in samples with different origin providing good results independently of the version or the instrumental technique used for their determination. As demonstrated in the previous sections, solvent-based extraction techniques show good efficiency for the extraction of plastic migrants from food samples. In fact, they have been extensively applied in this sense. The combination of solvent-based extraction with SPE ( Regarding SPE, it has been used not only for improving the matrix cleanness but also with separative purposes. In this case, the sample or extract is loaded in a column or cartridge (depending on the approach applied) and then the analytes are eluted using a solvent or a mixture of them. Therefore, the extraction is based on the partitioning of the analytes between the sorbent and the solvent. In some cases, an additional step in which the sorbent is washed previously to the elution is necessary to avoid the coelution of matrix interferences. As an example, Ashizuka et al. As previously indicated, SPME has also been applied in combination with solvent-based extraction with the aim of determining plastic migrants in food samples. In-tube-SPME has also been applied with good results in this field. Another technique that has been combined with solvent-based extraction for the analysis of plastic migrants in food is SBSE, In general terms, these combination approaches have been coupled to diverse analytical methods such as LC-DAD The use of plastic materials as packaging for food preservation has currently become a very familiar sight, both in supermarkets and at home. However, a wide number of compounds, especially additives that are commonly used during plastic synthesis in order to improve their properties or their quality, can migrate from packaging to food constituting a serious risk for health. This migration phenomenon has been extensively discussed in the literature. As it is well known, an extraction step before the analysis is necessary because of the high complexity of food matrices and therefore, the impossibility to carry out a direct analysis. In this sense, solvent-based extraction techniques have become one of the most used, taking advantage of their simplicity. In particular, LLE and SLE have been successfully applied for the extraction of a high number of plastic additives from liquid foods and also from solid/semisolid food samples, respectively. Normally, these methods only require a final filtration step prior to the analysis, which is generally carried out by chromatographic techniques. However, when highly complex foods (especially those with a high fat content) have been selected, additional extraction or cleanup steps, using solvents and/or sorbents, have been included very often as part of the sample treatment process. In particular, the combination of LLE and SLE with sorbent-based extraction procedures like SPE is generally developed nowadays. In fact, it is quite difficult to find procedures based only on LLE or SLE alone. In the future, new extraction materials (also based on the use of nanomaterials) will surely be used as part of such SPE procedures. International legislations are currently being developed at different levels to try to control the composition and application of plastic FCMs by also fixing SMLs for some of the compounds contained in plastic, especially for additives. Therefore, and considering the proved toxicity of some of them, it is expected that the use of this type of substances in the manufacture of plastic products will be increasingly regulated, establishing more specific and more restrictive SMLs in the near future. For this reason, new analytical methods will have to be proposed or adapted to the changes that will emerge in this regard, trying to provide not only high recovery values but also adequate LODs. Furthermore, the identification and quantification of NIAS will surely continue to be an important matter of research. Considering the high number of potential contaminants which can migrate into foods and the wide variety of these samples that are preserved in plastic containers, it seems clear that new methodologies that allow the simultaneous analysis of different families of compounds and, if possible, that can be applied to a large number of matrices of different nature will also be developed in the next years. In that case, solvent-based extraction techniques will continue to play an important role in the field. Besides, and taking into account the current trends in Analytical Chemistry, these new analytical methods will surely follow GAC principles,