Hard ceramic particles were frequently added to polymers to improve their mechanical properties, e.g. scratch resistance. In recent years, however, some members of carbon nano-family such as carbon nanotubes and nanodiamonds were also widely used as reinforcements in polymeric matrices. In the present research, three different fillers including nano-alumina (NA), detonation (DND) and non-detonation (NDND) nanodiamonds were added to polyacrylic base automotive clear coats to improve the performance of the coating. Both nanodiamond types were surface functionalized to improve their dispersion and hence strengthening capacity. Several laboratory and industrial tests were performed on the coatings to study the mechanical behavior and resistance of the coatings to chemical reagents. The results showed that addition of these particles can strongly increase the scratch resistance of the coating while the other aspects of the coating was not deteriorated. In addition, the results proved the great potential of surface functionalization of DNDs over NDNDs on the performance of the coatings. The coating containing as-received DNDs and NDNDs showed scratch resistance lower than those containing NA however. However, the heat treated DNDs, unlike the heat treated NDNDs introduced a better scratch resistance in the coatings, considerably higher than the NA containing coatings.In recent years, composite and especially nanocomposite materials have become an important class of materials due to their unique combination of properties over initial raw materials [ In the last decade much of the discussion on nanotechnology perspectives has been focused on carbonaceous nanomaterials [ Although several papers have considered different properties of polymeric nanocomposites reinforced with ND [ As mentioned above, there are numerous research reports that deal with the different surface modification of NDs [ A polyacrylic base resin which is widely used in automotive industries as the final clear coat was utilized as the matrix. Three types of nanoparticles including nano-alumina (NA), detonation (DND) and non-detonation (NDND) nanodiamonds were used as reinforcements. All these nano-particles were purchased from NaBond Technologies. According to the supplier data, DNDs characteristics were 98–99% purity, 4–6 nm diameter, 3.05–3.3 g/mm Initiation temperature for oxidation of DNDs was measured by a Shimadzu TGA-50 TGA device to determine the heat treatment temperature. Two types of surface modifications including heat and acid treatment were applied on DNDs as explained below. NDNDs show less potential for surface treatment than DNDs so they were just heat treated with the same conditions as DNDs. Because the surface treatment applied on NDs is not a convenient treatment for NAs [ To remove non-diamond carbons and generate carboxylic groups on surfaces of both DND and NDND particles, they were heat treated for 2 h at 450 °C in air atmosphere by a resistance furnace. These particles named HT-DND and HT-NDND hereafter. To produce carboxylic groups on DNDs surface, as-received DNDs (AR-DNDs) were acid treated by the following procedure. 2 The characteristics of the as-received and processed powders were studied by TEM (LEO 912 AB) to determine the size and the shape of the particles and FTIR spectroscopy (Shimadzu 4300) to determine their surface functional groups. The polyacrylic resin was first mixed with a paint thinner to reach the proper viscosity. Thinner/polyacrylic ratio was chosen as 1/4. The pre-weighted NPs were then added to the proper amounts of diluted polyacrylic resin and sonicated for 1.5 h by a Branson 3510 sonication bath. The resultant liquid nanocomposites were sprayed on painted steel plates with dimensions of 120 × 70 × 0.8 mm. To ensure good adhesion of paint to steel plates, an epoxy resin was first electro-deposited on the plate surface, baked, and then painted. The clear coat was then sprayed on the wet paint. The paint and clear coat were finally cured for 20 min at 140 °C in a vacuum oven. As a reference guide, an unfilled sample (Blank) was also produced. The prepared samples and their characteristics are listed in Before performing the mechanical tests on the surfaces of plates, they were allowed to rest for at least 24 h. The scratch test was performed based on ASTM-G171 standard using a Parsa Polymer Sharif scratch device. Scratch speed and load (500 g) were kept constant during the test. A scratch of length 8 cm was produced during each test. Five pictures were taken by optical microscope in 50× magnification from different places of this scratch immediately after scratching. Scratch width was measured from these images and converted to hardness by using Eq. Several industrial tests were performed on the samples including glossmetry, mechanical tests (pencil hardness, bending, and cross cut), and resistance to chemical agents (covering resistance to diluted acid, alkali, salt spray, saturated moisture, xylene, and gasoline). These tests will be described briefly. Gloss of coatings was determined by a Sheen Tri-Glossmaster device based on PSA D251413 standard. For this purpose, a beam of white light is emitted to the samples surface with the angle of 20° and its reflection is measured. This test is also a criterion of scratch resistance. It was performed in accordance with JIS K-5400 standard by Sheen 720 N device. In this test, different types of pencils from 9B (softest) to 9H (hardest) are utilized to determine the softest pencil which can scratch the surface of the sample. Each pencil is held at an angel 45° to the sample surface with a weight of 1 ± 0.05 kg on it, and is moved across the sample surface. The pencil hardness is then the first pencil which scratches the coating. The other industrial tests were qualitative tests in which after the test was performed (under the specified industrial standard) the sample was inspected by bare eye. The procedure of each test is explained below. This test is usually used to examine the elasticity and elongation of coatings. The sample plate is clamped and bent by rotation of the roller frame onto the 200 mm length and variable diameter of 3–37 mm conical mandrel. According to this test the coating failure at specified diameter can be easy identified in a single operation. It is performed by a Sheen SH801 device according to PSA-D251297 standard. This is a paint adhesion test, i.e. it is used to determine the resistance of paint and coating to separation from the substrate by utilizing a specially designed cutter to cut a lattice pattern into the coating, penetrating all the way to the substrate. In the current study a lattice of nine squares was cut and then the squares were separated by using a special adhesive tape. The number of separated squares divided by the total number of squares (9 here) gives the failure percentage. If none of the squares are separated, then the results will be 100% and it’s a Pass. It is a qualitative test and a quick pass/fail results can be accomplished through it. The test was performed according to PSA D251075 standard. In order to evaluate the resistance of the coating to chemical agents, the coated samples were dipped in different chemical media for certain times and the appearance of the coating was evaluated by bare eyes. Resistance to acid sulfuric, NaOH, and gasoline were evaluated according to SES W6117 and salt spray and resistance to xylene were evaluated based on the PSA D275437 and PSA D171058 standards, respectively. TEM micrographs of NPs are shown in  The surface functionalization methods generally show better results on DNDs because of much higher surface area of this type of NDs in comparison with the other types. Heat treatment has two main effects on NDs. The first effect of heat treatment is eliminating non-diamond carbon allotropes such as amorphous carbon or graphite. The non-metallic impurities cannot be eliminated by heat treatment. The second one is production of oxide functional group (such as ether, ester, and carboxyl groups) on the surface of DNDs. Some of these functional groups are beneficial and some are detrimental to the dispersion capability of DNDs. Because the effect of eliminating non-diamond carbon allotropes is much stronger, this treatment is generally considered as beneficial to dispersion capability of DNDs [ TGA curves for AR, HT, and AT-DNDs are shown in Results of scratch tests (calculated from Eq. Results of industrial tests are reported in The pencil hardness results of all samples are provided in According to the data reported in A comparative study on the effect of the addition of different quantities of various fillers including detonation and non-detonation nano-diamond and nano-alumina to polyacrylic on some tribological properties was investigated in this research and the main conclusions drawn from the results are as below: Addition of the as-received nano-particles to polyacrylic is beneficial to its tribological properties such as scratch resistance. Almost all samples showed higher scratch resistance than the Blank sample however, the level of strengthening depends on the type and content of nanoparticles and type of surface modification. Surface modifications used, especially heat treatment, greatly affected the strengthening capability of DNDs. Among the samples containing HT-DND and NA particles, the DND-HT-15 sample presented an increase in scratch resistance of 23.6% in comparison with the Blank sample. For acid treated DNDs the level of strengthening was moderate (˜11.3% improvement). While the optimum addition of the nanoparticles improved the scratch resistance, it did not deteriorate the other aspects of the coatings such as adhesion of the coating to the substrate or resistance to chemical agents. The authors are grateful of