A study has been conducted to understand how the cobalt and nickel ions affect the dissolution behavior of gold and thiosulfate consumption in the thiosulfate-ethylenediamine (en)-Cu2+ system. The cobalt and nickel ions enhance gold dissolution within the concentration range used in this experiment, but there was almost no additional thiosulfate consumption. The concentration of the copper(II) complex with en decreases in the presence of the Co2+. The redox/mixed potentials (E
                     Pt and E
                     Au) are measured using platinum and gold electrodes immersed in a gold leaching system. The test results show that the additional Co2+ and Ni2+ increase the E
                     Au but do not significantly change the E
                     Pt. The leached gold foils were analyzed by XPS. The results show that the additional metallic ions could change the morphology of the gold surface such that passivated products containing sulfur would decrease and the gold could be easily dissolved.Thiosulfate, as an alternative lixiviant for gold extraction, has received much attention in recent years due to the growing environmental concern over the use of cyanide. Many studies have been carried out to study the optimum conditions for gold dissolution, including suitable Eh and pH ( In the ammoniacal thiosulfate system, gold dissolution is hindered or promoted by a variety of metallic impurities, which either consume thiosulfate or modify surface reactions involving gold. Perez and Garaviz reported that at pH levels lower than 8.0, metallic iron (from grinding media) and iron salts dissolved in solutions resulted in a decrease in gold dissolution. Ferric ions were reduced to ferrous ions, and the thiosulfate ions were oxidized to tetrathionate ions ( The effect of metallic ions on gold dissolution varies depending on the ion type and concentration, as well as the solution chemistry and gold surface reaction. Because en is used as an alternative to ammonia by our research group ( Gold foils (99.99% Au, thickness 0.1 The concentration of Au in the solution was determined using AAS (atomic adsorption spectroscopy). The solution samples were oxidized by hydrogen peroxide, and HCl was added to the solution, which was then boiled to ensure complete conversion of the metal species to the chloride form. The thiosulfate concentration was determined by the iodometric method. To eliminate the effect of the hydroxyl and copper ions on the iodine titration, a certain amount of EDTA and acetic acid was added to the samples before titration. The absorbance of the Cu(en) The gold leaching experiments were performed in a round-bottomed flask using a magnetic stirrer at a rotating speed of 250 The gold dissolution rates were compared in the presence of the metallic ions using the following reference conditions: 0.1 Because copper is the catalytic oxidant of gold leaching, changes in the Cu(II) concentration have a critical effect on the gold leaching results. The complexity of the chemical reactions involved in gold leaching by the ammoniacal copper(II) thiosulfate system and the reaction mechanism of copper(II) and thiosulfate in the presence of oxygen has been studied by many researchers (  For the Ni Thiosulfate is a metastable oxysulfide that tends to readily undergo chemical decomposition in aqueous solutions. The significant consumption may be caused by different metal impurities from ores in the ammoniacal thiosulfate leaching of gold ( The effect of these additional ions on the thiosulfate consumption is presented in The concept of mixed potentials has been applied to explain the important aspects of corrosion for many years. In many hydrometallurgical systems, reactions occur by means of electrochemical mechanisms, including gold leaching in the thiosulfate system ( The electrode potentials of It was inevitable that the gold surface would be passivated during thiosulfate leaching ( The Cu 2p spectra of the gold surface leached by metallic ions-bearing solutions are shown in To further determine the morphology of the gold surface, From the XPS study, the gold dissolution is enhanced in the presence of Ni Gold dissolution would be enhanced in the presence of Co This work was financially supported by the