A study was carried out to analyse the behaviour of internal flows in a closed grinding circuit. The study was performed through mathematical modelling, using the Cumulative Based Kinetic model and obtaining the necessary parameters at laboratory scale with various minerals. Particle size variations in all flows of the circuit were analysed with the aim of comparing the time it takes to reach a steady state. Results show in all cases that product flow reaches a steady state before the whole circuit does, mainly because the recirculation flow reaches a steady state with slower pace. More research at lab and industrial scale is being planned to try to corroborate this result.When working with closed grinding circuits, it is usually considered that the circuit reaches a steady state at the moment when the particle size distribution in the product flow reaches a steady state. This study sought to test all flows to determine if product flow is actually the best one for monitoring the end of transient state or if perhaps another flow could give more accurate information. In the first stage of this research, we decided to use mathematical models to simulate the operation of a closed grinding circuit. The use of these models proved the potential of its application at industrial scale ( The model chosen to perform this study was the Cumulative Based Kinetic (CBK) model, which has been clearly defined and tested in This study was performed with six different ores using a 20″ The CBK model is given by the following equation: The results of materials characterization are shown in Mathematical calculations of the closed grinding circuit simulation were performed using a plug-flow simulation pattern. To carry out the simulation, we used grinding cycles or intervals of 2 Iterative calculations were made to reach the steady state for all flows. In every case the steady state was reached within 13 cycles, in agreement with the mathematical results. Regarding the analysis of results, it was considered that transient size distribution results in each flow obtained before calculations reached stability can be assumed as the transient flows. The normalized size The results show that grinding circuit reaches mathematical stability at different speeds for each ore sample, when all simulation conditions are the same. Also, it must be noted that in all cases the final product flow reaches stability more quickly than the other internal circuit flows, with the recirculation flow being in every case the slowest flow. The delay measured with the simulation was 2–3 cycles, which meant 4–6 From the results presented, it can be concluded that: The CBK model can be used to carry out a mathematical evaluation of the transient stage in a closed grinding circuit. The grinding circuit tested, with all mineral samples considered, reached whole stability after the product flow, with calculated differences of several minutes. Looking at the obtained results, it seems more accurate to consider the recirculation flow than the final product flow when monitoring the transition form transient to steady state in a closed grinding circuit. More research is being carried out at laboratory scale to corroborate this behaviour in the circuit flows. Additionally, some research is being planned at industrial scale to study this observed tendency.