The distributions of Sb and Sn between slag and matte in equilibrium with tridymite in the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si system at 1200 °C (1473 K) have been measured. The experimental technique involves high-temperature equilibration in sealed quartz ampoule, rapid quenching, and direct measurement of phase compositions using Electron Probe X-ray Microanalysis (EPMA). The closed system equilibration approach was used to minimize the evaporation of Sb and Sn from the samples. The experimentally-determined distribution coefficients of Sb and Sn between slag and matte were found to increase with increasing Cu concentration in matte above 40 wt%. The new data have been used to refine the computational thermodynamics model for the system containing Sb and Sn at dilute concentrations. The molten slag phase is described using the Modified Quasichemical Model in the Quadruplet Approximation. Liquid matte and metal phases were modelled using single solution built within the Modified Quasichemical Model in the Pair Approximation. The thermodynamic model can be used to assess and predict the deportments of Sb and Sn between the slag and matte phases in the high-temperature pyrometallurgical production, refining and recycling of copper.Antimony and tin are minor elements commonly present during in the pyrometallurgical processing of copper. There are several previous studies of the distribution coefficients of Sb and Sn as minor elements between slag and matte. (L Johnson et al. Yazawa et al. Roghani et al. Henao et al. The Sb distribution ratio between slag and matte measured from industrial furnaces was reported by several authors Park et al. A critical review of the previous studies has indicated that there is significant uncertainty in the distribution coefficients of Sb and Sn between slag and matte. The available L In the present study, laboratory experimental investigation of the distributions of Sb and Sn between slag and matte have been carried out at the gas/slag/matte/tridymite equilibrium in the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si system at 1200 °C (1473 K). The new data together with previous experimental results from the literature have been used for the thermodynamic optimization of the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si system containing dilute concentrations of Sb and Sn. The aim of the present combined experimental and thermodynamic modelling study is to provide a better understanding of the chemical behaviors of Sb and Sn in high-temperature copper processing. The research methodology used in this study is similar to that recently described by the authors The integrated approach used in the present study involves the combination of experimental and thermodynamic modelling studies performed in parallel. A preliminary thermodynamic database first developed from existing data is used to critically evaluate these data, to identify areas of importance for experimental research and to assist in the detailed planning of further individual experiments. The present integrated research program incorporates the experiments on the multi-component systems in the composition ranges, for oxygen and sulfur dioxide partial pressures close to those used under industrial process conditions. The thermodynamic model then is further optimized using the new multi-component measurements in the vicinity of the industrial slags. A number of iterations of experimental measurement and parameter optimization from binary and ternary to the multi-component systems and back were required in order to reach an agreement with the extensive data sets in the low-order and multi-component areas. A detailed description of the database development process and examples of the integrated experimental and thermodynamic modelling approach can be found in High temperature equilibration, rapid quenching and direct measurement of the compositions of the condensed equilibrated phases using Electron Probe X-ray Microanalysis (EPMA) technique was applied to study the complex, multi-component slag/matte/solid equilibria. This technique is based on the general approach developed by the authors and reported in earlier publications The high temperature equilibration of each of the synthetic mixtures was carried out in a sealed quartz ampoule in a vertical tube furnace at T = 1200 °C (1473 K). The starting composition was calculated using the FactSage software from the following pure materials: FeO The concentrations of the major components in the phases were measured by an electron probe X-ray microanalyzer (EPMA), JEOL JXA 8200 L (trademark of Japan Electron Optics Ltd., Tokyo). The EPMA measurements undertaken using an acceleration voltage of 15 keV and a probe current of 15 nA. The Duncumb-Philibert ZAF correction procedure supplied with the JEOL JXA 8200 L probe was applied. Reference materials from Charles M. Taylor, Stanford, CA were used as standards. The proportions of the different oxidation states of individual elements were not measured, and all elemental concentrations were recalculated to selected oxidation states to unambiguously report the compositions of the phases for presentation purposes. EPMA measurements of the Sb and Sn concentrations in slag and matte phases were done by: (i) Carefully selecting background positions of the Sb and Sn corresponding characteristic X-ray energy lines to avoid possible peak interference with the line of other elements; and (ii) Increasing measurement time of the background of Sb and Sn to increase the X-ray count rate of the background and hence increasing the EPMA detection limits for Sb and Sn. The EPMA detection limits for Sb and Sn are 281 and 318 ppm, respectively, estimated by Chen et al. The matte phase on quenching was found to consist of copper-rich veins, and the slag phase in some of the samples was found to contain sub-micron copper-rich particles. The inhomogeneity of phase compositions appears during quenching of the samples. The average compositions of these phases were determined using an EPMA line analysis approach with beam diameters between 10 and 50 µm depending on the available area of analysis in the samples. It has been demonstrated in a previous study The optimized thermodynamic database was developed through critically evaluating all available thermodynamic and phase equilibrium data for a given system to obtain one set of model equations for the Gibbs energies of all phases as functions of temperature and composition. From these equations, the thermodynamic properties and the phase diagrams can be back-calculated. Thermodynamic property data, such as activity data, can aid in the evaluation of the phase diagram, and phase diagram measurements can be used to deduce thermodynamic properties The selection of appropriate thermodynamic models for all phases in a system is important. The molten slag phase is described using the Modified Quasichemical Model in the Quadruplet Approximation Complete thermodynamic assessment of the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si system and all subsystems was recently completed Experimental data from the present study together with the information available from the literature have been used to add the minor elements into the thermodynamic models of slag and matte/metal phases, resulting in the development of a new thermodynamic database for FactSage 7.2 thermodynamic package   In the recent thermodynamic assessment of slag/matte equilibria in the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si system by Shishin et al. The distribution coefficients of Sb and Sn between slag and matte in equilibrium with tridymite in the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si system at T = 1473 K [1200 °C] are plotted as a function of Cu concentration in matte in Thermodynamic parameters for the solution models of phases in the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si system without Sb and Sn were presented in earlier publications In the present study, model parameters for slag and matte/metal solutions ( Cu-Sn parameters were taken from the FScopp database of FactSage 7.2 software Cu-Sb parameters were optimized to approximately reproduce the assessed diagram of the Cu-Sb system by Liu et al. For Sb, the results of transpiration experiments by Roine and Jalkanen The detailed modelling of above mentioned binary and ternary systems is the subject of future publications and may require several additional optimization iterations to refine the description of all available data. Within the slag solution model, the Gibbs energies of the end-members Sb Finally, the enthalpies of formation of SnS and Sb New data on the distributions of Sb and Sn between slag and matte phases have been obtained at gas/slag/matte/tridymite equilibria in the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si-(Sb-Sn) system at T = 1200 °C (1473 K). The present experimental technique eliminates a number of uncertainties associated with techniques used in previous studies, i.e.: The use of large crucibles that make it longer to achieve equilibrium in these multi-phase systems; The use of crucible that introduce contaminant elements to the samples; Slow solidification of samples that leads to changes in the compositions of the phases; and Manual separation of equilibrium phases that leads to cross-contamination of phases. It was found that the presence of Sb and Sn at dilute concentrations did not significantly influence the distributions of the major elements between phases in the system. In general, the distribution coefficients of Sb and Sn between slag and matte were found to increase with increasing Cu concentration in matte above 40 wt%. The values of the distribution coefficients L The experimental data and further thermodynamic model predictions show that the distribution coefficients L A combined experimental study and thermodynamic modelling approach has been used in the investigation of the distributions of Sb and Sn in the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si system. The experimental technique involves high-temperature equilibration in sealed quartz ampoule, rapid quenching, and direct measurements of phase compositions using Electron Probe X-ray Microanalysis (EPMA). Thermodynamic models have been developed for liquid slag and matte-metal solutions. The distributions of Sb and Sn between phases in the high-temperature pyrometallurgical production, refining, and recycling of copper can now be assessed and improved using the available data and thermodynamic model. The authors would like to thank the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 