Cementum extracellular matrix is similar to other mineralized tissues; however, this unique tissue contains molecules only present in cementum. A cDNA of these molecules, cementum attachment protein (hrPTPLa/CAP) was cloned and expressed in a prokaryotic system. This molecule is an alternative splicing of protein tyrosine phosphatase-like A (PTPLa). In this study, we wanted to determine the structural and functional characteristics of this protein. Our results indicate that hrPTPLa/CAP contains a 43.2% α-helix, 8.9% β-sheet, 2% β-turn and 45.9% random coil secondary structure. Dynamic light scattering shows that this molecule has a size distribution of 4.8nm and aggregates as an estimated mass of 137kDa species. AFM characterization and FE-SEM studies indicate that this protein self-assembles into nanospheres with sizes ranging from 7.0 to 27nm in diameter. Functional studies demonstrate that hrPTPLa/CAP promotes hydroxyapatite crystal nucleation: EDS analysis revealed that hrPTPLa/CAP-induced crystals had a 1.59±0.06 Ca/P ratio. Further confirmation with MicroRaman spectrometry and TEM confirm the presence of hydroxyapatite. In vivo studies using critical-size defects in rat cranium showed that hrPTPLa/CAP promoted 73%±2.19% and 87%±1.97% new bone formation at 4 and 8weeks respectively. Although originally identified in cementum, PTPLa/CAP is very effective at inducing bone repair and healing and therefore this novel molecule has a great potential to be used for mineralized tissue bioengineering and tissue regeneration.Cementum extracellular matrix is similar to other mineralized tissues such as bone and dentin; however, this unique tissue contains specific molecules only expressed by cementocytes, cementoblats and their progenitor cells present in the periodontal ligament. These unique molecules, cementum attachment protein (CAP) and cementum protein 1 (CEMP1) are believed to regulate the biological activities of periodontal ligament cells Cementoblasts are the principal cells responsible for the formation of cementum. Expression and purification of hrPTPLa/CAP was previously described Characterization of hrPTPLa/CAP secondary structure, molecular sizing and self-assembly properties were done using the following methods:     These experiments were conducted to elucidate the influence of hrPTPLa/CAP on the nucleation, morphology, micro and nanostructure of the calcium phosphate minerals. Calcium phosphates were crystallized by the slow and controlled chemical reaction between the calcium and phosphate ions (without organic matrix) in a semisolid medium at physiological pH and at room temperature. The semisolid crystallizing medium was prepared by using 2 To characterize the mineral deposits we used the following methods:      To determine the potential of hrPTPLa/CAP to induce mineral formation Male Wistar rats aged 7–8 Calvarias were fixed overnight in 10% formaldehyde as described elsewhere Expression of bone-related molecules was also analyzed in the new formed bone-like tissue in rat calvaria by double-immunofluorescence staining using mouse monoclonal antibody against human osteopontin (OPN), human bone sialoprotein (BSP) and human STRO-1, rabbit polyclonal antibody against human OCN (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) and against human PTPLa/CAP (produced in house). Tissues were fixed, decalcified, embedded in paraffin, sectioned and mounted on glass silanized slides as described elsewhere Eight animals were used for control and experimental groups and values are expressed as mean Circular dichroism of Taken all together the data indicates that hrPTPLa/CAP is a protein with a high percentage of random coil structure (structural disorder), that it is an acidic protein and that it self-assembles into nanospheres which then form aggregates resembling nanostrings. It has been shown that intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) are multifunctional and can have hydroxyapatite binding properties, as is the case of SIBLING and HMGI(Y) Human recombinant PTPLa/CAP was utilized for nucleation studies as described in the Methods section. Results from these experiments indicate that this protein promotes hydroxyapatite formation and growth after 7 The morphological features observed in these arrangements are in agreement with the apatite crystals found in human woven bone and mineralized cementum To answer this question we used the model of rat calvaria critical-sized defects. Gelatin matrix scaffolds containing hrPTPLa/CAP or blank gelatin matrix scaffolds were implanted into rat calvaria critical-sized defects and samples were collected after 4 and 8 In order to assess the molecular identity of the filled defect, the presence and expression of bone-related molecules was analyzed by double-immunofluorescence. OPN was present in osteocytes and cells inside bone marrow spaces ( In the present study, we provided further characterization of hrPTPLa/CAP secondary structure, self-assembly properties and biological capabilities of this protein. AFM and FE-SEM studies indicate that this protein self-assemblies into nanospheres with sizes ranging from 7.0 Circular Dichroism analysis revealed that Recombinant human PTPLa/CAP possesses functional biological activity in terms of self-assembly and hydroxyapatite nucleation. Our studies also strongly suggest that the hydroxyapatite crystal formation by hrPTPLa/CAP might be assembled through an immature mineral phase. Thus, hrPTPLa/CAP appears to be responsible for regulating the transformation of an immature mineral phase to crystalline hydroxyapatite. Overall matrix intervention during the nucleation and growth process gives rise to composite materials like bone and cementum with functionalized mechanical properties Using an established craniofacial defect model, hrPTPLa/CAP showed significantly greater bone fill compared as compared to controls, indicating the potential of hrPTPLa/CAP in craniofacial bone regeneration/augmentation. Calvarial critical size defects do not regenerate It is conceivable that hrPTPLa/CAP-induced bone regeneration is due to the induction of neovascularization and the subsequent recruitment of MSCs, since this protein has been shown to be expressed by paravascular stem cells in the periodontal ligament, and these cells are the suspected progenitors of osteoblasts and cementoblasts and express STRO-1 These studies were partially supported by grants from