Among the proposed hydrogen storage systems, magnesium alloys have proved to be promising since they are rechargeable with high hydrogen capacities (theoretically up to 7.6wt.%), reversibility and low costs. Small particle size, which can be achieved by milling, and small amounts of transition-metal compounds as catalysts result in increased hydrogen release/uptake kinetics. In this work, we developed the rate expression for the dehydrogenation of milled 7MgH2/TiH2, 10MgH2/TiH2, and MgH2 samples. The complete rate expressions, together with the values of activation energy and other rate parameters, were determined for the three milled samples by analyzing data obtained from non-isothermal thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The MgH2 doped with TiH2 by high-energy milling displayed substantially reduced apparent activation energy of 107–118kJ/mol and significantly faster kinetics, compared with 226kJ/mol for similarly milled MgH2 without TiH2 doping.Energy storage has been one of the challenges of the decade. Due to the environmental concerns, a need to develop a cleaner and safer fuel has been established. Hydrogen has been considered a promising substitute for the fossil fuel. One of the most important uses of hydrogen is in automobile as a fuel that not only can be stored safely but also can be supplied when needed. Currently, hydrogen is stored by liquefaction, compression or solid-state storage materials among which the latter exhibits higher volumetric contents and safety The important properties of solid-state hydrogen storage materials include the storage capacity, dehydrogenation reaction temperatures, hydrogen pressure generated by the dehydrogenation reactions, and the reversibility of dehydrogenation and hydrogenation reactions In order for the solid-state hydrogen storage materials to replace the conventional fuel, they have to meet the following specific requirements determined by the U.S. Department of Energy for on-board storage for vehicles: (1) The storage capacity must be high (>5.5 Systems that have shown reversibility in releasing and taking up hydrogen are classified into binary metal hydrides, intermetallics, carbon-based materials, and complex metal hydrides. Among these types of hydrogen storage systems magnesium alloys have proved to be promising since they are rechargeable with high hydrogen capacities (theoretically up to 7.6 Yet these systems have not met the DOE requirements due to their slow kinetics and large decomposition enthalpy that requires high temperature for dehydrogenation. The dehydrogenation reaction of MgH The high-energy barrier of the strong ionic bonding between magnesium and hydrogen can be overcome by utilizing a destabilizer mixed with the hydride to lower the dehydrogenation temperature and enhance the thermodynamics and kinetics of the reaction During the past years several approaches have been suggested to improve the hydrogenation/dehydrogenation properties of such systems. Those include reducing the particle size, forming binary or ternary magnesium-based metal hydrides, and alloying or doping with transition-metal elements such as Ti, Ni, Co, V, Mn, Fe, and Cr for their catalytic effects Researchers have found that the addition of Ti to MgH It is noted that TiH This paper reports on the formulation of the complete rate equation for hydrogen release based on experimental data obtained using MgH Experimental work on the dehydrogenation was described in detail by Choi et al. A thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA, Shimadzu TGA50) was employed to investigate the hydrogen release properties of the mixtures. Ten milligram samples were heated up to 350 The intrinsic kinetics for the solid gas reactions can be expressed by various rate expressions the general form of which can be written as  For gas–solid reaction involving fine particles the nucleation and growth kinetics given by the following equation is often obeyed: Equation The values of Furthermore, we express Δ Non-isothermal rate measurements are typically performed under a constant heating rate: Substituting these terms in Eq. It should be noted that the series on the right hand side converges rapidly for The appropriate form of For a large value of (  These results were analyzed by the method described in the previous section for non-isothermal data up to the point when the temperature just reached 350 Although the difference is small, Results show that the ( It is noted that the temperature dependence of this reaction system consists of two terms: the energy to overcome thermodynamic barrier for decomposition expressed by (Δ Having obtained the appropriate rate equation for the system, the calculated results of conversion versus time were compared with the experimental results, as shown in The final form of the complete rate expression for dehydrogenation is as follows: Complete rate equation Conversion vs. temperature relationship under linear heating Complete rate equation Conversion vs. temperature relationship under linear heating Complete rate equation Conversion vs. temperature relationship under linear heating The on-board hydrogen fuel system should be able to deliver hydrogen at an acceptable rate. The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) has established a set of targets for vehicular hydrogen storage system. The targeted delivery rate is 0.02 (g It is seen that the 7MgH In this work complete rate expressions for the dehydrogenation of milled 7MgH This research was supported in part by  heating rate activation energy dependence of rate on gaseous species concentration dependence of rate on fractional conversion standard Gibbs free energy standard enthalpy of reaction reaction rate constant pre-exponential factor reaction order partial pressure of species equilibrium pressure of species gas constant standard entropy change of reaction time temperature starting temperature fractional conversion