The magnitude of floods depends not only on the intensity and pattern of precipitation during the flood event (the ‘flood-producing’ precipitation), but also on the moisture stored in the catchment, which arises from antecedent hydrological processes over many preceding timescales. To characterise this effect, an empirical study is conducted on the influence of antecedent precipitation on significant flood events across multiple climate zones and catchment conditions, using 100 Australian catchments with hourly streamflow and precipitation. Antecedent conditions are shown to have a significant influence on flood volume, with three quarters of catchments having at least a 50% difference in flood volume depending on whether the catchment is wet or dry before the flood-producing precipitation event. The study considers the sensitivity of flow to antecedent precipitation by means of an ‘elasticity’ metric, which indicates the proportional change in flow for a change in antecedent precipitation or flood-producing precipitation. Flood-producing precipitation nevertheless remains the dominant flood driver across most catchments, with the elasticity of flow to antecedent precipitation typically being between 28% and 37% of the elasticity to flood-producing precipitation. Importantly, the elasticity of flow to antecedent precipitation relative to flood-producing precipitation decreases with increasing event magnitude, highlighting that conclusions of future change based on annual maximum streamflow may not be reflective of the processes that operate for more extreme floods that have the greatest impact on society.The hydrometeorological drivers of fluvial floods are often conceptualised as the combined effect of heavy (or ‘flood-producing’) precipitation events, and the catchment’s moisture conditions immediately prior to the heavy precipitation event. Although heavy precipitation is usually recognised as the dominant driver of most fluvial floods, the catchment’s antecedent moisture conditions (AMC) can have a strong modulating influence on the extent to which a heavy precipitation event will lead to a flood ( The partitioning between flood-producing precipitation and AMC has implicitly formed the conceptual basis of a large variety of flood modelling approaches. For example, the Rational method ( Continuous simulation approaches that are based on soil moisture accounting represent an alternative and more explicit method to account for variations in the relationship between antecedent conditions and flood-producing precipitation ( An alternative approach to understanding the relative effects of flood drivers is to empirically represent the association between flood-producing precipitation and the catchment’s AMC on overall flood response. Although AMC can be qualitatively defined as being related to a catchment’s moisture stores prior to a flood-producing precipitation event, quantifying the combined influence of moisture stored in the catchment’s soils, lakes, groundwater, reservoirs and other stores (e.g. snowpack) on flood flows is challenging ( Despite conceptual difficulties, several studies have used empirical approaches to quantify the relationship between the AMC and flood response ( To better understand the relative roles of flood-producing precipitation and AMC on flood runoff, this paper presents a new empirical approach to event delineation that has minimal reliance on assumptions embedded in flood models. This approach focuses on flood volumes to analyse the water balance and enable the estimation of event-based runoff coefficients. In this approach, flood flow events are characterised according to the total runoff volume and flood-producing precipitation is characterised as the total precipitation over an equivalent duration as the flow event. AMC is similarly represented by a weighted average of the antecedent precipitation depths where, unlike other methods, the timescale of the AMC metric is calibrated to each catchment. Two empirical metrics are then introduced to quantify the influence of AMC on flood volumes. The first examines the range of responses in flood volume to AMC for a given flood-producing precipitation event (termed the ‘antecedent effect ratio’) and the second explores changes in flood volume relative to changes in AMC (termed the ‘elasticity’ of flood volume to the AMC). This latter metric is especially relevant to questions regarding the composition of future flow events. The benefits of this empirical approach are that it overcomes sensitivity to the choice of hydrological model, and does not require definition of the AMC in terms of the moisture in the catchment. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. To quantify the effect of AMC on a flood flow event in conjunction with an associated flood-producing precipitation event it is necessary to first define the characteristics of an ‘event’. Two empirical metrics are then introduced that describe different aspects of the relationship between AMC and flood flow events. The first is a new metric developed to represent this relationship as a measure of the influence of AMC on flows for that catchment. The second describes the proportional change in flow for a change in flood-producing precipitation or AMC. Together these metrics provide an indication of the extent to which a catchment’s AMC influences flood volume. A common approach to event definition is to use a precipitation threshold and a time criterion; for example, precipitation greater than 10 mm with less than 1.5 h of intra-event dry period ( An alternative definition is therefore proposed for this study and is designed to: Use streamflow time series as the basis for delineation, thereby accounting for both rainfall patterns and catchment physiography; Use an Avoid reliance on event-based or continuous hydrological models, and therefore is not subject to the assumptions embedded in those models; and Mimic how events would be delineated by an expert hydrologist, while enabling automation for application across large numbers of catchments of different sizes and across different climate zones. The overarching aim of this new definition is to provide a much more physically interpretable separation of flood-producing and antecedent precipitation, in order to provide a solid quantitative basis for investigating how AMC influences flooding. The approach for delineating both historical flood events and the precipitation events that lead to those floods is given as Algorithm 1. The approach was designed to address both single- and multi-peak events, and was developed on the philosophy that it is the responsiveness of the catchments—rather than purely precipitation-based approaches—that should be the basis for identifying both the flood-producing precipitation event and the antecedent processes that lead to the event. The implementation of the algorithm is illustrated in  This paper implements the event delineation procedure for between one and four events per year to investigate whether the relationships between AMC, flood-producing precipitation volume and flood flow event volume change with the extremity of the extracted events. In this analysis, events with precipitation depths of less than 0.1 mm were removed. As a result of the difficulties in measuring the volume of antecedent moisture in the catchment, this paper uses a measure of the precipitation depth prior to the flood-producing precipitation events as a proxy for the AMC. Antecedent precipitation is likely to be the dominant control of soil moisture at depths that impact on precipitation to runoff conversion ( To support the investigation into the effect of AMC on flood response, a simple model was developed to determine flood event volume as a function of different combinations of flood-producing precipitation and antecedent precipitation. The model is as follows: The form of Eq. To fit the model at a site for a given antecedent precipitation length, To evaluate the performance of the model (Eq. A preliminary evaluation of the extracted flood volume, flood-producing precipitation and antecedent precipitation events at each site showed that the AMC had varying degrees of influence across different catchments. To illustrate this effect, A second metric explores the elasticity of how flood volume changes relative to changes in both flood-producing precipitation and the AMC. This latter metric is especially relevant to questions regarding the drivers of future flood events. While many hydrological modelling approaches may reasonably account for antecedent moisture through calibration to historical floods, the relationship between the AMC, flood-producing precipitation and flood volume may not remain constant under a future climate, and the elasticity metric helps determine the extent to which changes in AMC are likely to affect changes to flood runoff.  To evaluate whether the observed at-site An alternative measure of the effect of AMC is obtained through an ‘elasticity’ estimator that evaluates the proportional change in flow for a change in flood-producing precipitation or AMC. Previous studies have applied this metric at the annual timescale, by considering the proportional change of annual flows relative to changes in annual precipitation directly from the historical data ( The elasticity of flood volume to flood-producing precipitation volume is shown in Eq. To evaluate whether the antecedent precipitation to flow elasticity is statistically different from zero, a bootstrap test was conducted to determine the range of elasticity values for which there is no association between paired flow volume and antecedent precipitation. The test proceeds in a similar manner to the significance test of observed From each bootstrap dataset The empirical analysis of the effects of AMC on flood flows is supported by a database of catchments with extended sub-daily streamflow records and sub-daily rainfall data obtained from gauges located within or near the catchment. The initial database for this study comprised 270 streamflow gauging stations ( Presence of hourly or sub-hourly precipitation gauges in or near the catchment; and At least 20 years of concurrent hourly streamflow and precipitation data with less than 25% missing data. The final dataset comprises streamflow and precipitation data from 100 catchments across Australia ( The selected catchments range in size from 7 km  Visual inspection of the event delineation showed reasonable performance across the 100 sites for the majority of events, confirming that events could be delineated using the algorithm as a person would have manually performed by ‘eye’. For all sites there was an improvement in the model fit (Eq. The According to the bootstrap-with-replacement test the antecedent effect according to the Significant spatial variation is seen in the Variations in The distribution of AMC elasticity ( To investigate potential factors that may influence the elasticity of flow volume to the AMC and flood-producing precipitation, the at-site elasticities, Elasticity was evaluated with respect to the number of events extracted on average per year for both antecedent precipitation and flood-producing precipitation. The antecedent effect ratio ( When examining changes in It is noted that a detailed causal assessment of the climatic and/or physiographic drivers of This paper has demonstrated that AMC have a statistically significant effect in terms of the response of a catchment to flood-producing precipitation via the use of an elasticity metric (Eq. It may at first appear surprising that the elasticity results show a much lower influence compared to the The two metrics presented here ( Finally, it was found that the relative importance of AMC was seen to diminish with increasing flow extremity–likely indicating different dominant process controls. As only the largest one to four events per year on average were investigated, further analyses would be required to ensure that conclusions regarding antecedent precipitation elasticity were maintained for the rarer flood events (e.g. >20 year return period), which are often those that lead to the greatest societal impacts. To the extent that the well-known discrepancies in global trend analyses for annual maximum flows (e.g. Antecedent moisture conditions are widely understood as an important factor towards explaining differences in the translation of flood-producing precipitation to floods, but they can be difficult to study with floods arising from myriad combinations of hydro-meteorological conditions ( This paper presented a new approach to event delineation that has minimal dependence on modelling and is not reliant on the use of precipitation intermittency as the basis of event separation, but rather it uses streamflow time series as the basis for delineation. The philosophy behind this algorithm is that the responsiveness of a catchment should be the underlying basis for identifying the flood event, and thus the separation between the ‘flood-producing’ precipitation and the antecedent processes that occur prior to that precipitation event. The AMC is then represented using a weighted precipitation depth prior to the flood-producing precipitation events, which allows for the consideration of longer time scales while not being sensitive to choice of how catchment moisture stores (e.g. soil moisture, groundwater, lake and reservoir volumes) are measured and aggregated. This paper has demonstrated an empirical sensitivity in the flood flow response to antecedent precipitation via the use of two empirical metrics. The first metric (Eq. This study focused on the relationship between AMC and flow event volume rather than flow peaks or levels due to the importance of flood volumes for storage based design ( Finally, the demonstrated sensitivities in terms of catchment’s response to different AMC (via the A/Prof Westra was supported by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:    