The purpose of this study was to investigate the influence of the supercritical CO2 processing on the particle size and morphology of puerarin crystals. The process parameters included solvents, temperature, pressures, antisolvent times, addition volumes, antisolvent addition rates and solute concentrations. After being processed, the dramatic reduction of the dimensions and the change of the crystal shape were noticed. Decreasing the antisolvent addition rate, increasing the temperature and the addition volume below 50 ml led to a decrease in size. The new crystal of puerarin generated at the optimal conditions was 30.34 µm. The solvent of methanol and the concentration of 60 mg/ml were found to determine the type and degree of crystallinity of particles. These results showed that this process has the potential to produce a drug recrystallization product with newly generated crystal forms and the size of drug particles could be controlled through the tuning of various experimental conditions.For most orally administered poorly-soluble compounds, the bio-absorption process is rate-limited by dissolution in gastrointestinal fluids; in the case of parenteral administration, the effective bio-availability of compounds is limited by solubility issues. As for the crystal drug, two key characteristics of crystalline solid dosage forms are crystal habit and the crystal size distribution The conventional techniques for reduction of particle size include mechanical comminution (through milling, crushing and grinding), lyophilization and recrystallization of the solute particles from solution (through solvent-antisolvent techniques, spray drying and freeze-drying). All these techniques suffer from one or more disadvantages, such as thermal and/or chemical degradation, high solvent requirements or difficult removal of solvent traces from the final product. Besides, the classical crystallization techniques usually lead to a mixture of polymorphs because of the multi-step process used. Therefore, there is increasing interest in developing technologies which, particularly in the case of pharmaceuticals, allow one to produce microparticles with controlled particle size distribution and product quality (crystallinity, purity, morphology) under mild and inert conditions. Since the mid-1980s, a new method of powder generation has appeared involving crystallization with supercritical fluids. CO Adopting a GAS process to recrystallize pharmaceutical compounds will provide highly versatile methodology to generate new polymorphs of drugs. Many researchers have employed the GAS process for micronization and recrystallization of various pharmaceutical substances With the application of modern isolation technology and high throughput biological screen capability, more and more natural compounds with biological activity are being isolated and identified. However, many of these compounds with potent activity Absolute ethanol, acetone and methanol, analytical grade, purity of 99.7%, were bought from Guangzhou Chemical Reagent 2 Factory (Guangzhou, China). Pur, purity of 99.9%, was obtained from Beijing Union Pharmaceutical Factory (Beijing, China). Liquid CO A schematic diagram of the GAS apparatus is shown in a previous paper GAS experiments were carried out with the following experimental conditions range: recrystallization temperature of 30–43 °C, recrystallization pressure of 8–14 MPa, Pur solute concentration of 60–120 mg/ml, solution addition volume of 10–100 ml, antisolvent time of 1–6 h, type of solvent of absolute methanol, absolute ethanol and acetone, antisolvent addition rate of 25–105 ml/min. Samples of the processed powder were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM; Jeol JSM-6460LV, Japan). Powder samples were manually dispersed on an aluminum stub with a thin self-adhered carbon film. The samples were coated with a thin layer of gold using an ion sputter under 0.5 mbar argon atmosphere (at room temperature for 90 s, at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV, working distance of 15 mm, and at 1000, 3000 and 5000 magnification). Particle size distribution (PSD) was measured by laser diffraction using Master size 2000 laser particle analyzer (Malvern Instruments Ltd., Malvern, UK). The method used for analysis was dry method. The detailed operating conditions and the particle size results of the GAS recrystallization experimental runs are reported in Several experiments were conducted in the pressure range of 8–14 MPa, with the other operating conditions maintaining at the temperature of 38 °C, antisolvent addition rate of 75 ml/min, Pur concentration of 100 mg/ml, solvent of absolute ethanol, antisolvent time of 3 h and addition volume of 50 ml. When the pressure was increased from 8 MPa to 14 MPa, the particle size of Pur is increased ( Experiments were performed at fixed conditions as mentioned above while varying the temperatures only. As illustrated in We varied the concentrations of Pur ethanol solution from 60 to 120 mg/ml while maintaining other process parameters. The results showed that an increase in Pur concentration gave a decrease in particle size, then a little increase at Pur concentrations above 100 mg/ml ( It was reported that in the GAS process the solute crystallized more often in a supercritical mixture of CO Experiments were performed at fixed conditions as mentioned above while varying the addition volume in the precipitation vessel between 10, 25, 50 and 100 ml. The effect of this process parameter was not investigated in previous similar researches. From our results, it should be noted that the initial addition of volume in the precipitation vessel does have effect on the particle size of Pur crystals. When the solution was less than 50 ml in volume, the larger the volume, the smaller the particle size ( First, let us focus on the experiment runs numbered 17, 9 and 18 in The effect of solvent on determining the crystal growth mechanism in liquid crystallization is a subject of extensive research. The degree of crystallinity of the formed particles is important for processing pharmaceuticals, as it sheds some light on the role of the solvent during particle growth. To investigate the influence of the solvent on Pur crystallinity, the effect of the organic solvents, methanol and acetone were studied in addition to ethanol. The results showed that compared with other process parameters, the type of solvent had a dramatic effect on particle size, the external shape and internal characteristics of crystals as reported in other researches The precipitation of Pur from ethanol and methanol gave a very light, voluminous powder, as typical of CO Generally, Pur recrystallization by GAS in this experiment all reproducibly yielded a crystalline product at each condition. At most conditions, Pur produced was in the same crystal form (named crystal form II), while with 60 mg/ml as the Pur concentration (crystal form III) and with methanol as solvent (crystal form IV), Pur in two new crystal forms was achieved. The confirmation of the new crystal forms was published in another paper In this study, the GAS crystallization technique has been applied to the preparation of Pur. To sum up, it was clear that several parameters had an influence on the size and morphology of the crystals obtained and it was demonstrated that the particles' mean diameter and size distribution can be strongly controlled through the manipulation of the process parameters in GAS process. Of all process parameters, a good choice of the solute concentration and the solvent may lead to new pure polymorphs, while temperature, addition volume, and antisolvent addition rate had many influences on the particle size and size distribution. It must be pointed out that the analysis of morphology and the size of the drug showed a dramatic change of the crystals after treatment with supercritical fluids, indicating the formation of a light voluminous powder made of small particles having needle-like and prism habit. The GAS recrystallization process may provide an entirely different concept and kinetics for nucleation and molecular arrangement. Therefore, adopting a GAS process to recrystallize pharmaceutical compounds will provide a highly versatile methodology to generate new polymorphs of the drug in addition to conventional crystallization techniques and provide the potential for better therapeutic efficacy of the drug because of the newly generated crystal form. This work was supported by the Basic Research Program from