Zebrafish (Danio rerio) has been generally accepted as a simple model to investigate the vertebrate tissues. In this study, comparative observations to the structural characteristics of the wild type zebrafish skeletal bone before and after decalcification were performed to gain information about surface mineralization in the collagen-mediated mineralization system using Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) and Atomic Force Microscope (AFM). TEM observations to the decalcified samples showed empty space between the surfaces of the collagen fibrils. However in the TEM micrographs of the sections without staining and decalcification, hydroxyapatite (HA) crystals are observed to deposit on the surfaces, filling in the space and making the mineralized fibrils compactly aligned, with the diameter increasing to more than 150nm. Consistent evidence was supplied by the AFM observations, which also indicated that the mineralized fibrils become thicker and more compactly aligned. Moreover, it was revealed that the diameters of the mineralized fibrils increase, as mineralization becomes heavier. In highly mineralized areas, they aggregate into thicker fibers. All of these data have provided the first visual evidence supporting the concept of surface mineralization on the collagen fibrils in the zebrafish skeleton system, by which the structural complexity is achieved.Bone refers to a family of materials that have complex hierarchically assembled structures Since the mineralized collagen fibrils are the basis for bone materials, related principles of their assembly and mineralization have been widely pursued in vivo and in vitro. Utilizing the normally calcifying leg tendons of the domestic turkey, Originally, the zebrafish came into sight as an excellent model organism for vertebrate-specific problems of development In the present paper, we for the first time reported the comparative investigations on the microstructure of the inhomogeneous zebrafish skeletal bone sections with or without decalcification, utilizing TEM and AFM. The data obtained implied the existence of surface mineralization on the collagen fibrils associated with their hierarchical assembly. Additionally, the comparison of AFM measurements to the structural features of the fibrils in bone sections throughout the whole thickness supported this conclusion. The samples of For TEM observation, the bone tissues were double-fixed with cold 2.5% glutaraldehyde for 2 The cleaned bone materials were fixed, embedded and cut into thin sections (∼ In this experiment, MI PicoScan AFM (Molecular Imaging Co., Arizona, USA) was used to explore the bone sections at room temperature (23 To avoid subjective bias in selecting structural features that look interesting but may be quite unrepresentative of the whole tissue, we examined more than 400 TEM and AFM micrographs taken from 20 individual samples. In this present study, both TEM and AFM were employed, since they have respective advantages. Integrated analyses using TEM and AFM can provide more comprehensive information of the mineral–collagen complex structure. The TEM micrographs of the stained samples can display the microstructure of the collagen fibrils at ultrastructural level, while TEM of the unstained sections may expose the possible mineral depositing positions by showing the electron density distributions. On the other hand, AFM works by scanning the sample superficial surface. It can reveal the height distribution in A TEM micrograph of the collagen fibrils in the decalcified and stained sections was shown in To provide further evidence of the surface mineralization, AFM analyses under the control of a combined inverted optical microscope were performed. It is well accepted that the deposition of minerals during the formation of all vertebrate skeletons principally occurs in association with collagens. However, details of the precise structural events of the collagen–mineral interaction are incomplete, in which one aspect is the possibility that minerals may nucleate and deposit in association with the surface of collagen fibrils in addition to their interaction with the hole and overlap zones of the protein. The concept of surface-mediated mineralization on collagen was first proposed in a study of tendon calcification and subsequently mentioned in other work Here, it is necessary to clarify that the sample preparation methods are responsible for the maintenance of tissue structure. Both dehydration and decalcification could be devastating for the structure of biological specimens and create artifacts, however, to avoid this, double-fixation with glutaraldehyde and osmium tetraoxide, introducing both intermolecular and intramolecular chemical crosslinks, was considered to be the first step in the sample preparation, which is able to minimize the possible distortion and collapse of the sample structure. Therefore, the TEM and AFM observations in this study supplied new evidence on the surface mineralization associated with the collagen fibrils in zebrafish skeleton. The first and strongest evidence rose from the TEM observations to the space surrounding the surfaces of the collagen fibrils. The high resolution image of the collagen fibrils in the intact sections ( The third important evidence depends on the observations and comparisons of the mineralized collagen located from the outer bone layer inwards The SAD pattern measured from the surface minerals indicated that instead of randomly depositing, the minerals prefer to array on the surface of the fibrils with their 002 crystallographic orientations running along the long axes of the fibrils. This feature may imply that the surface mineralization occurs mediated by possible strong interactions between the mineral deposits and the fibrils. However, until now, little in vivo evidence in regard to the sites of surface nucleation has been well reported. Landis et al. have proposed that the nucleation sites perhaps are located in the vicinity of a channel opening, which might occur by particular stereochemical or electrostatic interactions, such as the charged groups of the constituent collagen α-chains at the collagen array surfaces and the molecular species located at or near the collagen channel entrance sites The summary of the bone structural features observed here by AFM and TEM provided new visual evidence supporting the concept of surface mineralization on the collagen fibrils in the zebrafish skeleton system, which creates the mineral–collagen complex. The data reported serve to fill a gap in knowledge between macromolecular- and anatomic-scale studies of the mineralization process in calcified tissues. The authors thank the Laboratory Fund of Tsinghua University for support of this research. This work was partly supported by NNSFC, project number 20031010, and by the National high-tech research program, program number 2001AA320605.