Currently, there is a growing interest for encapsulation of bioactive ingredients using calcium alginate microspheres or beads. Diffusion of the Ca in the alginate droplets provokes an ionic gelation and their conversion to hydrogel beads. The main objective of this study is to investigate the influence of physical properties of alginate and CaCl2 solutions on alginate droplet formation and penetration into gelling bath, in size and shape of Ca-alginate beads. The droplet formation and penetration in the calcium bath was investigated using a high-speed video recording. Viscosity of alginate solution was modified by changing the alginate concentration (from 10 to 30 g/L) and the viscosity of the bath was modified by using different water/glycerol mixes (0–90% of glycerol) to prepare the CaCl2 solution. Surface tension of CaCl2 solution is reduced by adding different concentrations of surfactants (Tween 20) in a range of 0.01–1 g/L. Droplets detach from the tip with a tear shape. In all conditions tested, the droplets reach a spherical shape in less than 15 ms after detachment and less than 25 mm from the tip. Spherical beads are obtained when the kinetic energy is high enough to break the surface resistance of the calcium bath and droplet viscosity high enough to avoid deformations. Penetration depth of alginate droplets were mainly affected by viscosity and surface tension of CaCl2 solution. When viscosity and surface tension of CaCl2 solution increases, sphericity decrease and shape deformations are observed. The surfactant addition enhanced penetration and prevented shape deformations of Ca-alginate beads.Bioencapsulation is defined as the process of confining bioactive compounds (e.g. microbial cells, enzymes, animal cells, plant cells, antibiotics, etc.) within a matrix in particulate form (i.e. bead or capsule) in order to achieve one or more desirable effects: immobilization, protection, stabilization, controlled-release and/or affect the physical properties of the bioactive compounds ( The alginate, a natural polysaccharide, is extensively used as wall material in encapsulation processes due to their non-toxicity, biocompatibility and mild gelling properties ( The main objective of this study is to investigate the alginate droplet formation at nozzle tip, its evolution during falling and penetration in the gelling calcium bath, in function of physical properties such as viscosity and surface tension of alginate and receiving CaCl Sodium alginate powder ALGOGEL 3001 (molecular weight: 151,200 Da) was obtained from Cargill (France). Algogel 3001 has a high guluronic acid content (M/G ratio) as 0.64. Calcium chloride dihydrate powder (CaCl A defined quantity of alginate was spread in a beaker containing 1 L of distilled water under high speed mixing. Then, the mixing speed was reduced and stirring was maintained for 1 h at low speed. Finally, the solutions were left standing for 24 h to remove bubbles before use. To evaluate the impact of the alginate solution viscosity, solutions of 5–35 g/L were prepared. Twenty g calcium chloride (CaCl The viscosities of alginate and CaCl The surface tensions of solutions were determined by using tensiometer (KRÜSS K-12, France) using du Nouy ring method and LabDeskTM software. For the surface tension measurement, 70 ml of each solution was used for the analysis and the temperature was kept at 25 °C (  First, alginate flow rate were changed from 50 to 300 ml/h in order to study the influence of it on bead diameter and sphericity. Then, alginate flow rate was set to 100 ml/h in order to see the influence of viscosity and surface tension of solution. The distance between the nozzle tip and collecting bath was 20 cm. After droplet penetration, beads were let to harden for 30 min to ensure complete gelation. Afterwards, the beads were filtered using a sieve and rinsed with distilled water. Then, beads were hold in CaCl Dripping process was divided into three steps. droplet formation, fall of droplets in air and penetration into the bath. Images were recorded and observed by using a Phantom V 7.3 high-speed camera (Vision Research, USA) at 400 images per second. For all determinations, at least 25 droplets were observed. From the image analysis, falling velocity (V) was evaluated by recording images, measuring the displacement of the droplet over a defined period of time, in function of distance from the tip. The kinetics energy (E) of the droplet was estimated using: Similarly, penetration depth was determined by recording images with the high-speed video camera and recording the maximum depth reached by the droplet in the bath. Morphological observations and size analysis of the beads were realized using a digital microscope (Dino-Lite, Netherlands). The maximum and minimum diameters (d The sphericity factor ( For All the given values are the average of results obtained from three replicates of analysis. Standard deviations are also given with the values. For the statistical analysis SPSS v.15 statistics program (SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA) was used. Data that prepared using Microsoft The results of viscosity measurement of alginate solutions prepared at various concentrations are given in Glycerol was commonly used to alter the viscosity of aqueous solutions. As glycerol concentration in CaCl The surface tension is not significantly modified by the addition of alginate to water ( Surface tension of water was measured and found as 72 mN/m as reported in the literature. Dissolved salts usually increase the surface tension of water ( The size of the alginate beads was determined over more than 60 experiments made in triplicate by modifying the concentrations of alginate, the size of the nozzle and the flow rate of the alginate solution, Tween 20 and glycerol concentration in the bath ( Viscosity of the alginate solution (and its concentration) has a statistically significant but limited influence on the bead diameter (  Where d is the droplet diameter, ρ the solution density, g the gravity constant, d Droplet formation at nozzle tip is the first step of dripping technic. This droplet formation was observed by using a high-speed camera and could be divided as follows ( Polymer liquid flows through the nozzle tip forming small relatively spherical shape (278 ms) Due to gravity forces, as the droplet grows it takes a pear or tear shape (525 ms) The deformation leads a neck which still maintains the droplet on tip (578 and 600 ms) The neck elongates until it breaks (603 ms) The droplet detaches with pear shape, while a small part of the neck remains on the tip (605 ms) In less than 15 ms, the falling droplet moves to a spherical form (618 ms). An interval between droplets, i.e. formation of the neck and detachment of the droplet varies between 400 and 1200 ms and depends on the nozzle size and the alginate flow rate. Alginate droplets detached from the nozzle tip with tear-shaped. Due to the surface tension forces, in less than 20 ms, droplets evolve to spherical shape. Analyzing the video recorded images ( Even with a large tip diameter and high flow rate, the distance to get spherical droplets was less than 2.5 cm and the time less than 1–2 s. Droplets are generally formed with the tip diameter less than 1 mm, leading to a usual time and distance lower than 500 ms and 1 cm respectively. It may then be concluded that, in practical conditions, droplets are spherical before to reach the CaCl To penetrate in the CaCl  While the droplet hits the liquid surface, different scenarios may be observed: The viscosity of the droplet is too low and the droplet spread out on the liquid surface. This was not observed with alginate droplets falling in a CaCl The droplet deforms the liquid surface but its energy is not strong enough to break the surface resistance and the droplet remains tied to the surface ( The kinetic energy of the droplet is sufficient to break the liquid surface. The droplets cross in the liquid surface with more or less deformation. The effects of the viscosities of both alginate and CaCl The penetration depth increases as the alginate solution viscosity increases. It may be expected that for higher viscosity, the droplets are less sensitive to deformation and behave more as solid spheres. The viscosities of both alginate and CaCl Impact of droplet alginate viscosity and Tween 20 concentrations in CaCl Surface tension of CaCl  Higher droplet viscosity allows deeper penetration and more spherical beads are obtained even for higher gelling bath viscosity ( Addition of a certain amount of surfactant enhances alginate droplet penetration by decreasing the surface tension. If surface tension of gelling solution (CaCl Ca-alginate beads were produced via ionotropic gelation principle using dripping technique. During the study, concentration and viscosity of alginate solution was modified. Also, by modifying viscosity and surface tension of CaCl Viscosity of alginate solutions has a statistically significant but limited impact on droplet diameter. Alginate flow rate and nozzle size have a stronger impact on the droplet diameter. As droplet detaches from the nozzle, it gets a spherical shape in less than 500 ms and less than 2.5 cm under the nozzle. One may then assume that in most cases, penetration in the gelling bath is the main cause of the bead deformation. Penetration depth decreases when alginate viscosity decreases and when CaCl2 gelling bath viscosity increases. If the penetration depth is too small, the CaCl2 gelling bath surface is not broken/open and droplets remain attach to its surface. Spherical beads are obtained first if the droplets are able to cross the CaCl This paper shows that using high-speed camera may really help defining optimum conditions to realize good dripping techniques. In future, research may continue to analyze the process more deeply and extend the study to more complex process like electro-dripping, co-extrusion, etc. Also more experiments should be conducted on penetration step of dripping to promote penetration of droplets into receiving solution.