IRFK2D is an ANSI Fortran-77 program that generates realizations of an intrinsic function of order k (with k equal to 0, 1 or 2) with a permissible polynomial generalized covariance model. The realizations may be non-conditional or conditioned to the experimental data. The turning bands method is used to generate realizations in 2D and 3D from simulations of an intrinsic random function of order k along lines that span the 2D or 3D space. The program generates two output files, the first containing the simulated values and the second containing the theoretical generalized variogram for different directions together with the theoretical model. The experimental variogram is calculated from the simulated values while the theoretical variogram is the specified generalized covariance model. The generalized variogram is used to assess the quality of the simulation as measured by the extent to which the generalized covariance is reproduced by the simulation. The examples given in this paper indicate that IRFK2D is an efficient implementation of the methodology.The assessment and evaluation of many engineering projects is based on spatial variables that, typically, are under-sampled. Examples range from hydraulic conductivity or porosity in an aquifer to rainfall in a river basin, ore grade in a mineral deposit and heavy metals content of soils. A common way of assessing the value of a variable at non-sampled locations is to estimate it by an optimal procedure such as kriging. It is, however, well known that a map of estimated values is a smooth version of the true spatial variability of the variable. Geostatistical simulation provides a more realistic means of evaluating the spatial variability of a variable. Simulated images reproduce a specified model of variability, usually inferred from the experimental data; in addition, a conditionally simulated image honours the experimental data. In many cases the spatial variable exhibits a trend that is not always simple or easy to interpret and, in such cases, the theory of intrinsic random functions of order A mathematical approach to the theory of IRF- A convenient model of generalized covariance is the polynomial model ( For example in 2D and for The linear term characterizes a continuous but not differentiable random function, the cubic term characterizes a continuous and differentiable random function and the quintic term describes a continuous random function that is twice differentiable. A discontinuous random function can be treated by adding a nugget variance term The restrictions on the coefficients are ( Kriging interpolation within the IRF- Simulation within the IRF- 1D simulation of Wiener–Levy processes and their integrals. Use of the turning bands operator to generate 2D and 3D simulations from 1D simulations along lines. For conditional simulations, conditioning the non-conditional simulation to experimental data. Verification of the generalized covariance of the simulation on a regular grid, by calculating the generalized variogram for different directions. These four steps have been implemented in the IRFK2D program. The first step is the simulation of Wiener–Levy processes and their integrals. Given a 1D random function The best-known process for simulating and the following recursive relationship ( The second step in the simulation algorithm is to use the turning bands method to generate a 2D simulation from the 1D simulations along the lines. The turning bands method is a powerful and useful mathematical operator ( Applying the turning bands operator to 1D simulations with generalized covariance given by Two issues that must be addressed are the number of lines to use and the discrete representation (i.e. band width) along the lines. For ergodicity, given a fixed number of lines in 2D space, a regular distribution is preferable to random locations of the lines ( In IRFK2D the number of bands along each line is fixed at 500 and the band width is given by The two previous steps generate non-conditional realizations of an IRF- The kriging implemented in IRFK2D is intrinsic kriging using the generalized covariance model specified by the user. The quality of a conditional, or non-conditional, simulated image is assessed by the generalized variogram calculated for different directions from the simulated values and by the extent to which generalized variogram model is reproduced in the simulation ( The input parameters to IRFK2D are provided in a parameter file as shown in the example given in The format of the simulation output file is identical to that of the experimental data file, i.e. The program structure of IRFK2D is given in RANDOM: generation of uniform random numbers in the interval [0,1]. GAUSSIAN: simulation of Gaussian random numbers with a given mean and variance. IRFKRI: intrinsic kriging system. CLA: data sorting subroutine. MATPROC: product of two matrices. MATINV: inverse of a matrix using LUDCMP and LUBKSB. LUDCMP: LU decomposition of a symmetric matrix. LUBKSB: back substitution from a lower triangular matrix. The last two subroutines are given in The performance of the program is demonstrated by application to three examples. For each example, the image map generated by the program (a realization chosen at random) and the generalized variograms are shown. The data set from The parameter file used with IRFK2D is shown in  When using geostatistical simulations for assessing the uncertainty associated with an under-sampled spatial variable, models should be as realistic as possible. Many regionalized variables exhibit real trends (i.e. with a physical explanation) that are not simple to model by a global low order polynomial surface. In these cases the theory of intrinsic random functions of order The quality of the simulation is assessed by means of directional generalized variograms of the simulated values and the extent to which the simulation reproduces the specified generalized variogram model, as suggested by This work has been supported by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), Grant Reference GR/M72944.